


A NEW AND ACCVRATE MAP OF THE WORLD DRAWNE ACCORDING TO THE truest Descriptions, latest Discoueries, and best Obseruations that haue beene made by English or Strangers. VVITH BRIEFE AND MOST PLAINE NOTES VPON THE VVHOLE BODY OF COSMOGRAPHIE. FOR THE EASIE VNDERSTANDING THEREOF: Pleasant and vsefull for all such as desire to know further then of their owne Home.


world map including numerous explanatory notes; surrounded by cosmographical diagrams including of the solar calendar, the northern astronomical hemisphere, the southern astronomical hemisphere, the concentric celestial spheres or orbs, the lunar eclipse, and the solar eclipse; also a diagram showing the imaginary lines by which the earth is divided and described; also a representation of a shooting star passing over a city; also representations of various mythological figures including Atlas and the personifications of Desire, Diligence, Observation, and Peace, surrounded by navigational instruments, and the personifications of Geography, holding a map and compasses, and Navigation, holding a cross-staff; also potraits of the circumnavigators Ferdinand Magellan, Francis Drake, Thomas Cavendish, and Olivier van Noort
AMERICA Was first discoverd ye yeer 1492. by Christopher Columbus, at ye charge of Ferdinand and Isabella. K: and Q: of Castill but denominated of Americus Vesputius seven yeers after.
This South Land vndiscouered commonly knowne by the name of Terra Australis incognita and Magellanica cannot certainly be affirmed either continent Ilands only Some few coasts thereof haue appeared to Sea men driuen therupon by extremity of weather whose names are set downe, the rest must remaine clouded in obscuritie till future times and further discoueries, produce them to light.
The North Hemispheare
The South Hemispheare
The Eclipse of ye Moone
The Eclipse of the Sun
A Figure of the Spheare
Peace is ye Nurce of Science, and these 3 the meanes to attaine it.
Desire
Diligence
Observation
Peace
Ferdinand Magellan. sayld about the World. 1524.
Sr. Francis Drake sayled about the World 1580.
Mr Thomas Candishe sailed about the World Ano 1588.
Oliver vander Nort sailed about the World. 1601.




The description and vse of the Figure with the twelue Signes, shewing the Theoricke of the Sunne on the left hand of these two Hemispheares.
THE outward circle of this Figure is diuided into 365 dayes equall, and allowing vnto each moneth his proportion of dayes, as Ianuary 31. February 28. March 31. April 30. etc.
The inward circle is diuided into 360 degrees, giuing vnto each Signe 30 degrees, the semidiameter of the twelue moneths is supposed to be diuided into 60 parts, from wch center is supposed another center to be 2 degrees 9 minutes of the said 60 parts, according to Ticho Brache, who maketh the place or point of the Sunnes Apogeum, to be in the 6 degree of Cancer, in this age of the world. The Apogeum of the Sunne is that point in which when the Sunne commeth vnto he is in his slowest motion, or furthest distant from the Earth, that is to say, Iune 17. then the Sunne shall be in the sixt degree of Cancer, the Peregeum of the Sunne shall be when he commeth into the sixt degree of Capricorne, being opposite to the sixt degree of Cancer. The second mouable part is diuided into 29 dayes and one halfe, which doth shew the age of the Moone. The next Circle is diuided into 24 houres, and each houre into 4 quarters, each quarter into 3 parts, each part being 5 minutes.


The vse of this Figure may be this.
FIrst, the day of the moneth being giuen to find the place of the Sun in the Zodiacke, or the place of the Sun being giuen to finde the day of the moneth: Take the Index of the Sun and bring it to the day of the moneth, sheweth the place of the Sun in the Zodiacke of the 12 Signes. Example, April 14. the place of the Sun will be found to be in the 4 degree of Taurus.
Secondly, the day of the Change or New Moone being giuen to finde the age of the Moone, the signe and degree she possesseth in the Zodiacke, the time of her comming to the South, and tune of full Sea or high water in any Hauen, knowing the time of the Changes or full Moone after this manner:
In some Almanack (or by the Epact) find the day of the change of the Moone going before, the day that ye desire; and so many dayes after the change, so many dayes old is the Moone.
First bring the Index of Sol or the Sunne to the day of the moneth, and there stay it. Secondly, bring the Index of the Moone, to the age of the Moon, and it sheweth the signe and degree that she possesseth in the Zodiacke, the houre and minute vnder the age, is the time of her comming to the South.
Thirdly, to finde the time of high water.
In the Table following finde the name of the Port or Hauen, and the houre and minute against that Hauen is the houre and minutes, that ye shall adde to the time of the Moones comming to South, is the time of high water in the said place.


A Tyde Table shewing the times of full Sea in the principall Hauens in England, or neere about thereunto.

Names of the Hauens.
H
M
Points of the Compasse.



Quinborow, Southamp. Portsmou.

0
0
South.
North.



Redban, Aberden.

0
45
S. W. b. W.
N. E. b. E.



Grauesend, the Downes.

1
30
S. S. W.
N. N. E.



Dundee, S. Andrewes, Silli.

2
15
S. W. b. S.
N. E. b. N.



London, Tinmouth, Hartlepoole.

3
0
South West.
North East.



Barwick, Ostend, Fount.

3
45
S. W. b. W.
N. E. b. E.



Frith, Lith, Dunbar, Narbon.

4
30
W. S. W.
E. N. E.



Faymouth, Gernsey, Lizard.

5
15
W. b. S.
E. b. N.



Foy, Lin, Humber, Way, Dartmouth, or Plimouth, Antwerp.

6
0
East.
West.



Bristol, Lanion, Foulnesse.

6
45
E. b. S.
W. b. N.



Milford and Bridgewater, Texel.

7
30
E. S. E.
W. N. W.



Portland, Peter-port, Hage.

8
15
S. E. b. E.
N. W. b. W.



Orkney, Poole, Orwel, Shelens.

9
0
South East.
North West.



Deepe, Luxe, Lenoyes, Needles.

9
45
S. E. b. S.
N. W. b. N.



Bolyn, Douer, Harwich, Yarmou.

10
30
S. S. E.
N. N. W.



Callis, Rye, Winchilsey, Calsho.

11
15
S. b. E.
N. b. W.




The vse of this Table.
Adde the houres and minutes right against each Hauen, to the Moones comming to the South, and the whole result will be the time of the Tide or high water. By this Table you may see in what point of the Compasse the Moone is in at the time of the Tide or full Sea.



Of blazing Starres.
BLazing Starres or Comets, are flames drawne into the higher part of the Ayre, which come by drinesse and long quietnesse in the Ayre. They signifie corruption in the Ayre to follow. They are either signes of warres and death, or tokens of earth-quakes, and dearth of corne. In the yeare 1618. there happened

 a fearfull blazing Starre from the 18 of Nouember to the 16 of December following. It was seene all ouer Europe. The Countries it passed ouer were, Noua Guinea, the Ile of Iaua, Sumatra, Madagascar, Monomotapa, Picora, Nombre de Iesus.


The manner of the Moones Eclipse.
THe word Eclipse is as much to say as To want light, and to be darkned, or hidden from our sight.
The Moones Eclipse is figured at the foot of America, ouer against your left hand, which is thus: viz.

When the Sun and Moone are opposite one to the other diametrally, and the Earth in the very midst betweene both: that is, when a right line drawne from the center of the Sun to the center of the Moone, passeth through the center of the Earth: For the body of the earth being thicke and not transparent, casting his shadow to that point which is opposite to the place of the Sun, will not suffer the Moon to receiue any light from the Sun, from whom she alwayes borroweth her light. And note, that euery time she is at the full, shee is opposite to the Sun, and yet the Earth is not at euery such full diametrally betwixt her and the Sun, for then she should be eclipsed at euery full, which indeed cannot be, vnless she be either in the head or taile of the Dragon.
Now the Moone is eclipsed in part, when the Sun, the Earth, and the Moone, be met in one selfe diametrall line, but the Moon is declining either on the one side or on the other.
But note that eclipses of the Moone may be vniuersall, because the Earth is far bigger then the Moone, and thereby able to shadow her whole body.


The manner of the Sunnes Eclipse.
THe Eclipse of the Sun is shewed by that Figure at the foot of Asia, against your right hand, and happeneth
When the Moone is betwixt the Sun and the Earth, which chanceth in a Coniunction or new of the Moone: and yet not in euery Coniunction, but when it falleth either in the head or taile of the Dragon: which may chance (as is said before) either totally, or in part: totally, in respect of those parts of the Earth whereon the shadow directly falleth. For sith the Moone is farre lesser then the Earth, she cannot shadow all the Earth, and therefore the eclipse of the Sun cannot be vniuersall: but yet to some parts of the earth it may be totally, to some partly, and to others nothing at all; as may appeare by the aforesaid Figure.


Of the Firmament and Constellations.
THe two Hemispheares in the middle aboue, filled with figures of men, beasts, fishes, and the like, embost with starres, doe represent the fate of the Firmament or Orbe of the fixed stars (those that appeare euery night) which were by ancient Astronomers diuided into, and distinguished by certaine Constellations, and each of these is knowne by a proper name. Of these Constellations the number (according to the ancient account) is 48, that are diuided into three parts:
1 Northerne Constellations, being 21 in number.2 Zodiacke Constellations, being 12 in number.3 Southerne Constellations, being 15 in number.
The Northerne Constellations consist of 332. stars.
The Zodiacke Constellations, which be also called the twelue Signes, consist of 280 stars.
The Southerne Constellations containe 293 starres.
Some of these Constellations consist of more, some of fewer stars, according to their greatnesse or smalnesse.
Besides these there are 120 stars that are exempt out of all the Constellations: so that the number of stars set vpon both Hemispheares are 1025; and diuers of them haue proper names.
But here is to be vnderstood, that all the stars in heauen are not numbred, nor cannnot, for that diuers of them are so small: but these 1025 are the principallest among them, and all that haue yet euer beene accounted of.
The two first parts of all, that is, the Northerne and Zodiacke Constellations are contained in that part right against your left hand, and placed ouer a piece of America. The last, that is, the Southerne, is comprehended in that other Hemispheare on your right hand, and ouer the European Sea.


Of the Figure of the heauenly Orbes and Elements.
THe whole world is diuided into two parts, viz. Elementall, and Etheriall or coelestiall parts.
The Elementall part is fourefold: viz. Earth, Water, Ayre, Fire: as may be seene in that round Figure of the frame of the heauens and elements one within another; the inmost and middlemost circle containing Earth and Water intermixed together: The next, the three Regions of the Aire: and immediately aboue that Orbe, is the Element of Fire: all which you may easily discerne by their seuerall names in their proper places.
The Etheriall or Celestiall parts doe compasse the Elementall parts: and containe the ten vpper Spheares: viz. 1 the Moone, 2 Mercury, 3 Venus, 4 Sol, 5 Mars, 6 Iupiter, 7 Saturne, 8 the Starry firmament, 9 the Christaline heauen, hauing no stars at all; the 10 is the Primum mobile, or first Mouer, containing all the rest within it; and mouing from the East to the West carieth about with it in violence all the other Spheares.
The rest of the Spheares haue contrary motions, euery one in his kind, though far slower then the other: and their motions are contrary, from the West to the East, and so are caried about oftentimes by the first Mouer before they make one perfect reuolution in themselues.
The Crystaline or ninth Spheare his motion is almost vnsensible, and is called The trembling Motion, and is performed according to the opinion of later Astronomers, in 49000 yeares.
The eight Spheare being the Starry Firmament, performeth his motion in 7000 yeares.

The rest of the Spheares are the seuen Planets; each Spheare containeth in it but one Starre; whereof the vppermost and slowest is Saturne, which performeth his course in thirty yeares. Iupiter being next vnder that, makes his reuolution in twelue yeares. Mars beneath him, finisheth his course in two yeares. Sol passeth through the Zodiacke in 365 dayes and sixe houres, which is one whole yeare. Venus ends her course in somewhat more then a yeare. Mercury holds equall pace with the Sunne. Luna courseth about the heauen once euery eight and twenty dayes.




Geography, and the principles thereof.

Certaine termes of Land and Water plainly defined and described.
THe Terrestriall Globe is defined to be a sphearicall body, proportionably composed of Earth and Water: into which two parts it is diuided. Whereof the earth comes first to view; whose parts are either
Reall,Imaginary: and the Reall parts either
Continents,Ilands.
Now a Continent is a great quantity of land, not interlaced or separated by the Sea; in which many Kingdomes and Principalities are contained; as Europe, Asia, Africa, America.
An Iland (called in Latine, Insula, quasi in salo) is a part of the earth, enuironed round with waters; as Britaine, Iava, St. Laurence Ile, Barmudas.
These againe are subdiuided into
Peninsula,Istmus,Promontorium.
A Peninsula, is almost an Iland; that is, a tract of Land, which being almost encompassed round by water, is ioyned to the firme land by some little Istmus: as Poloponnesus, Taurica, Cymbrica, and Peruana.
An Istmus, is a little narrow neck of land, which ioyneth any Peninsula to the Continent; as the Straights of Dariene in Peru, and Corinth in Greece.
Promentorium is some high Mountaine, which shooteth it selfe into the Sea, the vtmost end of which, is called a Cape; as that great Cape of good hope, and Cape Verde in Africa; Cape Comori in Asia; and that of St. Michaels Mount in Cornwall; the North Cape vp in Norway, and diuers other.
There are likewise other reall parts of the earth; as Mountains, Vallies, Fields, Plaines, Woods, and the like.
The other generall part of the Globe is the Water; which is diuided into
1. Oceanus.2. Mare.3. Fretum.4. Sinus.
1. Oceanus, the Ocean, is that generall collection of all waters, which enuironeth the world on euery side.
2. Mare, the Sea, is a part of the Ocean; to which we cannot come, but through some Straite, as Mare Mediterraneum, Mare Balticum, and the like.
These two take their names
Either from the adiacent places, as the Brittish Ocean, the Germane sea, the Atlantick sea.Or from the first discouerer, as Mare Magellanicum, Dauis and Ferbishers straits, etc.Or from some remarkable accident, as Mare Rubrum, from the red colour of the Sands. Mare Aegeum, Pontus Euxinus, and the like.
3. Fretum, a Straite, is a part of the Ocean restrained within narrow bounds, and opening a way to the Sea; as the Straits of Gibralter, Hellespont, Anian.
4. Sinus, a Creeke, is a crooked shoare, thrufling out as it were two armes to imbrace the louely presence of the Sea; at Sinus Adriaticus, Sinus Persicus, and Corinthiacus.
To this also belong Riuers, Brookes, and Fountaines, which are engendred of congealed ayre in the earths concauities, and seconded by the Seas waters creeping through hidden crannies thereof. Thus much of the reall parts of the Globe in generall.


Of the Circles of this Map; and their vses.
THe imaginary parts of the earth are such, which not being at all in the Earth, must yet bee supposed to bee so, for the better teaching and learning this Science; and are certaine Circles going about the Earth, answerable to them in Heauen in name.
The Meridian (which comes first to be considered) is a great Circle compassing round the earth from Pole to Pole; and is that which you see in the circumference of both Planispheares of this Map; and wherein are written the names of the Zones and Climates. This chiefe, first, fixed Meridian passeth through the Ilands called Azores, according to the ancient Cosmographers; and there are two reasons why they did there begin to reckon the longitude of the earth:
First, for that at that time there was no land knowne further to the Westward then that place.
Secondly, vnder that Meridian the needle in the Mariners Compasse had no variation, but did point directly North and South.
There are also many Meridians according to the diuerse place in which a man liues, the number of them equall to so many points as may bee imagined in the Globe; but the vsuall setting them downe to view, is by ten degrees asunder; and are those blacke lines which you see in both Planispheares, running down along from the North to the South Pole.
The vse of the Meridian, is to shew the longitude of any place. Now the longitude of a Region, City, or Cape, is the distance of it East from the first great Meridian; and this longitude is measured and numbred in the Aequinoctiall line by Meridians from the generall and fixed Meridian, into the East, and containeth the whole compasse of the earth, viz. 360. degrees.
To proue this by example, cast your eye on London, and you shall see it something to the East of the second blacke Meridian; passe downe with that blacke line to the Aequinoctiall, and look as much East there, as London is from that Meridian aboue, then count the degrees of the Aequinoctiall from the first great Meridian to that place, and that distance is the longitude of London; which you may perceiue to be 20. degrees and better. And the like manner of working is to be made for all other places.
That line full of degrees, crossing both Planispheares straight along in the middle, and diuiding the world into two halfs (viz.) North and South halfes, is called the Aequinoctiall line, or the Aequator; either because it is of equall distance from both Poles of the world, or else because the Sunne comming in this Circle makes the dayes and nights throughout the world of like length; which happens vpon the 10. or 11. of March, and the 13. or 14. of September. It passes through Abassia or Prestor Iohns Kingdome, and Mani Congo in Africa, through the great Iland Sumatra, and the Maldiue Iles of Asia; and in America, through Guiana.
The vse of it is to shew the Latitude of any Country, Citie, Promontory, or the like: Now the Latitude is the distance of a place toward the South or North, from the Aequinoctiall line or middle of the world, and is reckoned and measured vpon the Meridian toward either Pole: those therefore haue Northerne latitude that inhabit betweene the Aequinoctiall and the North Pole, as they haue Southerne latitude that are betweene the same Aequator and the South Pole.
Those blacke lines thwarting the blacke Meridians from East to West, are parallels, and are also called Aequidistants, being distant one from another 10. degrees toward both Poles; and are here set downe for the easier counting the latitude of any place from the Aequinoctiall: as for the latitude of London; count so many decimall parallels till you come to the parallel which is neerest London, (you shall finde them to be fiue) then follow that line to the Meridian, and see the figures set thereat; (they are 50.) moreouer adde to that number of 50. so much as London is situate aboue that parallel, the space is one degree and a halfe; thus shall you finde the latitude of London, (that is, the distance thereof from the Aequator toward the North Pole) to be 51. degrees and a halfe: and in like manner must the Latitude of all other places be sought. Thus much of Longitude and Latitude, by which two the whole Earth is reckoned.
The Meridian and Aequinoctiall, as also the Zodiacke, are filled throughout with degrees, the number 360. and euery degree consists of 60. Minutes, and containes, according to our ordinary account, 20. leagues, or threescore miles.
The great circle that is drawne bending bias in the one planispheare vp to the Tropicke of Cancer, in the other downe to the Tropicke of Capricorne, is the Zodiacke; it is replenished with degrees, and bears on it the characters of the 12. signes.
The vses of it are to shew ouer what Countries and people the body and beames of the Sunne come perpendicular at some times or other in the yeare: and it shewes to all (where the dayes increase and decrease) the longest and shortest daies of the yeare: for the Sunne (which causeth the same) being alwaies in this circle, and therein mouing, about one degree a day, all the while he is comming vp from the Tropicke of Capricorne to that of Cancer, the dayes increase in the Northerne Climats; but contrariwise in his course backe from Cancer to Capricorne, they shorten to vs, and lengthen to those in the Southerne Climates: and this Circle shewes the foure quarters of the yeare, Spring, Summer, Autumne, Winter.
The Tropicke of Cancer, (so called of the coelestiall signe Cancer) is a circle, whose distance from the Aequinoctiall toward the North, is 23. degrees and a halfe. When the Sunne is come so farre Northward as to touch this circle, then is our longest day in the yeare.
It passes through the Southermost parts of Barbary and Aegypt, Arabia, India, China, Noua Hispania, and the Iland Cuba.
The Tropicke of Capricorne, (likewise so named of the signe Capricorne in the starry heauen) is a circle of like distance as the other Tropicke from the Aequinoctiall Southward, that is, 23. degrees and a halfe. When the Sunne is gone downe to this circle Southward, it is our shortest day in the whole yeare.
This Tropicke passes through Monomotapa, Saint Laurence Iland, Peru, and the South coasts of Brasile.
The Articke, or North polar circle, is distant from the North Pole 23. degrees and a halfe; so much as the Tropicke of Cancer is from the Aequinoctiall: but the distance betweene that Tropicke and it, is 43. degrees.

You may see it passe through Island, Norway, Boddia, Moscouie, Tartary, crosse Davis Straits, and Groenland.
The Antarticke or South polar circle, is distant from the South pole, 23. degrees and a halfe; so far as the Tropicke of Capricorne is from the Aequinoctiall.
This circle passes through Magellanica, or Terra Australis Incognita onely.
Now these foure lesser circles, (viz.) the two Tropickes, and Polar circles, doe fitly part the earth into fiue Zones.


The Zones.
A Zone is a space of earth, contained betweene two of the smaller circles, or within the compasse of either polar circle: the name signifies as much as a girdle, by reason that each Zone compasseth about the earth in manner of a girdle. Of these there be two kinds: one temperate, the other vntemperate.
There bee two temperate Zones, the one North, the other South.
The North temperate Zone is that space of earth contained betweene the Tropicke of Cancer, and the North polar circle.
The South temperate Zone is that space of earth stretched along betweene the Tropicke of Capricorne, and the South polar circle.
They are called temperate Zones for that the ayre thereof hath a far better and more moderate temperature, and meeter for man to inhabit, then the vntemperate Zones. The breadth of them is 43, degrees apiece, which degrees make either temperate Zone to be 2580. English miles broad apiece.
The vntemperate Zones are twofold: one exceeding in the extremity of heat, the other as much in cold: they haue beene thought in former times altogether vnhabitable, but later experience hath found them more fit for habitation.
The Torrid or burnt Zone (which is the hot vntemperate Zone) is that space of heauen which you see contained betweene the Tropicke of Cancer, and that of Capricorne. It hath the name of Torrid, because the Sunne continually passes thereouer, and casting downe direct rayes, affects it with a maruellous heat, thereby making it not so conuenient for the inhabitants, as the temperate Zones are. The breadth of this Zone is comprehended betweene the two Tropickes, and ^^^^aines 47. degrees, that is of English miles 2820.
The frozen Zones are space of earth inclosed within either of the Polar circles: of these th^^e are two, one North, the other South.
The North frozen Zone is that space of earth contained within the compasse of the North polar circle. The breadth thereof is reckoned 23. degrees and a halfe, (viz.) from the Pole it selfe to the polar circle: which of English miles is 1410.
The South frozen Zone, is that space of earth compassed all about with the South polar circle: It hath the like breadth from the South pole, as the other frozen Zone hath from the North pole; and likewise the number of miles is the same.
They are called Frozen Zones, because they (for the most part) exceed in cold: and that is caused in regard that the Sunne, for a good part of the yeare, is vnder the Horizon, and sees them not: and when he is come vp into their sight, his appearance (which is for a pretty long season together) rather comforts them, then any virtuall heart proceeding from him; for there the Ayre is stuft with thicke foggy vapours, and his beames at highest fall but very oblikely on them: so that what through his want and vnability to dispell the cold, and the colds force to resist and beat backe the Sunnes heat, these Zones remaine almost vnhabitable, and euen (as the word is) frozen.
The names of all these, set in the right place of each Zone, you shall see in that Meridian going about America and Magellanica.


Of the Climats.
IN that great Meridian going about Europe, Asia, and Africa, are described the Climates: Now a Climat is a space of the Earth included within the space of two Parallels. The vse of them is to shew the difference of length and shortnesse of dayes ouer all the world, as you may see in the midst of euery Climat set the number of the houres of the longest day in the yeare, vnder that Climat: the longest day in one Climat differing halfe an houre from the longest in another. So that there are foure and twenty Climes, consisting of forty eight Parallels, ere the day come to be 24. houres in length, which is twelue houres longer then the ordinary Aequinoctiall day is. Now this is to be vnderstood; Vnder the Aequinoctiall line, and 13. degrees, that is 3. Parallels, on either side thereof, the dayes exceed not the length of twelue houres, but after in euery Clime increase the length of halfe an houre, so that there are numbred (as is said before) 48. Parallels, which make 24. Climats, before the dayes become 24. houres long: the which length they being growne to, their increase is then by whole weekes and moneths, till in the foure and twentieth Clime, about the Pole, the day is full halfe a yeare long. And as it is thus betweene the Aequator and North Pole, so is it betweene the said Aequator and the South Pole: wherefore there are two sorts of Climats, that is, 24. Northerne, and as many Southerne. The Climes Northward are thus named: the first is Dia Meroes, because the middle parallell thereof passes through the middest of the Inland Iland Meroe, in the Continent of Africa; the second is Dia Sienes, the third Dia Alexandrias, the fourth Dia Rhodos, the fift Dia Romes, the sixt Dia Ponton, the seuenth Dia Boristhenes, the eight Dia Ripheos, the ninth Per Daniam. The South Climes haue the same names, saue onely that the word Antuis thereto added; as Anti-Dia Meroes; the next, Anti-Dia Sienes, and so along vnto the ninth Southward: further then the ninth Clime on either side the Aequinoctiall they are not named; but yet the Climes runne on both wayes to the number of 24. as is seene in the Meridian. That there be but nine named, the reason is, because when these names were giuen, no more then nine Climats were knowne to those of ancient times; but since, though the number of them be increast to 24. the rest are not so knowne by proper names, but remaine innominate.


The Diuision of the Earth, and of the foure parts thereof.
THe World in latter times hath been diuided into the known and vnknowne: This last, since obscurity hides it, silence shall ouerslip it. The knowne, branches it selfe into a fourefold diuision, viz.
1. Europe,2. Asia,3. Africa,4. America.

Europe.
TO begin with that quarter wherein we liue; Europe (as also the other three) consists of Continent and Ilands. The Continent hereof is shared by the inhabitants of these countries:
1 Spaine,2 France,3 Italy,4 Belgia, or Netherlands,5 Germany,6 Denmarke,7 Norway,8 Sweeden,9 Muscouia,10 Poland,11 Hungary,12 Dacia,13 Sclauonia,14 Greece.
The European Ilands are these: 1. The British Iles, viz. Great Britaine, (whose possessors are English, Scots, and Welchmen) Ireland, Orchades, Hebrides, Sorlings; and other on the East, South, and Westerne coasts, 2. The Mediterranean Iles, which are, Maiorca, Minorca, Corsica, Sardinia, Sicilia, Malta, Candy or Creete, Cephalonia, Zant; The Grecian Iles, and some other of lesse note in the North Seas, Island and Frisland.
Europe is extended in length about 3800. miles, in breadth it exceeds not 1200. On the North the frozen sea beats the bounds of it, toward the West the Occidentall Ocean washeth it, Southward it is girt with the Mediterranean Sea; but the Archipelago, the Euxine Sea, Meotis Palus, and the Riuer Tanais, (now called Don) with a line drawne from thence vpright Northward, are the Easterne limits; the chiefe Riuers hereof are, Danubius, the Rheine, and Vistula.


Asia.
BEfore any thing be said of the Prouinces of Asia, a few of her prerogatiues shall be related which ennoble her. As 1. mans creation: 2. The birth of our Sauiour; his diuine miracles; and the worke of our Redemption and Saluation: 3. The actions memorized by the holy Penmen of the Old and New Testament: also here were erected the first Monarchies of the Babylonians, Assyrians, Medes and Persians.
The Continent of Asia containes these Regions,
1 Natolia,2 Syria,3 Palestina,4 Armenia,5 Arabia,6 Media,7 Assyria,8 Mesopotamia,9 Persia,10 Chaldaea,11 Parthia,12 Hircania,13 Tartaria,14 China,15 India.
The Ilands of Asia, are Rhodes and Cyprus, in the Mediterranean Sea: in the Orientall Ocean, Iapan, the Moluccae, the Philippine, Ladrones, Borneo, Gilolo, Iaua, Sumatra, Zeilan; and an infinite number of lesse account.
The length thereof reaches 5200. the breadth 4560. miles, or thereabout: It is bounded Northward with the frozen Sea, and straits of Anian: all the East along it resists the assault of the Orientall Ocean; toward the South the Indian Ocean and Arabian Sea wreak their fury thereon; on the West lies the Red Sea, and that Aegyptian Istmus where it is parted from Africa, but where it disioynes it selfe from Europe, the Westerne limits are the Aegean and Euxine Seas, Palus Meotis, the Riuer Tanais, and a right line drawne to the North. The chiefe Riuers are Euphrates, Indus, and Ganges.


Africa.
AFrica in forme resembles a Pyramis, and is built of these Countries on the Continent: 1 Barbary, 2 Numidia, 3 Lybia, 4 the land of Negros, or Guinee, with the adiacent Prouinces, 5 Aegypt, 6 Aethiopia or Abassia, Prester Iohns kingdome, 7 Congo, 8 Monomotapa.
The Ilands are Zocotara, in the Sea of Arabia; and that of S. Laurence, or Madagascar, in the Indian Sea: but in the Atlanticke Ocean, St. Thoma: the Iles of Capo Verde, Gorgones, or Hesperides, the Canaries, the Azores.
Africa runs on in length 4150. miles, and is reckoned 2000. miles broad, or thereabout. The Easterne limits thereof are the Red Sea, and Istmus of Aegypt, where it is seuered from Asia: on the South continually rages the Southerne Ocean: Westward all the coast is inuironed with the violence of the Westerne or Atlanticke waues: on the North beates the Mediterranean Sea. The Riuers of most note, are Nilus and Niger.


America.
AMerica, or the new World, acknowledgeth a twofold partition of
Mexicana,Peruana.
America is counted in length from the North Pole to the Straits of Magellan Southward.
Mexicana is that which containes the Northerne Tract, comprehending the Nations of 1. Mexico, 2. Quiuira, (in which is included Noua Albion;) 3. Nico, 4. Florida, 5. Virginia, 6. New England, 7. Noua Francia, 8. Terra de Labrador, or Corterealis, 9. Norumbega, 10. Estotilland, 11. on the other side of Davis straits Groenland, 12. California.
This part is in compasse 13000. miles, and lookes Eastward vpon Mar del Nort, or the Virginian Sea: West vpon Mar del Zur, and the straits of Anian: the Northerne coasts extend to the Pole: Southward it is ioyned to Peruana by the Istmus, and that but 17. miles broad. The chiefest Riuers hereof is Rio, St. Laurence, or the riuer of Canada.
Peruana containeth the Southerne part of America, and comprehends 1. Castilia del oro, 2. Guiana, 3. Peru, 4. Brasile, 5. Chili, 6. Chica, 7. Patagones.
This part is compasse 17000. miles; being bounded on the North by that forenamed Istmus, with which it is ioyned to Mexicana; lying East against the Aethiopian Ocean: Westward the Pacificke Sea, or Mar del Zur, presses vpon it: beneath Southward the straits of Magellan limit it. Herein are these Riuers of note, Orenoque, Marganon, or the Riuer of Amazons, and the Riuer of Plate.
The Ilands of America are, Salomons Iles, which bee many in number; and Tubarones, or the vnfortunate Iles, all situate in the Pacificke Sea: There lye in Mar del Nort, Terra noua, or New-found Land; Bacaleos, Trinidad, Iamaica, Cuba; Hispaniola that was first discouered by Columbus; the Lucaie 40. in number: the Summer Ilands, or Bermudas; Smiths Iles, and diuers other.




