



AN ESSAY, OR TASTE OF THE first part of our Brutan Chronicles.

The History of Brute and Brutans setteth forth.
Principally and antecedently their persons, and in them sheweth the
geneallogy or issue which they had.artes which they studied.actes which they did.
This part of History is named Anthropology.Accessorily and consequently the
timeswhen they beganne to Rule. How long they ruled.
This part of History is named Chronology.placesin the Iland, of Brutany; This part of History is named Topographyout of the Iland of Brutany; This part of History is named Topography

When a man is borne into the world, he learneth some thing or other: by learning he is brought to do somwhat: but as all deeds are done in the compasse of a place, so are they bounded with their beginning and ending.



THE GENEALOGY OR ISSVE of Brute.
BRute the first begat three sonnes of Innogen: the first was Locrine the second Camber, the third Albanact.
Locrine the eldest sonne begat Madian of Guendolin and Habren of Elstrid which had a skinne as cleere and white as Iuory, or Lillies, or Snow it selfe.
Madian begat Memprise,
Memprise begat Ebranke,
Ebranke a very goodly person among thousands and strong, begat Brute the second, and nineteene sonnes and thirtie daughters: these fiftie children were borne vnto him of twentie women.
Brute the second begat Leyl,
Leyl begat Hurdibras,
Hurdibras begat Bladud,
Bladud begat Leyr,
Leyr begat three daughters, the first was Gonorill, the second Ragan, the third Cordeil, but left no sonne behind him. Cordeil the youngest daughter, as it came to passe succeeded hir father, but Morgan and Conedag her two nephewes deposed her: Conedag the sonne of Ragan being prouoked by Morgan the sonne of Gonoril his coosin german slew him in battell and ruled alone, and begat Riuall, Riuall begat Gurgust, and Sisill Gurgusts brother succeeded Gurgust, and Iago Sisils next kinsman succeeded

Sisill, and Kymer, Iagoes brother succeeded Iago, and begat Gorbodug, Gorbodug begat Ferrex and Porrex of Wyden, whose generations and issues are vnknown to vs, as the issues of Ebranks nine and fortie children are not knowne very well, nor the generations of Camber, of Albanact, of Morgan, of Gurgust, of Sisill and of Iago.
Thus the eighteene Rulers that came of Brute the first are come to an end, as a tale that is tolde in sport, or as a tree that is digged vp in earnest. Yet neyther seuen Polydores more, nor ten Buchanans shall perswade me, that this Genealogy is a fabulous Tale. Let Polydore get him to Vrbin in Italy, and Buchanan hye him to Buchany in Scotland: it becommeth not these outlandish intruders to vsurpe the censure of the Brutan Histories: if they looke well about them they haue enough to doe at home: we neede none of their gossiping cups: but they are dead, and their historicall iudgementes are interred with them: if any man will raise them from the graue, who will beleeue their mortified Ghosts? A Brutan may iustly except against the witnesse of an Italian, or a Scot: Ielousie and malignity are two blinde guids: Then hold your owne, ye braue Brutans, and guide your selues, your owne heades are fittest for your owne bodies.



THE ARTES AND ACTES OF Brute, and his Brutans were in their Vertues and Vices.

Their vertue and Temperance appeared in

Friendship and communion

Betweene man and wife in marriage. Locrine married Guendolin: Leyr married his two eldest daughters with two Dukes: Cordeil was married to Aganip Duke of the Gaules for her womanly vertues, and vertuous womanhoode.

Talke and conference,

Betweene superiour and inferiour, the ruler and the subiect. Guendolin after her husbandes death liued contentedly and louingly with her kindred and acquaintance in Cornewall till shee dyed. Brute the second carried euer a greene shield with him, to signifie, what a minde he did carry withall, euen a mind and desire, to haue all thinges grow and florish like the fruitfull fieldes vnto a ioyful haruest: whereupon hee was named Greeneshield, a Prince gentle toward all men, and merciful to the needie. Leyl liued peaceably in his young dayes. Hurdibras allayed the factions and quarrels that hee found among his people, and of vnquiet men made them very quiet. Leyr liued moderately with his subiectes. Cordeil behaued her selfe so louingly and paciently, that she would not punish the two sonnes of Maglan and Hennine for their fathers: she thought it no reason, to plaister one bodie for an other bodies sores, to beate

one for anothers fault. Riual liued quietly. Gurgustus kept his countrey in rest and wealthy peace by some learned counsell.
Betweene the father and the childe: Cordeil being euer modestly and maydenly shamefaced, either would not or could not flatter her father Leyr with needlesse phrases and vain othes, but answered him mildly and simply without ostentation or deceite, that she loued him as her naturall father with an obedient euer and thankfull hearth vnfainedly.
Betweene two coosins: When Conedag was informed by his olde trustie friendes, and tolde from his mortall ennemies, that Morgan began roundly to make open warre agaynst him, he himselfe desired peace by letters, and sought it with all good meanes otherwise by Embassadours, he was so vnwilling to shed bloud, if he might chuse, or euen to carry armour against his kinsman.




THIS WAS THEIR TEMPERANCE in Deedes and Wordes.

Their vice and Intemperance appeared in
Wordes: First, Gonoril told Leyr, she loued him more then her owne soule: then Ragan sayd, she loued him vnspeakably.
Leuity: When Locrin saw Elstrid, he would haue reiected Guendolin: Memprise liued loosely, and spent most of his time in pastime and licentious games.
Drinke: Gurgust by some naturall infirmitie of braine was dronken once a day: this dronkennesse neither shortened his life, nor hindered his actions, as it seemeth by the yeares of his gouernement and life.
Discord: Madian was subiect to much impatience and tyrannie. Memprise, procured the death of those great men whom hee feared for their vertue and therefore hated for his owne guiltie life.
Venery: Locrine kept Elstrid his captiue for his Concubine, and accompanied her a long time, too long by sixe yeares and twelue monethes. Memprise solde himselfe to adultery, he gaue his body to buggery and beastly loue, which was loue, sauing your reuerence. Ebrank had twentie wiues, some saye, but I think nineteene of them were huswifes, as we commonly saye, and she his wife onely that married him and knew him first: A right line is betweene two, to go aside is to go amisse.



Their vertue, or wisdome is seene in
Discipline or desire of knowledge: Madian, though he were borne a mortall Prince or earthly God, was in his childhood sent into Cornewall to his most valiant grandsir Corin, that he might learne of him all experienced manhood fit for a soueraigne Ruler. Bladud in his young yeares was sent otherwise and carried ouer seas to Athenes, that hee might, forsooth, be taught the wisedome of the Grecians: this Athenian English Prince at his returne brought home with him no lesse then foure great Philosophers, to teach the Brutans, and either found or founded Schooles for them at Stamford or Stanefoda after the smoothest and Atticall Idiome.
Artes, both Geometry, and Astrology: Brute presently vpon his Arriuall searched this Iland optically and throughly, he and his surueyed it quantitatiuely and queintly to the purpose. Hurdibras taking in his head and hand, to build the cittie, or woodworke and stoneworke of Caerpalladour, called for the iudiciall aduise and deuise of Aquila his Astrologer in laying the foundations of that starry and elementary Citty, that the worlde might better esteeme it.
Philosophy, both naturall and morall: the foure wisemen of Athens, that taught some of the Brutans, euen as Bladud the king appointed them, had many times for their variable and strange voices a wonderfull great audience, and those wisemens schollers succeeded them and continued orderly about the times of fourteene hundred yeares after with great glorie, but but how good, I knowe not. Bladud found the hote

Bathes in this Iland by his Geomanticall and Hydromanticall skill and subtiltie. Brute the first made many good politicke laws for the benefit and direction of himselfe and his subiectes. Guendolin ministred true iudgement to the people well and wisely, at last, fearing by reason or inspiration that the king Madian her sonne would scarsely vse her Honourably, as the son should vse his mother, went her way and dwelt far enough ought of sight in Cornewall among them that were glad euer of her daily company. Ebranke for his sonnes sake and his owne, sent his thirtie daughters to Siluius an Italian Duke, that they might be married with their owne bloud, the old Troian bloud, and thereby get their father many friendes or welwillers abroad, to strengthen him in his neede, if nede were.
Wordes of counsell: Cordeil tolde her father in a melancholicke vaine, That as his riches were more or lesse, so he should be loued and feared more and lesse.

This was their Prudence in teaching and learning.




Their vice or folly is seene in
Deceite by bulding: Locrine for want of better conueiance built a caue for his Concubine, and made some few men of his priuy Counsell, but tolde other men, that it was a secret place for praier and sacrifice in the maner of his owne outlandish religion: when he heard and knew of Corins death, he crowned Elstrid queene and reiected Guendolin, whom he seemed to loue hitherto for feare of Corin, and not for liking.
Deceit by weapons: Memprise slewe his manly brother Manlius by faithlesse craft, to be out of his emulatiue danger and dangerous emulation.
Magicals: Bladud dedicated his Bathes to Minerua a dead woman: he taught Necromancy in all parts of his country: he vndertooke to flie aloft in the ayre with deuised winges and meanes artificially, and so fell downe inartificially and died sensibly, neither could he become admirable this way, as he hoped.
Wordes: Leyr forgetting his Honour asked his three daughters a fond needlesse question, as some vse to dally with young children, and would forsooth, heare of them that were women grown, How much they loued him: they might haue shewed on their finger.
Ignorance: the Gyantes of this Iland being onely strong, and wild men without any great forecast, were subdued for want of arte and gouernment. Sisill let all matters go and runne at auenture. Iago had the same vile fault, and died of a frensie, as he liued with a megrim.


Their vertue and fortitude is known by their Acts in


Peace,
These honourable Rulers approoued their Princely magnificence, and Philotimy in a braue maner. Brute the first named this Iland Brutanie of his owne Noble and famous Name: He built a fortunate Cittie by the Tems, and called it Troy-new in perpetuall honour of his owne Countrey. Ebranke built a faire Cittie in hys land Northward, which he called Caerbranke after his owne name: He built another Cittie with a Castle in Albany, and called it Edenbrough, in regard of his daughters. Leyl built a Citie in this land Northward, which he called Caerleyl by his own name. Leyr built a Citie in the midst of his land, and called it Caerleyr in respect of his owne name. Thus they purchased their Glorie with heroicall expences, and publicke actions profitably.Then the vertuous subiectes shewed their excellent magnanimitie in good sorte: They suffered not Madian to rule ouer them, till hee was able to carry armour in the Field, and lead an armie. Duke Corin went to king Locrin with his ordinary battle Axe in his hand, and behaued himselfe so manly, and plainly with the king, that he would not or durst not reiect Guendolin his spouse, as he before had purposed. Good warly rhetoricke.
Warre
at home
Those Dukes Maglan and Hennine suffred not their wiues king Leyrs two eldest daughters to be kept fro^ the Crowne by Cordeil the youngest daughter. Locrin fought with Humber and flewe him in battle, because he had slaine his younger brother Albanact the Prince and ruler of Albany.Conedag and Morgan the sons of those two Dukes deposed euen Cordeil their aunt from hir vsurpation and royall gouernment.Conedag defended his land against Morgan, and put him to flight, and slewe him, and ioyned Morgans kingdome to his owne. Guendolin the queene gathered an army against her husband Locrin the king, and in their conflict he was slaine with an arrow.abroad.
Ebranke got great victories, and rich spoiles both in strange countries far off, and neere hand, and then returned home with his mony and men in safety and ioy: it is no lesse courage, to get out of troble, then to go through it.


This was their Fortitude, in doing for their friends, and vndoing their foes.




Their vice or extream fortitude is knowen by
Couetous ambition: Manly warred with his elder brother Memprise to depriue him of the kingdome, accounting it his owne, if he could win it. Leyrs two sons in law Maglane and Hennine expelled him out of his land, and vsurped his place a while, no time to count of. Morgan raised war against Conedag his coosin german, with whom he liued neighbourly aforetime, but now he aspired to Conedags kingdome. Porrex made sodaine war vpon Ferrex his brother, and put him to flight, and slewe him, to be ruler himselfe alone.
Audacious anger: When the people might do what they would in the raigne of Sisill, they being naturally giuen to fighting, fell to ciuil war among themselues, and spilt much innocent bloud. Rage is blinde: villanes somtime turne wars to their vile vses.
Pusillanimity or base idlenesse: Leyl for want of a good heart coulde not rule his subiectes when he was olde. Cordeyl being at her wits end despaired of her libertie, and murdered her selfe in prison. Gorbodug liued without any memorable act, like an idiote or a verie swaine. Sisill by continuall ease fell into many colde and phlegmaticke diseases, and at last a lethargy made an end of him: as hee sowed, so hee reaped: of a lasie life, came a lothsome death.



Their vertue or Iustice is proued in
Diuiding in the generations of the eighteene kings the Crown is euer iustly possessed, either by the sons, or by the brethren, or by the next of the kings bloud, except the next to king Leyr.
Brute the first deuided Brutany among his three sonnes, the eldest had the best third, the youngest the worst part, the middle sonne the meane part, not so good as the best, nor so ill as the worst.
Ebranke built a Temple in Caerbrank and appoynted an archflamin to ouersee it. Leyl built a Temple in Caerleyl and ordained a flamin to rule ouer it. Hurdibras built Caerkent, Caeruin and Caerpalladour, for the benefit of the countrey, and in euery of them he made a Temple. Bladud built a Temple in his Citie Caerbadon, which was made by him for theyr vse that kept the Bathes or came to them.
Conedag and Morgan the sonnes of two sisters parted Brutany betweene them, and liued quietly: So did Ferrex and Porrex two brethren for a time: but the comedie became a tragedie.
Rewarding: Brute the first gaue Cornewall to Corin his fellowsouldier for ouercomming Gogmagog the Gyant in wrastling. Locrin bestowed the spoyles of Humbers armies vpo^ the souldiers that woon them in battell. Cordeil welcomed her father Leyr most reuerently when he fled vnto her for succour, and restored him to his kingdom. Kymar kept his land in right frame and order, by giuing all braue men that they truely deserued: the chiefe pollicy with good natures.
Challenging: Corin seeing changeable affections of Locrin charged him with a promise and contract

made betweene him and Guendolin, and vrged him so straitly and seuerely, that hee made him content to stand to his word, the rather for that good seruice which Corin did his father Brute.
Reuenging: Locrin reuenged the death of Albanact his brother with the death of Humber. Guendolin fought against her owne husband, to plague him for his whoredome and other iniuries, and prouided so well for her selfe, that in the triall of their Cause hee was slaine, and his whore drowned with her base daughter, the fiery and deceitfull roote Baaras with the leafe. Conedag and Morgan deposed Cordeil from the kingdom which she held from them a long time with some title by her father though insufficient, seeing these were the sonnes of her eldest sisters. Wyden with her waiting women chopped her sonne Porrex in peeces by night, for killing his brother Ferrex without any iust cause.
Punishing: Gurgust was abhorred of the Brutans for his daily dronkennesse, but suffered to be king for his birthrightes sake. Madian and Memprise were hated of good men and feared of wicked men for theyr extreame and beastly crueltie: so betweene both they were secretly forsaken in time of hunting and the wild beastes suffered to destroy them. Here we may very fitly consider, how the Power from heauen punished the people of Brutanie with raining bloud three dayes, and vexing them with infinite swarms of venimous strange flies, that stung their king Riual and many other to death. See, what life is that flies may take away, euen litle flies with their little stings.

This was their Iustice in Religion and Pollicy.




Their vice or Iniustice is proued in
Diuiding: Locrin crowned Elstrid his concubine queene, when Guendolin his true wife liued. Ebranke dedicated the Temple of his Cittie to a liuing name and dead carcasse Diana, that coulde not defend it or him. Leyr gaue halfe his goodes to his two eldest daughters at their marriage, and made them mightier then himselfe, for speaking to him fairely or paintedly, but he gaue nothing with Cordeil to her dowry, because she told him an open truth without anie forgerie.
Rewarding: Leyr at his death, gaue his halfe kingdome to Cordeyl, for defending him in trouble: the people made her queene by common consent, and thereby hindered the right of her two Nephewes the very next apparant heires.



THE CHRONOLOGY OF Brutes offspring.
BRute the first began to rule in the yeare of the world, 2855. and ruled 24. yeares, about the time of Samuell the mightie Prophet in Israel.
Locrin began in the yeare 2879. and rule 20. yeares, in which time hee kept Elstrid seuen yeares, about the time of Saul the first king of Israel.
Guendolin began in the yeare 2899. and ruled 15. yeares, about the time of Dauid the kingly Prophet in Israel.
Madian beganne in the yeare 2914. and ruled 40. yeares, about the time of faire Absolons fame in Israel.
Memprise began in the yeare 2954. and ruled 20. yeares, about the time of Salomons magnificent buildings in Israel.
Ebranke began in the yeare 2974. and ruled 60. yeares, in the 23. yeare of his raigne he built Caerbrank, about this time the fierie Prophet Elias of Israel began to teach.
Brute the second began in the yeare 3034. and ruled 12. yeares: about this time Baals Prophets were slain at the brooke Kison by the commaundement of Elias the Prophet of God.
Leyl beganne in the yeare 3046. and raigned 25. yeares: about this time Eliseus the great Prophet beganne to worke wonders in Israel.
Hurdibras began in the yeare 3071. and raigned 30. yeares: now Lycurgus the Lacedemonian law-maker florished.
Bladud began in the yeare 3101. and raigned 21. yeares: now Hesiodus the Poet was famous, now Homer liued.
Leyr beganne in the yeare 3122. and raigned 40. yeares: now Sardanapalus the last king of Assiria was in his pride and sensualitie.
Cordeyl began in the yeare 3162. and ruled 5. yeares: nowe Esaias the Prophet began to prophesie among the Iewes.
Conedag began in the yeare 3167. and raigned 33. yeares: now Romulus and Remus were borne: now the Olimpiades began.
Riuall began in the yeare 3200. and raigned 46. yeares: now Roome was builded: now Sennacheribs army was destroied by an Angel of God in one night.
Gurgust began in the yeare 3246. and raigned 38. yeares: now Gyges got the kingdom of Lydia and Numa of Roome: heereaboutes Herodotus beginneth his histories, which containe 230. yeares.
Sisill beganne in the yeare 3284. and raigned 49. yeares: nowe Tullus ruled in Roome, and Ieremias the Prophet began to prophesie.
Iago began in the yeare 3333. and raigned 25. years: now Ancus Martius ruled in Roome and Nabuchodonosor in Babilon.
Kymar began in the yeare 3358. and raigned 54. yeares: now Daniel and Ezechiel the Prophets began to prophesie: nowe the seuen wisemen of Greece were famous.
Gorbodug began in the yeare 3412. and raigned 64. yeares: now Tarquinius was expelled out of Roome: now Pythagoras liued: now Cyrus the great, was in his glorie.
Ferrex and Porrex beganne in the yeare 3475. and raigned 5. yeares: now Xerxes beganne his Greeke wars: now Anaxagoras the Teacher of Pericles, Socrates and Thucydides was famous and somwhat singular.
Thus Brute and his offspring seeme to ende in the yeare of the world 3480. and to haue continued in the Gouernment of Brutanie 735. yeares. There is a time

of life, and a time of death, a time to arise, and a time to fall, a time for one stock and a time for another. Yet infinite be that time, which is predestinated for the name of Brute and his Brutans, euerlasting be that honor which is due to the branches of such a Tree as groweth without withering, is strong without decay, and may best serue euen for the Phenix of all men, and Vna of all the women in the earth.


The Topography set downe in the Historie of Brutes generation.

The places mentioned in this Iland are vniuersall
More: Locry the south part of Brutanie, Cambry the west part, Albany the north part so named, of Locrin and Camber and Albanact the sonnes of Brute. All the kings that succeeded Locrin raigned in Locry, and Conedag ruled it as his heritage. Morgan fled into Cambry from Conedags armie: he was ruler in Albany, which was assigned him for his portion. One of Leyrs sonnes in law was Duke of Albany.
Lesse: Cornewall so called of Corin, is in the boundes of Locry: there Guendolin wrought her chiefe practises: there Madian was brought vp: one of Leyrs sonnes in law was Duke thereof. Glamorgan is in the limits of Cambry, there Morgan was slaine, and his Armie ouerthrowne, of whom that part had the name.



Other places ar lesse particular.
In the water: Brute built Troynew by the Riuer Tems. Locry and Albany are deuided by the riuer Humber, where Locrin vanquished the Duke of the Albans called Humber, of whome that riuer had the name.
Cambry is parted from Locry by the riuer Seuerne, called otherwise Habren, in which Elstrid and her daughter Habren were drowned by Guendolins commandement, and of that daughter the Riuer had the name.
In the land: Brute landed at Totnes Hauen. Troynew built by Brute: heere Locrin made Elstrids caue: heere Bladud, Conedag and Gorbodug were buried. Caerkent the Cittie of Kent or Canterbury, Caerwin or Winchester, Caerpalladour or Shaftsbury built by Hurdibras. Caerbadon or the Citty Bathe, and Stamford built by Bladud. Caerleyr or the Cittie of Leyr or Leecester built by Leyr. There hee was buried: there Cordeyl was buried: These are in Locry: Caerbranke, or the cittie of Ebrank, or Yorke, and Edenbrough, or the cittie of Maides, built by Ebranke. Caerleyl the cittie of Leyl: these are in Albany.


Places more particular are
Temples and religious houses: Ebranke built a Temple in Caerbranke, and there he was buried: there was Riuall buried, there Iago was buried. Leil built a Temple in Caerleyl, and there was he buried.
Hurdibras built three Temples in his three Citties,

and in the Temple of Caerwin was he buried. Bladud built a Temple in Caerbadon: there Sisill was buried. Bladud fell downe vpon the aultar of Apollo, when his flying failed him.
Prophane places: Ebranke built a Castle in Edenbrough. The Caue of Elstrid built by Locrin. The bellies of beastes were the toombers of Madian and Memprise.


Places out of this Iland mentioned are
Neerer vs: Germany: thence Elstrid was brought by Humber: thence Ebranke brought great spoyles. Gallia whence Ebranke got many riches: there Aganip the husband of Cordeil was Ruler: Leyr and Ferrex in their neede fled thither.
Farder from vs: Latium in Italy: whether Ebranke sent his 30. daughters.
Athens in Greece, where Bladud was taught and schooled. For the trauailes of Brute before hee came to vs pertaine not to vs in respect of the places or otherwise. Till hee was of our Commonwealth, he was not with vs, but against vs.




THE GENEALOGY OR ISSVE OF CLOTO.
CLoto Duke of Cornwall descending from Corin, Great Brutes nephew began the second family of the Brutan kinges, and begat Mulmucie,
Mulmucie begat two sonnes of Conwen his wife, the first was Belin, the second was Brenne, a verie personable man, yet hee left no knowne seede behinde him.
Belin begat Gurguint.
Gurguint begat Guintelin.
Guintelin begat Sisill, the second of Martia his wife.
Sisill begat Kymar the second.
Kymar begat Elane.
Elane begat Morind of his concubine Tanguestela.
Morind begat 5. sonnes, the first Gorboman, the second Archigall, the third Elidure, the fourth Vigeny the fift Peridure, which died without any naturall issue, onely Elidure begat Gorboman the second.
These are the 14. Generations of Cloto in the kingdome of Locry, which 14. onely are well registred, and acknowledged as true heires in the succession of the Brutan Crowne. There are differences of Houses aswel for number as for time: but opinion destroieth nature often, or else some families would last euer, the force of education is mightie.



THE ARTES AND ACTES OF Cloto, and the Clotoans, are in their Vertues and Vices.

Their vertue or Iustice appeareth in
Diuiding: Mulmucy of all the kings was first crowned with gold: hee founded the Temple of Troynew. Belin the first brother possessed the first part, and Bren the second inherited the second: after that Bren fled out of this Iland and left no children, Belin tooke his kingdome for his owne. Elidure being a younger brother to Archigall, gaue ouer the kingdome vnto him, accounting it rightly Archigals good for his life time. Peridure after the death of his elder brother Vigeny tooke the kingdome into his handes, because Vigeny died without issue, and ioyned his owne kingdome and this in one.
Rewarding: Mulmucy made of his Temples priuiledged sanctuaries, that none should die or suffer any violence in them: his lawes which he writ approue his righteousnesse. Belin repaired the olde Citties which other kinges had built aforetime: hee offered sacrifices and giftes freely to the Gods, and most solemnly thanked them for the victorie he got against Brenne and his Norwaies. He ordained three archflamins in three Citties, hee confirmed his fathers lawes. Martia was generally allowed for Ruler and king of the realme, euen in the dayes of her husband and her sonne, because her gift in iudgement was most singular, and vnmacheable. Gorboman repaired all the Temples in his whole kingdome throughout. Elidure was chosen king three sundry

times for his vpright dealing in all cases. That constant vertue is happy that findeth her friendes constant like herselfe.
Punishing: Belin would not restore Brens kingdome vnto him, because hee had lost it by falshoode, and in triall of warre. Belin would not deliuer Guilthdake the Danish intruder out of prison, and send him home to his kingdome in Denmarke, vntill hee had taken a most sure order for a yearely tribute in consideration of his present deliuery to bee payd to Belin and his heires for euer. Gurguint, when the Dane denyed hys yearely tribute, plagued the Dane incessantly by fire and sword, till hee agreed to pay him the yearely tribute, which was lawfully due to the king of Brutanie. Archigall was depriued of the kingdome by his subiectes for his wicked life. When Morind had ouerthrowne the Mores that inuaded his land, hee burnt them before his face, because they had burnt in some partes of this Countrey. Heere wee may well consider the Iustice of Heauen, which slewe many of Brens souldiers, and wounded him to death, when hee had spoyled a Temple.


Their Vice or Iniustice appeared in
Diuiding: Archigall sought by all meanes, to aduaunce base men and rude vassals, whom hee fauoured most, and to pull downe the great and rich men, whom hee liked not so much as them. Like will to like: tyranny respecteth onely herselfe. Peredure and Vigeny enuying the grace and glory of their brother Elidure, made warre against him and tooke him prisoner, and kept him in hold while they liued, without

any other reason, but the vnreasonable power of forcible entry.
Punishing: Kymar the second being hated of some vngratious and desperate subiectes was slaine by them most wrongfully: the more vnhappy man hee that coulde not foresee. Morind was of so violent and boisterous a nature, that whosoeuer offended him should surely dye for his fault, though it were but a small trespasse, because hee was displeased. Euery offence is not deadly: no man liueth without offences: but a Prince without patience doth euer most mischiefe.


Their Vertue or fortitude, is seene in
Peace at home: Mulmucy built Blackwell Hall and Malmesbury: hee beganne to cut and lay out 4. Highwaies vniuersall to this Land: he restored chiualry. Belin built those 4. waies, and finished them: he built a Citie and a Hauen with faire gates in Troynew and a Tower. Guintelin built a Cittie: Gorboman the first, built two Citties.
Peace abroad: Bren built some Citties in Italy and repayred some.
Warre at home: Mulmucy vanquished 4. great Dukes, which warred with him for the crowne of this kingdome. Belin ouerthrew Brens armies twise, he took Guilthdake prisoner, and those ships that were sent against the Land. Morind slewe an Irish Sea Monster: he destroyed a Duke of the Mores and hys men, that arriued in this Iland to destroy it.
Warre abroad: Belin and Bren sayled together with both their forces into Gallia and subdued it.
Bren sought afterward newe kingdomes abroad, he vanquished great partes of Italy, and sacked Rome it selfe: he got infinite spoyles in Macedonia. Gurguint sayled into Denmarke, and forced the king there in his owne Land to yeald vnto him.
Reuenging: Bren gathered himselfe an Army in Norway, to recouer his kingdom of Belin thereby. So he prouided for himselfe afterward in Armoricke against Belin vppon the same cause, and for the like purpose.


Their Vice or extreme Fortitude is in
Ambition: Bren arose with all his powers against Belin, to take from him his right Dominion, if hee could. Vigeny and Peredure conspired against Elidure, and tooke his kingdome from him by open force.
Rage: Bren threatned Belin with wordes of great defiance, if he had not his kingdome of him againe. He spoyled the Temple of Macedonia in despite of all gouernment.
Pusillanimitie: Elidure was content to bee taken and prisoned, rather then giue any cause of bloudshed among his people by meanes of warre.


Their Vertue or Prudence is set forth in
Writinges: Mulmucy made many positiue lawes in his natiue language, and caused them to be published, that all men might read them for their direction and better aduisement.
Marcia a queene made many statutes, to teach the subiects aright and easie way of morall life. Right in respect of the crooked way, and easie in respect of the loose and carelesse way which breedeth sorrowes.
Doinges: Mulmucie fauoured all learned men of all kindes, being minded to vse euery one in his mistery. Belin fortified the late kingdome of his brother, and now his owne kingdome, with his owne souldiers, and put out all Brens men for his sake, and his owne safetie: hee allowed his fathers lawes for his time, lesse any man should obiectiuely quarrell with him. Archigall seeing by dayly experience, the dayly miseries of a wicked and inconsiderate life, learned a new lesson, and led his life orderly euer after. Bren knowing his owne bodily beautie applied himselfe to that vaine, and got goodwill by marrying great women in forraine Landes, when he could not stay at home. Belin was more carefull of his owne land, then for outlandish goodes, and returned from Gallia to Brutanie, where his greatest charge was.


Their vice or folly is in
Conceite or opinion: Mulmucy dedicated a Temple to Apollo, as if the dead man were wise and mightie.
Ignoraunce: Elane ruled fondly and vnrulily.
Presumption: Morind fought with a Sea monster, and made no man of his counsell herein.
Improuidence: Kymar was slaine by his enemies in time of hunting, where they tooke him alone at a dead vantage.

The best Remedie against Follies Wichery is, a tryall of all causes, which belong to any effect. Hee that can follow this Rule infallibly, cannot be foyled in his Actions.




Their Vertue or Te^perance is known by
Liberalitie: Mulmucy, accounting the Cittie, and the Countrey two pillars of his kingdome, priuiledged the waies which went to Citties, and which were for plowes, that the Cittizens and husbandmen of the land might be loued the more, and better vsed for their immunities among themselues, and with souldiers. Bren gaue much treasure to his Noble Lordes in little Brutanie, to winne their goodwill, and wage battell with their helpe against Belin. A man alone is but halfe himselfe.
Marriage: Bren married the Duke Elfinges daughter in Norway: he married the dukes onely daughter of little Brutany, and thereby was mightie in both places for fauour and power: but I cannot tell certainly, what became of his first wife: he was an od man of wit and practise.
Concord: Conwen the mother of Belin, and Bren ioyned her two sonnes in one, yea euen them two, which was somewhat strange: but what may not wordes do, if they be well tempered, and seasoned with true modestie? when they were readie with their armies to ioyne in battell, insomuch that straitwaies they ruled their former rages, and went brotherly together against the common enemy. Gurguint liued peaceably: so did Guintelin: so did Sisill the second: so did Kymar the second: so did Gorboman the second. A sober heart maketh peace, a drunken head, strife.
Mercie: Gurguint meeting with a Nauy of 30.

strange shippes in the Scottish Seas, and seeing plainly their extreame neede, and hearing withall their pittifull Supplication, gaue them his goodwill to dwell in Ireland, and assured them of his good fauour, so long as they liued well and neighbourly. Elidure for his notable mildnesse, and mercifull nature was named Meeke: he heartily lamented his brother Archigals poore and wretched estate, therefore he fayned himselfe sicke, that by these meanes all his Noblemen, and Lordes might come and visite him, and at their being with him, hee sued to them, as it had been for his life, That he might resigne his kingdom vnto Archigall.


Their Vice or Intemperance is known by
Anger: Morind was outragious alwaies and intollerable in his heate.
Maleuolence: Archigall gaue himselfe to breede quarrels chiefly against his Noblemen and Richmen.
Incontinency: Bren being wounded to death in a tempest sent from the cloudes, slew himselfe in a desperate rage. Who can saue him whom God hateth? It was wonderous, that the Heauens should fight for Apollo. I may thinke the Sprite of the Ayre was suffered, to play this part, to vpholde Apollonisme.




THE CHRONOLOGY OF Clotos offspring.
AFter the yeare of the worldes Creation, 3480. there was ciuill Warre continually in this Iland for the space of 50. yeares: in which time vainglorious Xerxes was weakened of the Greekes, both by Sea and Land: then the 12. Tables of Lawes were brought to Roome: then Euripides was born: then Esdras began to restore the Temple at Ierusalem.
Mulmucy began in the yeare 3530. and raigned 40. yeares: in which time Bellum Peloponnesiacum began and ended: then Socrates died violently by poyson and malice.
Belin began in the yeare 3570. and raigned 26. yeares: in the first fiue yeares he and his brother Bren liued quietly together: in this time Roome was taken of the Gauls: now Aristotle was borne, may the world be glad thereof?
Gurguint began in the yeare 3596. and raigned 19. yeares: in this time Xenophons greeke History is ended: now Alexander the great is borne, to begin a peece of a new world.
Guintelin beganne, 3615. and ruled 26. yeares: in which time Plato dyed, the more the pitie: then Isocrates and Demosthenes plaied their partes with Philip: then the Greeke Monarchy began to go on foote: hereabout Buchanan begins his Scottish kinges, 330. yeares before Christes Natiuitie.
Sisill began, 3641. and ruled 7. yeares: in this time Alexanders kingdoms were deuided betweene his worthies.
Kymar the second began, 3648. and ruled 3. yeares: in this time Cassander restoreth the Cittie Thebes the 20. yeare after Alexander destroyed it.
Elane began, 3651. and raigned 9. yeares: in this time Seleucus beganne his raigne in Syria, and Demetrius deliuered Athens from the Macedonian yoke.
Morind began 3660. and raigned 8. yeares: in this time Flauius a Secretary published the Ciuill Lawe, which the high Priest onely knew aforetime.
Gorboman began, 3668. and raigned 11. yeares: in which time Decius the sonne deuoted himself to death for his Country Rome in the wars of the Samnites.
Archigall began, 3679. and ruled 5. yeares: in this time the Consul T. Coruncanus began first to professe the Ciuill Law: now Pirrhus the Epyrote made warre with the Romans.
Elidure began, 3684. and ruled 5. yeares: in this time Ptolomeus Philadelphus entertained many learned and wise men.
Archigal began again, 3689. and ruled 10. yeares.
Elidure began againe, 3699. and ruled 2. yeares.
Vigeny and Peredure began, 3701. and ruled 9. years: in this time the 70. translated the Bible into greeke: in this time the first Punick war beganne: now Phalereus the Rhetorician, now Theocritus the Poet, now Euclides the Geometrician, now Aratus the Astrologian liued.
Elidure began again, 3710. and raigned 4. yeares.
Gorboman the second began in the yeare of the world, 3714. and raigned 10. yeares: in this time the people created T. Coruncanus the high Bishop in Roome.

Thus the Time of Clotoes offspring seemeeh to end in the yeare of the word, 3724. and to haue endured 194. yeares in the Rule of Brutany: a verie little time of continuance for so many kings: but all plantes haue not roote alike: some are rooted broadway, as Elmes, and fall quickly: some are rooted downward, as Okes, and stand in the mids of the windes, euen till the violent axe or verie age ouerturne them.




THE TOPOGRAPHY MENTIOned in Clotoes Offspring.


The places named are in the Iland

general
Cambry, where Rudank ruled in the conflict of Mulmcy.Locry, where Pinnor ruled in that conflict. Belin and his successors ruled there. Vigeny ruled ther.Albany, where Statery was Ruler in that time of conflict. Bren and Peredure raigned there.Northumberland, there Yeuan ruled in the time of the conflict: here Belin prepared an Army against Brens comming.
speciall,
More burials,
Mulmucy buried in Troynew Te^ple: so was Gurguint: Belin at Belinsgate: Guintelin in the Temple: Archigall at Grantam: Elidure at Caerleyl.Lesse, cities and the foure highwais. etc
Warwicke built by Guintelin: Cambridge and Grantam built by Gorboman: Caerusk built by Belin, here he ordained an archflamin. Troynew, where Belin consulted with his Lords and with Bren.




Other places not so generall are these: the Tower of Troynew built by Belin: there Elidure was imprisoned. Belinsgate built by Belin: Blackwell Hall, an Malmesbury, and Pauls founded by Mulmucy: Bristo by Bren: Calater a wood neere Caerbranke, where Bren was discomfited

in his first and second wars against Belin: there Elidure met Archigal. Caerbranke the place where Belin counselled with his Lordes about Guilthdake: there hee ordained an archflamin: there Elidure restored Archigall by the assent of his Lordes.



The places named out of the Iland

general
Ireland: there Gurguint placed the 30. sayle of shippes that he met on the Sea.Orcades: there he met those ships wa^dring.Norway: Bren fled thither from Belin, and there he gathered his second army against him.Armorica or litle Brutany, where Bren prepared his third Army.Denmark, from that countrey Guilthdake, came in armes against this Iland. Gurguint sayled thither, to fight for his owne goodes.Gallia: there Bren ruled, and repaired some Cities.Italy: here Bren became most victorious.Macedony: here Bren spoiled himself and all. Mauritany: Morind ouercame an Army of Mores, which came against this Iland.
speciall
Roome: here Bren made hauocke of all.Capitoll: Bren besieged it, and for one thousand poundes of gold, brake vp and departed.Millan, Pauy, Bergomum, Comum, Brixia, Verona, Tridentum, Vincentia, and other Cities built or repaired by Bren the rauenous and magnificent Prince.




Thus one Generation of men passeth, and another commeth, but the vertues of men are euerlasting, yea and their bodies by traduction are immortall: So a vertuous man shall be a mortall God, if his minde or body haue their issues.




THE THIRD GENERATION or rather succession of Brutan Kings.
THe death of Gorboman the second begat a politicke body in this Iland without an head. This Acephalia begat Vnrulinesse in the lower partes.
Vnrulinesse begat Strife, among the Nobles and Commons,
Strife begat Trouble on both partes.
Trouble begat Wearinesse and Weaknesse,
Weaknesse begat Desire of rest,
Desire of rest begat Election, and
Election begat Morgan, and made him Ruler.
Morgan begat Goodwill in his subiectes,
Goodwill for his sake begat Emerian his brother, who died as the other did without issue, his death let Ambition a traytor out of prison,
Ambition begat Sedition,
Sedition begat Confusion,
Confusion begat Vnquietnesse,
Vnquietnesse begat Desire of order,
Desire of order begat Deliberation, and
Deliberation begat Iual and made him king.
The death of Iuall begat Emulation,
Emulation begat Wit and Inuention.
Inuention begat Friendship,
Frendship begat Rimo, and made him Ruler. When he was dead his companion Geruncie was made king

in respect of that familiaritie which he had with Rimo. Then Cathel so handled hys matters in pleasing the chiefe men by hys liberall behauiour, that hee raigned next and dyed. Then Coil ouercame mens hearts with hys vertuous actiuitie, and was annointed king, and dyed: then Porrex the second wrought many good works, and was next king to him, and dyed.
Then Cheryn fed all the mad fellowes humours in the realme that he could heare of, and by voices got the kingdome.
Cheryn begat a sonne, and called hym Fulgen, who dyed without issue: then Eldrid by faire and large promises got the Crowne and dyed: then Androgy outwent hym in all kinds of allurement, and succeeded him and begat Vrian that dyed without issue. Then Eliud by his misticall artes did extraordinary and admirable acts, and thereby was made king.
After him Merian by inuenting newe practises for warres, and occupations was so honoured generally, that he was Ruler. Then Bladune arose from priuate desertes to publicke fauours, and at length hee was king: the same kinde of nature begat Capene, and next hym Ouine, and euen such a pacificatory mind preferred Sily. After hym Bledgabrede by hys pleasant demeanour and merrimentes, pleased all the Nobles, and became theyr Ruler. Then Redargy arose next him in such a sort, and so did Samuly: But Penisell being vnmachable in strength succeeded hym: then Pirrhy for his strange swiftnesse, and incomparable dexteritie in all feates of manhood, was ruler of his brethren. In those dayes publicke actions made kings.
These are the 24. rulers, which succeeded Gorboman

the second, and make a line of succession rather then of genealogy. Yet wee may call this a politicke generation rightly in the whole body of the realme, though it be not a naturall generation in theyr owne proper bodyes from Morgan to Pirrhy. All men haue not the gift of children: of all these Rulers here are but two sons, and their two fathers, the other seeme to haue left no seede behinde them. Sometime the imperfection is in the wife, sometime in the husband: there are watry loynes, and rotten thighes in both sexes. Some men are barren naturally, some are barren artificially, some are barren by olde age, some make themselues barren with preternaturall dyet, some are made of other men by chirurgicall incisions. Or if they had children and were not barren, the more vnhappy they that coulde not continue as they began. Some families are taken away by sicknesse, some by wars, some by mischances in theyr dyet and exercise, some are put from theyr owne, and are euer in thraldome, and are neuer againe heard of in the worlde. God almighty knoweth all thinges from the first to the last: but if a man shoulde sucke the stars, or be sucked himselfe as they say, of the king of Fayries, he should not finde a perfite History of this time of these Kinges. Yet such as it is, I beleeue, a reader may go farther and speed worse: the most morals the best Historie, but a man may insert phisicall obseruations vpon occasion to good vse and purpose, so long as History is an example of life in both wayes of Action.



THEIR ARTES AND ACTES are set downe in their Vertues and Vices.

Their Vertue or Iustice was approued in
Diuiding: Emerean succeeded Morgan, because hee was his brother: for brethren are twigs of the same branch, fingers of one hand, partes of the same body. If one twig fall off, the sap of the tree must feed the other twig which standeth on. If some of the fingers be cut off, the vaines must serue the fingers that remaine: if one arme be rotted of, the other arme must be in stead of both armes. Fulgan succeeded his father Cherin, and Vrian his father Androgy. For the sonnes body is the fathers body deriued and continued: it is the old body made young againe: the sons and fathers body are as the same body of one tree in right length: the seedes of trees bring forth all theyr owne kindes: in which respect Morind is a true king by Natures law.
Rewarding: Iual among the Noblemen was chosen the king for his moderate vertues, and equall iudgementes that appeared euer in all his wordes and works. A rare instance of worthinesse worthily considered, and may of it selfe deserue a Treatise to proue the Ciuilitie of olde Brutanie, which many disgrace for malice, and more for ignorance, and most for company.



Their vertue or prudence was shewed
In the art of Musicke: Bledgabrede both studied and practised musicke: hee was very famous: and I thinke, in respect of his charge and gouernment, very wonderfull. A monasticall liuer, and much more an oeconomicall hath no partes of time for such young childish studies, if he looke wel about him: and how can a king that is the keeper of all other men haue any time for such vaine insignificant voices? Yet the circular wisdome of this king had such a capacitie by some myraculous infusion from heauen, that hee was fit both for the grauest and the lightest studies, either to learne them by contemplation, or to vse and teach them by action. He saw by his instrumentes, how to tune and string his kingdome: he could preuent and pacifie tumultes with his musick: he might perhaps allay the waues of the Sea, and breake the thunders aloft with his diuine melodie: he coulde keepe himselfe from wearinesse by his musicke: he could mitigate the violence of diseases with his sweete voices: musicke was his prosody, his pronunciation, his disposition, his instrument of instrument, and the life of his life.


Their vertue or Temperance appeared in
Behauiour: Coil liued all his time quietly without any war and tumult: A contented mind is not contentious. Porrex the 2. behaued himselfe, either fatherly toward his youngers, or brotherly toward his equals, or gently toward all men. By this meane he was more happie with the helpe of the Graces, then the first Porrex, whome the Furies destroied. The Graces are moderate Vertues, the Furies are immoderate Vices.



Their vice or Intemperance was in
Diet: Cheryn was a drunkard, a cupleache, a bellygod, a water rat, he had been well vsed if hee had been punished with abasement, and turned out of his throne into a wineseller, and of a winebibber, made a winedrawer.
Manners: Vrian was nothing but a carnall man, his wit was carnall, his bodie was carnall his life was sensuall, he was without anie diuine or humane excellencie. What should such a man haue an excellent place in the commonwealth? why may the Heauenly Power abide so vnholy a beast, to represent his inuisible king in so holy a Seat as the imperiall Seate of a Prince? a singular place, a singular incumbent.
The other kinges that are not once noted with any vertuous or vicious actes might as good haue not been borne: they are certainly miserable men that leaue no memorable act behinde them: but are onely named, as a man may giue a name for distinctions sake to a tree, or a hill, or a house, or a field, or a stone, or anie dead thing, without any father account, or regard of them. The greatest Name maketh and sheweth the greatest man, the least name, the least man: the greatest name springeth from the greatest actions, it is not the number of Actes which beget a great Name. All goodes that a man hath within and without him, all are giuen and lent him to doe good: the Pillars of the life are Health, Wisedome and Riches, yet some men are famous for their sicknesse, folly and beggery: A memorable man euen with these three plagues is happier then

an obscure man with those three blessings: al the goods we haue serue for the life, and yet the life consisteth not in the possessions which wee haue: Riches serue for Health, and Health serueth for Wisedome, and the actions which belong vnto her, Wisdome serueth for life, and to keepe vs from the pathes of destruction and death. Life serueth to get a Name by doing good. I would reioyce more in this, to haue my name written in heauen, where it may euer be in sight and remembrance, then be all these 24. kinges fortunati infoelices, whose renowne is layd in Hell, and deuoured of the Graue. A liuing Cynick, more happy then a dying Caesar. A liuing dogge better then a dead Lyon. Yet let go vainglory and bannish selfewill: A name without true vertue deserueth no memorie: Many are recorded that are not worthy of a register: now there is no remedie: or else it might haue probably been wished, that no obiect or vile examples of base men had been written. For my part, I cannot thinke, that so many kinges could liue and die without some glorious actions, howsoeuer mishap, or enuie, or the Deuill hath blotted them out from our eye-sight.



The Times of these Kinges.
MOrgan began to raign in the yeare of the world. 3724. and ruled 14. yeares: now the Panareton of Syracides was written, and then the

Panareton of Brutanie fell into a dead sleepe, wherein it lay still aboue 100. yeares.
Emerian began in the yeare, 3738. and raigned seuen yeares: now was Ennius the Poet borne: now Archimides the Mathematician liued with admiration.
Iual beganne, 3745. and raigned 20. yeares: now Naeuius and Plautus flourished: now Hanniball began the second Punick warre.
Rimo began* 3765. and ruled 16. yeares: in this time Hanniball fled to Antiochus for succour.
Geruncy began, 3781. and raigned 20. yeares: in this time Antiochus raged in Iewry.
Cathel began* 3801. and ruled 10. yeares: nowe the Macabees bestirred them like Bees: now Terence the Poet flourished.
Coil began, 3811. and raigned 20. yeares: in this time the third Punick Warres began.
Porrex the 2. began, 3831. and ruled 4. yeares: now the Citty of Numantia in Spaine was rased.
Cherin raigned one yeare: Fulgen two yeares.
Eldred ruled one yeare: Androgy one yeare.
Vrian raigned 3. yeares: Eliud 5. yeares.
Merian ruled two yeares: Bladune two yeares.
Capen ruled 3. yeares: Ouine two yeares.
Sily raigned 2. yeares, eleuen kinges in 24. yeares: About this time the Saduces and Pharisees beganne their sects in Iewry: now the warre of Iurguth began and ended: nowe Tully was borne in the yeare of the world. 3859, an hundred and three yeares before Christ.
Bledgabrede began, 3860. and raigned 20. yeares: in this time was Pompei borne into the world.
Redargy began, 3880. and ruled 3. yeares: in this

time was I. Caesar borne into the world.
Samuly ruled two yeares? Penisell three yeares.
Pirry raigned 2. yeares, foure kinges in 10. yeares, and ended in the yeare of the worlde, 3890: in which time Antony and Crassus the Oratours of Roome, and in Q.M. Scaeuola the Lawyer liued:

So these 24. kinges continued 166. yeares in the Gouernment of Brutanie.

Heere is no Topography, heere is no place named: they were now I may well say kinges Abstracts: that they did it no where, either incomprehe^sibly like Gods, or metaphisically like strange men. The musicke of Bledgabred and the actions of the rest were, belike, in no place of any great account. Yet because they were kinges and enioyed their kingdomes, theyr doomes must needes be giuen somewhere, and their cunning must needes be shewed in some place, and that was euen the generall Land of Brutany, without any particular nomination of lesse places. Right Soueraignes and perfit kings, whose Actes were vniuersall and common to the whole realme, not appropriate or fancied to any one Region therein. If the head moue and guide the body it doth more then if it moue or guide one part thereof. A generall praise is greatest, and this was these kinges speciall glory aboue others, to rule all places, to rule the Land. The best vse of one commendation or other is, to encounter some one dispraise or other that hath been or may be, but they that do all thinges well, haue no neede themselues of particular History. If Sily ruled 2. yeares, suppose in reason, hee was no silly one. If the other kinges were kinges, that was all in

all. A king cannot possibly be without his excellencies, and memorials.
Now I diuine modestly, heere were actors without recorders of their actions, patrons of learning, but no learned men: or, they were of both sortes, but their studies came to no effect, by some force: or, they were very old when they came to the Crown, and could do nothing: or, the furies and helhoundes raged so extreamely, that the Muses and Graces coulde not bee quiet for them: or, their actes were wrought in needleworke onely, and so worne out: or, the senses, and senslesse desires so ruled them, that theyr liues were not so short as their actes: or, the Histories were written in some strange kind of polygraphy and steganography, and coulde neuer yet be read, but remaine in some obscure place: or, they made little account of writers, and these set as light by them: or, they that take most pains at their booke, were not most regarded: and thereupon studied to themselues: or, some infortunate and maleuolent configuration of mouable skies and starres, and spirites remoued all Histories out of the way: or, the Kinges and People agreed among themselues, to bee remembred by being not remembred, wishing to haue their time called The vnknowe Regiment, adiudging secrecie greatest wisedome: or, our Countrimen listened so much after other Noble Actors in the earth, that they had no leisure, to doe any thing themselues: or, they disdained to haue them theyr iudges after their death, whom they would scorne to haue their iudges in their life: or, some outlandish enuy destroyed the rowles and registers of our Histories, to make vs seem barbarous: or, the Vniuersitie men of Stamford had by

some Priuiledge got them wiues, and so forth: and had no leisure to do any thing but liue: or, before the kings were crowned, they were worthy men, and after theyr coronations they fell to make books of nothing: or they could tell, how to get a Soueraigntie, but they knewe not, how to keepe it: or, they writ their Chronicle hieroglyphically, and set the pictures of other creatures in the places of their kinges, and by the ignorance of some carelesse men were esteemed as gaies, and not otherwise regarded: or, it was not thus, or so: perhaps, neither this, nor that, but some other way, I cannot tell howe, nor I care not greatly, for feare I may bee thought neither idle, nor well occupied. Now, good Reader, albeit I ioyne a morall genealogy with a naturall, and seeme to breake the stile of history, yet, because affections rule otherwhile asmuch as kinges, I may truely say, my deuise is allowable in itselfe. Where issue wanteth in the Prince, there the issue of the people is considered, seeing some Princes are begotten of the people, as some are of their parents: these are heires by the law of particular nature, and they by the reason of vniuersall nature and of grace. As for the other partes of this third Offspring, I hope, they are seemely and fit enough for this place. It is lawfull to make the best vse and most gaine that wee can honestly, of anie thing that we read or write: probable additions, and reasonable collections are neuer amisse: it is better, of the two extreames, to make more then wee neede of our Countreimen, rather than make lesse of them then wee should: superfluitie is not best, nor scarcitie: that history is most worth which doth a man most good.



THE FOVRTH GENEALOGY or issue of Capor.
LAbour the sonne of Parsimony the daughter of Queene Temperance, made Capor a man of infinite wealth: then Order, the sonne of Reason, the daughter of the Empresse Truth, made him a man of greatest fauour in this Land: by these two meanes ioyned with his royall bloud, he became Ruler of Brutany, and begat Dinel,
Dinel begat Hely,
Hely begat three sonnes: the first Lud, the second Cassiuelan, the third Stenny.
Lud begat 2. sonnes: the first Androgy, the second Tenancy. Then came Death, and tooke away Lud and hys brother Stenny, while his two sonnes were children, and Age made Cassiuelan Ruler: then came Discontent and begat Rage in the minde of Androgy, that hee went away: then arose Parentage, and created Tenancy for the king.
Tenancy begat Cimbelin,
Cimbelin begat 2. sonnes, the first Guinder, the second Aruirage: then came Deceite, and slew Guinder: then Deuise set forth Aruirage, and made him right king.
Aruirage begat Marius of his wife Senissa, the daughter of Claudius the Emperour.
Marius begat Coil the 2. Coil begat Lucy, which dyed without issue.

These are the 11. heires males and successors of Capor in his kingdom: for the Generation of Cassiuelan, of Stenny, of Androgy and of Guinder, are vnknown, the more is the pity, seeing they were very singular men in their kinds. Albranches of a tree prosper not, euer some are withered and rotten.




The Arts and Actes of Capor, and the Caporites are seene by their Vertues and Vices.

Their Vertue or Iustice is in
Defending and regarding: Lud and Stenny were at great variance betweene themselues, because Lud would haue the City of Troy new called Caerlud by his owne name, but Stenny would haue it keepe the olde name in honour of the predecessors, and Troians from whom he came. It is iustice, both to respect our auncestors, and iustice to consider our own glory: This were a pretty question for discourse, which name ought to take place, and stand in force, if it were well handled.
Diuiding and deposing: Cassiuelan the 2. sonne of Hely, was the Protectour and Gouernour of the Realme in the minoritie and nonage of Luds two sonnes, hys two nephewes. Kingdomes are too heauy for childrens shoulders. Cassiuelan ordained a common sacrifice to God that gaue him the victory against the Romanes, and a publicke feast to his Nobles that helped him in the battels, and deuised many pastimes, in honour of God and men.
Tenancy was made king by the treasonable absence of his elder brother Androgy. Euery one of these kings hath his right succession, except Cassiuelan which vsurpeth.
Punishing and correcting: Cassiuelan summoned Eueline to appeare before him and the Councell, to answere for the death of Hirelda. When he could not preuaile with Androgy by faire meanes, he made warre vpon him, to plague him for his stubbornesse. Ought Androgy

to bee at his call? a disputable matter of great vse. Nature preferreth the kings son to the Crowne before the kings brother, but Pollicie preferred Cassiuelan before Androgy, a good man before a bad.


Their Vice or Iniustice is in
Diuiding: Cassiuelan appointed vnto Androgy the eldest sonne of Lud the Citty of Caerlud, and the land of Kent, and to Tenancy the younger sonne the Land of Cornewall, and kept the kingdome from them, though they were his elder brothers true sons, and vsurped it himselfe by force. He is not fit to be a Protector that is ambitious: it is a wofull thing, to be a childe among our enimies, or amongst the enuious sectaries.
Reuenging: Androgy being vnable of himselfe to withstand Cassiuelan sent letters to I. Caesar in Gallia, and certified him, that if he would come into Brutany he should be welcome: when hee had gotten Caesars Army to set vppon Cassiuelan in the valley of Dorobernia or Canterbury, and the fight had endured till both partes were almost weary, he came vpon Cassiuelan with a fresh reply, and put him to flight: and thus he displeased the whole realme to please himself, yet his owne hurt was neuer the lesse for making the misery of his Country greater. But when Cassiuelan thought to punish Androgy, he punished himselfe as much as him, he did euen put fire to Brimstone, and flaxe to the flame. It was traiterously done of him, to warre against his legitimate king, and of Androgy, to make his natiue Country subiect to outlandish Powers.



Their Vertue or Prudence is in
Order: Cassiuelan brought vp Androgy and Tenancy, Princes sonnes, princely in all points. Cassiuelan considering, that the two victories which he had gotten of the Romans, concerned himselfe, and all his Noblemen most specially, caused an assembly of them to be made, that in a generall meeting, there might bee a generall thankesgiuing to God almighty, and to one another for their seruices and actes done in the Field. Nothing teacheth men more courage then a beleefe of heauenly assistance, with an honourable remembrance of their vertues: this way of harting men is chiefest.
Desire of knowledge: Lucy seeking al means to make his people true and louing among themselues, and hearing that Christians were without hatred and falshood, desired to heare their religion and receiue their doctrine, and sent two Noble schollers, Eluane and Meduine to Eleuthery Bishop of Roome with letters, desiring to be taught Christianitie.
Reformacion: Lucy changed the three Archflamins, and the 28. Flamins into three Archbishops, and 28. Bishops: he destroyed the Temple of Apollo in the Ile Thorney, and made a Temple in honour of the Almighty God, which we now call Westminster.
Discipline: Lucy seeing that men were executed for disobeying the law, because heerein they disobeyed God, and that the kings pardon was not so much to be esteemed as a pardon from God, and perceiuing the heartie and vnfained repentance of some offenders, and knowing that God forgaue such men,

thought it no reason, that such Penitents should be put to death, but reserued to a better vse: wherefore he ordained, that if any man did offend by mischance and repent him, or any one were oppressed, and could not otherwise escape oppression then by appealing to Gods word, that such men should get them into the Temple of God, and ther approue themselues to be true godly men, and so be safe both body and goods.


Their vice or folly is in
Permission: the Brutans forgetting the true title that Luds two sonnes had to the kingdom of their father, and feeling the liberall gifts of Cassiuelan an vsurper, suffered him to keep the Rule and Key of all the Land, and taught one another, to disinherit one another by causelesse and deceitfull popularitie and flattery.
Hatred: the Brutans could not agree vpon a king, no not in fifteene yeares space when Lucy was dead, though euery countrey must needs see one nearer the Crowne then another, if they could aduise the^selues and marke euery family in good ma^er. They could not foresee the miseries of forrain Dominion, they were blinded with malice, and selfewill among themselues.
Improuidence: Cymbelin was brought vp in Roome, both in contempt of all his own countrey learning, and in slauery to outlandish with. Coil the second was brought vp in Roome, as if hee were borne to serue Roome, and not to serue Brutany. Of the two extreames, it is safer to haue our men vplandish, then outlandish, plain then perilous.
Deceit: the Brutans set great long sharp stakes closely in the bankes where the Romanes should arriue, and so troubled them extreamely in theyr landing: a poore and pittifull inuention to slay and Host.



Their vertue or temperance, is in
Behauiour: Lud was bountifull in housekeeping, and by that means beloued generally. Cimbelin with the moderate vsage of himselfe, so pleased the Emperour, that he loued him greatly, and receiued manie good words and gifts from him: if this were not intemperance, to please an enemy. Aruirage got into such fauour with Claudius the Emperor, that he married his daughter Genissa: if this were not incontinence, to be linked with outlandish, that was mightier then himselfe. He was beloued of his subiectes for his vsage toward them in all cases.
Marius was of honourable demeanour euery way. He accepted the pitition of the vanquished Pictes, he allotted to them the fardest part of Albany: afterward he gaue himselfe to the wealth of the realme. Lucy was loued of all his subiectes for his good life: hys loynes were in the cloudes, and hys seed among the starres: he had rather be a father in Morals, then in Naturals: such was his abstinence. It may be, Galaxias the milky and bright way in heauen was made in honour of such men as Lucy was, no meaner then a Saint.
Marriage: the Brutans would not in any case ioyne their daughters in wedlocke with the Pictes, whom they knew to be barbarous Scythians by discent of bodies, and consent of mindes, and very vnfaithfull.


Their vice or intemperance is in
Rashnesse: Hirelda and Eueline two knightes in gaming fell to wrastling, and in heate fell to wordes, and in anger fell to blowes, and in rage fell to wounds,

and Hirelda was slaine in the tumult that arose by these meanes. A gaming not so profitable as the death of a good knight is hurtfull in a realme.
Disobedience: Eueline being sent for by the Protector Cassiuelan and the Councell departed from the Court with Androgy his kinsman, and tooke no leaue of them: Will is it selfe witlesse: a stomacke without a heart, maketh a man a swine.
Reuenge: Aruirage vsed such meanes, that he got Hammon the Romane, who siue his brother Guinder guilefully, and when he had him in his handes he caused him to be cut in peeces, and threw him peece by peece into the Sea at South-hampton, satisfying herein his insaciable anger for his brothers death and supposing vainly and madly, that he killed Hamon so many times as he had peeces of him.


Their vertue or fortitude is in
Glorious desire: Hely called the Ile of Ely after hys name, that he might be famous for euer. Marius set vp a Colosse in remembrance of the victory he had of the Picts, with Marij Victoria grauen in it: a warly Register.
Magnificence: Lud repaired olde Temples and Cities and built new. He made walles about Troynew, and called the West gate Ludgate in honour of hys owne name, and then dwelt most there because he had built most there. Aruirage road about the realme, to renew the decayed Cities which the Romans defaced: he built a Castle at Douer to strengthen that

part of the Land against forraigne Powers.
Wordes: When the Romanes thought to terrifie the Brutans by their letters, these sent them word, that as they must, so they would defend their Countrey from all forces. Aruirage being for his Noblenesse made the Emperours sonne in law, and wishing to haue a memoriall of Claudius his queenes and wiues owne father, called the Cittie where he married Claudiocestria or Glocester, the rather, to be free fro^ tribute in respect of his wife, though he were free of himselfe by his vertue.
Victories: Cassiuelan made the Romans flie to their ships at their first battell, and at the second: beware the third.
Desertes: Cymbelin in his youth led so manly a life in Roome, that the Emperour Augustus made him a knight there in his order of knightes.
Exercise: Hirelda and Eueline two braue knightes wrastled openly at the Feast which was made after the victories against the Romanes.
Warre: Guinder denied to pay tribute to the Romans, and chose rather to sight with them then yeald otherwise. Aruirage did the like, and when they came against him; he made them flie from the southeast part of this Iland to the southwest, there he draue them from Excester and Totnes, and within seuen daies made all well. Marius staied the fire and sword of the Picts in Albany and slew their armies.
Deuise: Aruirage seeing his brother Guinder dead, took on him presently his armour and Princely cognisa^ce, that the Brutans might not suspect their kings death and be discomforted: then hee continued the battel so stedfastly and heartily, that the Brutans were stirred vp to fight valiantly by his liuely example, till they ouerthrew the Romans.


Their vice or extreme fortitude is in
Bold rashnesse: Stenny Cassiuelans brother in the wars against the Romans canne to I. Caesar and puld hys sword out of his hand, and slew Labienus a tribune of the Romans therewith, and was slaine.
Obscure glory: When Stenny was dead, he was buried at Caerlud: and the sword which he puld from Caesar with his deaths wound was buried with him, that it might be a remembrance of one venturous action euen in a hole.
Abasement: Cassiuelan was tributary to Roome nine yeares. Tenancy was too deligent in paying tribute to Rome, euen 3000. pounds in gold. Cimbelin hauing choice to pay or not to pay tribute, forgat the slauery of the act and payd it. Aruirage was perswaded by his wife to pay tribute when he had resisted the Romanes valiantly. He should haue sent such a wife for the tribute vnto Roome from whence she came, and kept the mony in his cofers for warres. Coil saw in his poreblinde eyes, that it was best to yeald to Roome, and agreed to pay tribute. Androgy departed to Roome with Caesar: a mad and fickle courage.




THE TIMES OF THESE KINGS.
CApor began his raigne in the yeare of the world, 3894. and raigned two yeares: now Mithridates raised warres in Asia, and Lucullus was sent against him.
Dinel began in the yeare, 3894. and rule 4. yeares: in this time Verres spoiled Sicilia three yeares together: now Vergill the Poet was borne.
Hely beganne, 3898. and raigned one yeare: in this time Hortentius the Oratour flourished in Roome.
Lud began, 3899. and rule 11. yeares: in this time the Poet Horace was borne, the conspiracie of Catiline was detected, Ierusalem was taken of Pompey, Caesar entered the wars in Gallia.
Cassiuelan began, 3910. and rule 19. yeares: in this time M. Crassus spoyled the Temple of Ierusalem, the ciuill wars began betweene Caesar and Pompey, Caesar corrected the Roman yeare, Ouid the Poet was borne.
Tenancy began, 3929. and raigned 23. yeares: in this time Mecaenas liued, the patrone of Horace, Vergill, and other learned men, and gouerned Roome and Italy in the absence of Caesar Augustus so named for that reuerence was giuen him in a diuine maner: now Vergill dyed.
Cymbelin began, 3952. and raigned 35. yeares: now Horace died: the Angel Gabriel was sent to Zachary and Mary: Christ was borne the 13. yeare of his raigne, Onid and Liuy dyed.
Guinder began, 3987. and ruled 28. yeares: nowe Iohn-baptist preached and was slaine, Christ taught the Iewes, Paul was conuerted, Iames was slaine, Seneca was made Neroes teacher.
Aruirage began, 4015. and ruled 30. yeares: in this time Paul did most of his Actes, Iames the lesse was stoned, 70000. Romanes were slaine of the Brutans. Paul was beheaded, Peter crucified, Seneca and Lucan bled to death.
Marius began, 4045. and raigned 52. yeares: in this time Iohn euangelist writ his Reuelation, Plutark and Tacitus liued, Timothy was stoned, Dyonisius slaine with the sword.
Coil began, 4097. and raigned 54. yeares: now Ptolony and Galen liued, the Christians by their praier got a strange victory of the Marcomanni, and obtained a mighty great raigne from heauen: now Lent was appointed by Telesphorus.
Lucy began; 4151. and ruled 12. yeares: in this time the Gospel was first preached in Brutany by Fugacius and Damianus: Commodus would be called Hercules and Deus, but was strangled of his owne man in Vestilians house.

So this Generation of Capor, and the 11. Caporites ended in the yeare of the world, 4163. and seeme to haue endured the times of 274. yeares in the kingdome of Brutanie.




THE PLACES IN THIS HISTORY.


The places are


at home


more vniuersal

Albany the Prouince of the Archbishop of Caerbrank or Yorke,
Cambry the Prouince of the Archbishop of Caerusk.
Locry the Prouince of the Archbishop of Caerlud or London.



lesse vniuersal


Kent, Cornewal.

VVestmaria named of Marius, the Ile of Ely.



more particular

Ludgate: the Temple of Apollo: the bankes where the Romanes landed in Cassiuelans time: the Northgate of Caerlud where Stenny was buried: Hamons hauen: Douer Castell: the hauens of Sandwich and Totnes.



lesse particular

Caerlud, there Tenancy and Cymbelin where buried.
Dorobernia or Cantorbury: the valley there.
Caerbrank, there Cassiuelan and Coil were buried.
Claudiocaer or Glocester, there was Aruirage buried.
Excester, the Towne vnder the Wood.
Caerliel, there was Marius buried.





abroad


Gallia.


Roome.






The reasonable metaphors of this fourth genealogy may well be allowed, because they stand vpon reasonable causes. The morals which follow them might be more sententious and effectuall by much then they are, if I might speake no more then good reasons fitly vsed: but all wordes are not fit personally which are most fit really, and so I let them go for this time, perhaps looking for a better conuenience of time and place to vtter them. The Synchronisme which followeth is right, if the chronology be right, which neuerthelesse agreeth with one writer, though it differeth from another: that is worth the labour which is materiall: the quantities of times teach vs no qualities of good life: Mathematicks haue not the rules of moralities: the heart of histories is the actions of men: the life of the actions is the vertue of the actors. If the phrase be not exquisit, or the obseruation not singular, or the method not exact and perfit, it is but one part of an Essaye among the rest, it is but a tryall of that may be done, it is but the token of a good minde to this businesse. Yet take me euen as I am, and I know that my Essaye is not behinde any other writer in this theame, whome I haue seene for those vses, which are required in a History: euen take me as ye finde me, not as any momes feigne vpon me.


The Genealogy of the Romano-Brutans.
BRutany by meanes of much trouble, bred doubtfulnesse in it selfe, and hereof grew Resistance, till Resolution held with Kindred, and tooke

the sonne of a Brutan before the child of a Romane: thus Basianus Caracalla was for his good mothers sake made king, but his elder brother Geta was refused. Busines sent Caracalla to his Romane Empire: Fauour made Carasse the Viceroy for a time, and Flattery with Perswasion and Vsurpation made him Ruler: War ouerthrew him: Victory created Alectus a Roman the king of Brutany: Displeasure puld him downe, and Comparison set vp Asclepiodate, Duke of Cornewall: yet Coil the Earle of Colechester brought the peoples goodwill into such a wheele, and so turned it to himselfeward, that he slew Asclepiodate, and was the third of that name king next him: then Feare amazed Coil, till Marriage ioined Constantius a Roman Duke with his daughter Helen, the fayrest mayd aliue: then Contentment setled them both in the kingdome, and Loue brought them foorth into the world Constantine the first, whom Excellency lifted vp to the Roman Empire: but Agreement appointed Octauy Duke of Cambry the ruler of this Iland: then Enuy flew from Roome, and brought Traherne on his winges against Octauy, and made him fly abroad for a time, but Strength and Hope carried him home againe, and Prouidence counselled him to marry his daughter with Maximinian one of Helens kindred, and him Conueyance made king against Conans minde: then Superioritie remoued Maximinian to Roome, and Gracian by grace and desert supplyed hys roume in Brutany: but Crueltie so alienated the people from him, that Force destroyed him as an vngratious Ruler: then ill Neighbourhood in Albany made the Brutans to seeke vppon Roome, and Submission obteined help of the Romans two times, but varietie of Wars

made Roome leaue Brutany at this time, and good Neighbourhood in little Brutanie caused their king Aldroene to assist the great Brutans, but yet dangers held them without a Ruler many yeares.
When Romanes raigne as much as Brutans, I must not make long account of them both, and in this respect I call them Romanobrutans or Brutanoromans, which you will: their Genealogy is so mingled and put together, that a Grammarian Doctor might make a great question of the name, and shew much conceit. I had rather point at such slight and needlesse questions, then intreate of them more or lesse: and partly vppon such a cause I containe Topography, at this time in the morall Tables of Vertues and Vices, and would chuse to ioyne the places with the actions hereafter, rather then diuide them, and set them seuerally, as I did before with more reason then I can now. One day telleth an other, and one night certifieth another: new and old names are diuersly considered.


Their Arts and Acts are in their Vertues and Vices.

Their Vertue or Iustice is in
Diuiding: the Brutans knowing, that Bassian the second sonne of Seuerus the Emperour was borne of a Brutan woman, and that the first sonne Geta was borne of a Romane, iudged that a Brutan had more to do in Brutanie then a Roman: and therefore ioyned with Bassian against Geta and made him king, but Geta was slaine: Consanguinitie is more valuable then Primogeniture, the part then the adiunct, life then time.
Correcting: the Brutans feeling, how Alectus brought in many exactions cruelly vpon them, forsooke hym and chose Asclepiodate a Brutan for their king, and pursued the Romans from place to place, til they had slaine their captaine Alectus by Caerlud for his crueltie. Asclepiodate threw Liuius Gallus a Roman captain into the Brooke which ranne from More-field into the Tems, and drowned him for his rebellion: in remembrance of this iustice, hee called the riuer Galbrooke, or Walbrooke to this day, that other outlandish might euer learne, to be quiet with our Princes in their owne Countries and Kingdomes.
Obeying: the Brutans seeing, how Gracian held hys Rule onely by force of armes against all right and reason, arose against him, and slew the Romane by force, and rid himselfe from his enforcementes. Conan Meriadock being commanded from Octauy his Prince, to be quiet, and not once seeme to hinder the comming of Maximinian into this Land whome he sent for, obeyed his Princes rather then his owne will, layd away his armour, suffered him to enter, and do euen as Octauy would. What should a subiect striue against his Soueraigne? a stranger may come into the land if he be sent for.
Rewarding: When Maximinian had ouercome the Gauls in Armorica, the Brutans and Romans his souldiers proclaimed him Emperour in the field for hys glorious Act. See what it is to please good subiects: A Princes chief treasure. Seuerus buried at Caerbrank, so was Constantius: Alectus in Caerlud, Coel at Colchester, Carasse in the field: Octauy in Caerusk: Asclepiodate where Coil slew him.



Their vice or Iniustice is in
Persecuting: Maximinian liuing quietly and honourably, both because he was a chosen Prince, and married a Brutan kings daughter, was not content with the Brutans due reuerence toward him, but he sought meanes to destroy them, yea the most honest and innocent men among them, euen the good Christians which were like harmelesse lambes in the Land, whom he persecuted vnrighteously vpon the opinion of his owne heathenish religion more then any right iudgement. A true christian neuer deserueth death, he is so moderate and reasonable in al points, so that he is most vniust that will trouble such a man. Hee that aforetime was iniurious to a Philosopher was accounted a tyrant, but he that tormenteth a true Christian, which is a true Philosopher, and a perfite wise man, is worthy to be iudged a deuill incarnate, a bloudsuccour, a monstrous man. Such a man was Maximinian, and may well be chronicled the king with the hellish heart and bloudy hand.


Their vertue or temperance is in
Marriage: Helen the daughter of Coil the third married Constantius, a Roman by the agreeme^t of the Brutans, not on her owne head, lesse she should seeme incontinent: she was but a part of hir countrey, not aboue it, or out of it. Octauy married his daughter to Maximinian a Roman, by the consent of his Lordes, lesse he should seeme to make more of his owne will then the benefite of all other men: a publicke matter must be allowed publikly of them whom it concerneth most. Dionote Duke of Cornwall sent his daughter Vrsula and 11000. Virgins with her to Conan a Brutan the king of Armorica, that he should not ioyne

himselfe and his knightes, and men with strange bloud, but with very right Brutans.
Conan desired this, and Dionote perfourmed it, both constant and prouident to auoide confusion of nations, which causeth all Tragedies and Rages in the end.
Wordes and liberalitie: Constantius was a man of speciall affabilitie, and familiaritie with all his men, which propertie if he had not at Roome, he learned in Brutanie, where the people are generally of freest heartes, fardest from bondage, and must bee well vsed in speach, of all thinges: he was of a singular liberalitie, he cared more for his subiects goodes then his owne: his saying was, That wealth doth more good in many handes then in few or none, or in the Princes Treasure house: a saying farre enough from tyranny. Octauy so behaued himselfe toward the Brutans of all sortes in the time of his Royal Lieuetenantship, that all men for the moste part fauoured, and furthered him greatly, euen to the attainement of the kingdome it selfe: the chiefest wonders and noblest acts, and famous thinges haue euer commonly begunne and ended with the power of wordes: the ordering of wordes maketh a man aboue beastes, and that man a king of men that can order them best of all other. Maximinian gaue the country of Armorica to Conan a Brutan, to hold it from him and his heires for euer, and to content him for missing the kingdome of great Brutany: by this meanes they were good friendes at the last, and forgat old enmities.
Toleration: Constantine the sonne of Helen suffered

the Brutans, to vse their religion: he was no tyrant in forcing them against their consciences, as other had been, although he were a Pagan, because he desired chiefly to keep them in peace.
See what a good mother doth otherwhile in time of neede: I beleeue, Helen played the Princely Oratour for Christians, and defended them before her sonne for good men and good subiects, and was their best friend in Brutany next the inuisible and immortall defence that came from heauen, and bred a desire of peace in Constantines minde, by besetting him with businesse on euery side.


Their vice or intemperance is in
Flattery: Carasse being vnable to ouerthrow the Picts, and louing them somwhat for helping him against the Romanes, stoode in a maze betweene hope and feare, and gaue them a part of Albany for their possessions, that they might be quiet, and not stirre vp warre against him: liberalitie or courtesie shewed to a barbarous nature, is a weapon turned vpon your selfe: Bores and Bares cannot vnderstand fayre wordes and deedes: neuer hold vp a candle to the diuell.
Rusticitie: Constantius was of so vile prouision in housekeeping, though he were a king, that on festiuall dayes hee borrowed plate of his friendes to furnish his tables and cupbordes therewith: It is an vnseemly thing for any man, to set forth himself with other mens goodes: it is small credite for a scholler to seeke credite by vsing that oration or sermon that is not his owne: among all men a Prince must be

sufficient of himselfe for all matters that pertaine vnto him, if he be deficient, his grace is lost, his maiestie diminishyd, and hee euen rurified like a priuate subiect. Let not the beastes eate mans flesh in anie case, lesse they loue it.


Their vertue or prudence is in
Discerning: Helen in her virginitie was learned in all points of true morall wisedome: afterward, eyther by some diuine inspiration, or by some humane information at Hierusalem, shee found the Crosse whereon Christ was crucified, and the three nayles wherewith he was nayled: they that seeke in zeale shall finde in ioy. Constantine vsed to haue the booke of God, which is the Spirite and Rule of Regiment, carried before him wheresoeuer he want: he caused the Bible to be copyed out, and sent into the partes of his kingdome: he sawe by a vision a crosse in heauen with these wordes vpon it, In this signe is victory. Such are the heauenly fruites of a heauenly minde: so we shall reape euer as we sowe.
Prouiding: Octauy being restored to his kingdome, gathered together infinite riches, to be better able then he was aforetime, to wage warre against the ambitious and laborious Romanes: Souldiers run to the greatest pay. He sent for Maximinian coosin german to Constantine the Emperor, and offered him his daughter in his life time, lesse hee should be marred with ill Counsell, and married to another after his death, which he perceiued to be at hand: guide them that cannot guide themselues. Maximinian made his sonne Victor fellow with the Emperour of

Roome, that he might strengthen himselfe on both sides, both at home and abroad: it is surer standing on two legges then on one: surer holding with two handes then with one.


Their vice or imprudence is in
Murder: An Earle of Brutany that fauoured Octauy much, seeing how wofully he was fled into Norway for feare of Traherne and the Romanes, which ouercame him in Westmerland, and considering in his hot wit, that Traherne being Helens vncle and a Brutan, ought not to haue done such wrong for the Romans sakes to the king of Brutany, but haue rather fought for him, neither vndermined him one way nor other, but with a butcherly wisedome layd violent handes vpon him, and slewe him, that Octauy might returne safely into the realme againe: Defect of inuention turneth a man into a bloudy beast.
Improuidence: Maximinian gathered his riches so vnauisedly, that with them he gathered the ilwill of the Brutans.
To haue is not the rule, but to get well: a mans glorie is not in mony, but the glory of mony is in a man.


Their vertue or fortitude is in
Victories: Bassian and the Brutans slew Geta, and the Romanes by night. Maximinian ouerranne great partes of Gallia and Germania. Octauy ouerthrew Traherne and the Romanes three legions neere Winchester, and made them flie euen into Albany, and pursued them into Westmerland. Gracian being sent into the field from Maximinian, ouercame Guany the Duke of the Huns, and Melga the Duke of the Pictes,

and kept this Land from their furor by the helpe of the Brutans. Coil Earle of Colchester, which hee built rose against Asclepiodate, and slew him and was made king.
Battels: Bassian was able to endure all the pains of war: a right Emperour for the campe. The Brutans seeing the valiant wit of Carasse, made him their king in spite of the Romans, and rather then they would yeeld to Roome they dyed in battell: Death is better then slauery among enemies. Constantine the first armed himselfe with the Brutans, and fought against Maxentius: did he not good among them to doe them the more mischiefe, as the Philistines suspected Dauid who was a true saint of God? Conan Meriadocke made war with Maximinian at diuers times, because hee was a Roman: O it is an hard bone to digest Rome which counteth all birdes dawes besides her owne chickens: the man that hath another maister beside himselfe in his owne house is beside himselfe, or else I beleeue, he shalbe set beside his cushion at the last.
Magnanimitie: Maximinian called Armorica Litle Brutany in honour of Brutans, because they conquered it: that a man winneth is his owne: a man may call his owne possession by what name it pleaseth him: new Lordes will haue newe names for their newe landes. Octauy being appointed king in the absence of Constantine, and hearing that Constantine was then made Emperor of Rome, thought verily, that he had enough to do in Roome, though hee medled not with Brutany, and tooke the Crowne to himselfe, and chased

the Romanes vp and downe in the land, and played Rex with them at all handes, to redeeme his Countrey from thraldome as hee counted it. Home is for the homeborne.


Their vice or extreme fortitude is in
Ambition: Carasse a Brutan of lowe birth, of a high heart, but a venturous man, a very hardydardy in deede as euer liued, keeping the Hauens, and playing the Sea captaine, aspired to the kingdome and got it, both by greater promises then hee coulde perperforme, and by gathering more bankrupts and ruffians to his side then he could keepe, and contemning all noble and great men in the Land: there was but one way with him, and that was in his head onely: all was one with him, so that one might be all: selfe-loue was selfewill, and both were for himselfe.
Abiection of minde: When Coil the third saw, that Constantius was come from Roome with a great armie, he feared and graunted him tribute and peace, and euery thing els, to be out of danger, yet the most danger and damage in graunting these: A babies wit in a kings estate. The Brutans being afflicted by the Picts two times promised the Romanes a tribute to helpe them: then they submitted themselues to Aldroene of little Brutany, that he might succour them. O Heauens: where was olde Brutanie now? where, but in the Sea as a dead sea Whale?




THE TIMES OF THESE Romano-Brutans.
AFter there had been a king for 15. yeares space, (in which time Clemens Alexandrinus liued: the Prophets were translated into Greeke) Bassian began his Raigne in the yeare of the world, 4179. and raigned 6. yeares: in this time Papinian the great Ciuilian Chauncellor to Seuerus flourished.
Carasse began in the yeare, 4185, and ruled 8. years: in this time Origen began to shew himselfe: Tertullian flourished.
Alectus beganne in the yeare, 4193. and raigned sixe yeares: about this time Zephirine chaunged the Communion cuppe into glasse for more decency, which had been of wood commonly.
Asclepiodate began, 4199. and ruled 30. yeares: now Calistus appointed the 4. Ember weekes for the 4. quarters: Vrban ordained that diuine vessels should be gold or siluer.
Coil the third began, 4238. and raigned 27. yeares: now Philip was the first christened Emperour: Cyprian was martyred. Decius the persecuter was swallowed of a quagmire: Paul the first Hermite liued.
Constantius began, 4265. and ruled 30. yeares: in his time Eutychian bishop of Roome buried 300. martyrs with his owne hands: Carus the Emperour was killed with lightning: the Citty Spira in Germany was built.
Constantine the first began, 4295. and raigned ten yeares: nowe 20000. Christians were burnt in a Church on Christmas day at night: Arnobius was famous.
Octauy beganne, 4305. and ruled 54. yeares: now Siluester refused to weare a golden Crowne, which great Constantine offered him: the great Nicene Councell was held: Lactantius and Hilary were famous: Moonkes beganne in Antonie the Hermite, and Nuns in Marcella and Sophronia: Constantinople was built.
Maximinian began in the yeare, 4359. and raigned 8. yeares: about this time Athanasius and Basilius flourished: the Thalmud of the Iewes was compiled by Rabbi Iohanan: Iulian the Apostata and Libanius raged.
Gracian began, 4367. and ruled 4. yeares: now Epiphanius wrote against heretickes: Vphila found out the Gotes Letters, or a b c: about this time Gregory Nazianzene and Ambrose flourished.

So the Gouernement of these Brutanoromans continued for the space of 183. yeares: but heere was no certaine Ruler in Brutany for 36. yeares after.



THE SIXT GENEALOGY OF Brutan Kinges.
THe Brutans chose Constantine the second, the sonne of Aldroene king of litle Brutany for their king, and he raigned ouer them and begat three sonnes, the first was Constancie, the second Aurely, the third Vter, but then Credulity slew him.
Constancie the eldest son succeeded his father, but died without issue: for Doltishnesse and Treason slewe him, and Force lifted vp Vortiger to the kingdome, but Self-will sharpned him so, that the people hated him, and by plaine might created his sonne Vortimer their king: then Wichery puld him downe, and Insinuation restored Vortiger: yet Right and Vengeance at last destroyed him: then Common Consent made Aurely the second son of Constantine the second a king, but the diuels Art slew him, and he dyed without issue: so Vter the third son of Constantine succeeded him in the kingdome, and begat vppon Igerne his wife, or rather concubine Arthur the king, who raigned and left no seede behind him: then Constantine the third, the sonne of Cador a Cornish Duke Arthurs coosin was made king, but lasted not, for Conan his kinsman slew him and became king, and begat Vortipory, who liued and dyed without issue: then Malgo the nephew of Conan raigned as king: hee was of stature and personage the goodliest among all men of his time, but left no Royall seede behinde him: thus Carency got the kingdome by the goodwill of Brutans, and lost it by his quarrellous nature: so Cadwan was chosen king, and hee begat Cadwallin the king, who died and left no seed behinde him: then Cadwallader by his Noblenesse and manhood together obtained the Crowne and dyed without issue, and was the last king of the Brutans in the seate of Locrine. But, who can tell the genealogies of Camber? how happy is hee in his dwelling places, which no man taketh from him? His loynes are like a springing well: he runneth within his bankes, and is not stopped: surely his Riuer is one of Gods Riuers: his Hils are the mountaines of Safety. Locrine

lay more open to the windes then Camber: hys braunches are dryed vp with the Northeast windes, and the boysterous stormes haue broken them, but Camber had the fauourable Westwindes euer in his borders. The waters of Camber grow full of soothsaying reedes, the pens of Writers haue set him in more honour then hys brethren, he alone vpholdeth his fathers house. The great God of the world keepe him euermore with his inuincible right hand and stretched out arme, make his naule whole, and fil his bones with marrow and heat, giue him plentie of the fruites of the earth, and increase his cattle without number: leade forth hys sonnes in Triumphs and his daughters to the marriages of the mightiest, make hym blessed among all the nations of men, and raise vp the meanest of his people to renowne and glory: exalt thy frendes and conuert thy foes, fill thy coasts with all earthly and heauenly ioyes that be or may be.


THEIR ARTES AND ACTES are in their Vertues and Vices.

Their vertue or prudence is in
Discipline: When Constantine the second saw, that his eldest sonne Constancy was slow of wit, and giuen to be solitary, he made him a moonke in the Abbey of Saint Swithune in Caerguent, and committed his other two sonnes to Guetheline Archbishop of Caerlud to be taught. If children be set into that way which they haue most minde vnto, they will prooue best in that way. A yoong Prince cannot bee brought vp better vnder any, then vnder a reuerend and Princely

churchman, seeing they are both pastors of the people, and bishops of men.
Prouidence: the two sonnes of Constantine being vnable to get the Crowne by might of arms, and fearing, that treason should be wrought against them as it was against their eldest brother, looked to the safetie of their liues, and fled into little Brutanie. If we cannot do that is right and due, the best way is to saue the principall that is most worth. It is no shame to flie, when resisting is wilful death. Bruciuall saued 50. moonks of Bangor by flying from Ethelfride duke of Northumbeland, when 1200. had been slaine by him. The Bishops of Caerlud and Caerbranke in Carencies time fled to Rome for feare of the cruel Saxons, and dealt so wisely with Pope Gregory, that they were saued from bloudy handes.
Doctrine: Aurely desiring to teach the Brutans, to beware of outlandish friendship, which had in his days so intrapped and infected them, caused Merlin by his Art Soueraigne, to fetch the great stones out of Ireland, which are now vpon Salsbury plain, and set them neere the place where Hengist and the Saxons against their Oath did murder hundreds of the best Brutans with kniues secretly prouided for the purpose, and tooke Vortiger their king prisoner, and ransomed him at their pleasure, That when they should see those stones or heare of them, they might remember the stony heartes of outlandish friendes, the hypocrisie of Saxons, the vntrueth of strangers, and either appoint them true ouerseers, or els away with them out of the Land.
Gouernement: Vter after hys brother Aurelius death

ruled the Realme so orderly and circumspectly, both in respect of trecherous flatteries, and trusty friendship, and all matters both common and extraordinarie, that he was surnamed Pendragon, A Prince as mightie and subtle among men, as the Dragon is among the beastes of the field. A good name is a treasure, but why do men commend a man, which ought to be the phrase onely of dispraise? Hee that can shut his handes from straungers, as Vter did, shall preuent many woes. Arthur disposed all things in order, sailed into Gallia, left his nephew Mordred for king, and wrought great myracles abroad. It had been more wisedome, to haue wrought them at home, if they were good, to do his owne people good: or if they were deceites, to haue practised them priuily, that his name might not be blotted and diminished.


Their vice or imprudence is in
Credulitie: Constantine the second fauoured a Pict so much, that he might haue accesse to him at all times, euen into his bed chamber, though hee had been the greatest enemy that the Picts had in Brutanie manie yeares: this Pict knewe it too well, and wayted his time: and at last tooke him alone, and slew him in his bed chamber. Straungers cannot be true friendes, if they and we haue at any time been at ods. Thy desire to pleasure vs with their seruice, to serue vs such a turne, as the Fox doth the simple Kid or Lambe. Vortiger entertained Hengist the second time for this daughters sake, that is one foe for another foes sake: he neuer imagined, that Hengist was his foe, though Vortimer his son had chafed him, and

chased him out of the land: he met him on Salsbury plaine, to intreate of peace that should be betweene them, and came peaceably with his men, as the agreement was, without weapons, but presuming childishly, that all was well, when nothing could possibly be safe in any reason: hee searched not Hengistes company, to see if they carried any weapons vnder their long gowns, and by this babish credulitie spoiled himselfe of his libertie, and 460. noblemen Brutans of their liues.
When Aurely lay sick in his bed, his friends that wer about him, being as sick in their wits as he was in his body, suffered a Saxon to be hys Phisition, and to minister vnto him, till he poisoned him. If the Brutans knew not, that he was a Saxon, they were vnreasonable to take they knew not who^, if they knew him, and yet trusted in his helpe, they were senselesse and vtterly out of their wits. Cadwallin ioyned in friendship with Penda a Saxon, but afterward hee neuer thriued in any wars which hee tooke in hand as he did aforetime: hee that could not see, that the Saxon would onely vndermine him, was vnwise: he that would trust him at all, was not wise, seeing he might liue well inough without his help.
Dissimulation: Vortiger Duke of Cornewall prouided king Constance the Sheep a gard of 100 Wolues or Picts, and then vsed all means to please them with words and gifts: when he had made them dronken, hee complained to them of his pouertie euen with teares: anon they deuised such an helpe for him as they could, he so pierced their headlesse heartes, and heartlesse heades, that assoone as he was gone from

them in sorrow, they followed him with the head of Constance: he lamented for ioy of his death, and lesse he might be suspected of the fact, hee caused the 100. Picts to be executed after the law, and of all men was most against them, yet so, that some men perceiued his shites. He that hath any lawfull title in any possession is wisest, if he seeke it lawfully, or els, he may be put iustly from his owne. The Duke of Cornwall had more right to the Crown then the Dukes sonne of little Brutanie, but was it not extreame folly to chalenge it in so villanous a maner? and was not Constance a most improuident creature, to be garded with them which scarsely regarded him so much as a countriman doth his beast? Surely God was angry with Brutans, when hee suffered their Rulers to liue so rudely without the Rule of wisedome. O yee Heauens blesse ye our Nobles, and al other Regents on the earth, or els they will be without Regiment in their liues and end basely with vile death. Constance had been fit to be a poore mans Sowe in a sty, which is content with any vsage, so the trough be ful and the bones at rest: lay a logge into a cloyster, and it will come out all worme eaten, and fit onely to be burnt.


Their vertue of fortitude is in
Magnificence and Magnanimitie: When Vortimer saw that he must die, hee called his souldiers before hym, and gaue all that he had among them, and exhorted them, euer to hold their owne against the Saxons, and all forraine enemies. A true heart is vertuous to the last gaspe. Ambrius built the Abbey of Amsbruy, Arthur built the castle of Windsor, and founded

the order of knightes of the round table: Artgall the first Eare of Warwicke, one of Arthurs knights chose a Beare for his beast, because Arth in that language signified a Beare, in remembrance of his name among all his posteritie. Quicheline gaue seuen myles compasse of land to Berine Bishop of Winchester, to build his See there, and Kenwalke his sonne finished it. Saint Osuald gaue his daughter Elfleda xii. Lordships, to build xii. Monasteries with them, vi. in Bernicia, and vi. in Deyra. When Cadwallader had conquered the Saxons in Kent, and in the Ile of Might, hee gaue the fourth part of the Ile, that is, 300. households to Wilfride in honour of religion and of his owne name.
Victories: Edolf Earle of Chester seeing how Hengist slew the Brutans with secret kniues, got him to a hedge, and defended himselfe with a stake, and slew of the Saxons 70. men and escaped.
Vortimer the sonne of Vortiger hated the Saxons more then hys father loued them: hee pursued them and gaue them battell at the riuer of Darwent, and ouerthrew them, at Epyford he ouercame them, hee chased them by the sea side into the Ile of Might, he vanquished them at Cole More, he turmoyled them in Norfolk, in Essex, in Kent, he put them out of their possessions, he droue them to the Ile of Tenet, there he besieged them by water and by land, and neuer left them till they fled out of the land. Aurely with the aid of the king of little Brutany tooke Caerbranke from Octa and tooke him prisoner: he sought with Hengist at Crekinford, and slewe 4000. souldiers and 4. Dukes of the Saxons: he droue them out of Locry

euery where, except Kent: hee quitted himselfe from Ella and Porth, two mightie Saxons. Vter in the time of his brothers sicknesse put to flight Pascenty the sonne of Vortiger with his army of Germans, and afterward slew him, and Guillioman the Irish Prince at S. Dauids in Cambry, and Cossa and Octa the Saxons. Arthur fought 12. battels with the Saxons, and euery time ouerthrew them: he made them pay him tribute: when hee was in Gallia, and heard of Mordreds treason, he returned and fought with him at Sandwich and ouercame him, and againe hee ouerthrew him at Winchester, and at Bathe he slew him. Constantine the third vanquished the two sons of Mordred and put them to flight when they rose against him and chalenged the Crowne by theyr fathers title. Vortipory the son of Conan discomfited the Saxons in many battels and got the vpper hand of them alwaies. Malgo subdued the Saxons in all his wars, he conquered Ireland, Scotland, Iseland, Norway, Denmarke, the Orcades, and possessed them. Arthur slew in one day an hundred and fortie Saxons with his owne hand. Cadwallader slew Lothary Prince of Kent, and Athelwald king of Southsex, and possessed those landes. Cadwallin droue the Saxons all along to Middlesex and made Penda pay him tribute. Now armies stay in Saxony, and papermen flye from those coastes: these do more harme in many places then those old armies did: these will be sauced as they were, and hunted out of the land by order of discipline: none so busie as they, and yet none more slight then they: there is an Arthur in paperworke against their inuasions, which may in all

right and equitie giue them twelue disgraces at the least, and perhaps twelue times twelue: let the triall proue all, or let that labour be lost, if they can recouer there 12 losses of this newe Arthur.


Their vice or extreme fortitude is in
Ambition: Vortiger tooke Constance out of a Monasterie to be king, that he might do what he list in the kingdome vnder such an innocent and milksop, and make his simplicitie a meanes for himselfe to get the Crowne, as it proued afterward. Mordred Arthurs kinsman being appointed Vicegerent in his royalty, gaue great giftes and castels more then his owne to Cerdrick a Saxon, and agreed with him to be crowned at Winchester with his goodwill, so that himself might be crowned at Caerlud by his liking. The two sonnes of Mordred the vsurper rebelled against Constantine the third for the kingdome and lost it. No right or trueth can stay an aspyring humour.
Pusillanimitie: Arthur gaue two Shyres to Cerdrick Duke of the Westsaxons, to the end hee might be quiet: those two shyres could do Brutans more good then Arthurs peregrination: an enemie must not giue or take any thing, but winne all by might or sleight. When Cadwallader had raigned 12. yeares, hee forsooke all his princely attyre, and went to Roome, and led a monasticall life euer after: he preferd rest before riches, the hood aboue the Crowne.
Rage or crueltie: The Pictes to please their captaine Vortiger slew Constance their king, and presented hys head to Vortiger, imagining they had done the best act that coulde be, to redresse his poore estate, wherof he had complained to them. Renowne the daughter

of Hengist, the concubine of Vortiger, seeing what Vortimer had done in spight of the Saxons her countreymen and friends, how he had taken away their possessions, howe he reedified Churches which they destroyed, howe hee was like to destroy them all, if he liued a while, sought out witches and magicians, to charme or charactize him to death by some practise, but when they could not worke vpon him, she insinuated her selfe to one of his neerest men, and so corrupted his minde and sense with wordes and gifts, that he consented to poyson his Lord, and so hee did. Conan loued quarrellours aboue other men, he made away his owne vncle that should haue bin king, and slew his two sonnes. Ethelfride Duke of Northumberland massacred 1200. moonks of Bangor in a beastly immanitie, to please Ethelbert king of Kent, which had offered praiers to God against him. Carencie was so giuen to ciuill warres, that he loued them aboue all other acts, wherby he fell into such hatred, that hee was not able to stand against the Saxons. Out of all question, it is extreame madnesse, to admit any strangers into our countrey, that are eyther more militar or more politick then the commonaltie, vnlesse it be for a time, and then away with them, or they be kept in their boundes with certaine companie, and neither see nor heare more then belongeth to strangers: what shuld strangers but be vsed strangely? they pretend pouertie, but they intend to weaken our land: they flie for religion, but they foster heresies: draffe is their errand, but drinke they would: either they are diuels in their owne likenesse: or else they are Angels with the entrals of Diuels: foolish

pitty destroyeth the Cittie: prouide for the weakest, the strongest can saue it selfe: the malignant hand will spoyle the impotent people, when it cannot spill the bloud of Nobles: but if Hares wurry Hounds, and Harts be wounded of Ferrets, then is the world turnd vpside downe, the Hunters are vile keepers, and the keepers are vilest men: Let Brutans be fedde and taught as is meete for them, and let my life go, if they make not their ennemies round about them like Hares and Ferrets, which euer auoyd the presence of men.


Their vertue or temperance is in
Life and maners: the Clergy in the time of Cadwallin behaued themselues so soberly and fatherly in all points, that they were honoured of most men, insomuch, that as they went too and fro in the streetes and other places, the people would kneele downe to them, and aske them their blessing, and gaue them whatsoeuer they demanded.
Wordes: Berine Bishop of Dorchester conuerted Kingelist the king of the Westsaxons, and christened him, which he could neuer haue done without most temperate and well seasoned speech: by the like moderation Pauline conuerted Edwine king of Northumberland to the christian faith. Melite Bishop of Caerlud conuerted Sebert king of Essex to Christian religion. The Clergy of Kent delt so with their king Ercombert, that he puld downe the Temples of his false Gods, and kept the Lent fast, and became a Christian. When the Brutan Bishops saw, that Austin took vpon him as their soueraigne, they would not resist him presently, but stayd a while, to see his life and behauiour,

and then to vse them therafter, either frendly or aduersly.
Liberalitie: When Ethelfride had put away his wife being great with childe, Cadwan receiued her into his Court, and kept her honourably till shee was deliuered, and so long after as shee would. Osuald Duke of Bernicia liked so wel of Cedda Bishop of Winchester, that hee gaue him land to build and Abbey thereon. The more is giuen for the promotion of Gods Maiesty, the more he giueth to our benefite.


Their vice or intemperance is in
Loue: When Ronowen had saluted Vortiger with a golden cup of wine, and desired him to drinke of it, he beheld her bewtie, and was presently so inamored of her, that he could not be quiet, till he had put away his owne wife, by whom he had three sons and married her, and for her sake loued Saxons more then Brutans: he lay with his owne daughter to haue issue of her, but in vaine. Vter fell in loue with Igerne the wife of Gorleis Duke of Cornewall, and slewe him at his castell Tintagel, and tooke her to wife. Malgo fel into the sinne of Sodom, and lost all that he had gotten aforetime: let not sense rule reason.
Liberalitie: Vortiger entertained Hengist, and Horsus with their three ships, he gaue them ye hire of souldiers, he bestowed the Ile of Tenet vpon them: hee graunted Hengist so much ground as hee could compasse with a buls hide: he took away the Earldom of Kent from Garangon, and gaue it him.
Anger: Constantine the third siue one of Mordreds sonnes for rebelling against him euen in the Minster of Winchester: the other for the same cause in the

temple at Caerlud. Dionote Abbot of Bangor would not yeeld to Austin, because he was of another Prouince, neither would he preach to the Saxons, because they spoyled the land, do Ethelbert king of Kent what he could vnto him.


The vertue or iustice is in
Rewarding: Constantine the second receiued the crowne and rule of Brutanie by a couenant that hee made with the Brutans, when he deliuered them from the tyranny of the Picts. When Aurely remembred, how fast the Brutans resorted vnto him, and Vter at their landing at Totnes, and how truely they serued him in his warres, did them one good turne for another, and repaired their temples and houses, which the Saxons destroyed, and restored their religion to them againe.
Deuiding: In the time of Carency it was determined at Worcester by a Councell of the chiefest men, That the goodes of the Church should be bestowed on the Bishops, their Clergy, the Churches the poore people, and then Gregory the great, appointed the two Archbishops of Brutany at Caerbrank, and Caerkent. The Archbishop of S. Dauids had vnder thim these 7. Bishops. Hereford, Cardiff, Landaff, Bangor, S. Asaph, Worcester, Morgan.
Punishing: The Pictes to reuenge the death of the 100. Picts that garded Constance, made war agaynst Vortiger: the friends of Constance deuised to ouerthrow him for the death of their Prince: thus he was tossed vp and downe the land, that hee could not be safe. The Brutans seeing Vortigers extreame affection toward the Saxons, deposed him: when hee was taken

prisoner by Hengist, they forsooke him: Aurely and Vter burnt him to ashes in his Castle. The Bishops refused Austin by the aduise of an old Anchorite, who iudged him no man of God which vsed his brethren like his seruants. Cadwan slew Edwine and Osricke and Eufricke Saxon kinges for the bloud of the Brutans which they had poured out like water on euery side of the Realme.
Burials: Vortimer was buried solemnly at Caerlud. Aurely and Vter were buried at Stoneheng in Salsbury plaine. Arthur was buried in the valley of Glascenbury. Constantine the third at Stoneheng. Vortipory, Vortiger, Malgo, and Carency were not orderly buried for their vile liues. Cadwan died in war, and was buried accordingly. Constance deserued his faire buriall.


Their vice or iniustice is in
Couetousnesse: Vortiger forgetting his loyaltie to his Prince abused him intollerably, and got him by his own consent the strongest Castels, and best treasure that he had: he euer defended the 100. Pictes what naughtinesse soeuer they committed in the Court.
Vnthankfulnesse: the Brutans being desired by Vortimer on his death bed, to bury his body at the hauen where the Saxons vsed to land, in a sepulchre of brasse spire like, to put them in feare with the remembrance of him and his acts, eyther neglected his will or forgat it. O vniust men that take such a farewell of their friends. Vter died by force of poyson at Verulam in Hertfordshire neere S. Albons. Constantine and Constance, the father and his sonne were not buried after the maner of Princes.
I haue not that peculiar regard of places nowe, which I had before, partly by reason of forenamed causes, and partly in that they are sufficiently set foorth in these morall tables. I desire heerein and euer a quiet iudgement, and then I doubt not of any censurer, but he will speake fairely. Yet I must leaue euery man to himselfe, to doe as he is caused in his deliberatiue and considerate insight. If I omit some histories of Saxons, I do but my duetie: what haue I to do with them, vnlesse it were to make them tributary to Brutans? otherwise, let their owne men commend them if they wil, I owe them no seruice by writing or speaking. Yet I haue named some of the Saxons, though I doe it more for their sakes with whome they dwelt, then for any merite of their owne. Let them lye in dead forgetfulnesse like stones, that haue desired, or doe desire the trouble of Brutanie: let their names be cleane put out, and not come among the righteous. When men play the parts of beasts, let them go among the numbers of cattell in Zoography and keepe their fit place. An ape must not come among Churchmen, Serpentes must not dwell in chambers of Counsell, make bates are not in case to co^uerse in the dwellings of peaceable Lords, who can abide, to haue a deformed mocker with hys distorted mouthes, a venimous hisser with his noysom breath, a rayling stage player with his trifling actions for his companion? Arise ye sonnes of Ebranke, and yee kinsmen of true auncient Brutans, and make those stonehearted creatures know, that they are made to be your seruants and drudges: let not any double forked toong perswade you, that Brutanie is vnder any part of the earth.




THE TIMES OF THESE KINGS.
BEtweene the death of Gracian, and the raigne of Constantine the second, were about 36. yeares passed ouer in Brutanie without a Ruler. In this time Theodosius was excommunicated by Ambrose for murder: Ierome and Austin and Gouldmouth flourished: Claudian the Poet was famous: Siricius Bishop of Roome forbad Priests to marry.
Constantine the second began to raigne in the yeare of the world, 4407. and raigned ten yeares: in this time the Goths and Hunnes inuaded Italy, and possessed it: the Vandals entred into Spaine and spoiled it: the first Councell was set against Pelagius the heretick a Brutan.
Constancy began in the yeare 4417. and ruled 5. yeares. In this time Ierome died: S. Alban was martired at Moguntia: Saluian the teacher of Bishops flourished in Massilia: Burgundians were conuerted to christian religion.
Vortiger began to rule, 4422. and ruled 16. yeares: Then Vortimer beganne 4438. and ruled 7. yeares. In this time Austin died: Cyrill, S. Patricke and Cassian flourished: Theodosius founded a generall Schoole at Bononia: Attila with 500000. souldiers spoyled the Romans horribly, and all partes where he went. Clodoue the first famous king of Fraunce liued.
Vortiger began to rule again, 4445. and ruled 9. years:
Aurely began, 4454. and raigned 19. yeares: in this

time Genserick with the Vandals subdued Roome: the Venetians began to dwell in their Ilands where they dwell now: Mamertus a Bishop inuented Letanies: Hilary of Roome adorned Churches with gold and siluer.
Vter began, 4473. and ruled 16. yeares: in this time Honorick the son of Genserick banished 334. Bishops and Priestes out of Africke, and slew many thousand christians, but at last he was eaten vp of wormes: Fulgentius the Bishop of Hispalis flourished: Theodoricke the king of Gothes did many noble and vertuous acts in Italy, and builded decayed places.
Arthur began 4489. and raigned 26. yeares: in which time S. Patricke dyed in Scotland being 62. yeares old: Theodorick would not suffer the Romans to practise any feates of war, or to haue any weapons, for feare they should rebell: Cassiodore of a Senatour became a Moonke.
Constantine the third, began, 4515. and ruled 3. years: at this time Gildas the Brutan liued, surnamed Sapiens, Boethius the Christian Philosopher liued and was martired.
Conan beganne 4518. and raigned 3. yeares: in this time Symmachus the Roman prelate tooke vpon him to be supreme ruler and iudge of all Councels in Christendome.
Vortipory beganne 4521. and ruled 4. yeares: now Clodoue the French king vowed christianisme and was baptised: Olympius an Arrian, for blaspheming the Trinitie was slame with lightning from heauen.
Malgo began, 4525. and raigned 35. yeares: now Iustinus the Emperour was first crowned by the Roman Bishop: Iustinianus made the Codex of the ciuill

law: Tribonianus disposed the Digests of the same law: S. Benedict and his sister Scholastica wrought woonders. Priscian liued.
Carency began, 4560. and ruled 3. yeares: but after his death the Brutans had no king for 24. yeares space, till Cadwan was made king: now Totilas the tyrant of the Gothes raged in Italy, and Narses sent from the Emperour slew him: the nation of the Hunnes was almost vtterly extinguished in Greece, by the Emperor: Armenij receiued Christian faith.
Cadwan began 4587. and raigned 22. yeares: in this time S. Brigit the Scot was famous: Gregory of Roome called himselfe Seruaunt of Seruauntes: the Latine toong was not vsed in Roome, because all men conuersed there.
Cadwallin began 4609. and ruled 48. yeares: now Heraclius slew Phocas and got the Empire, and married his sisters daughter: the Arabians receiued the law of Mahomet, and were called Saracens: Isidore Bishop of Hispalis liued: Sabinianus Bishop of Roome appointed bels to distinguish the times of the day: Honorius spoiled the Temple of Romulus to build the Temple of Saint Peter.
Cadwallader began 4657. and ruled 12. yeares: in this time the Saracens got great part of Africk. Martin of Roome constituted that his Clergy should vowe chastitie, or loose their liuings.

Thus these kinges raigned 238: yeares. I omit the interraignes, before Constantine the second, and Cadwan: one was 36. yeares, the other 24. yeares.



