


A brief Treatise, exhorting sinners to repentance, commonly called, The Conuersion of a sinner.


The Argument.

Sinners are commonly co^uerted to God, through feare and dread. Who if they read and well weigh holy writ, would tremble and quake, considering the iminent perils wherein they dwell, and would diuert from their wicked wayes, to the path of perfection, thereby the better to ridde themselues from the gnawing gripes of a giltie conscience, and dreadfull torments due vnto sin, which otherwise God threateneth vppon them.


The first Chapter.
WE reade in the diuine Scriptures, yt God, before he defaced and vtterly rased the Citie of Hierusale^, by Nabuchodonozor king of Babylon, sayd
to the Prophet Ieremie in this wise:
Iere 32. Take a booke not written in before, and write therein, that which I haue said vnto thee, against Iuda, and against Israel, from the first day I began to talke with thee, euen vntill this present day, and publish it in the presence of all the people, thereby to prooue, whether this Nation vnderstanding the manifold miseries I minde to bring vpon the^, will reuolt from their iniquities, that in so dooing, I may haue compassion vppon them, pardon their offences, and cease to exercise the whippe of my wrath which I haue alreadie prepared. The Scripture addeth further, that Baruch, Scribe to this Prophet, pronouncing that which hee had written, in the open audience and assembly of the people and Princes, such horrour and feare fell amongst them, that as me^ amazed, each beheld others, considering the heapes of woes and wretchednesse which then was vttered before them.
This is the way (gentle Reader) that God then practised, and hath don many
times since, to daunt mens hearts, and violently to wrest them from their wickednesse, as the most effectuall and forcible meanes that may bee founde to that purpose. For such and so great are the things which the Scriptures and our fayth daylie telleth vs in the fauour of vertue, and hatred of vice, that if men would reade them attentiuely, and ponder them aduisedly, there is no doubt but their hearts would relent, and their flesh tremble thereat, considering the dreadfull daungers wherein they dwell. Wherefore the cheefest thing that the Prophet desired aboue all others,
Deut. ^2 for the redresse of this vncurable maladie, was this, when hee said: I would GOD this senselesse generation which are vtterlye deuoyde of counsell, did know, and throughly foresee what will happen vpon them, which if they did (as in dutie they are bound to doo) they could not possibly proceede or co^tinue longer in their so crooked course of life. But they are all sunke in the vile sinke of sensuall delights: some hunt
after honours, some for high promotions and dignities, others beating theyr braynes day and night how to cloath curiously theyr carraine corps, and to accomplish their carnall concupiscence: haue no time, eyes, nor heart, to looke to their owne estate, and with the eyes of their minde, to meditate vppon these things, whereof the Prophet speaketh, very properly,
Osea. 7 saying: Behold, Ephraim is like vnto a Doue deceiued, that hath no heart. For the wicked haue heart, wit, and will inough, to loue, to couet, and to count againe, and againe, vppon the pelfe of this world, but they haue neither witte nor will, once to thinke vppon the glory of the worlde to come, which is so infinite and so inestimable, that if the least part thereof bee exactly tried and examined in the minde, it would suffice to euacuate the filthy smoake which hath shut vp the eyes of their vnderstanding, and to make them to acknowledge and confesse their owne errour. For this cause therefore beeing moued principally, I haue thought it very
requisite to set downe certaine perswasions tending to this purpose, to the view of al that list to read or write them. Following heerein the example of the Prophet Ieremie, to shew not onely the greeuous calamities that God hath prepared for the vniust, but also the perfect blisse that he hath prouided for his seruants the godly, that the euill disposed returning from their wicked race, may be receiued into the fauour and mercy of God, released of their trespasses, and deliuered fro^ all those punishments which God menazeth vpon them in holy scriptures.



The Argument.

A Christian ought to consider his profession, that he is subiect to death, and must render a straight account in the other life, of all his doings here. Where he shall discerne sensibly, the cryes and griefes intollerable, wherwith death and sinne rewardeth the vngodly, both here and in the world to come, there neither
the beautie and fine feature of the body, neither the flattery of false fortune, nor yet the pompe of stately dignitie, shall ought preuaile to withstand the wrath of the iust Iudge, against the wretched sinner.


Chap. II.
TAking my first entry in that which is most obiected to our sences: Remember that thou art a Christian, and a man. Concerning thou art a man, hold it for a ground infallible, that thou shalt die: after which death, because thou art a Christia^, be sure thou shalt giue vp a reckoning of thy life forepassed. Of this, the faith which we professe wil not permit vs to doubt: that other, dayly experience doth confirme assuredly, so that none can shunne or escape the one nor the other. Be he Pope, Prince, or Emperour, there shall come a time wherein eyther hee shall see bright day continually, or vgly night incessantly. That time shall come without al doubt, yet thou knowest not when, whether
it will be to day or to morrow. In what time thou now readest this writing, whole and sounde in all thy sences and members, measuring the vayes of thy life according to thy businesse, and delights, shalt see thy selfe in a bedde with a candle in thy hand, attending the dint of death, and sentence pronounced against humaine kinde, which by no manner suite may bee released. There shall be presented vnto thee, the depriuation of all earthly delights, the insupportable payne and passion of death, the ende and last Pageant of thy life, the horrour of thy graue, the cursed condition of thy body, allotted to be deuoured of woormes. But the wretched estate of the soule will bee much more greeuous vnto thee, which beeing yet in the body, knoweth not after an houre or two where his habitation shall be assigned.
Then in a moment, thou shalt see thy selfe sette before the tribunall seate of God almightie, blaming and accusing vnto him thine owne naughtie life.
There thou shalt clearely discerne she foule enormious crimes whereof thou art guiltie, and shall curse ten thousand times, the day in which thou diddest transgresse the commaundements of God, and the delight which stirred thee thereunto. Then shalt thou meruaile at thy selfe, how for so brickle pleasures (as are those which thou imbrasedst) diddest hazard thy selfe to endure perpetuall torments, whereof thou now beginnest to haue a taste and smack, for that the ioyes beeing now quite vanished away, and the doome due vnto thee approaching neare, that slender substance which was in them loosing his essence and beeing, seemeth that it was nothing at all: But the remorse and sting wherwith they presently prick and presse thy conscience, appeareth to bee of inestimable force and efficacie.
Perceiuing therefore, how for such transitorie trifles, thou art at poynt to be bereaued of so incomparable felicitie, beeing abashed thereat, considerest thine owne distresse, for that thou hauing
runne out thy race, there resteth no longer continuance of life, nor leysure of repentance, neither thy worldly freendes, neither the Idols to whom thou hast auowed the whole trauaile and terme of thy life, can assist or succour thee at all, yea those things which earst thou louedst most tenderly, will be heere vnto thee the cause of gretest greefe. Tell me I pray thee, when thou shalt see thy selfe plunged in this perplexitie, whither wilt thou turne? what wilt thou doo? to whom wilt thou crye? To go backe it is impossible, so goe forwarde intollerable, to remaine as thou art, thou mayest not: what then wilt thou doo? Then sayth God, by the mouth of the Prophet, the Sun shall not bee seene of the vngodly in the midday, and I will bring darknesse vppon them in the bright day, and I will conuert their pleasaunt sports to bitter plaints: their dauncing and dallying, to dolour and deadly dread. Oh what wordes bee these?
Ezech. 32 The Sunne shall go downe in the midday, because
she huge heape of sinne then ouerwhelming the wicked, which seeing by the iust iudgement of God, the course of their life and time of repentance to b^ abridged, many of them are so appalled with feare, that they fall to flat dispayre of the mildenesse and mercy of GOD. And abyding yet in the middest of the day, for so much as is remaynent of their mortall life, which is the very time to merit or not to merit: it seemeth vnto them that they haue no longer respect to doo good or euill, but are vtterly excluded of both: verily the passion of feare is of great force and vehemencie, which maketh things that bee farre from vs, seeme to bee present: and of a trifle, rayseth a tragedie. If the consideration of this, causeth them sometime to quake, a little, what then shall the feare of their vndoubted and iust ieopardie cause them to doo? They beeing yet in this life, beginne to suffer sensibly the greefe and reproach of the Reprobate, and in one very moment, are both quick and dead. For bewayling the present
pleasures which they must forsake, beginne to seele the future miserie which so much they feare. They holde them most happie which tarry here behinde, whereby they are prouoked to enuie, which greatly augmenteth their griese. To those the Sunne goeth downe at noone dayes, for so much, as which way soeuer they caste theyr eyes, they see themselues debarred on euery side from accesse to Heauen, and that no beame or sparke of comfort appeareth vnto them: for if they regarde the bountie of God, they see how sore they haue offended him: if they behold his iustice, they see him in a manner rigorously to rush vppon them: for that hitherto the time and tide hath beene at their becke, but now Gods turne is at hande: If they looke backe to their life forepassed, they see what accusations groweth therof: If to the time present, they see themselues to pecke ouer the pearch by peecemeale: If they looke forwarde a little further, they beholde the Iudge attending for their accounts. Alasse what
shall the seely wretches doo, beeing atteinted with so many trespasses, and affrighted with such furious feares at once? For this cause the Prophet said, that the bright day shall be turned into darkenesse, thereby to giue vs notice, that those things whereof the wicked are wont to take their greatest consolation, should then be vnto them the cheefest cause of their discomfort. It is a good thing, I graunt, for a man to see his sonnes, his friendes, his house, his worldly workes, and all that he loueth besides: but then this chearefull light shall bee altogither conuerted to profound darknesse, for that all these things shall heape more heauinesse, and shall become most bitter persecuters of their affectioned louers. For as by nature and common custome, we take no small delight in the present possession of those thinges which we loue and like well: So likewise, the losse thereof bringeth excessiue greefe. Therefore let the sweete children depart out of their fathers sight when hee lyeth at poynt of
death, and lette the mother also absent her selfe, that shee may not giue and receiue by her presence so many sharpe assaults of sorrowe. And his departure beeing into so far countries, his iourney through so straunge and vnknowne waies, the pinching smart which hee abideth, will not permit him to haue confidence in any thing, neyther will graunt him to take his leaue of his freends. If thou standest now vppon the same termes I spake of, thou shalt well perceiue I haue not swarued from the truth: but if thou bee not yet come to this gulfe, beleeue them that haue made their passage before thee, as Ecclesiastes sayth, They which passe ouer the Seas do tell strange perils: if such things doo occurre ordinarily before the departure, what shall happen after? If the eue and vigil be so dreadfull, how shall the feast it selfe bee, and day of saluation? Tell me, I pray thee, what wilt thou thinks, when thou beeing depriued of this light and life, alone, poore and naked, without any other
companion then thine owne guiltie conscience, shalt make thy appearance bebefore the supernall seate of the righteous Iudge, where a rigorous and seuers reckoning shall be erected of thee. There shall be no talk of hanging, heading, or depriuing of this mortall life, but onely of the death and life eternal. If in the recordes of this rufull reckoning, thou be deepely charged with arrerages, debts, and trespasses, what yrkesome agonies shall thy poore heart then indure? How much shalt thou bee confounded? How sore shalt thou repent thee to haue done amisse? How distressed of comfort and counsell shalt thou bee The greefe of the Princes of Iuda was exceeding great, when they beheld the pearsing sworde and Souldiers of Sesacke King of Egypt, to bee dispearsed through the streetes of Hierusalem, when by theyr present plague and punishment, they recognized and confessed theyr former defects. But what is all this, beeing compared to the confusion and wee which there shall wrap
the wicked on euery side? what shall they doo? whither shall they flee? who shall bee theyr shield and befence? For there weeping and wringing of handes doo not mooue compassion: there detesting of former follies, is not accounted of: there no petition, no promise will be accepted: There no truce dayes or time of repentance can be graunted, for that hauing finished the last pageant of the play, they cannot enter the stage againe to play theyr part afreshe: there neither eloquence, nor worldly wealth, nor fauour, may purchase pardon, for that Salomon sayth:
Prou. 11. Ezech. 17. In the dayes of tribulatio^ richnesse shal be of no force, and shall be despised vtterly: onely Iustice and equitie shall defend thee from death. But who can describe or paint in his colours the seueritie of his iudgement?
This exhortation then beeing so good and so fruitfull, I beseech thee deare brother, sucke out the sappe and sweete thereof for thy commoditie, scanning and considering attentiuely this, wherevpon
vpon thou must trust and depend, as she thing which concerneth thy perpetuall wealth or woe, and though herein are many things well worthy to bee noted, yet aboue al others, let these three things neuer be forgotte^. Then first, what greeuous paine thou must then suffer, for hauing purchased by thy desert Gods indignation. The second, how feruently thou wilt wish that thou haddest framed thy lifs according to his holy will and pleasure. The third, that looke what penance thou wouldest the^ be glad to performe, if it might be granted thee: now through mature deliberatio^, to assay and labour to liue in such sort as then thou wilt wish to haue liued.



The Argument.

At the day of iudgement, a Christian must be accountable particularly of each little thought and fact committed in this life: where the sinner being co^uicted by the iust sentence of God, shall be detruded to perpetuall paines, gastly shrikes, and to the
profound darknesse of the infernall prison: and there being scorched with the glowing coales which be neuer extincted through, wrath and fury, shall curse both God and himselfe, and calling eftsoones to minde, all the good and euill which he hath omitted and committed, augmenteth thereby his owne annoy. He therefore that will not obiect himself to so many miseries, must cal himselfe to repentance in time.


Chap. III.
AFter death, followeth the particular and speciall iudgement of euery ma^, and after that the generall and vniuersal iudgement of all men, wherein shall be fulfilled ye saying of ye Apostle, Wee must all of force shew our selues before the iudgeme^t seat of God, that euery one may giue an account of the good and euil he hath done in this body. Many matters are to bee considered in this iudgement, but one of ye cheefest, is, to mark of what things we must giue a
reckening. I will search Hierusalem, diligently (saith God) with a candle in my hand. Such is the phrase of the Scripture, whereby we ought to be admonished, how narrowly we shal be the^ sisted and searched, in the very least things that may be. For there shal not be one fond cogitation, nor one minute of an houre mispent, but it shall bee skored vp in this reckoning. Who is not abashed and appaled at these words of our Sauiour, saying? Verily I say vnto you, that at the time of this audite, men shall be accountable of euery idle worde which they speake vnaduisedly. Then if of these words which hurt or hinder no man, a reckoning shal be required, what shall be required, I pray you, of dishonest and vnseemely speeches, of filthy imaginations, of hands bathed and imbrued with blood, of wanton lookes and vncontinent eyes? In figne, of the whole life imploied and consumed in leawdnesse and trecherie? If this be true, as it is most true, what can bee inferred or gainsayed,
why this iudgement shoulde not bee so rigorous as it is knowne to bee indeede? Howe full of ignominie shall hee bes, who in the open face of such a reuerent Senate, is prossed and burthened with each vaine worde that hath passed him from the time of his natiuitie? Who will not woonder at such a straunge demaunde neuer heard of before? and who durst to aduouche it, vnlesse it had beene the wordes of Gods owne mouth? What King hath euer exacted an account of any his subiects to the value of of a pinne? O how excellent is the Christian religion, howe pure is the sinceritie which by it wee are taught, and with howe great care doth it demaunde the same puritie againe, and how sharply doth it punish our defects heerein. Further, how passing great shalbe the shame and reproch of the reprobate, when all the mischiefs which hitherto they haue closely couered in the corners of their house, and all the brutish vehauiour of theyr youth, with all the secret sores and festered
carbunckles of their conscience, shall be published in the theater, and open view of all the world. And further, who standeth vpon such sure grounde, that hearing this, his colour doth not begin to chaimge copis? Some rather then they will disclose the secrets of their heart to one man, in a place sequestred from all accesse, beeing ouercome with shame, in eschewing thereof, haue bidden the brunt of many huge perils: How shall they then be confounded whe^ their most couert drifts and treasons shall bee reuealed in the presence of God and his Angels, before so many millions of men and women, as haue beene from the beginning, are now and shall be hereafter? This confusion shalbe so great, that as the Prophet saith, they shall cry vnto the hilles,
Math. 25. saying: O ye hilles fall vpon vs, and close vs in your Caues, that we may not shewe our selues with such exceeding shame. But wo worth ye wretches, your hope is frustrate, ye toyle against the tide, weighing the force of that sentence definitiue, Go ye caitiues
into euerlasting fire, long since prepared for Satan and his adherents. What shall that cursed generation imagine then will become of themselues hearing this? for if, as Iob saith, we can scarce abide to heare his mildest wordes,
Iob. 4. who can abide those thundring threats of his omnipotencie? These words shall be so sharpe and so pearsing, that at the verie instant, the earth shall open it selfe wide and large, and into the bottome and bowels thereof, shall be whirled topsie turuie, all those, who,
Iob. 2 as the same Iob saith, here haue had their paradise and pleasures, in sundry sortes of Musicke and harmony, trifleling out their time and yeares in all kinde of mirth and iollitie. This fall and cracke of the earth, S. Iohn describeth in his Apocalips, in this maner: I saw an Angell descending from heauen with great power, and with such brightnesse, that all the earth was lightned therewith, and hee cryed aloude, saying, The great Cittie of Babilon is fallen downe, and is made of the habitation of diuels, and the cage of all
filthy and abhominable fowles. And further hee sayd: I sawe another mightie Angell lifting vp on high a great stone, much like to a mylstone, and did cast it into the sea, saying, With such a violence shall the great Babylon bee throwne into the bottomlesse pitte, and shall neuer recouer his estate againe. In this sort shall the vngodly fall into the blacke and gastly prison full of confusion and vtter desolation.
Esay 66. But what tongue can expresse the innumerable and sundrie sorts of torments, in that place addressed for the wicked? There their bodies shall be broyled with furious flames co^tinually: there their soules shall be consumed with the worme of conscience, which will neuer cease his greenous gnawing. There shall be that incessant howling and gnashing of teeth, whereof the Scriptures treateth in so many places. There these vnhappie wretches surseysed with cruell dispaire and rage, shall waxe wood against GOD and themselues, in suche dispiteous wise, that they shall deuoure their
owne fleshe, and in a franticke moode rent it with their nayles, crashing their teeth togither, and spilling their Intrailes with sorrowe and sighing, blaspheming and denying continually their creator that hath adiudged them to such sharpe punishments. There euery of them shall crie out vpon his cursed condition and vnfortunate byrth, estsoones repeating those pittifull bewaylinges, and wofull wordes of patient Iob,
Iob. 3. but with a minde and intent farre contrarie to his. These bee the wordes. Curst be the day wherin I was borne, and the night in whiche it was sayd, A man is come into the worlde: let that day be turned into darknesse: let it not be reckoned of God, nor beautified with light: let it be ouerwhelmed with darknesse and shadowe of death: let it be full fraught with obscuritie and bitternesse: let that night be ouercast with a black cloude: let not that day be numbred among dayes and moneths of the yeare. Why did not death receiue me so soone as I was issued out of my mothers
wombe? why was I not carried from the place of my byrth, straight to my graue? why was I lulled in my mothers lap? or why did she giue me suck? This shall be their melodie, their mydnight mattens, their morning and euening prayer. O filthie tongues, which babble of nothing else but brawling and blasphemie. O wretched cares, which heare no other things but wofull mourning. O vnhappie eyes, whose obiect, is miserie vppon miserie. O wretched bodies, who haue for your harbour a fierie fornace. In what case shall they then be, who heere earst wallowed in wealth and wantonnesse? O what fleeting delight hath wrought continuall greefe? O what wofull habitations are addressed for you? Now gone is all your gallant glee and iollitie, wherein you delighted for a moment, for which ye now lament eternally. Now what doo your treasures auayle you? where is your pompe and pleasure become? the seuen fertile yeares are now ended quite, and in place thereof, are now succeeded the
seuen barren yeares, which shall so consume the abundance of those which are passed, that there shall not remaine any one shadow or shewe thereof. Therefore all your former felicitie is drenched and wrapped vp in the waues of wretchednesse, and are now driuen to such straights and scarcitie, that not so much as one droppe of water shall be granted vnto you, wherwith ye might somwhat asswage the raging thirst which vexeth you so furiously: neyther shall your wonted prosperitie releeue your miserie, but rather thereby ye shall be more fiercely afflicted. For therein is accomplished this saying of Iob,
Iob. 21.24.25. that the sugred soppes of the vngodly, shalbe at the last deuoured with wormes. Which S. Gregory in his Moralls, expoundeth in this sort: The memory of their wonted ioyes, maketh their present paine to seeme more bitter, by calling to minde how braue and frolike they haue bene, and how base and vile they now are come, and howe for loue of that which so soone slipte away, they suffer that
which neuer shall haue end. Then shall they perceiue euidently the subtil slights of the enemie, and being called to their account, shall mutter too late these sayings of Salomon:
Sap. 5. Woe vnto vs wretches, howe apparaunt is it now vnto vs, that wee haue strayed from the trade of trueth, that the light of instice hath not shined vpon vs, and that the sunne of intelligence hath not risen ouer vs.
Wee haue wasted and wearied our selues in the crooked and crabbed way of wickednesse: but we haue not stepped one foote in the plaine and easie path which leadeth to righteousnesse. What are we now abettered by our Princely traine and treasure? All these thinges are now vanished as the fleeting shade, and as the swift Courser chased vppon the spurre, as a shippe driuen with the tide and tempest, which leaueth behinde no print of his passage.
This and such like in the infernall pitte, shall bee the talke of those which haue bene offendors. For that the hope and trust of sinne, is like vnto chaffe chased
with the winde, or as the skumme and froath of the Sea dispearsed with the waues, as the smoke sodeinly dissolued into the ayre, or as the remembraunce of a pylgrime passing by the way. These be there the complaintes, and this the perpetual penance of the vngodly, which shall not assist them at all, because the time is passed wherein they might haue bene releeued hereby. Come therefore in the time of grace and repentaunce, and you that haue eares, receiue the sounde aduise of our Lorde vttered by the Prophet, saying:
Iere. 13. Serue and glorifie God before the day be depriued, before the darke night of death steale vppon you, and ere your feete be entrapped, or ye stumble at that foule blacke hillocke. Therefore take the time and day whilest ye haue it, for it shall be turned into darknesse. And our Lord himselfe, who better then any other, knoweth the deapth of this daunger, aduertiseth vs hereof in his Euangelist, saying,
Luke 11. Take heed yt your hearts be not opprest with too much meate and drinke, and with
ouermuch care and turmoyle of this world, least that dreadfull day catch you at vnwares, which will steale vpon you like a theefe, and vpon all those which inhabit vpon the face of the earth. Therefore watch and pray continually, that you may be deliuered from these huge heapes of calamities, which hereafter will happen, that you being cleane and vndefiled, may be presented before the sonne of the pure Virgin, the promoter of all our auaile and profit.



The Argument.

Those which haue loued God, and liued according to his will, shall be rewarded in Paradise, which is the glory and merit that good men do respect. Which notwithstanding any difference that is among the elect, bringeth a common comfort and pleasure to them all, because there is perfect charitie, and God is all and in euery thing. Wherfore no other exercise is vsed there, or no other paine or trauaile, then to loue God, to laude and glorifie him incessantly for euer.



CHAP. IIII.
NOw that we haue declared the co^demnation and sharpe sentence to be pronounced vpon the wretched sinner: it followeth consequently, that we treat likewise of the glorious recompence wherewith the righteous shall be endued, which is nought else, but that happie life and kingdome which God hath ordeined for his chosen people euen from the creation of all things, which is such and so excellent, that neither with the tongue of men nor Angels it can be expressed. But that ye may haue some taste of this, heare what S. Augustine briefly saith in commendation hereof, in a certaine meditation of his, in this sort: O life alotted by God to them that loue him, a liuing life, a life voide of care, a blessed life, a quiet life, a pleasaunt life, a pure life, a chaste life, a life enemie to death, a life that knoweth no greefe, voyd of molestation, of smart, of anxietie, voyd of all corruption, voyd of perturbatio^s, not subiect to varietie, change
or mutabilitie. A life full of beautie and perfection, where no enemie shall molest thee, nor no trespasse offend thee: when is perfect vnitie, vnfeigned and holie loue: where all feare is far away: where is one eternall day, without alteration: where God is seene face to face, which is the foode of all that there abive. Sweet GOD, with an vnsatiable heart and greedie minde, I couet thy hidden treasures, and the more I long after them, the more I luste and burne in desire: considering thee my delight, my life and Sauiour, in contemplation whereof, I feele my selfe exceedingly refreshed and reuiued. O moste happie life, O very blessed kingdome, altogither with out death, and without ende, which doest not yeelde to any succession or alteration of times, where is bright day continually, without interruption of night: there it is not knowne what mutation meaneth, where the tryumphant Souldiour accompanied with a glittering crewe of Angelles, singeth vnto GOD without ceasing, the passing
praise of Sion, hauing gotten the crowne of euerlasting felicitie. I would to God that my sin, my greeuous guilt, were forgiuen me: Thrise blessed were my soule, if after this painefull pylgrimage, I might be worthy to see and beholde thy glory, the beatitude, the beautie, the walles, and the gates of thy Citie, thy streetes, thy pallaces, thy noble Citizens, thy worthie King, setled in his throne of magnificence. Thy walles are made of precious stones, thy gates are beautified with shining Pearles, thy streetes are paued with pure gold, which resounde and ring aloude with the peales of perpetuall praises. Thy houses are buylded with quadrant stones, adorned with Saphyrs, thy beames and rafters are of golde, where no corruption can abide, nothing may enter that is defiled. O Hierusalem, our mother, thou art braue and pleasaunt in thy deuises, the force of no aduersitie is felte in thee, neither any of those discommodities are susteyned whiche here we find. Thy ioyes are farre aboue
any which this wretched life can yeelde vs. In thee is neuer founde night, darkenesse, nor chaunge of times. Thy light issueth neither from lampe, nor from the Moone, nor yet from the stars, but God the light of all lightes, is ho which lightneth thee. The supernall Emperour keepeth continuall residence in the middest of thee, enuironed and assisted with many millions of his ministers. There the angelicall quires answere each to other melodiously: there the frutes of true nobilitie, doo yeelde a pleasaunt sent and spectacle to the beholders: there is celebrated the feast of those, who being safely arriued from ye bottomlesse sea of these miseries and mishappes, are incorporate in one societie with those which possesse eternall life: There is the company of the Prophets, the royall ranke of the Apostles, the inuincible hoast of innumerable Martyrs: there is the sacred conuent of graue Confessors: there are the true religious, the deuout women, who despising all delights and dalliance, haue conquered their fraile inclination:
There are the virgins and younglings, which with their vertuous indnstry, haue shunned she allurements of this vile deceitfull world: There are the innocent lambs, who robbing themselues of all earthly pleasures, doo now skip and leape for ioy, in theyr propper and peculiar houses. And whatsoeuer difference there be in glory amo^g them, notwithstanding the solace and contentation, is common to all: There charitie ruleth beeing entire and perfect, for that god is all in all, whom they alwaies see, and seeing him continually, are euer enflamed with his loue, therefore they louing praise him, and praysing loue him, all their exercise, all their endeuour, is to magnifie him without ceassing or intermission. O how happie were I, and most happie, if after the dissolution of this corporall prison, I might heare the sweete musicall songs of that celestiall harmony, and sing Psalmes of co^mendation to the eternall king, of al the woorthy company of the most happie Cittie. Now happie shoulde I be, yea
twise blessed, if I might attaine to this felicitie, to sing and stand before my King, my God, my guide, and to behold him in his glorie, as himselfe hath promised to be seene,
Ioh. 7. whe^ he said: O father, my desire is, that all those may be with me which thou hast giuen me, that they may see the cleare brightnesse which I had with thee before the foundation of the world. And all this is vouched out of S. Augustine. Now tell me then what a chearefull day shall that be, which shall so illuminate and clarisie thy courage, if at the full consummation of this pilgrimage, thou passe from mortalitie to immortalitie, and in the same time that other^ begin to droope, to doubt and dread, thou shalt beginne to lifte vp thy head, be cause the wished day of thy redemption approacheth neare. Lifte vp th^ minde a little (said S. Hierome vnto th^ virgin Eustochia) out of the dungeon o^ this corrupt bodie, and setling thy self before the gate of the heauenly tabernacle, scan and consider well the mer^ of this thy present distresse, and whatglorious day that day shall be vnto thee
wherin the virgin Mary garded with a troope of pure virgins, shall be prest to receiue and welcome thee, and wherin thy Lord and spouse himselfe, with all his holy Saints, shall meete thee, saying,
Can. 2. Come away and follow me quickly my loue, my delight, my doue, for now the wofull winter is passed, the sharp showres are ceased, the tempests and whirlwindes are appeased, and here spring vp sweete fragrant flowers in this lande of behest. This shall be then the delight and consolation that thy soule shall receiue before the high throne of that most blessed trinitie, before the angels, but specially by him to whose custodie thou were earst committed, whe^ these and all the rest shall declare the sundry tribulations, the trauels and persecutions that thou hast suffered for ye loue of Christ. S. Luke sheweth,
Act. 9. that when ye charitable Tabita deceased, all the widowes and poore people besought the apostle Peter in her behalf, shewing him their garme^ts which she had made: the Apostle being moued thereat, praied vnto God instantly for so mercifull a
woman, whereby shee was restored againe to life. What a singular comfort shalt thou then perceiue in thy soule, when those blessed spirits shall take thee, and set thee before the diuine consistorie of God, publishing thy deserts, and reciting orderly thy almes, thy prayers, thy fasting, the integrity of thy life, thy susteining of wrong, thy patience in affliction, and temperance in delights, with all thy other vertues and good deeds whatsoeuer? O what delectation shalt thou then reape of euery good action here atchieued? howe shall the force and valure of vertue bee manifested vnto thee? There humble obedience shall triumph with victorie. There vertue shal be rewarded, and the wel disposed shall be regarded according to theyr desert. Besides this, what inward and secret solace shal that be vnto thee, when thou seeing thy selfe arriued in so assured an harbour, shalt haue regard towards the course of thy dangerous nauigation passed, and shalt see the troubles and torments wherein thou liuedst earst,
she wyles, the ambushes of the enemy, the cruell incurtions of theeues, which new thou hast escaped. There it is where resoundeth this song of the Prophet:
Psal. 93. Were it not that the Lord was mindfull of mee, my soule should haue hardly auoyded the infernall habitation. But specially, when thou shalt perceiue how in this worlde offences are multiplied, how daily so many soules descend to hell and damnation: how among such a multitude of castawayes, God would associate thee into the fellowship of his chosen people, which shall be the inheritours of such a renowmed kingdome. But that which passeth al this, is, to see the solemne feasts and tryumphes which there are helde day by day, for the welcome of their newe brothers, who hauing ouercome the world, finished and performed the race of their pilgrimage, come to receiue the crowne of eternitie. O what ioy shall it be to behold the accomplishment of that which doo appertaine to the setting vp and new erection of the walles of the noble Hierusalem,
with what sweete embracing's and cullings shall they be welcomed by all the celestiall court, seeing them come laden and lugged with the spoiles of the vanquished foe. There they shall enter with the victorious barons, with those worthy women, which haue conquered the world, togither with theyr brickle nature. There likewise the vncorrupt virgins, murthered and martyred for their spouse sake Christ Iesu, shall enter with double triumph: that is, with conquest of the flesh and of the worlds, adorned and crowned with Garlandes, fraught with roses and freshe greene flowers, all about their heads. In like maner, there litle boyes and gyrles mastering their tender yeares with discretion and vertue, shall come in to receiue the hyre and guerdon of their integritie. Where they shall finde theyr freendes, knowe their ministers, recognise theyr parents, and culling and kissing them affectionately, shall heare the glad tydings to bee made possessors of eternall felicitie. O how then shall the fruite of bertue taste deliciously, although in
times past the roote thereof seemed sowre and vnsauery. Sweete is the shadowe after noone, the fountaine is pleasaunt to the thirsty and wearied waifaring man: sleepe and rest yeelde great comfort to him that hath trudged and toiled all day: but farre greater contentatio^ peace bringeth to the saints, after their weary war, securitie after perils, and perpetuall repose after infinit trauailes.
The broyle of battaile is now appeased, to be armed it needeth not, neither on the right fide; nor on the lest. The children of Israel were armed, when they went to the land of promise, but after they had conquered the countrey, they laide aside their weapons, and euery of them forgetting quite the feare and trouble of warre, they all were lodged in the harbor of rest and quietnesse, and enioyed the fruition of long desired peace. There may ye eyes wearied with lo^g watching, receiue their quiet sleepes. Now may ye subtil serpent attending to entrap vs, come out of his ambush: now may ye happy Hierom betake him to rest,
who made the night and day one, in lamenting his defaultes and trespasses, encountering couragiously the cruell conflicts of our auncient enemie: there the horrible armours doo neuer sound of that bloudie beast: there is no place forth: crooked craftie Serpent: there the venomous Basiliske dooth not effende the sight nor his hissing is not heard, but the breath and sweete sounde that distils loth from the loue of the holy Ghost, here raungeth rounde about. Where is clearely discerned the royall magnificence of God himselfe. This is the region of rest and securitie, scaled aboue all the elements, where the dark cloudes and filthie vapours doo not ouerlappe the bright and pure aire. What happie things are said of thee, O Citie of God? happie are they, saith Tobias, which loue thee,
Psal. 147. and enioy thy peace. O my soule, extol and magnifie God, who hath deliuered Hierusalem his holy city, from troubles and vexation. Nowe blessed should I be, if hereafter in the remnant of my time, I might see the beautie and
brightnesse of Hierusalem, whose gates shall be of Saphyrs, and of pollished Smaredges, the circuite of whose wall shall be of pearle and precious stone, the streetes shall be of white marble, interlaced with pure Alabaster, and euery place resoundeth with Alleluia, and voices of gratulation. O mery, sweete, velectable counsaile, O high renowmed glory, O blessed societie, who shal be those happie Christians, picked or sorted out to dwell in thee? It seemeth a hard thing to desire thee, yet no man can liue without this desire. O sonnes of Adam, O wretched generation of men, how sensuall and abiect are your thoughts, for if this bee the viands or foode ye ought to feed vppon, what other thing doo you labour for? whereabout do you goe? what, will ye loose a benefit so inestimable, rather then ye will trauaile a little? If this may bee obteyned with labour and paine, for mine owne part I desire them, I call and cry to all the trauailes and toyles that may bee suffered in the world to come vpon me, that
tribulations turmoile and tosse mee at their pleasure, that my body bee vexed with infirmities of all sorts, and my minde afflicted with sorrowe and anxieties: let both the one and the other consume me in griefe: let all the creatures of the worlde rise vp and impugne mee: let me be the reproach of me^, the outcast of the world: let my life bee spent in dol^ and distresse, and my yeares finished in wofull weepings: For all this I make no reckoning, so that after I may communicate and haue my part with the Saints in Heauen, and may haue eternall rest in the day of tribulation, and may ascende to the people which are cloathed and adorned with that shining glory. Goe to now, O foolish worldling, drudge and toile for high titles and dignities, erect lodgings and pallaces, enlarge the limits of thy possession, let Kingdomes, and if thou wilt, lette the whole world be at thy commandement: yet for all this, thou shalt not be so great as the least of Gods seruants, who receiueth that which the worlde cannot
ginohim, and yet possesseth eternitie. Thou with thy riches and ryot shalt accompany the rich glutton in the dampe of eternall damnation: hee with poore Lazarus shall be caried vp with Angels, and conueyed into Abrahams bosome.



The Argument.

In the paines of hell, the sinner can haue no co^fort, for as the lot of the blessed is an vniuersall prosperitie, which in it conteyneth all good things: so the estate of the reprobate is a general and vniuersal misery, which comprehendeth all euils in it selfe. For there the senses of the conuicted sinner shal be tormented particularly, one after another, proportionally to the crymes they haue committed, without all hope of end or release of their grief, which shall be eternall, eager, infinit, sharpe, without intermission.


Chap. V.
THe least part of these rewardes, were inough to stir vp our earthly and lumpish hearts to doo much
more then that which wee are eni^yn^^ vn^o by the commaundements of God. But what if with this glory exceeding all measure, we adioyne in like manner the vnmeasurable punishments prouided for the wicked? For that those cannot there be reuealed with this saying: What if I be a castaway? no other incouenience ensueth thereof, then neuer to see the glory of God, and to be hereafter as though I neuer were, not knowing good nor euill. But they misse in their reckoning, beeing allotted perforce to take one of these vnequall conditions, that is, eyther to be glorified with Angels, or accursed with Diuels: to rule with God eternally, or to burne in hell perpetually. The one of these twaine they must needes elect for the place of theyr perpetuall abode. These bee the two baskets which God foreshewed in a figure to the Prophet before the Gate of the temple, the one of them filled with dilicate and holesome figges: the other full of such filthy and vnsauery figges, that euery man abhorred to taste
or touch them. Which signifieth nothing else then the oddes and difference of two fortes of people: the one is of the chosen, to whom God hath bestewed his mercies bountifully: the other of the abiects, to whom God extendeth the heauie hand of his iustice. And the lot of the first sort is so excellent florishing, and that of the others so wofull and wretched, that the greatnesse of these two extreames, so much differing betweene themselues, cannot be specified by any words. But omitting all other considerations, the state of the happie is an vniuersall felicitie, wherein all good things are conteined: and contrariwise, the condition of the wicked, is the hauen where arriueth all vnhappinesse, the nourse of sorrow, and harbour of distresse. All the miseries which are in^^dent to this life, be miseries in speciall, and therefore doo not torment all our members generally, but one or some of them alone. For example hereof, we see some men greeued in their eyes, some in their eares, many in their stomacks,
others in their bellies, and not a fewe at the very heart. Yet none of these infirmities doo vexe all the sences vniuersally at one instant, but some of them particularly. Notwithstanding, the smart is oft full sharpe and vehement, and the night ouer tedious to him that abideth either of these greefes, be it but the aking of a toothe or gumme. Admit now, that a certaine man shoulde suffer such an vniuersall punishment, that no member, sence, or ioynt, should bee free from peculiar tormentes, and that at one very instant hee must abide most bitter paines in the head, in his eyes, in his teeth, eares, stomacke, liuer, heart, and to be short, in all the other members and ioyntes of his bodie, and that hee laie in this perplexitie vppon a bedde, feeling the seuerall greefes assigned to euery member. What excessive forrow should he suffer, thinkest thou, which were tormented in this sorte^ or what thing coulde be more miserable and pittifull to beholde? If thou sawest a dogge in that distresse, it would
perforce moue thee to compassion. This deare brother (if any comparison may be vsed herein) is that, which not for the space of one night, but for euer, is suffered in the pitte that perpetually burneth with fire and brimstone. For as the vngodly do greeuously offend God with all their sences and members, making them ye instruments to further their franticke follies and excesses: so by the ordinance of God, there they are all torme^ted, and euery of them abideth his proper punishment. For there the incontinent eyes shall be afflicted and affrighted with the vgly sight of diuels: the eares with confused cryes and complaints: the nose with the intollerable stenche of that filthy denne: the taste, with raging thirst and famine: the feeling, and all the body besides, with pearcing colde and heate: the imagination shall be tormented with the apprehension of present paine: the memorie, by hauing still in mind ye pleasures passed: the vnderstanding, with co^sideration of the glorious kingdom lost, and cursed co^dition that is hapned. The diuine Scriptures
tures signifieth vnto vs this pluralitie of paines, where it saith, that in hell shall be famine,
Mar. 15. Psal. 10. thirst, weeping, and gnashing of teeth, the two edged sword, the spirites and creatures of reuenge, serpents, wormes, scorpions, bytles, sowre sasages, water distilled of gall, stormy tempestes, and other such like annoyances. By which it frameth and preferreth to our presence, an euident patterne of the diuers and dreadful plagues practised in hell.
Exod. 10. Finally, there shall be inward and outward darknesse, both of the body and minde, farre more obscure then those of Egypt, which might be felt and touched with the hand. There shall be fire, but not suche as we vse commonly, which smarteth a little, and vanisheth quickly: but such as is most fit for that place, that is, which afflicteth vehemently, and neuer ceaseth to torment. If this be true, how can it be, that those whiche beleeue and confesse the same, should line so loosely, and sleepe in such securitie? What daunger, what tedious toyle would not any man gladly
vndertake, rather then he would endure one day, yea one houre, the least of these torments? Why then to shun a perpetuitie of calamities so tragicall, doo they not imploy themselues to so easie trauaile as that which is requisite to the following of vertue? This thing were inough to sequester a mans soule from his sences, and to bring him to an extacie, that deliberateth aduisedly herevpon. Yet if among these huge heapes of miseries, were any hope of ende or redresse, it woulde quallifie somewhat their gripings corsies: but alas, they find it there farre otherwise, for the gates of comfort are closed vp on all sides. In all kinde of heauinesse that may happen in this life, resteth alwayes some reliefe, wherein the afflicted may repose himselfe, as that which is administred either by reason of time, freendes, or company of many whiche doo participate with him in the same mishap, or by hope to be released at last, may mittigate their maladie: But in this euill onely, the cundits of grace are so stopped,
and the passages of common comfort so interrupted, that these vnhappie creatures can finde fauour on no side, neither from heauen, neither from the earth, neither of the time passed, nor present, nor of that to come, nor of ought that can be else, but they seeme to be pressed and pearsed of all partes, and that all creatures co^spire against them, whereby at last they ware wood and wrath with themselues. This is the extreme straightnesse, whereof the wicked bewayle themselues by the Prophet, in this sorte:
Psal. 17. The dread of death hath hedged me in on euery side, and the infernall frightes haue inuironed met round about, in such wise, that whereon soeuer they peepe or prie, their obiect is alwayes miserie exempted of mercie. The Virgines whiche stoode prest at the Pallace of their spouse, were receiued in,
Matth. 15. as the Euangelist saith, and sodeinly the gates were locked. O perpetuall pinning faste, O immortall inclosure, O gate of comfort which neuer shall be opened, which is as though he
had saide, Closed is the porte of pardon, shut is the doore and hatch of hope and intercession, of grace, of consolation, and of meriting any more. The sixe daies are vanished, wherin Manna was to be gathered, but the Sabboth it could not be founde, wherfore he must fast alwaies, which would not prouide for himselfe in time. The y^le sluggard (saith Salomon) fearing the colde will not till his grounde in the Winter, whereby he shall begge in the sommer, and nothing shall be giuen him. And againe, He that laboureth in the sommer and time of haruest, is discreete: but he that then betakes him to sleepe, is the sonne of perdition. What greater confusion can there be then that which hapned to the riche myser, who might haue purchased his place in heauen with the crums of bread that fell fro^ his table: by his couetousnesse in deteyning that litle, is now brought to such penury himself, that he craueth, and shall craue co^tinually one drop of water, and shal neuer obtaine it. In whose heart doth not this
request of that wretch moue a remorse. O father Abraham, pittie my case, and send Lazarus,
Luke 16. that he may dip the top of his finger in the water, and may touch my toong therewith, for this fire tormenteth me out of measure. What lesse petition could be demaunded then this? for he durst not request one vessell of water, neither would he that Lazarus should wet all his hande, nor his whole finger, (which is to be wondred at) but only the toppe of his finger, and yet it would not be graunted vnto him. By which thou seest how close the gates of grace are shulte, and howe farre the prohibition and curse stretcheth, which is prepared for the vngodly, sith they cannot get so small a matter. In such sort, that cast they their gastly lookes which way they will, let them extend their hand to what place them list, they shall finde no crum of comfort, be it neuer so small. And as one fallen into the sea, plunging in the deapth of the waters, can finde no perfect footing, and often stretching out his arme, catcheth
and graspeth round about in vaine, being now euen swallowed in the gulfe: So shall it happen to the accursed crue, to whome the worlde is without any stabilitie, for wading in the waues of such woe and wretchednesse, and alwaies striuing with death, without trust or stay of any succour to leane vnto. Of all the greefes which is suffered in that mischeeuous place and harbour of aduersitie, this is the greatest: for if these punishmentes were determinable by any time, yea though it were a thousande yeares, or a hundred thousande million of yeares, it were some kinde of comfort, for that which hath end, is not altogither to be dispraised: but the paine of the wicked shall be eternall, and the time of their distresse shall be coequall with the diuine glorie of God: so long as God shall liue, so long shall they dye: and when God shall cease to be that he is, then shall they likewise leaue to be that they are. O dying life, O liuing and immortall death, I know not whether I should call thee life or death, for
if thou be life, why dyest thou? if thou be death, how doest thou still endure? I will not therefore call thee the one nor the other, for that neither the one nor the other, conteyneth ought that good is. Life hath his limits, and death dureth but for a time, which much auayleth to the asswaging of sorrowes, but in thee are neyther boundes nor space at all. What then art thou? Verely thou art the penaunce of life, and the plague of death, for thou hast the sting and torment of death euerlastingly, and of life thou hast the perpetuitie without intermission. GOD spoyled both life and death of their happinesse, and committed to thee, that which was left for the perpetuall punishment of the vngodly. O cursed confection, O bitter pill, berest vtterly of all the benefites and delights that floweth from our sweete Samour Christ, which is the foode that all wretched sinners feede vpon. I wish therfore, deare brother, that not sildome thou wouldest erect thy earthly minde to the consideration of this eternitie, and
as a beast of the world wouldest sometimes make thy repast thervpo^. Which that thou mayest performe effectually, propone before thy eyes of vnderstanding, the affliction that a sicke man suffereth in one night, specially if hee be seased with some sharp infirmitie. Mark I pray thee, how oft he turneth and walloweth in his very bed, how he can take no kinde of rest, how the night seemeth so long vnto him, that he reckoneth euery houre of the clocke, and each houre seemeth a day long. He looketh and longeth for the light, which nought or little auaileth to moderat his misery. Then if this sorrow bee so great and insupportable, what shall the paine be of that eternall night, which hath no morning nor dawne of day? O profounde darkenesse, O night perpetuall, O night accursed by Gods owne mouth, the light whiche was wont to lift vp it selfe in the morning, is not seene in thee. Consider nowe what a torment it is to liue alwayes in suche a night as this is, not couched in a softe bedde, as a sicke man is,
but rather in a fornace flaming with fires. What shoulders can be able to abide these so feruent heates? what heart will not melt with sorrow, to continue in such torment for euer? Which of you (saith God by the Prophet) can sustaine that consuming fire, and liue in that excessiue heate? O dreadful threats, if that a man cannot endure possibly to put the toppe of his finger vppon one glowing coale, whilest a Pater noster is saide: howe shall he abide to broyle both bodie and soule in these eternall flames, which are so fierce and vehement, that comparing them to those which here we see in this world, seeme of no more force then fire paynted on the walles? Is there any iudgement in the earth? haue men vnderstanding? doo they perceiue the weight of these wordes and threates? thinke they that those are deuices faigned by Poets? or doo they perswade themselues that it toucheth some others, and perteineth not to them? Wherein they are much deceiued, and sottishly feede their foolish
fancie, sith it is verified by the eternall trueth, saying, Heauen and earth shall decaie, but my word shall neuer want his force and vigour.



The Argument.

We haue great cause to be the seruants and affectionate friends of God, as well for the gifts of nature bestowed vpon vs, and the infusion of grace which we haue alreadie, and hereafter hope to receiue, as also for dread of his wrath. Among which benefits and graces granted vnto vs, the Sacraments are most precious. Hauing then receiued such and so many benefits of him, we ought not to shewe our selues ingratefull, that all his troubles and trauels suffered here on earth, may be for our behoofe and profit.


CHAP. VI.
SOme man peraduenture will maruel why I should accumulate so many reasons to iustifie this that I haue begunne, and to confirme an approued veritie, and a thing so commendable as
is that atchiuing of vertue, but this discourse is not addressed to that ende, nor to extenuate any doubt that may be in a matter so manifest.
But for that monstrous is the malice of our corrupt minde, and the conflicts very cruell which striue to destroy the soueraintie of renowmed vertue, it is requisite that her bulwarkes be of sufficient strength to beare the brunt and shocke of all assaultes. But for my better proofe and progresse of this matter, it shall not be amisse to adioyne here vnto, howe much we are bounde to the seruice of God, not onely for hope of the hire which we expect at his handes, nor for dread of his iustice, but cheefely for those good things which by him we presently enioy. For if all creatures imbrace their benefactours, and bruite beastes acknowledge them by whome they haue bene releeued: yea, if the lawe of thankesgiuing be of such force, that the fierce Tygres, Lions, and Serpentes, yeelde to her segnioritie, and liue vnder her lore, howe shall I escape to be accounted
more cruell then those beastes, if I should not loue and magnifie him, who hath bene so beneficiall vnto me? What is there either in me or without me, whith is not issued from the bountie of God? Thou Lorde hast created my soule to thine owne image and similitude, thou hast disposed the organes of my bodie, and beautified it with such feature and varietie of members and sences, that regarding well the curious cunning of the worke, appeareth that it can be wrought by no other artificier then thy selfe. Thou haste and doest ordaine daily all thinges necessarie for the preseruation of this thy woorke, thy prouidence is my guide, thy hand doth sustaine me, thy creatures serue me, thy medicines heale me, thy foode doth nourish me, thy Angels guard and keepe mee, thy wisedome instructeth mee, thy mercy prouideth for mee, and thy patience supporteth mee: Finally, all that I haue, are thy goods, thy grace, and thy mercy.
For who giueth mee my essence,
to be that I am, but thou that art the Fountaine of all essence and beeing.
By whose benefite doo I liue, if not by thine, which giuest light and life to all them that breath? who giueth me iudgement and vnderstanding, if not thou which art the lampe of eternall light? Therefore what should a man doo for such a one, who hath him so much his benefactour? Why should he not serue him with all his forces both of bodie and minde, who hath made him all, and doth preserue him all, both bodie and soule, and by whose direction he is gouerned altogither? Wherfore if we be so much bounde vnto him for his benefites giuen vs by nature, how can we gratifie him sufficiently for those his giftes of grace? How canst thou counteruayle his curtesie, who amongest so sundry sorts of people and nations of Infidels, hath singled thee out for himselfe, hath created thee a Christian, and hath washed thee with the water that distilled from his precious side, and there hath adorned thee for his sonne, and hath inuested
thee with all habites and ornamentes that are requisite for that dignitie? But after, when againe thou were fallen from this preheminence, who can declare how patiently hee did holde thee vp, when thou sinnedst? with what eyes did he beholde thee, when thou madest no reckoning of him? how carefully did hee guard thee, when thou diddest procrastinate thy returne vnto him? with how many holy instincts did he stirre thee? with how many harolds did he sommon thee to come, that at the last, forsaking thy former follies, shouldest bowe to his holy will and bent?
But what shall I say of that supernall grace, of that most excellent benifite of our redemption? O Lorde the heauens blesse and extoll thee, and the Angelles sing prayses of thy merueilous workes. What neede haddest thou of our auaile, or how could our annoy bee preiudiciall vnto thee? If I offende (sayth Iob) what hurt is it vnto him? and if thine iniquities abounde, what harme taketh hee thereby? and if thou doo well, what is he
she better therefore? But what commoditie? what reward can he reape at thy hands, who is God omnipotent, so rich and so free, and far from all wracke and woe? that GOD (I say) whose wealth, whose power, whose wisedome can be neither augmented nor diminished: who neither before the co^stitution of the world, nor after he had made all things, is one iot more or lesse then hee was before: nor if all the angels and all mankinde should be saued, and should praise him perpetually, is any whit the woorthier: nor if they all were damned and did blaspheme him, is lesse glorious at all. This so great a lord, not drawne nor driuen by any straights at all, but of meere grace and bountie, whilst our acts of hostilitie were yet in fresh memorie, was content to encline the heauens of his royall maiestie, and to descend into this Caue of calamities, to cloath him with the vesture of our mortalitie, to charge himselfe with the deepe debt of al our sins, and for satisfaction thereof, to endure such torments as were neuer
suffered in this world. For my sake, O Lorde, thou wast borne in a stall: for mee thou wast laid in a manger: for mee thou wast circumcised the eight day: for me thou wast conueyed into Egypt: for me (to conclude) thou wast persecuted and turmoyled with a number of infamies: for me thou watchedst: for me thou trauailedst: for me thou swettest: for mee thou didst weepe: for me thou hast prooued all those euils which my enormous crimes haue deserued, thou beeing innocent and guiltlesse. Finally, for mee thou wast apprehended as a malefactour, abandoned of thy freends, solde, denied, presented before the tribunall seate of those iudges, where thou were accused, bufferted, defamed, whipped, spitted at, scratched, condemned, crucified, blasphemed, pierced with a speare, dead and buried. Therefore with what desert of mine, can I acquite my selfe, I will not say of all these courtesies, but of the least drop of blood shed out of thy holy side, for me vnworthy wretch. How is it possible that
I should loue him sufficiently, who so hath loued me, so hath created me, so hath redeemed me, and hath bought mee so dearely? If I be lifted vp from the earth (sayth our Sauiour) all things shall be drawne after me. But with what chaines, with what violence?
With the force of loue, and with the bondes of his benefits. With the rope of Adam (sayth our Lorde) I will draw the^ vnto me, and with the knot of loue. Therefore who will not bee lifted vppe with this draught? who will not suffer himselfe to bee catcht and caried with such chaines? If one little drop of water falling continually vppon a stone, will pearce and breake it at the last, how shall not the bonds of so many benefits be inough to rent my stony heart a sunder? And if the very earth wrought in the feruent heat, is sometimes conuerted into fire, how shall my heart be free from burning, beeing so beset with the glowing coles of such vnmeasurable loue? if it bee so haynous an offence not to loue this Lorde, what shall it be to offend
him, to despise him, and to transgresse his commaundementes? How canst thou haue any heart or hand to offende those handes which haue bene so bountifull vnto thee, which for thee were spread vpon the crosse? When that lasciuious woman besought the Patriarke Ioseph, that he would betray his maister, the holy man repelled her with this saying, Behold, O wretched woman, what trust my Lord hath reposed in me, to put all that he hath into my handes, except thee his wife, therefore with what face can I commit this vilanie against my Soueraigne? Which is as if hee had sayd, If my Lord hath been so friendly affectioned towards me, if he hath committed all that he hath to my custodie, if in such wise he hath fancied and honoured me, that in me only it resteth to dispose of his affaires: how may I, beeing tyed with the bonds of so many benefites, haue any handes at all to offende a Lorde so liberall? And it doeth not content him to say, It is no reason to offende him: but, How can I
offend him? for the greatnesse of good turnes, doo not onely restraine the will, but in a manner all power and possibilitie to annoy the benefactor. And it bindeth fast both the handes and the feete of a man, that he cannot striue against it. Wherefore if these kind of ceremonies, as to bee gratefull for good turnes bee of so great force, what shall we thinke of the benefites of God? That man committed to Iosephs fidelitie all his businesse, and God hath put into thy hands all that he hath. Consider then howe much Gods treasures are more woorthy then any that Pharao did possesse, for that so much more is this which thou enioyest, then was that which Ioseph did receiue. But tell me what thing hath God, which he hath not giuen into thy hands? heauen, earth, the sunne, the moone, the starres, the sea, birdes, fishes, trees, beasts, and finally all that is conteined vnder the golden globe, he hath bestowed vppon thee: and yet not that onely which is heere belowe in earth, but likewise all that is in the Heauens aboue,
which is the glory, the riches, and the delights of Angels and Saintes, which are there praying busily for thy commoditie. All things (saith the Apostle) are yours, whether it be Paul,
Paul. or Apollo, or Peter, bee it the worlde, bee it life, bee it death, bee it the time present, or that to come, all is yours, for that all serueth for your behoofe: and yet not that alone which is aboue the heauens, but the Lord of heauen himselfe, hath giuen vs his onely sonne, after sundry sorts, sometimes as a patron, sometimes as a defendor, sometimes as a sauiour, sometimes for a teacher, sometime for a Phisitian, sometime for a rewarde, sometime for a conseruation, sometime for a remedie, and for each other our need. The Father hath giuen vs his sonne, the sonne hath merited for vs the holy Ghost, the holy Ghost hath made vs meritorious of GOD the Father himselfe, from whome floweth the streames of all felicitie. Therefore if this father (as the Apostle sayth) hath giuen vs his onely sonne, which was
the greatest gift he could bestow on vs, howe will hee not deliuer vnto vs with him all other things whatsoeuer? Therfore if it bee true that God hath giuen vnto thee al that he hath, if he hath wrapt thee fast with obligation of so many benefites: howe is it possible that thou shouldest molest or greeue so liberall and bountifull a benefactour? If it be a greeuous crime, not to be thankfull for so good turnes: what shall it be to adioyne to ingratitude, the contempt and offence of the benefactor? If that young man founde himselfe in such bondage, and so impotent to annoy him who had committed to his fidelitie the charge of his house: what heart or courage canst thou haue to offend him, which for thy behoofe hath created both heauen and earth? O more vngrateful then the very beast, O more cruell then the Tigres, O more insensible then the senslesse creatures, not to consider so great a fall: for what beast, what Lion, what Tiger, did euer hurt the man that did them good?
Saint Ambrose writeth, that a dogge
all one night howled and bewayled his maister, which was slaine by his enemie: whither repairing many the next morning, to view the dead corpes, amongst whom the murtherer also made his appearance, whome so soone as the dog beheld, furiously ranne vpon him, in such wise, that the malefactour was detected thereby. Wherefore if a dogge for a peece of bread did shewe such loyall loue to his maister: howe canst thou become so vngratefull, to suffer thy selfe in the lawe of reason and humanitie, to be inferiour to a dogge? If that beast was wroth against him that had slaine his maister: what wilte not thou bee wroth against them that haue killed thy Lorde and Soueraigne? and who are those that haue killed him, but only thy offences? these are euen they that tooke him, that bounde him, that whipped him, that nayled him to the Crosse. For all the torments had not bene sufficient for this exployt, had they not bene assisted by thine offences. Wherfore then doest thou not waxe wood against
these so cruell murderers which haue bereaued thy Lord of his life. Wherefore, seeing him dead in thy sight, doth not thy affection increase towards him, and thy wrath towards sin, which hath killed him, knowing that whatsoeuer in this world hee hath said, done, or suffered, was to imprint such an hatred in our hearts against sin, that we should detest it vtterly. To slay sinne he dyed himselfe, and to binde it hand and foote, hath suffered himselfe to be bound vpon the crosse. Why then wilt thou make frustrate all the labours and paines of Christ? Wilt thou run headlong into the thraldome and bondage fro^ whence Christ hath deliuered thee with the ransome of his precious blood? why doest thou not tremble and shiuer at the onely name and sounde of sin, now that thou hast seene the extremities that Christ vsed in the remoouing thereof? what could GOD doo more to restraine vs from sinne, then to set himself before vs bowed pitifully vpon a crosse? who durst displease God, if hee saw heauen and earth
open before him? yet much more it is to see God stretcht vppon a crosse, then all this. Wherfore, whosoeuer is not stirred with this motiue, there is nothing in the wide world, whereby he may be reduced from the fonde and perillous iourney wherein he is entred.



The Argument.

God doth not suffer those to want any thing necessarie to this world, which bee righteous, and do keepe his co^mandements, but doth comfort them with his graces and gifts infinitly, as well temporall as spiritual, present, as those to come. Whereof the vngodly haue exceeding great scarcitie, for that noble vertue is euermore associated with all good things, and contrariwise, vice with mischiefes and miseries.


CHAP. VII.
BUt peraduenture thou wilt say, that all these things before treated of, are right iust, as well ye good things as ye evil
yet desirest to see some present motine, which should serue to eleuate thy heart, fithe the thinges obiected to our daily viewe, doo moue vs more forcibly. Of these things also we will giue thee thy glut, and thou shalt haue thy sacietie of that thou desirest. For admit our Lord had kept the best wine and meate fill the ende of the banket, yet for all this, he will not that his seruants should faints with famine by the way: for he knoweth very well if they should be so scanted, they cannot continue in their iourney. Wherefore he said vnto Abraham, Feare not, O Abraham, for I am thy defendour, and thy rewarde shall be great. By these words two things are promised, one in this present life (as he was his defendour in all things perteyning therevnto) the other in the life to come, which is the guerdon reserued for him. But howe great the first promise is, and howe many sweete solaces it conteyneth, no man knoweth, but he that hath read the Scriptures diligently, which inculketh and repeateth
nothing more then the singular prerogatiues which our Lorde hath promised to his seruaunts in this life. Reade the holy Psalme of the Prophet,
Psal 25. Psal. 91. Psal. 18. Dominus regit me: Reade, Qui habitat in adintorio: Regarde with thy vnderstanding, Diligam te domine fortitudo mea: reade the benedictions and the curses of Deuteronomium: finally, reade the new and old Testament, and thou shalt see apparantly, what fauour and friendship is promised to the iust and righteous in this life. Heare the verdit of Salomon in his Prouerbes vpon this matter, Blessed is the man that hath found wisedome, for it auayleth more to-possesse that, then all the heapes of golde and siluer, be it neuer so fine and precious: it is of greater price then all the riches of the world: and all that can be wished for, and desired in the heart of man, is nothing comparable therevnto. The length of his daies are in his right hand, and in his left, are riches and glorie: his wayes are faire, and his pathes peaceable, and to all them that obtaine
it, and to euery one that with perseueraunce shall enioy it, shall be happie. Marke then, my sonne, the constitutions and counsailes of God, for this shall be likings and life to thy soule. Then shalt thou take thy iourney voyde of care, and thy feete shall not fayle thee: if thou sleepe, thou shalt not be affrighted: and if thou betake thee to rest, thou shalt haue a quiet repose. This (deare brother) is the solace and quietnesse that the righteous haue in their wayes: but consider howe much the wayes of the wicked differeth from this by the sentence of the Scriptures: vnhappinesse, and lucklesse chaunce is euer in their way, neyther know they what it is to tread the steps of peace and tranquilitie. And againe, Ecclesiastick sayth: The path of the vniust is ful of lets and obstacles, and at the ende of their iourney for an harbour is addressed for them, hell, darkenesse, and paine. Doth it seeme now good vnto thee to diuert from the way of God, to follow the way of the world, beeing so contrary each to other, not onely in the
and, but also in the midway, and at euery step? Which then is the greater inconuenience, to endeuour through one torment to get another torment, or else with one repose to atchieue an other repose? But that thou mayest discerne more clearely the manifolde benefites which presently doo accompanie this good thing, bee attentiue to the promise that GOD himselfe made to the Prophet Esay, to the obseruers of his commaundements, in these woordes, according to the intent of diuers Interpreters: When thou shalt be (sayth hee) such and such, as I haue willed thee to be, vnwares shall come vpon thee the dawne of bright day (that is the light of iustice) which shall cast out and bannish quite the dryerie darknesse of thy errours and defaultes, and shalt quickely knowe true health, and the equitie of thy well dooings shall stande before thee as a burning lampe, and the glory of our Lord, shall enuiron thee on euery side, that thou mayest be honoured in the sight of God,
and men. Then shalt thou call vpon the name of our Lorde, and he will heare thee, because thou louedst him, and shall say vnto thee, behold me here prest to accomplish whatsoeuer thou canst aske. Then in the middest and deepe darkenesse of the tribulation and distresse of this life, the comfortable beames of diuine fauour shall shine vpon thee, and thy tribulation shall be as the middest of the day, for that our Lord had ordeyned, that thy miseries themselues, and thy transgressions passed, should accumulat vnto thee greater felicitie, presenting alwayes to thy minde assured peace, and firme tranquilitie. And in the time of scarcitie and famine, he shall feede thee full, and shall supply thy wantes aboundauntly, and thy bones shall be deliuered from death, and from the flames of eternall fire, and thou shalt be like vnto a moyst garden, and as a fountaine which runneth incessantly: and in thee, that shall be accomplished which many yeares hath bene vnfinished, to the ende thou maiest stand vpon a sure foundation,
from generation to generation, and if thou wilt endeuour to celebrate my festiuall daies, not contriuing them in foolish delightes, nor in preferring thy will before mine, obseruing carefully my will and behest in this voyage: then will I create thee a Lord, and will giue thee such solaces as shall farre surpasse all pleasures of the worlde. And I will exalt thee aboue the highest turrets of the earth, to a most blessed state of life, wherevnto neither fortune nor humaine nature can adde or detract ought at all. And after all this, I wil enstal thee into the precious inheritaunce that I promised to Iacob thy father, which is the benediction of glorie, because the mouth of God hath spoken it. These are the rewards which God promised to his seruantes, of which although some are yet to come, notwithstanding many of them pertaine to this present life. As is that new light and heauenly brightnesse, that abundance of all things, that assured trust in GOD, that diuine assistance to al petitions and demands, that
peace and securitie of conscience, that diuine prouidence and protection, that flourishing Gardein (which is the deo king and garnishment of grace) the fountaine which floweth continually, which is the great plentie of all things, those supernall ioyes which exceede the capacitie of man, that lifting vp of the spirite which cannot be augmented by assistance of humane nature.
These fauours and prerogatiues promised by God, are all the workes of his mercy, the influence of his grace, the testimonies of his loue, the effect of the fatherly prouidence he extendeth to his seruaunts. Vpon euery one of these I could say much more then the breuitie of this volume will permit, for that euery of them would aske a seuerall Treatise. Wherefore the iust shall reioyce of all these good thinges, both in this life, and in the life to come, whereof the vniust shall be vtterly destitute. By which meanes, marke what oddes is betwixt the one part and the other, nowe that these are so fauoured from heauen, and
those in such distresse and penury, for if thou consider aduisedly all things before treated of, and doest weigh the estate and condition both of the iust and vniust, thou shalt finde that the lot of the righteous is in the fauour of God, but that of the vngodly in vtter disgrace:
The estate of the good and of the euill. these are his friendes, the other his professed foes: these enioy the light, the other dwell in darknesse: these participate in delight with Angels, those with dririe swine: these are free indeed, and masters of themselues, those other the thrals and vassalls of Satan: these liue in vnitie, those other in deadly discord: the trust and testimonie of a false conscience, delighteth these, and to the other mindes, resorteth alwayes the guilt of their filthy facts: these with a resolute minde abide the brunt of tribulation in their accustomed place, those other, as light chaffe are repelled by the winde: these depende vpon the anker of hope, those other haue no stay to leane vnto, being obiected to euery chaunce and chaunge of fickle fortune: the prayers of these
are acceptable to the eares of the Lord, the other petitions are odious and execrable. The death of these is quiet and glorious with diuine honour, and that of the others troublesome, defamed, fraught with a thousand feares. Finally, these liue as children vnder the guard and gouernment of God, they sleepe securely vnder the winges and shadow of his prouidence: but the others excluded from this diuine protection, wander too and fro as scattered beasts without head or guide, thrust out to apparant perils and alaroms of fortune. Then if such and so excellent perfections doo accompany vertue, what restraynt can there be, why thou shouldest not imbrace so soueraigne a thing? what canst thou alleage for thy excuse herein? To wrangle and say, this is not true, cannot extenuate thy guilt, seeing thou seest howe it is founded vppon the infallible word of God, and testimonies of the scripture. To say these perfections are of small price, auayleth not, for that (as I haue before mentioned) they exceede
all that mans heart can wish for. To alleage that thou art thine owne enemie herein, and that thou doest not desire these good things, is most vntrue: for a man is by nature a friende to himselfe, and humaine will hath felicitie for his subiect, which is the ende of his desires. To affirme that thou hast no sence nor taste hereof, sufficeth not to acquite thy crime, considering thou beleeuest them to be true, although thou canst not taste them. Originall sinne bereaued thee of thy taste herein, but not of thy faith, and faith is a testimonie more sure, more secure, and more doubtlesse, then all other experiences, witnesses, and warrants of the worlde. Wherefore then doest thou not preferre this testimonie before all the other allegations? Why doest thou not attribute more to fayth, then to thine owne sottish seeming and iudgement? O that thou wouldest determinately commit thy selfe into the handes and armes of God, and trust to him onely, how suddenly shouldest thou perceiue in thy selfe the accomplishment
of these prophesies, shouldest soone see the greatnesse of these treasures, shouldest see how senslesse and blinde all worldlings are, which doo neither feele nor fancy this felicitie, and shouldest see with howe iust reason God commaunded vs this kinde of life, saying, Come vnto me al ye that are laden and weary, and I will ease your greefe. Receiue my yoke vppon you, and then ye shall finde comfort in your soules, for it is full sweete and delectable. God is no deceyuer, his promises are neither false nor fraudulent. Which sith it is so indeed, why doest thou flee or faynt? why doest thou abandon peace and pleasure? Wherefore despisest thou the allurementes and sweete soundes of thy Pastor? How darest thou to chase vertue from thee, hauing such a gallant superscription, as heere thou seest grauen by the hande of God? It was much lesse then this, that Queene Sabba had heard of Salomon, and yet she came from the vttermost partes of the earth, to trie whether those things were true
which were reported vnto her. Wherefore then hearing such and so certaine tydings of vertue, doest thou not betake thee to a litle trauell? If thou wilt be assured hereof, graunt thy selfe vnto the word of God, and confidently commit thy selfe into his handes, loose thy selfe from the hands which hath wrapt and wonne thee, and thou shalt see that the same of vertue is lesse then her merite, and that whatsoeuer we haue said is nothing, in comparison of that she is in her proper effect.



The Argument.

To perseuere in sinne, with a thousand excuses and delaies; intending to amend his life hereafter, deceiueth a Christian maruellously. For by this meanes he blindeth and burieth himselfe in the durtie dunghill of vice, and waxeth daily more prone therevnto, in such wise, that iniquitie taking deep roote in the intrailes of his mind, it will very hardly be remoued.



CHAP. VIII.
NOtwithstanding all these assertio^s whereby the condition of vertue is iustified sufficiently, the wicked wil neuer want their wonted excuses and delaies: for as it is written, He that will shake off his friend, searcheth for a cause of quarrell, but in so dooing, he meriteth a greeuous reprehension and controlment. Yet some there be which with one onely worde will easily reply to all this, saying, It sufficeth them to amend hereafter, and then to reduce the course of their life to a better order: foolishly feyning to themselues, that it is too hard a matter presently for them so to doo, and that in time to come, they may attempt and atchieue this thing with more facilitie:
How fondly man deceiueth himselfe. which is one of the grossest errours wherewith a man may delude himselfe. For if thou mindest so long to proceede and perseuere in that perillous path wherein thou art entred, still augmenting the heape of thine iniquities, howe canst thou so easily hereafter
forsake it at thy pleasure, thy naughtie conditions beeing growne by continuall custome into an habite? Further, if thou continue heerein, euill custome shall bee more fortified and confirmed, and nature shall be corrupted the more, and the diuell shall preuaile and haue more power vpon thee, and shalt be still farther from the fauour of GOD, and consequently more blinde, more enclined and plunged deeper in the stinking puddle of iniquitie. Then howe can it be more easie for thee to performe this businesse, beeing increased with these newe difficulties, by reason of thy perseueraunce in sinne. If euery time that thou doest offend, thou leauest behinde th^^ a dayes iourney of thy voyage towardes vertue: how canst thou more readily frame thy selfe thereunto hereafter, hauing let slip so many daies iourney, as thou hast committed offences? It may well appeare, that by this answere thou art instructed by the father of lyes and falshood, that after thou hast so long inured thy selfe to vice and
folly, and haste runned a race so farre from the trade of vertue, shall then bee most easie for thee to attayne therevnto. But among these things, what shall I say of the great power of custome, and of the force shee hath to binde and wrap thee fast in wickednesse? For true it is, that as they which fasten a nayle in any thing, with euery stroke they driue it further in, and yet with other strokes further, and so the more still they strike, the more they fasten it, and waxeth thereby the more harde to pull out againe: In like maner, by each euill fact we commit, vice, as it were with a beetle, is more deepely rammed into our minde, where it is fixed so fast, that there can very hardly bee founde any force able to remooue it. Whereby wee see not seldome, that the olde age of those who in their flourishing yeares were wholely giuen to carnalitie, is often subiect to the dissolute manners of theyr youth, yea although they then abhorre them, and nature thereof disclaymeth vtterly: which onely commeth to passe
through the tyranny of euill custome. For it is affirmed by Iob, that ye bones of the wicked, shall be full of those vices that they vsed in their youth, which shall acco^pany them in their graues, in such sort, ye vice hath no other end then death, which is the dissolution and extinguishment of all mortall things, which onely suffiseth to redresse and cure it. And the cause hereof, is custome co^firmed, which nowe is growne to nature. For vicious appetites, taking such roote in the bones and bowels of their souls, is euen like vnto a ioynt ague, which hauing setled it selfe in the intrailes of a man. is become incurable. The very same thing is shewed by our Sauiour in the resurrection of Lazarus, which had lien dead nowe foure daies, whome GOD called againe to life with such vehement shrikes and cries: notwithstanding hee raised many from death before, with such falicitie, thereby to make it knowne vnto vs, what a wonder it was that God raised him againe, who foure dayes had beene dead and buried.

This long since, is espied to be in sinne. For (as Saint Augustine openeth this place) of these foure dayes, the first is the delight we haue in sinne: the second is, the consent of minde: the third, the accomplishment in deede: the fourth, the perseuerance in sin: and he that is come to this point, is Lazarus lying dead foure dayes, who cannot be receiued but with the loud lamentations and teares of our Sauiour. If peraduenture this chaunce vnto thee (which very seldome hapneth to any) tell mee what lawe canst thou alleadge for thy leawdnesse, that God before all worlds hauing loued and created thee, to inuest thee with the glory of eternall felicitie, wilt not consume in the seruice of him, who hath bin thy benefactor and friend so long, in this short and brickle life that thou enioyest.



The Argument.

Repentance ought not to be deferred to the end of life, for the^ God doth seldome grant them his grace to dye well. For he
that hath lead a leaud life, hath commonly a worse death: and so findeth a righteous recompence for his vniust deserts.


CHAP. IX.
BVt some there be so blinde and shamelesse, that it suffiseth them not to haue sinned all their life passed, but they resolue with themselues wilfully to wallowe therein, vntill they sensibly feele themselues assited with the very sommons of death. O dreadfull time, full of perplexitie, what thinkest thou with this price to purchase the Kingdome of Heauen, and to merit the societie and seate of Angels? Doest thou not see, that whatsoeuer is done at this time, is necessitie, and not will: is forced, and not free: is constraint, and not consent: is feare, and not friendship: yet it is loue, not the loue of God, but selfe loue, which shunneth naturally his owne annoy? Doest thou not perceiue, that these things are meere opposite to the rule of equitie, that thou hauing dedicated
the whole tearme of thy life to deuotion of the diuell, wilt in the ende require to be rewarded of God? Doest thou not behold herein, euen that which the fiue foolish Virgins did prepare, whereof the Euangelist sheweth, that they were making them readie, when they shoulde haue giuen vppe their accounts? Therefore, how canst thou expect any better successe, then thou art admonished by this example, continuing in the selfesame carefulnesse? God is mightie, and can inspire vpon vs true repentance when he list: but howe often it happeneth at this houre, and howe fewe they bee, which then repent hartily, aske S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, S. Gregory, and all other Saints, and thou shalt see howe precisely and scrupulously they speake in this matter, and thou shalt well perceiue what a madnesse it is, so confidently to commit thy selfe to the mercie of a gulfe, wherevnto so many skilfull Pilots did passe, with such great horrour and feare. To dye well, is a knowledge which ought to
be learned all the life before, for in the houre of death, the diseased is cumbred with so many cares and greefes, that hee hath no leysure to learne to dye well. It is a generall rule, that as the life is of euery man, such is his daath.
The death of the wicked is conformable to their life. Whereby it followeth, that if the life bee mischeenous, the death is miserable, except God for some speciall purpose doth dispose it otherwise. These be not my words, but the Apostles sayings: The ende of the vngodly, shall be like vnto their deserts. For speaking generally, neither doo we looke for a good euent of wicked beginnings, nor of good attemptes, cuill happes. Reade ouer the whole Byble, and thou shalt not heare any thing repeated so oft as this: What seede a man soweth, such croppe shall he gather: and that in the extremitie of death, the vniust shall reape the fruite of their trauels: and that God will impart to euery man according to his merits: and that the death of euery man, shall be conformable to the life he hath lead: and that the iustice of the righteous man, shall be
vppon his head, and the curse of the ^^godly vpon his head, likewise with a thousand such like sentences. If all the diuine scriptures might be powred out, to see what would issue thereof, scarce any thing would appeare more often to our view then this.
Wherefore if thy workes be wicked, and thy life likewise, what other thing can we prognosticate thereof, but that the ende will succeede as the beginning and middle hath beene? What thing else shall we thinke him to gather in the other life, but corruption, who in this life hath sowen nothing else but corruption? Peraduenture as our Sauiour saith, We may gather roses of thornes, figges of furse-bushes, etc. If the house of the wicked, as Salomon sayth, declineth towards death, and his foote path leadeth directly to hell, what other port can bee expected after this nauigation, but euen such an ende as where the wall or tree shall fall, which bendeth to one side, but in that part whither it howeth most. For he whose life, whose
dooings, whose thoughts hath bene their onely regard to hell, (for that they haue all deserued it) where shall he settle himselfe after all this, but euen there right? where shall he haue his habitation, if not in outward darkenesse, which alway walked in inward darknesse? how wouldest thou bring to passe, that in the ende of his iourney he should arriue in heauen, which hath alwayes pursued the beaten pathe that lyeth straight to hell?



The Argument.

Wee ought not to abuse the mercie of God, perseuering in sinne, vpon confidence thereof. For if Gods mercy can suffer so many Infidelles in the worlde, and in the Church so many wicked Christians, and that all those should be cast away quite: he will also suffer that euery one which stil remaineth in sinne, shall perish eternally.


CHAP. X.
ANd if on the other side thou say, that great is the mercie of God, which dooth embolden thee in such
that continuing in thy naughtie life, are yet assured of thy saluation. But tell mee, how canst thou offer greater ini^rie to the mercy of God, then of his beneuolence to take occasion to displease him? Who taught thee to argue in this sort, that because God is good and gracious, shou shouldest haue leaue to be vngracious, and to merit heauen thereby? The holy Ghost neuer taught thee this kinde of reasoning, but rather in this fashion, That God being so good, ought to be honoured, obeyed, and imbraced, aboue all other thinges: wherefore sith God is pittifull, it is good reason, that in him I shoulde repose my whole trust and considence that he will pardon my treipasses, bee they neuer so hainous, so that I detest them vtterly, turning my selfe vnto him with a sincere heart. But proceeding alwayes in sinne, beleeue it well, hee will not abeare it, yea, hee will condemne thee and hate thee the more, whome hee suffereth so long. Thou canst not gainsay me, that of an hundreth partes of the worlde,
there is scarce one repleated with Christians, and that of ninetie and nine which abide in the worlde, none are saned. For as in the time of that great flood, none was saued out of the Arke of Noe, nor out of the house of Rubbe, none escaped of those which dwelt in Hierusalem: so none can be saued out of the house of God, which it his church, euen that which wee call Christianitie. Beholde in what pickle and perplexitie it standeth in these dayes, and thou shalte finde for certaine, that in this whole mysticall bodie from toppe to toe, is scarce any thing entire and sounde. Sette aparte some principall Cittie where discipline taketh place, and range abroad through all Townes and other places, where (as I saide) is no talke of discipline, and thou shalte finde much people, of whome may be verified that which GOD saide touching Hierusalem: Search all the streetes and houses of Hierusalem, and if thou shalte finde one iust man, for his sake I will haue compassion vpon the Cittie.
Raunge abroad (I say not now through Innes and Markets, for that these an^ places dedicated to deceit) but through the best Cittizens houses. As Ieremie saith, Listen thy eares to that they speake, and thou shalt hardly heare ou^ good word, but bitter backbytings and murmure shall fill thy eares. Their disorder, their oathes, their blasphemie, laughter, discorde, threates, and of all sides, both heart and tongues, debate of earthly drosse and gaine, but verie s^dome of God and good things, but altogither in swearing and forswearing his holy name, which is the memory he hath left vnto vs. The same Prophet saying, Let them be mindfull of me, but not in swearing falsly by my name, i^ such sort, that by the externall shewe, a man can scarce coniecture whether that nation be Christian or Heathen, except it be by the sounde of belles, and ruthful rage of swearing and forswearing, which ringeth rounde about, wherein they ^^ceede all Infidels. Then how can the^ bee vnited to the number of those (...)
whom Esay speaketh in this wise, All they that behold this people, shall quickly knowe them to bee the plantes to whom God gaue his benedictio^. Wherfore if suche ought to bee the life of a Christian, that all they whiche beholde him, may soone iudge him so be the sonne of God, in what sort shall we deeme of those which seeme rather scoffers and contemners of Christ, then Christians indeed? If this then be the life of these, what hope can we haue of their saluation, according to the generall rule we haue set downe before? All this is spoken, that thou maiest perceiue, if God, notwithstanding his so great mercie that thou alledgest, suffereth so many Infidels in the world, and so many euill Christians in the church, and if all these Infidels doo perish, and so many Christians too, he will also be contented that thou shalt perish with them, if thy life be conformable to theirs. But peraduenture the heauens were fauourable to thy birth, and therewith all the commaundementes of God were altered,
and the lawe of his Gospell and of his iustice, that for thy sake should me made an innouation of all things. With this pittie he suffered the fall of Angels, and the transgression of our first Parentes, and with them the blot of humaine generation, and destruction of the whole worlde, with the great floud, and the dreadfull desolation of Hierusalem, of Babylon, of Niniuie, and of many other noble Cities and Prouinces.
And with this, he suffred also that hell should bee enlarged, and that daily so many millions of soules should tumble thither: And will he not suffer likewise that thine shall passe the same way, liuing as disorderly as they did before thee? But thou maiest obiect, that then God was rigorous, and is become now more milde and curteous, and yet with this pitie and clemensie, he hath suffered all that thou hast heard, to the end that thou shouldest likewise feare thy fall, although thou be a Christian, whilest thou art wicked. Sith it is certaine, that fruitlesse faith is not the instrument of saluation,
but the cheefest matter of aggrauate damnation. Perchaunce Gods glorie shall be lessened if thou enter not therein, Or art thou of such power, that God standeth in neede of thee, and must heare with thee perforce? Or hast thou any bill of his hande, whereby hee is hound to bestow vpon thee such passing priuiledges? If the children of Dauid which were priuiledged by the merite of their parents, God did not spare to punish them according to their deserts, for that they offended greeuously in his sight, so that many of them died miserably in his disgrace: whence hast thou this confidence so to assure thy selfe of thy safetie? Thou doest ere, deare brother, yea thou offendest, if thou take this to be trust and hope in God: this is not hope, but plaine presumption: for that which we call hope, is, to beleeue that a man repenting and forsaking sin, God will forgiue him all his greeuous crimes: but thine is presumption, if thou beleeuest, that persisting still in wickednesse, shalt not faile of thy saluation.




The Argument.

To say that the loue of the world is the cause of sinne, is a vaine excuse, proceeding from a corrupt and carnall Christian, who hath no taste nor sent of supernall blisse. Wherefore hee abiecteth those which are true and sincere, and searcheth busily after false, fraile, and momentall pleasures, which presently he perceiueth not. Then should he knowe the deceit and daunger of them, and how perfect good are the spirituall delights.


CHAP. XI.
BUt perhaps thou wilt say, that the loue of the world hath thy heart and hands fast hardle with the fetters of her slourishing vanities, and that she it is that maketh thee to decline from thy well attempted voyage. This is the excuse of one that hath not tasted of the spirituall delights, and therefore desireth corporall comfort. The countrey clowne deemeth that there is no brauer Palace any where, then his rude Cottage at home, for that he neuer sawe the lo^^e
furress and curious workemanshippe of Castles and Cities. The litle babe wofully weepeth being descended from his mothers womb, because he is ignoraunt yet howe much this worlde is better whither he commeth to dwell, then the prison where he was pent before. Our first parentes made great reckonings of their villages and houses made with strawe, before they espied the braue buildings framed with timber and stone. To whome wee may well resemble all sensuall men, who hauing yet no taste of spirituall spices, nor prooued their sap, their sweetnesse, their beautie, dignitie, and nobilitie, couet more greedily the shadowes and shewes of happinesse, because they knowe not any part of perfelt selicitie indeede. For if they had any true knowledge hereof, it were impossible but that they should vtterly despise all sensuall solace. According to this saying of the Prophet Esay, In that day thou shalt detest all siluer and golde, and the idols which earst thou diddest adore, euen as durtie ragges of no reputation,
and shalt say vnto them, when thou art clensed: Depart from me, get you out of my house, in such sort, as men contemne their false gods, after they know the omnipotent God: So will they reiect the vanities of the worlde, so soone as they haue a smacke of the true celestiall blisse. For (as Saint Bernard saith) at the first taste of spirituall comfort, all flesh from whence issueth each earthly delight, leeseth his sent. For this is that Syren song, that dreame of Sirces, which hath bewitched so many foretches. But in opening this deceit, mother fraude that lurked earst, appeareth in sight, which is, that they are not onely ignoraunt of the spirituall blisse, but also of the temporall ioyes themselues, for if they knew them throughly, it is not possible that they shoulde like them so well as they doo. For tell me, what is the world and all the iolitie thereof, (if with in corrupt eyes ye rightly regarde it, his guise, his begining and progresse) what is this world I say, other then a heape of wo, a schoole
of vanitie, a market of deceit, a bottomlesse pit of errours, a prison of darknesse, alwaies infested with theeues, a durtie dunghill, a sea of stormy troubles? This world (as the Philosopher said) is a barren lande, a stormie field, a wood of thornes, a greene medowe, full of serpents, a gallant garden, but fruitlesse vtterly, a fountaine of vaine thoughts, a pleasaunt poyson, a fable finely framed, a delighting frenzie: what good things are therein, which bee not altogither false and frayle, and what euill things are incident to it, which bee not tryed to be true? his purpose is restlesse, his securitie without safetie, his paines to no purpose, his teares auaileth not, his intent without euent, his hope frustrate, his mirth fatned and forced: his dolours to bee true, is order full of disorder and confusion. So that deare brother, take it for vnfeigned veritie, that the quiet and contentment which thou expectest, cannot bee had in this world, but to bee rich in the fauour of God, but in contemning
thereof, and in esteeming lesse of earthly things then they be indeede. Go rounde about the sea and land, wander whither thou wilt (as saith S. Augustine) and thou shalt finde wretchednesse euery where, if thou walk not in the way of the Lord, in whom consisteth all felicitie and contentment.



The Argument.

The way of God is now nothing difficult, nor austere at all, but is become very plain and easie, by the instruction and ensample of Christ, but especially by his passion, his resurrection, and assention, and after by his sending downe of the holy Ghost.


CHAP. XII.
OTher there be which excuse themselues, saying: The way of God is very hard, and this is onely because his precepts are repugnant to the inclinatio^ of mans appetites. This is one of the principall causes that maketh men to loath this labour, but the authors of such
allegations, though they bee Christians, and liue vnder the lawe of grace, they knowe not yet the first letter that standeth in the Alphabet of this lawe, nor haue any smacke of this misterie. O thou vnhappie wretche which makest profession to bee a Christian, tell mee I beseech thee, wherefore came Christ into the world? wherefore did he shead his blood? why did he institute so many sacramentes? why sent hee the holy Ghost? what is ment by the Gospell, by grace, by this word Iesu? what doth this renowmed name of Lorde and Sauiour signifie which thou woorshippest? If thou knowest not, aske of the Euangelist, who sayth: His name shall be Iesu, for it shall be hee that shall saue his people from their sinne. But what is it to be a sauiour and deliuerer from sinne, if by him wee doo not meritte pardon for our offences passed, and grace to excuse those that are to come? For what cause came Christ into the world, if not to helpe vs to saluation? Wherefore dyed he vppon the Crosse, if not to
slay sinne? why did he rise againe after his death, if not to reuiue vs? Likewise, wherefore spent hee his blood, if not for a medicine able to heale thy festered woundes? wherefore ordained hee so many Sacraments, if not for a speciall remedie against sinne? what is she cheefest fruite of his comming and possion, if not to shewe vs thereby the way to Heauen, which before was austere and difficult?
Esai. 40. As appeareth by Esaias, where hee saith? At the comming of Mossias, the crooked wayes shall become straight, and the bitter passages pleasaunt, large, and wide. Besides all this, why did he send his holy Ghost, if not of flesh to make thee spirituall? and wherefore did hee sende it in the forme of fire, if not to the ende thou shouldest bee inflamed as fire, illuminated, fortified, and transformed into himselfe, and should drawe thee to heauen, whence he descended, that he might powre vppon thee the grace and vertue that floweth from him abundantly, thereby to lighten the heauie yoake of sinne, and to mittigate
the exercise of vertue, by reioysing in aduersity, by hope in perils, and by ouercomming in temptations. This is the beginning, the middle, and ende of the Gospell, that as one carnall man and a sinner (which was Adam) made vs all earthly and sinners: so an other man beeing celestiall and iust (descending from Heauen) made vs all celestiall and iust. What other thing did the Euangelistes write of? What other promises did the Prophet forespeake of? what else did the Apostles preache of? There is no other diuinitie but this: this is the woorde abreuiated: this God wrote vppon the earth: this is the consummation and abridgement heard by the Prophet Esay, which was verified by the sequell of the great abundance of vertue and iustice, which came into the world immediately after.
Then (deare brother) behaue thy selfe, as though thou wert newly conuerted to christianitie, and aske of some skilfull Diuine, what thou art charged to doo by this thy Religion: of whome
thou shalt receiue no other aunswere, then that it behooueth thee to bee a good man: which to accomplish, this profession giueth thee comfort and courage, and causeth the carnall man to become spirituall, giuing vnto him the holy Ghost, the better thereby to proceede in the promises. Surely it is a great ouersight, that thou bearing the name of a Christian so many yeares, knowest not yet what difference is betweene the written lawe and the lawe of grace.
In this then consisteth the difference (sith thou knowest it not) that lawe enioyned a man to bee iust, not furnishing him with forces necessarie for that exployt, but this also chargeth vs to bee iust and good, giuing grace and abilitie to accomplish this commaundement: therefore for this cause and no other, it is tearmed, the law of grace. That pressed vs to battaile, without weapons to fight: willed vs to ascend to Heauen, but gaue vs no ladders to climbe: prescribed to men that they should bee spirituall, yet did it not inspire them with
the holy Ghost that they might be spirituall. But now it is otherwise, for this lawe ceasing, the other succeeded, which farre exceeded it, by his merites, and by the sacred blood of Christ. And yet as though the olde lawe were not extinguished, nor Christ come into the world, thou standest Iewishly coniecturing, that of thy selfe thou art sufficient to fulfill and execute this lawe, and so to be iustified. Wherefore euery one that vnderstandeth this, shall perceiue apparantly that many Authors agree, that this way of the Lord is both sweete and sowre.
Psal. 18. For loue of the wordes issuing out of thy mouth, saith the Prophet, I trudge a iourney harde and vnsauery. I am delighted with thy Commaundements, as with the greatest treasures. For this way conteineth in it selfe both partes, that is, it is difficult and easie: difficult in respect of nature, easie in respect of vertue and grace: in suche sort, that which was harde by one reason, is light by another. As our Sauiour sheweth when hee said, That his yoke was
easie, and his burthen pleasaunt: for a yoke and burthen is all ene in signification. But to say it was sweete, declareth the facilitie hee had in bearing it here, through the grace which was giuen vnto him: So that if thou demaundest, howe it is possible that beeing a yoke it should be easie, seeing it is the propertie of a yoke to bee heauie and hatefull? Wherevnto it may be answered, that God doth quallifie the greefe of those that willingly submitte themselues to the saide yoke, as he hath promised by the Prophet Esay, saying, I will bee as hee whiche looseth the yoke, and as he that vnloadeth a mans necke from the weight thereof. What thing is more woorthie of admiration, then this, that a yoke is easie, and that by God it is made portable, for that himselfe supporteth the burthen? Wherefore then dooth it seeme a thing incredible vnto thee, that this burthen should be pleasaunt, seeing God dooth helpe to sustaine it? But wilt thou see both these contrarieties to concurre in one person?
Heart what Saint Paule saieth,
Rom. 5. We suffer aduersitie in sundrie sortes, yet are we not impatient: wee liue in extreme penurie, nor for this are we ouercommed: wee abide persecutions, yet are we not destitute: we are humbled, yet not confounded: oppressed euen to the earth, yet not reiected vtterly. Now regarde on the one side the loathsome loade of labours, and on the other side, the delight that is therin by the benefite of grace,
Esay 40. which yet the Prophet Esay sheweth more manifestly, saying, They which trust in the Lorde shall chaunge their strength, shall ruime swiftly without sweating, shall goe still and neuer be weary. See heere the yoke made easie by the vertue of grace. Beholde the fury of the fleshe abated and conuerted to the force of the spirite, or to tearme it more rightly, the might of men turned into strength of God. Heare how the Prophet did not restraine himselfe neither from labour, nor from rest, nor from the commoditie he gat of the one and other, where he saide, They ranne,
and it greeueth them not, they went forth still and were neuer weary.
Wherefore welbeloued brother, thou oughtest not to diuert from this way, though it seeme somewhat harde and sowre, sith God and his grace are thy guides therein. For it is no reason that nature should more preuaile then grace, nor Adam to bee of more power then Christ, nor the diuell to be greater then God: nor yet the custome and long vse of euill, then the habit of vertue and well dooings.



The Argument.

A man should not prognosticate his conuersion to God, nor his repentance and auersion from those offences, whereby hee hath displeased the diuine maiestie of God, and his neighbour: for the more he is spotted and infected with the filth of vice, and the slower hee is in cleansing and curing thereof, so much the more hee doth aggrauate the burthen of his penance.



CHAP. XIII.
WHerefore if the causes bee so many, and so great, which of the one part dooth moue thee to change the course of thy life to a better race, and on the other side, haue no sufficient excuse to withhold thee from so dooing: Tell me, I pray thee, when wilt thou be ready to reuolt from sin? Turne back thy eye, brother, a litle, towards the life that is passed, and consider of what yeeres thou art now: for now is the time, for the houre of enterance is passed, and the beginning to vnloade thy selfe from thy former faultes. Beholde that thou being a Christian, regenerate with the water of holy baptisme, hauing God for thy father, and the Church for thy mother, which God formed and framed with the lawe of his Gospell, and with the doctrine of the Apostles and Euangelists, and (that more importeth) with the foode of Angels, and yet thou liuest so loosely as thou were an Infidell altogither, and neuer knewest God. But
tell me, what sort of sinne, what follie can bee founde, wherein thou art not culpable? what forbidden tree is there, wherein thou hast not fixed thy eyes? what greene medowe, where at least in thought thou hast not glutted thy lasciuious lust? what pleasaunt accident hath beene obiected to thy sight, wherevnto thy desire hath not bene extended? What appetite of thine haste thou not assayed to accomplish? Calling God to thy minde, and how thou art a Christian, what more couldest thou doo, then to haue a fayth without expectation of the other life, and feare of future iudgement? What hath thy life bene else then a webbe of wickednesse, a sinke of sinne, a pathe of pleasure, a perpetuall disobedience to God? How hast thou ledde thy life hitherto, but as thy appetites hath guided thee, as best fancied thy fleshe, in exalting thy selfe, and in the glorie of the worlde? These haue beene thy Goddes, these the Idols wherevnto thou haste kneeled and crowched, whose hestes thou haste fully performed.
But in the^ meane time, what account haste thou kept with the diuine lawe of God, and thy allegeaunce due vnto him? Perchaunce thou hast esteemed him no more then if hee had bene a God made of wood, for many Christians there bee, which will as easily beleeue that there is no God, as they thinke to offende him scotfree. For they doo no lesse beleeuing the one, then they woulde if they beleeued the other. What greater wrong, what greater despite may there bee, to so greate a Prince, then thou beleeuing all that the Christian religion instructeth thee, liuest no otherwise then if it were a fable? But art thou not appalled at the multitude of thy former offences, done without gruge of conscience? Dooth not his omnipotencie cause thee to quake, against whome thou haste committed such enormous crimes? Lift vp thy eyes, and regard the immeasurable greatnesse of that supernall Lorde, adored of all the Potentates of Heauen, before whome the whole circuite of
the world lyeth prostrate, in whose presence, all that is created is as light chaffe tossed with euery puffe of winde. And consider what a thing it is, that such a silly worme as thou art, hast so oft pronoked the wrath of that eternall God. Looke vppon the exceeding greatnesse of his iustice, and the sharpe punishments which hitherto he hath vsed in the world against sinne, not onely in particular persons, but in Citties, Nations, Kingdomes, Prouinces, and in the vniuersall world: and not only in the earth, but in heauen, and there not in sinners only, but in his owne innocent sonne. Then if this were executed vpon greene wood, and for the faultes of others, what shall be done in withered wood ouercharged with the weight of proper offences.
Wherfore what can be more vndecent and intollerable, then that suche a vile vermine should delude a Lorde so puissaunt, that with a becke or a word can detrude thee into the deapth of hell and damnation. Looke in like sort vpon the patience of this Lorde, who nowe so
long hath looked for thy returne, as thou hast beene an offendour. If after so long sufferance, thou wilt still abuse this merde in incensing him to anger, hee will vnloade his bowe, will emptie his quiuer, and powre vppon thee the dartes of damnation. View the profoundnesse of his deepe iudgements, whereof wee reade and see daylie things worthie to be wondred at. We may see a Salomon after all his wisedome, his parables and profounde mysteries of the Cantickles, to forget God, and to fall downe in renerence of Idols. We may see one of the first seuen Deacons of the Church, which were enspired with the holy ghost, not onely became an heretick, but also a teacher, and a father of heresie. Wee may see day by day many starres to fall from Heauen into the earth, with a miserable fall, to tumble in durt, and to bee fedde with the draffe of swine, which earst at the table of our Lorde, were susteined with the bread of Angels. Therefore if the righteous for their secret pride, or negligence and ingratitude,
became so vnmi^d full of God, after they had beene his dutifull Seruaunts so many yeares: What doest thou looke for, hauing framed thy life to no other trade then to accumulate one sinne vppon an other? Therefore, whosocuer we see to liue in this sort (as wee haue tolde of before) shall it not bee expedient, that hee shoulde nowe at the length, cease to fill vppe the measure of his iniquities, and to assay to please God, and to deliuer his soule from bondage? should it not suffise him, that he hath liued so leaudlie till this houre, addicting himselfe wholy to the worlde, the flesh, and the diuell, and hereafter to imploy himselfe, and to runne out the remnant of his race, (...) the homage and honour of God? is it not needefull after so long time, and so many iniuries committed against his Diuine Masestie, to feare his seuere instice, which the more patiently it beareth with the wicked, so much the more rigorously is reuenged vppon them in the ende? shall it not be reason that hee should bee
afraid to lye so long swallowed vppe in the gulfe of sinne, depriued of the grace of God, and to haue so strong an enemie as is hee, who of a deare father, through his deserts is become his adnersarie and his iudge? Shall it not bee reason, to dread, least the force of long vse bee turned into nature and habitte, making of vice necessitie? How should hee not feare by little and little to fall into a reprobate sence: whereunto when a man is come, hee doth not any thing that is acceptable in the sight of almightie God? The Patriarke Iacob said to his father in lawe Labin, Fourteene yeares are passed since I haue scrued thee, and haue had charge of thy businesse, and now it is time that I attend vppon mine owne affaires, and that I begin to prouide for mine owne house.
Wherefore I pray thee, sith thou hast bin so long, not a retayner, but a daylie waiter to the worlde, not letting slip any oportunitie of this life, which was eyther appendaunt to thy pleasures, or agreeing to thy appetites: shall it
not to be reasonable for thee nowe at the length, to get some commoditie for the soule, and for the bertering of thy estate, in the other life? certainly there is nothing more short and vnsure, then the life of man. Why then thou prouiding so carefully all necessaries for that which is so momentall and transitory, dost not likewise make some prouision for that which endureth for euer?



The Argument.

A man ought to remember himselfe, and that he is a Christian, and that he beleeue firmely all that he is taught by his faith, which should mooue him eyther through loue or feare. All things inuite him to the loue and seruice of God, among which hee should acquire wisedome, and harken to the words of Christ, who fixed himselfe to the crosse for our redemption.


CHAP. XIIII.
NOw therfore if it be true as I haue said, I beseech thee deare brother, and charge thee by the precious blood of
Christ, that thou remember thy selfe that thou art a Christian, and that thou take all that which our faith teacheth for vnfeined veritie, which plainly prooueth vnto thee, that besides other things thou hast a iudge, to whose eye lyeth open all the actions and moments of thy life, who will come at a day vnwares, wherin he will exact an account of thee, euen of euery idle worde. This faith telleth shee farther, that a man at his death, is not quite extinguished, because after this mortall life, succeedeth an other, which lasteth eternally: and shat mens foules doo not perish with their bodies, but that the bodies resting, and raked vp in their graues, the soules yet enter into a newe Kingdome, and into an other new world, where such condition and company shal be assigned vnto them as their manner and behauiour hath bin in this life. Heere vnto this faith adioyneth yet more, that as the rewarde of vertue, so the scourge of vice is so infinit, that although the whole worlde were full of bookes, and euery creature
were a Scriuener, the writers woulde sooner dye, and the world be at an ende, before it could bee knowne and treated of particularly, that which each of these doth containe in it selfe. This faith also informeth thee, that our debt and dutie is so great, through our benefites receiued of God, that though the number of a mans yeares did surpasse the sandes of the seas, yet they should be too fewe to acquite himselfe in his seruice towards him. The same faith affirmeth, that vertue is of such passing valour, that all the treasures of the worlde, and all that a mans heart can desire, may in no respect be co^pared the reunto. Wherfore if such and so great things doo exhort vs to vertue, why be there so fewe which imbrace it, and endeuour themselues to attaine it? If men may bee mooued with any aduauntage or interest, what greater gaine is there? what life more perdurable? If with feare, what sharper punishments? what paint more permanent? If with the bonds of bountious liberalitie, what greater
debt haue wee then that which we owe vnto God, of whom wee haue receiued all things? If the dread of dangers may stirre vs, what greater perill can there bee then that of death, whose comming is so vncertaine, whose account so straight? If peace, if libertie, if the gifts of the holy Ghost, and the solace of a sugred life, be desired of all men, it appeareth euidently, that all these things are founde more readilie in that life which is lead by vertue and reason, then in that which is ruled by rage and passions, for that a man is a reasonable creature, and not a beast. But if all this bee not regarded, shall it not bee sufficient, that for the maintenaunce of veriue, GOD descended from Heauen to the earth, and was made man, (who hauing created ye world in six dais) imployed thirtie and three yeares in this worke, wherein hee also spent his bloud and life. God dyed to slay sinne, yet for all this, wee endeuour to reuiue in our hearts those whom God would destroy with his owne death.

What should I say more? for all reasons are sufficient to promote this matter, or to shewe it as it is. Fo, I say, not respecting the crosse onely, but which way soeuer we turne our eyes, we shall finde, that all things doo cry and cal vs to this commoditie, sith there is no creature in the world (if hee bee well noted) but doth inuite vs to the loue and seruice of our supernall Lord: in such sort, that looke howe many creatures there be in the world, so many preachers there are, so many bookes, so many voyces, which doo stirre vs therevnto. Wherefore, howe is it possible that so many shriking sounds as heere thou hearest, so many promises and thundring threats, can beare no parte to perswade thee thereunto? What should God, or could he doo more then that he hath doone, eyther by promising or threatning, to drawe vs to himselfe, and to withdraw and terrifie vs from sinne? This notwithstanding, beeing of such weight, what shal I blame the boldnesse or bluntishnesse of men, which beleeuing this
assuredly, doubt not to dally out the day in sinne, to sleepe with sinne, to arise with sinne, and to bathe themselues in the beastly puddle of all iniquities: and to doo all this without feare, without scruple, without abridging their sleepe, or abating their fare, as though all their beleefe were a dreame, and the sayings of the Euangelists, fables of Titius the Giaunt, and such like? Howe couldest thou doo more then thou doest, if thou diddest doubt of thy beleefe? sith it is euident, that hitherto onely the shame and feare of the wordle hath brideled thy appetites: yet the feare of God cannot restraine thee from satisfying thy sensualitie, nor make thee blush in executing thy diuellish deuices. Tell me, blind as thou art, depriued of vnderstanding, beeing in suche securitie and confidence, wherevpon worketh the worme of conscience? whither is fayth vanished, knowledge, iudgement, reason, which onely endued thee with the title to bee called a man? Doest thou not dread so huge, so certaine, so vndoubted daungers?
If thou were set at the table and serued with meates, and some man should come vnto thee (thogh a knowne lyer) saying, that the meates set before thee were impoysoned, thou wouldest doubt and dreade to cate it, were the meate neuer so delicate, and he a lyer that did aduise thee: Then if the Prophets, if the Apostles, if the Euangelists, if God himselfe doth cry vnto thee, saying, Death is in the potte, O wretched man, death dwelleth in gluttonie, which the diuel presenteth before thee, and darest thou to receiue thy death with thy owne hands, and to drinke the dramme of thy damnation? What now auaileth this beleefe buried in thy bosome? where is his light, his firmnesse as steele, his pearsing sharpenesse, seeing none of all these things can extenuate thy sinne?
O madde myser, O franticke foole, made sencelesse by the subtile sleightes of the Serpent, adiudged to eternall darkenesse both within and without, for that thou goest straight from inwarde to outward darkenesse. Blinde
thou art, because thou seest not thy miserie: sencelesse, because thou doest not perceiue thy perdition: and more obdurate then the Diamonde, because thou feelest not the weightie beetle of the worde of the Lorde. O wreche wrapte in woe tenne thousande folde, woorthie to be bewayled with no other teares then those whiche shall lament thy damnation, saying, If thou knewest the contentment, the quiet, the peace, and riches that God in this life hath offered vnto thee, which nowe are thus shut and kept from thee. O wretched was the dismall day of thy natiuitie, but muche more miserable shall bee the day of thy death, which shall be the verie doore and first steppe to thy damnation. Howe muche better had it beene, if thou haddest neuer beene borne, then to bee tormented for euer? Howe muche better had it beene for thee neuer to haue beene baptised, nor to haue knowne the fayth, sithe there they serue thee to none other ende but to make thy faulte more greeuous? for
if the reache of reason bee sufficient to cause the guilt of the Philosophers to be inexcusable, for that they knowing God in a sort, did not glorifie him (as the Apostle saith.) Howe muche lesse can he excuse himselfe whosoeuer hee be, hauing receiued the light of faith, and the water of Baptisme, and yearely receiueth the holy Communion, and euery day heareth his doctrine, doth nothing that belongeth therevnto, as the Philosophers themselues haue shewed to haue done in their liues? But what shall we inferre of all that we haue said before, if not to conclude briefly, that there is no other fence, no other wisedome, no other counsell in the worlde, but to reiect all the lettes and intricate cares of this life, and to pursue that onely pathe, where is obteyned sure peace and eternall blisse? To this reason doth inuite vs, iustice, lawe, heauen, earth, hell, life, death, and the mercy of God. To this the holy Ghost doth enioyne vs by the mouth of Ecclasiastick, saying, My sonne, employ the flourishing yeres
of thy youth to discipline, that in thy age thou maist sucke the sweete sappe of sapience, as he which tilleth and soweth, expecteth with patience the commoditie that groweth thereof. Thy griefe and smart shal be very slender, and soone shalt haue a plentifull haruest. My sonne harken to my words, and despise not the aduise I giue thee: put voluntarily thy feete into the fetters, that prudence hath prepared, and thy neck into her yoke: bowe downe thy shoulders, and take her bonds vpon thee, and let it not greeue thee to bee tyed therewith: Couple thy selfe to her with all thy heart, with al thy forces, and with all thy might: Follow her footesteppes, search her diligently, and thou shalt find her, and when thou hast found her, leese her not againe in any condition. For she shal giue comfort to thy crooked age, and that which earst seemed sowre and tedious vnto thee, shall become sweete and delectable, and her fetters shall bee the foundation of vertue, and her chaines the iewels of glorie. For in that happie life, her bondes are the bulwarkes of
health. Thus much saith Ecclesiastick, by which wordes hee notifieth vnto vs, the great beautie, the delights, the liberbertie and riches of true wisdom, which is vertue it selfe, and the knowledge of God, of which we heere treate. But if this be not suffient to mollifie thy stonie heart, lift vp thy eyes, and looke not to the water of the world, which fleeteth quickly, but beholde that Lord, who dying vpon the Crosse, and sharpely satisfying for that whiche thy sinnes deserued. Where he standeth in that forme as thou seest, with his feete fastened, to stay for thee, and with his armes stretcht abroad to receiue thee, and with his head declining to giue thee at thy comming (as to the prodigall sonne) the sweet kisse of reconciliation. There he calleth to thee (if thou hast the grace to heare him) with so many cryes as he hath woundes in all his bodie. Imagine with thy selfe that thou hearest his wordes in thy heart, sounding in this sort: Turne vnto me, turne vnto me, O Samaritane, turne vnto me, for I will receiue thee.
Thou knowest well that thou hast committed adultery, with all those louers thou lustest after, yet for all this turne vnto me, and I will pardon thee: turne vnto me, I say, for I am thy father, thy God, thy Creator, thy Sauior, thy faithfull friend, thy onely benefactor, thy full and perfect felicitie, thy finall ende. In me thou shalt find rest, ioy, peace, health, truth, wisedome, and all treasures. In mee thou shalt finde the flowing vaine of the liuely water, which chasest thirst away, and lifteth vp a man to life eternall. In me thou shalt stand like vnto the tree planted by the riuers side, which yeeldeth his fruite in due and conuenient time, whiche neuer leeseth his verdure, and all that hee doeth shall succeed prosperously.
My brother, these are the voyces, the drums, and trumpets, wherewith Gods eternall wisedome, calleth sinners vnto him, if thou wilt harken to this harmenie, and not lysten to the Syren songes of the subtil Serpent, turne thy selfe vnto
to God, and amende thy life speedily, to the which ende this Treatise is addressed. But how this is to be performed, shalbe shewed in the next volume.

The ende of the Conuersion of a Sinner.



Sundrie profitable Contemplations, gathered by the saide Author.


The Argument.

A Christian man which couetteth to come vnto God, must make his enterance through the gate of compunction, generally confessing all his offences. Wherevnto it shall auaile him much, to exercise himselfe euery day in certaine Prayers and godlie Meditations, and in the considerations of death and of Gods seuere iudgement.


CHAP. I.
HE therefore that is departed out of Egypt, and beginneth to march towards the land of promise: hee that like vnto the loste sonne reremembreth himselfe, and openeth his eyes to behold the beames of glittering vertue, and knoweth the perplexitie wherein hee is plunged,
and the fraude of this fraile life, and desireth to returne to the plenteous repastes of his fathers house, his first passage must be through the straights of penance, where it behoueth him ruthfully to record in his minde the former ryots and excesses, and firmely to purpose the amendment of them. And for that this discussion and examination ought to bee as the Prophet sayth, with affliction and remorce of conscience, it is the part of the penitent, at that time to vse al such praiers and ronsiderations as by any meanes may stir him to teares and dolour. To the which auaileth much the consideration of death, of Gods finall iudgement, of the paines of hell, and of the passion of Christ, suffered for the satisfaction of our sinnes: Sith it is apparant, that if there had bin no defects on our side, there had heene no cause of his greeuous annoy. These and such like considerations may mooue vs to sorrow, and to the detestation of sin, which is the cheefest part of repentance. In the which we should exercise our selues, not onely the space of
fiue or sixe dayes, but the greatest part of our life. Wherein many penitents are deceiued, who beeing most diligent in scouring their conscience, and scanning their faultes, are quite carelesse in bewayling of them, whereas both the one and the other are most necessarie, but cheefly the last. And I thinke verily, that the cause why so many faynte in the following of vertue, and in long time cannot attaine to perfection, and sometime to surcease their iourney begunne, is, because they haue not layde a sure foundation, nor haue not planted the rootes deepe inough in this exercise. For this beeing the piller of all the building, when the foundation it selfe is feeble, the worke cannot bee firme which is erected vppon it. To the which ende, it is very necessarie to assigne certaine dayes, many or sewe, as the holy ghost shall direct vs, wherein (as I haue sayde before) we may exercise our selues in all such prayers and meditations as maye induce vs to this sorrowe. For the
plainer declaration of this doctrine, I minde to impart vnto you a fewe of the foresaid considerations, which may serue, not onely to stirre vs to be sory for our sinnes, and to the hatred thereof, but also to allure vs to the loue of vertue, and to the feare of God, and to the contempt of the world, for al this is needfull to nouices and beginners.



The Argument.

He that list to encline his heart to the hatred of sinne, and to the dread of God, must conuey himselfe into some couert corner, and must bend and imploy his minde to the contemplation of the heauenly blisse, and the iniquities which abound here in earth.


CHAP. II.
VVHosoeuer then will haue his heart setled hereupon, and wil fasten this firmly in his mind, must euery day once or twise, take a time most quiet and conuenient for that purpose, and sequestring himselfe into a secret place, al other earthly thoughts and vain imaginations
being laid apart, arming himselfe first with the shield of faith, and humbly crauing the grace of the holy spirit to assist him in this behalfe: assuming to himselfe, the minde of that deuout Publican, which durst not to lift vp his eyes towards Heauen, for the confusion and horrour of his offences. Let him repeate some generall confession, or else the Psalme Miserere mei deus, with so great deuotion as he can deuise, and suddenly let him apply his minde to the considerations following, that by this meanes he may attain the feare of God, through the sorrow, the dread, and detestation of sinne.



The Argument.

In the first co^sideration, a christian ought to runne ouer the multitude of the mortal offences that he hath committed.


CHAP. III.
THe first sting that may stirre vs to the woe and hatred of our iniquities, is, to consider the infinit
number of them, and to fixe them before our eyes, as a terrible troupe of armed Souldiers, that the soule may be appalled with so hidcous a spectacle. Runne ouer therefore breefely all the commaundements of God, through all the capitall sinnes, through all the sences, the powers and parts as well of thy body, as of thy soule, and thou shalt perceiue, that there is scarce any commandement which thou hast not transgressed, nor any sinne wherein thou haste not sunke, nor any sence externall or internall, which thou haste not abused, nor any benefite which thou haste imployed to that ende for which it was giuen thee: But as the Prophet sayth, God hath giuen thee his golde and siluer, and therewith thou haste serued Baal. Looke therefore into thy selfe throughly, and viewe the race of thy life passed, and thou shalt see a huge webbe fraught full of deceit, of trecherie, of pride, of lyes, of slouth, of enuie, of couetousnesse, of hatred, of entisements, of blasphemie, of malice,
and of a thousand other manners of mischiefes: and thou shalt finde, that like a brutish beast, in all and euery of these thou haste followed and fulfilled thy sensuall delights, without regarde of the lawe of iustice or reason, and thou shalt perceiue, that thou hast liued as a Gentile or Pagan altogither, which neuer knewe God, or as though thou so beleeuest, that there were no God, no death, no iudgement, no paine, no blisse, nor any thing else to be thought, but euen to be borne, and to dye. He then that hath liued this many yeares so disorderly, shall it not be reason, that he imploy the fewe dayes that are remayning of his life, in bewayling his former yeares fondly consumed, and to feele sensibly the ruine and decay of the powers of his soule, and the time that hee might hane gayned in this while, which hee shall not get hereafter? For time lost can neuer be recouered.
Throw therefore thy selfe downe prostrate before the feete of thy sauionr, and with a pe^siue hart, say as followeth. My
sinnes, O Lorde, are in number about the sands of the Sea. I haue spotted my selfe with the filth of euery vice, and my offences are so multiplied, that I deserue not, nor dare not to beholde the Heauens, because I haue prouoked thy wrath, and haue done euill in thy sight.



The Argument.

In the second consideration he should consider, that by sinne is lost the grace and comfort of the holy Ghost, the mutuall amitie, the fauour and fatherly protection of God, the participation of all the good things don in the vniuersall Church, and the benefit^ of Christes passion.


CHAP. IIII.
VVEigh farther, of howe great treasures vice doth robbe and spoyle thee, which is one of the considerations that shoulde most affright a Christian, whatsoeuer hee bee, examining throughly on the one side, what is lost by sinne, and on the other side, with what facility carelesse men offend daylie. For by sinne is
lost the grace of the holy Ghost, which is the most precious gift that God can bestowe vppon his best beloued in this life. It robbeth vs also of the fauour of God, which alwayes accompanieth his grace. And if it be a great griefe to leese the fauour of an earthly Prince, howe muche greater should the griefe be, to incurre the displeasure of him that is king of heauen and earth? It bereaueth vs of the vertuous flowing from aboue, of the giftes of the holy Ghost, wherewith the soule is made bright and pure in the sight of God, and is armed and animated against the force and violence of the enemie. It robbeth the soule of his interest in heauen, which proceedeth from the same grace, sith that by grace glory is giuen (as the Apostle saith.) Also of the spirit of adoption, which maketh vs the sonnes of God, and insteed thereof, insecteth vs with the furie of rebellion, which causeth vs to impugne his holy pleasure, whereby wee leese the entertainment due vnto sonnes, and the fatherly prouidence which God taketh
of those whome hee receiueth for his children, which is one of the greatest treasures that in this life may bee enioyed. Wherein the Prophet reioyced not without good cause, when hee saide, I am right glad (O Lorde) because I see my selfe shrowded vnder the shadowe of thy winges, which is, vnder the protection and fatherly prouidence that he hath of his chosen people. By sinne, is lost, the peace, the quiet, and comfort of a guiltlesse conscience, the sweetenesse and solace of the holie Ghost, the fruite and merite of the vertuous actions that thou haste wrought all thy life before, euen vntill that houre, the participation of all those treasures which the Church holdeth in her custodie. Finally, by sinne is lost the participation and fruition of the merites which flowe from Christes passion, who is our head, because a sinner is not incorporated in his bodie as a liuely member through grace and charitie. All this is lost by one mortall offence, and that which is gained thereby, is, to be
adiudged to eternall tormentes, and for that time to be cancelled out of the booke of life, and in steade of the sonne of God, to bee made the vassall and bondslaue of Sathan: and in steade of the temple and seate of the moste blessed Trinitie, to become the denne of theeues, the neast of Serpents, the receipt and harbour of venemous Bafiliskes. This is the guerdon conuenient for sinne, whereby thou maiest learne, whether it bee not good reason to tremble and quake, beholding with howe little scruple of conscience, with what facilitie and confidence, so many carelesse men offende without measure. And farther, what reason it were that thou bedeawest thy cheekes with bloudie teares, if not for the loue of God, yet at least for thine owne distresse, which hast loste suche inestimable riches, for so small a myte as is the delight and taste of one trespasse. If Esau wayled and wept so bitterly, because he had lost his inheritance in lewe of the like taste: with what cryes and
complaintes shouldest thou fill heauen and earth, for the losse of so woorthie of patrimonie? that with greefe and sorrowes sharpe, thou maiest recouer the thing thou hast lost by dalliance and delights.



The Argument.

In the third consideration, hee should thinke vpon Gods benefites bestowed vpon man, that he might be abashed therat, and be ashamed of himselfe. And therefore enioyne himselfe to some sharpe affliction, for that hee hath bene a creature so vngratefull and vnkinde.


CHAP. V.
FOr the better replication of this, ponder in thy minde the infinit number of Gods benefites. For how much the more a man wayeth how bountifull God hath bene towardes him: so much the more he shall be confounded in himselfe, seeing how wicked he hath shewed himselfe to God. In this sort the Prophets did often perswade the people of
God to repentance. And in this manner Nathan the Prophet beganne with Dauid, when ere he reprooued him of adultery, laide before him the fauoure and regall dignitie, wherevnto God had promoted him, and what else he had reserued for him. In like sort, a man should chiefly regard these ten kindes of benefites that ensue: that is, the benefite of creation, of conseruation, of redemption, of baptisme, of calling, of diuine inspiration, of preseruation from euill, of the Sarraments, of peculiar grace and priuate prerogatiues which hee hath receiued of his Sauiour, and lastly, of the glorie which hee expecteth heereafter to haue. And particularly, let him fixe himselfe vppon the benefite of vocation, whiche is this, that God hath looked so long for his conuersion, and hath suffered and supported his sundrie sortes of sinne, with such exceeding patience, breathing vpon him eftsoones godly motions and diuine inspirations in the very midst of his naughtie life, thereby to withdrawe him from
his iniquities, and to stirre him to repentance.
Weighing then with equall balance, this wonderfull liberalitie and benignitie of our Sauiour on the one side, and on the other, our stubbornnesse, ingratitude, rebellion, and abhominations committed against so mercifull and bounteous a benefactor, who will not be abashed and appalled thereat? who will not rent his cloathes? whose eyes will not yeelde streames of teares? whose heart and intrailes will not bee consumed in sighes? who wil not call all creatures to reuenge and to wrecke their wrath vpon a caitiffe so ingratefull and rebellious?



The Argument.

In the fourth consideration, a Christian should consider the contempt and iniury he hath done to God by his offences: esteeming more, and preferring earthly drosse before his diuine Maiestie.



CHAP. VI.
COnsider farther, the despight and great wrong yt is done vnto God through sinne, for that so oft as we offend, the iudgement and practise thereof doth still passe into our hearts, weakeneth the vnderstanding, whereby we banish all feare of transgression, nor we feele not the weight of sinne, whiche if it were set diametrically in the one part before the interest of sin, which is some delight, or gaine, or steppe of dignitie, or such like, and on the other part the displeasure of God, whereby we leese vtterly God himselfe, who is the toppe of our felicitie. In such sort, as though God were conteined in one ballance, and the taste aforesaide in the other, and a man placed in the middest, deliberating and giuing sentence which should be reiected, despiseth God, to enioy that fleeting delight: what greater contempt, what more ignominie, what so great reproach
can there bee offered to the diuine Maiestie of God, then to preferre and esteem better of drosse and filth, then of Gods excellencie. Wherein we much resemble the Hebrewes, when Christe and Barabbas beeing presented before them, to knowe which should bee deliuered, with one accord they rather chose Barabbas then Christe. And this is as though we woulde say vnto God, we will no more account thee for GOD, but we will adore and haue for our God and finall ende, our owne delightes and proper gaine. For hee that so muche regardeth a delight, that he preferreth it before the loue of God, and esteemeth and accounteth it of greater price then God himselfe, assayeth to robbe God of his royall dignitie, who is the prop and piller of our beatitude, bestowing it vpon some brickle or beastly pleasure, whiche is as though he would bereaue God of his crowne, and giue it to a creature. What thing can be more horrible then this: God commaunded the Heauens beeing sencelesse Creatures,
that they should feele this defect, and should woonder thereat, saying by the Prophet Ieremie, O ye Heauens bee astonied thereat, and lette your gates cracke with maruelling, for my people haue offended mee greeuously after two sortes: They haue forsaken mee the fountaine of the water of life, and they assay to asswage their thirst in stinking puddles, which can holde no water. He then that considereth how many thousand times hee hath done vnto God the very same contempt and iniurie, what should he not tremble to haue committed so greeuous crimes? should hee not wish that his eyes were turned into fountaines of teares, to bewails night and day so great euils and excesses.



The Argument.

Fifthly, we ought to consider how much God hateth sinne, and for the same, how many men be scourged with sundry calamities.



CHAP. VII.
COnsider the execrable hatred that God beareth to sinne, which cannot be comprehended in the vnderstanding of man, for that the malice of sin is conformable to the maiestie of the person offended. Wherfore as the greatnesse and omnipotencie of God is infinit, so also is the malice of sin committed against him. And farther, as the bountie of god is infinit, so he hath an infinit hatred to wickednesse. And yet if thou will know this geare more clearely, and wilt imprint deeper in thy minde the hugenesse of this hatred, and therewithall wilt fixe in thy heart the feare of God (which is the foundation of all our auaile) marke the dreadfull and bitter punishments yt he hath executed against sinne, and thereby shalt vnderstand it the better. These punishments are innumerable, but thou mayest set to the view of thy consideration, the most notable amongst them. As was the wrath of
God extended vpon his cheefest Angell, and all his adherents: Vpon the first man, with all his posteritie: Vpon the whole world, by the generall floud: Vppon the fiue great Cities consumed with fire and Brimstone, discending from Heauen: Vpon the two sonnes of Aron, Nadab and Abiu, because they would offer vp sacrifice to God with other mens fire: Vppon Dauid, for his adulterie: Vpon Saule for his disobedience: Vpon Hely, for not chastening his Children: Vpon Anania and Saphira, for their auarice: Vppon Nabuchodonezer, for his pride: Vpon Hierusalem, Babylon, and Niniuie, and other Citties, which for their diuers offences, were vttterly destroyed and left desolate. Consider also, the fiercenesse of hell fire, and the torments thereof, which GOD prouided for the reuenge of sinne: the satisfaction and punishment that his sonne was forced to endure, before he coulde cure the guilt and griefe of sinne, which is more terrible then all
the rest, for the worthinesse of the person, vpon whom it was executed. Euery one of these punishments, if it bee scanned aduisedly, with his due circumstances, shall much auaile to aduise vs of the dreadfull seueritie of Gods iustice, and the mortall hatred he heareth to sinne, whereby may be driuen into our hearts, the dread of God, and dolour of sinne.
He therefore that considereth how oft he hath incurred this so haynous indignation of God, shall it not be requisite that hee shrinke and shiuer thereat, and that hee with for a sea of sorrowfull sobbes and teares, to quench therewith the furie and flame of Gods hideous hatred enkindled against him? A man therefore meditating in his minde with a vehement passion of dole, that the mightie Lorde of hostes will lay vppon him, all the plagues before mentioned, or at the least some part of them: lette him meekely prostrate himselfe before the presence of God, and beeing truely humbled in the very bottome of his
heart, say he thus.




A Prayer.
O Supreme Creator of all things, I reckoning in the secret records of my minde, my greeuous guilt committed against thy diuine Maiestie, doo meruaile at my folly, yea at my madnesse, weighing how benigne and mightie a patron I haue abandoned. I accuse and curse my ingratitude, seeing that from such libertie, I am come to so wretched thraldome: I know not what to expect or hope for, but hell, death, and desperation. For the iustice which I cannot shunne, doth gall and crush my conscience: yet remember contrariwise thy infinit mercie and clemencie, which by the testimonie of thy Prophet, excelleth all other workes, and by the which in a cortaine manner thou masterest thy selfe, suddenly a ioyfull sparke of hope doth recreate my sore afflicted soule. For why should I dispayre to obtaine pardon of him, who by his Prophets doth so oft inuite sinners
to repentance, saying, I wish not the death of a sinner, but rather his conuersion and life. And thy onely begotten sonne by many Parables hath manifested vnto vs, howe readie thy remission is to all true penitents.
This he shewed by the Iewell which was lost and founde againe: by the prodigall sonne, whose perfect image I acknowledge to be in my selfe. For he I am which haue wrongfully renounced thee my most affectioned father, and hee that wasted his bloud riotously: and following the pursuites of my fleshly desires, haue fled from the^ pleasant path of thy commaundements, and haue fallen into the beastly bondage of sinne, and consequently, haue beene oppressed with extreame distresse and miserie. From whence I know not who can restore mee home againe, but hee onely from whome I haue reuolted. Sweete Sauiour, let thy mercy receiue the man that humply prayeth pardon, whom thou hast graciously expected euen till this houre. But because
this is not due to my merittes, in stead of them, I offer vnto thee all the trauailes and deserts of thy dearely beloued sonne, and all the sorrowe and torments that he hath suffered for me.
Therefore, most mercifull father, for the feruent loue and petitions of thy deare sonne, forgiue the faults of thy histoyall vassall, regarde the noble sacrifice offered by thy sonne, and race out of thy remembraunce, the disobedience of thy leaud seruaunt. For the raunsome that he hath payde for my deliuerie, surpasseth farre any my debts or trespasses whatsoeuer. Oh that it would please thee to put in a payre of balance my leaudnesse and thy liberalitie, my wickednesse and thy woundes, no doubt the peise of them would bee more weightie a great deale. For what guilt can bee so greeuous, for which such sorrowe cannot satisfie sufficiently? which cannot bee washed away with such affliction, with so many teares, and with such obedience and humilitie, with such inuincible patience,
and aboue all, with such immeasurable loue? What crime can be so enormous, which may not bee cleansed with that bloudie sweat, yea whole flouds of blood? What sinne is there so execrable, which is not cured by Christes death? Oh heauenly Father, I offer here vnto thee, the selfe-same my Sauiour and Redeemer, Iesus Christ thy sonne, beloued most tenderly. His sharpe sorrowes, his agonies incomprchensible, the which thou knowest exactly to be suffered for my defects: and in stead of the contrition which I ought to haue for them, I offer vnto thee his bloudie sweat: in stead of my teares, which I cannot shed because of the adamanticall harnesse of my hart, I offer vnto thee, his humble and ferue^t praiers, for all my slouths and negligences. For ende: I offer vnto thee all his loathsome labours, and vertuous exercises, his austere life, and all that he hath wrought therein, and the bitter torme^ts that he did abide, as a worthie sacrifice of thy diuine glorie, for all the iniquities wherewith my whole life I haue offended
thee, and for the good things which I haue omitted and left vndone. Which liuest and raignest for euer and euer. Amen.







The Argument.

In the sixt consideration, a man should thinke vpon death, the last iudgement, and bell paines. And how greeuous will be the separation of the soule from the bodie, by meanes of death, which by reason of diuers accidents occurring then togither, is the very receit of excessiue sorrows and anxieties.


CHAP. VIII.
TO these considerations, I wil adde other three, out of Sarasinus of Fermus, that is, death, iudgement, and she paines of hel, which are a very necesry appendix to all yt we haue treated of before. The same Doctor telleth vs, that to him that is newly conuerted, nothing
is more behouefull and requisite, then the meditation of death, both for that it repelleth vaine delightes, as also because the practise thereof is of such facilitie, as the whiche we daily viewe with our eyes, and feele with our hands: yea, we may rather say, that our surest portion is with death, and that we dye continually, hauing a bodie so corruptible, that euery houre altereth and chaungeth his shape, and neuer resteth in one estate. Like vnto a riuer that passeth with a furious and headlong course, wherof no part can be marked throughly: for it running swiftly, whilest ye note one waue, straight it is not the same that ye looked vppon before, but is turned into another. Many deuout considerations may be had co^cerning death, which the matter it selfe yeeldeth sufficiently to him that aduisedly deliberateth herevpon. Of which, minding to collect a fewe, I doo affirme, that if thou intende to reforme thy life, when thou risest in the morning, perswade thy selfe so much as thou maiest, that the same
will bee the last day of thy life, and dispose of thy soule and worldly affaires, in suche sort, as though in verie deede thou shouldest not liue one houre longer, and thinke not that thou deceiuest thy selfe in so dooing, for if death may attache thee euery day, thou shouldest likewise daily attende his comming. And farther I say vnto thee, that no one day of thy life shall passe without many negligences, vnlesse thou doest enforce thy selfe to beleeue that euery of them is the laste of thy life. Thinke also vppon the dreadfull stroke of Death, which because it is so vncertaine, ought to bee feared continually: And consider to howe many perilles of death we are subiected, and thou shalt finde that they are innumerable, as well within the bodie as without, in so muche that if thou looke warily about thee, thou shalt perceiue Death to be paynted in euery place, and businesse. Thinke also what pressures and agonies shall assault thee at the poynte of death.

To this consideration, it shall assist thee much, to beholde sometimes a man dying. Marke the accidents and painefull passions of that houre, howe his bodie lyeth forsaken of naturall heats, his sences without force or moouing, as though it were a very stone, the extremities and vttermost parts waxe colds, the face is turned into the colour of leade, the bowles of the eyes dipped in, the mouth full of fome, the tongue swollen, the necke winding to euery side. Then marke also howe the brest beateth and panteth, and is readie to burst asunder with paine, the lippes waxe blewe, the teethe become dumbe. Finally, all the bodie dissoluing it selfe, and being forsaken of the soule, with sorrowe inestimable the man resteth a lumpe of earth. Thou perceiuing and viewing well such perplexities in other, maiest likewise represent the same spectacle in thy selfe, imagining that the Phisttians haue nowe giuen thee ouer, as knowing the maladie to bee incurable; thy friendes and kinsfolkes about thy
bedde, whose presence shal augment the griefe of thy departure. O how dreadfull shall that separation be, where welth shall not asswage thy woe, but shall rather plunge thee deeper in the gulfe of calamities, neyther shall honours assist thee? yea thou shalt leaue them with like vehement smart, as thou gottest them with greedie desire, and for thy wonted delights, shalt reape the fruites of a gnawing conscience. What then wilt thou doo beeing brought to this poynt? what counsell wilt thou then take? To go out of thy bodie will be intollerable, to abide there impossible, to deferre thy departure, cannot be graunted thee, neither maiest thou returne to thy sensuall delightes, which nowe are senslesse togither, but knowing thy selfe, and scanning them more narrowly, shalt bee abashed at thine owne brutish behauiour, and if it were possible, wouldest flie from thy selfe. Shalt see thy selfe beset with horrible monsters, that is, with thine owne sinnes, of whom whither soeuer thou wandrest, thou shalt
be pursued and hedged in, all that is passed shall seeme vnto thee as the twinkling of an eye, and shalt know the time to come to be infinite. Then mayest thou well say with the Prophet, The dolours and daungers of death hath inclosed mee rounde about, and the furie of hell hath assaulted mee. By this minding and meditation of death, thou shalt acquire many great commodities. First, thou shalt be stirred and incensed to the seruice of God, the feare of whom is the foundation of wisedome, and beginning of true blisse. Endeuour therefore, so to arme and addresse thy selfe at all poynts, that thou be not vanquished by sinne. Farther, shalt viewe thine owne wretchednesse and infirmities, whiche will serue as a corzie to quallifie the swelling rancor of pride, and to establish humilitie, the very queene and guide of all other vertues. And shalt easily reiect hatefull auarice, and greedie gaping for earthly vanities. For the memorie of death, causeth thee to knowe, that none of these thinges
can be called thine, which thou canst not carry with thee out of this world. And thou co^tinuing in this exercise, vnwares thy dread shall be turned into desire, and death shall not seem so terrible vnto thee, for that it depriueth thee of thy temporall life, as delightful and acceptable, because it giueth ende to so many greefes and miseries, and giueth enterance to life and light eternall. And thou shalt perceiue howe little cause thou haddest to complaine, or to be sorie, weighing that whilest thy bodie doth perishe and consume in the graue, thy soule liueth blisfully in heauen, with a firme beleefe to rise againe at the last day to life euerlasting.



The Argument.

In the seuenth consideration, ought to be premeditated how seuere and rigorous Christ will be at the day of iudgement: for that his countenance will then declare to the wickid beholders, nothing else but furious wrath and reuenge, which none can escape, for there must be giuen vp an exact account of all thinges done and
thought of in this world.


CHAP. IX.
EAch man proueth and perceiueth in himselfe by often experience, that his vnderstanding, by the apprehension of some fearfull obiect or weightie consideration, retireth and coucheth closely within it selfe, and for that instant, repelleth easily all other idle imaginations. For which cause, it is most prositable counsayle, that a sinner at his first conuersion exercise himselfe seriously in such cogitations, for that by this meanes, peeuish fansies, sometime through dread, sometime through wonder, will be either brideled or banished quite. If the memorie of death, as is aforesaide, hath such force to cut off, and to restraine our vaine and bagraum thoughts: howe much more may this be done by the remembraunce of that which insueth after death immediately, whiche is Gods iudgement, and the paines of hell? By which meditations,
if thou often thinke vpon them, shall be brought to passe, that which Ecclesiastick affirmeth, Remember thy daies, (whereby hee meaneth that which then shall happen vnto thee) and thou shalt neuer doo amisse. S. Hierome not without iust cause said: Whether I eate or drinke, mee thinkes still I heare the sounde of the Trumpet buzzing in my eares: Arise from death, and come to your iudgement. Which howe terrible it shall be cannot be imagined, sith all other terrours or tragedies whatsoeuer in comparison of this is nothing at all. Many times God hath manifested his iudgements in this worlde, as when hee drowned the worlde with the great floud: when hee burned Sodome and the Cities adioyning: when he strooke Egypt with diuers dreadfull plagues: when he made the earth to open in the desert to swallow vp sinners: all which iudgements, beeing compared to that generall iudgement which shall be exercised in the last day, are but shadowes, but shewes, and figures of the veritie.
If then thou desire to come to thy selfe, and to gather thy wits togither with the remembraunce of this, represent to thy imagination the terriblenesse of Christ thy iudge, whose countenance shall declare nothing else but rigour and reuenge, as at the first comming he shewed mildenesse altogither. From whom thou canst not appeale to any other, because he is supreme Iudge: neither canst thou auoide his furie, because he is most puissant: and for that hee is the very fountaine and God of knowledge, nothing can be concealed from him. And because he hateth iniquitie out of measure, hee will not suffer any sinne to be vnreuenged.
There thou must bee accountable of all thy transgressions, debts, and trespasses, whereof if the least be inough to put thee in extreame danger and perplexitie, who can make satisfaction for so many debtes and arrerages, as shall bee exacted at thy handes? Then thou shalt bee examined how thou hast vestowed thy time, howe thou haste
ordered thy body, howe thou hast gonerned thy sences, and how thou hast guided thy heart, howe thou hast answered to the diuine inspirations, how thou haste acknowledged so many curtesies. In the which accusation, thou shalt bee conuinced with so many witnesses, as are the creatures which thou hast abused by sinne, which then will be so stirred to reuenge the wrong done vnto their creator, that if it were possible, those which are immortall would dye with feare. For it shall be a horror inestimable, to see the worlde all on fire: the buildings and princely Pallaces ouerthrowne and torne in peeces: the earth to tremble: to viewe the elements to chaunge theyr course: the Sunne to bee darkened: the Moone and Starres to leese theyr light: to beholde the death and destruction of all creatures: the open gaping of graues: to heare the voyce of the terrible trumpe, and wofull waylings of nations: to marke the discouering of consciences: to regarde the monstrous
deformed diuels, and she in^^^nall furnace sparkling with furious flakes. But of all other things shall be most terrible to looke vppon, the victorious flagge of the Crosse, clittering in the ayre, with all the ensignes of the glorious passion of our Sauiour: To see the Iudge to charge his enemies for the making frustrate, yea the reitteration of so many torments as hee hath suffered for their redemption. Who might more easily endure the smart of hell paines, then to see themselues so accused and accursed of the Lord of bountie and courtesie, and to be expelled from his presence to perpetuall punishment.



The Argument.

In the eight consideration, we ought to premeditate vpon the intollerable terrour of hell paines, which shall be perpetuall. But of al those torments, the most greeuous is the losse and lacke of Gods chearefull countenance, without any hope for euer to gaine it againe.



CHAP. X.
BUt it may so chance, that mauger thy might, for all these considerations, ydle thoughts will not forsake thee, though it must needes bee a sounde fleepe and a very drowzie dreame, that will not bee awaked with such incitations. Yet thou must not be discomforted, but howe much more difficults doo arise, so much the more stoutly thou shouldest striue to atchieue thy enterprise. Assay then whither the search of hell paines will bee more behouefull vnto thee, concerning which, two things are chiefly to be noted, that is, the vehemencie of their smart, and the time of their continuance. The least of these is able to mollifie the most stubborne and stony heart of the worlde: but the which is not mooued neither with the one nor with the other, is eyther dead in his soule, or else beleeueth not that which the Christian faith sheweth.
For though the greatnesse of hell torments cannot bee imagined nor expressed,
filled with most iust feare. If thou accustome thy selfe to such exercises, a^^ doest perseuer therin, in short space thou thalt become a newe man, for by these meditations thy minde shall be brought to despise the world, to shun sinne, to fear these paines, and to loue vertue. And though at the beginning thou bee appaled and affrighted vehemently, yet hand patience a while, for thy colde feare shall be qualified and tempered with the heat of loue, as the black night is turned by little and little into the bright shining day.

EINIS.

