



AN ABSTRACT OF THE INDENTVRE OF COVENANTS.
WHEREAS of late, Differences The cause of the now compounding. haue arisen, betweene the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Wentworth, Lord of the Mannors of Stepny and Hackny and his Lordships Copy-hold Tennants of the said Mannors, for and concerning some of the customes benefits and priuiledges of the said Tennants. It hath now pleased the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth in consideration of three thousand pounds of lawfull money of England, in the thirtieth yeere of the The consideration giuen for it. raigne of our late soueraigne Lady Q. Elizabeth, by the Copyholders of the said Mannors Vnto the Right Honorable Henry Lord Wentworth, his Lordships Father satisfied and paid: As also of three thousand and fiue hundred pounds more to him the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth The Deede of Couenants. now paid, by indenture bearing date the 20. day of Iune in the fifteenth yeere of the raigne of our soueraigne Lord King Iames of
 England France and Ireland, and of Scotland the fiftieth, made betweene him the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth Lord of the said Mannors of the one part: And Sr Iohn Iolls Knight, and diuers others of the Copyhold tenants of the said Mannors (whose names are particularly in the said Indenture recited) of the other part: For the appeasing and finall end of the said differences, and for preuention of the like, and all other which in time to come might happen, arise or grow, betwixt the said Lord his heyres or assignes, Lords of the said Mannors, and the said Copyhold tennants their heires or assignes, to couenant grant conclude and fully agree to the effect following, that is to say,
Imprimis, That the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth That the Lord Thomas is seized in Fee. is, and vntill a perfect act of Parliament shalbe had and made, wherby all the liberties priuiledges, benefits, customes, immunities, discharges, additions, alterations, enlargements, matters, and things, in the Schedules to the said Indenture annexed mentioned, shall be for euer confirmed, shall bee and continue seised of a good, absolute and indefeazable estate of Inheritance in Fee-simple to him and his heires for euer in possession, of and in the said Mannors and either of them, and of the Copyhold lands, tenements and hereditaments of the said Copyhold tenants before mentioned parties to the said Indenture. And that he now hath and then shall And hath power to confirme the following Articles. haue full power and lawfull authoritie to ratitifie confirme establish and make good, All and
 singular the couenants, articles, alterations, enlargements, free customes, immunities, discharges and agreements, contained in the said Indenture and Schedules, or either of them to the said Copyhold tenants respectiuely, and to their seuerall and respectiue heires and assignes, of and in the seuerall and respectiue messuages, lands, tenements, and hereditaments, whereof they are seized of any estate by copie of Court Roll.
And that the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth his That these Articles shall for euer be obserued. heyres and assignes, and all other Lords of the said Mannors shall for euer hereafter, obserue, performe, fulfill, allow, ratefie, make good and keepe all the said Articles, certaintie of Fines, vsages, customes, priuiledges, benefits, immunities, discharges, compositions and agreements in the said Indenture and Schedules contained: And shall not at any time hereafter, leauy, take, require, or demand any other fines, suites, customes, workes, or seruices, or in any other manner, then in the said Schedules are specified; And the Rents which for the said Copyhold tenements by the space of two yeeres now last past, haue beene yeelded and paid by the Copyhold tenants thereof. And also that the said tenants, their heyres and assignes shall for euer hereafter peaceably and quietly haue, hold, maintaine and enioy their seuerall and respectiue Copyholds, with their appurtenances, according to the seueral grants thereof to them made, and vnder the seuerall
 rents for the same respectiuely, now due and payable according to the true meaning of the said Indenture and Schedules without any let, suit or hinderance, interruption, alteration, question, or contradiction, whatsoeuer of him the said Lo: Wentworth, his heyres or assignes, or any other claiming any estate, right, title, vse, interest, office, profit, charge or demaund vnder his Lordship, his heyres or assignes, or vnder the said Henry Lo: Wentworth deceased: And that the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth his heyres or That hereafter none of these lands shall be seuered from the Mannor. See A^ricle 68. assignes hath not, nor hereafter shall grant, or conuey, seuered from the Mannor whereof, the same is now holden, any of the messuages, cottages, lands, tenements, or hereditaments of the said Copyholders, for any other estate or terme, other then by copie of Court Roll, according to the custome of the said Mannors, except the free-hold to be seuered at the desire of such person, as then shall be Copyholder thereof respectiuely. And that the certainty of Fines, free customes, immunities, liberties, priuiledges, articles, discharges, and agreements in the said Schedules contained, for and concerning the seuerall messuages, cottages, lands, tenements and hereditaments, whereof the said parties to the said Indenture are Copyholders, or reputed Copyholders shall for euer be, and be had, vsed, accompted, adiudged, taken and enioyed, as the true customes, vsuages, priuiledges, immunities, discharges and liberties of and within the said Mannors, and either of
 them, not to be violated, altered, changed, or denied by the Lord or Lords of the said Mannors, or either of them now or hereafter, at any time or times in any wise being.
Item, That for the better ratifyings, establishing, That a Decree shalbe had in Chauncery to confirme the now agreme^ts. confirming, strengthning, perfecting and making good of all and singuler the said articles, couenants, agreements, certaintie of fines, vsuages, customes, inlargements, and alterations of vsuages and customes, compositions, liberties, priuiledges, freedomes, immunities, discharges, matters, and things in the said Indenture and Schedules contained: and for the setting forth of what estate the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth is now, and then shall be seised of the said Mannors and premisses, vpon a bill of complaint against his Lordship, in his Maiesties high Court of Chancerie to bee exhibited, his Lordship will appeare, and make such answere, and further such proceedings, that therevpon a perfect decree with the free consent and agreement of his Lordship may bee had and there enrolled against his Lordship, his heires and assignes. By which the said Articles, couenants, agreements, certainty of fines, vsuages and customes, and alterations of vsuages and customes and all the compositions, liberties, priuiledges, freedomes, immunities, discharges, matters, and things in the said Indenture and Schedules, or any of them contained shall be decreed, ratified, established, and made good, and be put in vre: vsed and enioyed for euer.

Item, That hee the said Thomas Lo: Wentworth his heires and assignes, at his and their That an act of Parliame^t shall be procured to confirme the same for euer. owne proper costs and charges, will procure at the first Session of the next Parliament of our Soueraigne Lord the Kings Maiestie, his heires or successors, one statute or act of Parliament. By force whereof the said Articles, couenants, agreements, certaintie of fines, vsuages, customes, enlargement and alterations of vsuages, customes, compositions, liberties, priuiledges, benefits, freedomes, immunities, discharges, matters and things in the said Indenture and Schedules or either of them expressed, shall be established, ratified, enacted, and confirmed to be, and to continue for euer, of force and to be put in vre and vsed for euer hereafter. in such state manner and forme, qualitie, condition and degree, as the same are in the said Indenture or Schedules or any of them expressed, for and concerning the lands, tenements, and The Tennants must pay twenty pounds towards the charge of i^. hereditaments, whereof they now are copyholders, or reputed copyholders: Towards the charges of the procuring of which said Act of Parliament, the said tenants are to pay vnto the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth, his heires, or executors, within one month next after the obtaining and passing therof, the somme of 20. pounds.
Item, That he the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth For better assuranc within fiue yeares. his heires and assignes, at any time within fiue yeeres, next ensuing the date of the said Indenture, before such Act of Parliament as aforesaid had and obtained, at the costs in the law of the
 said Copyhold tenants, or some of them, vpon request made vn^o him the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth his heires or assignes, by the said Sir Iohn Iolles, William Gough, Edmund Barber, Iohn Eglesfield, Isack Cotton, Thomas Best, Richard Hoskins, George Saris, Henry Dethick, Iohn Howland, Thomas Yardley, Iohn Lowden, Richard Cheyny, Gresham Hoogan, William Palmer, Nicholas Dickens, Nicholas Diggins, Peter Sumner, Iohn Bennet, Richard Edwards, Michael Bonner, and Nicholas Hollam, or any ten of them, or any ten of the heires or assignes of them, shall and will make, doe, acknowledge, execute, and suffer all and euery such further acts, deeds, and assurances, for better settling, assuring, and confirming of the vsuages, customes, benefits, liberties, priuiledges immunities, discharges, certaintie of Fines, compositions agreements, matters, and things in the said indenture and Schedules contained, as by them, or any ten of them, or any ten of the heires or assignes of them shall be reasonably deuised, aduised, and required. That leases may be let for 31 yeeres and 4 months without lisence.
Item, That euery one of the said Copihold tennants, their heires, and assignes, shall and may freely hereafter from time to time, graunt, lease, or demise, by deede, or otherwise, without See article. 38. licence or copie of Court Roll, such or so much of their said lands, tenements, and hereditaments, to such person and persons, and for such terme and estate, not exceeding thirtie one yeeres and foure monethes, in possession from the time of
 the making of any such graunt, or demise, as to them and euery or any of them respectiuely, shal be thought fit or necessarie without any forfeite of estate, seizure, claime disturbance, deniall, or impeachment of his Lordship, his heires or assignes, or any of his or their officers. So alwaies, that such graunt, lease, and leases so to be made, be at the first or second generall Court (for the mannor whereof, the lands or tenements so happening to be granted, leased, or demysed are parcell) to bee holden next after the making thereof bee published in open court of that Mannor before the homage there, and a remembrance thereof to be required to be made in the Rolles of the said Court, for the date terme, and quantitie of lands, cottages, or tenements so granted, leased or demised: Which remembrance of the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth couenanteth and granteth, for him his heyres and assignes: To and with the said Sr Iohn Iolls and the rest of the said Copyhold tenants vpon the tender of a certainty therof in writing, to the Steward, or deputy Steward of that Mannor for the time then being, together with sixe pence in money, for the entring thereof, shall be in the Court Rolls of that Mannor duely, and in conuenient time, and without delay enrolled, and a note thereof deliuered by the Steward, or his deputy, to the party so leasing, or any for him, without any other consideration, fee, or reward to be giuen or paide for the same. Recitall of the Letters Pattens from the King to my Lord concernning the Freehold.
Item, That whereas the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth
 by his Highnesse letters pattents vnder the great Seale of England, dated the 19. day of Iuly, in the thirteenth yeere o^ his Maiesties raigne of England, etc. and forty eight of Scotland. Hath obtained licence to grant to such of his Maiesties liege people as he shall thinke fit, messuages, cottages, lands, tenements, and hereditaments, parcell or reputed parcell of the said Mannors; To hold to them their heires and assignes in free and common Socage respectiuely, of his said Mannors of Stepny and Hackny, by such and the same rents, and seruices, and other profits, as in the conueyances thereof shall be expressed, and not to hold of the King in Capite, nor of any of his Maiesties Honors or Mannors in Knights seruice, as by the said letters pattents more at large may appeare. Now if the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth shal not at the first If the Act of Parliament be not Procured: then the Tennants vpon request shalbe made Freeholders. Session of the next Parliament, procure such an act of Parliament to be good and effectuall in law for the purposes aforesaid: Then his Lordship will at all times after the end of the said first Session of the next Parliament vpon reasonable request, and at the costs of the tennants, (whom it shall concerne) their heires or assignes, make, doe, and execute, such reasonable acts, deuises and assurances in the law, whereby the said Copyholders, their heires or assignes respectiuely, shall hold and enioy their and euery of their said copyhold, messuages, houses, lands, tenements, cottages, and hereditaments, with the like wayes, easements,
 commons and commodities, as are thereto now belonging, or now therewith vsed or enioyed. And the free-hold and inheritance thereof, respectiuely to them and to their respectiue heires and assignes for euer. To be holden of such of the same Mannors, whereof the same is now holden in free and common Socage; for and vnder the seuerall and respectiue yeerely rents for all seruices and demands, as they or any of them doe now seuerally and respectiuely pay for the same, as by them, or their councell learned shall be reasonably deuised and required.
Item, That the said Copyhold tenants, their heires and assignes respectiuely, shall and may For enioying the Common. for euer hereafter, without any let, impediment, interruption, deniall, or contradiction of his Lordship, his heires or assignes, or any claiming vnder the said Henry Lo: Wentworth deceased, not onely during the time they shall be Copyholders, but also afterwards when they shall haue obtained the free-hold and inheritance of their seuerall and respectiue Copyholds, peaceably hold and enioy, such and the like common of pasture and in such manner, in all the Commons, Masts, and commonable places of the said Mannors, as they or any of them heretofore, haue, had, vsed, held, taken, or enioyed, or might lawfully haue taken or enioyed. The Tennants not compounding are excepted from al benefit hereby. Neuerthelesse it is agreed, that neither the said Indenture and Schedules, nor any couenant therein contained shall in any wise extend or enure to the benefit or aduantage of any
 other Copyhold tenants of the said Mannors, other then the said Copyhold tennants named parties to the said Indentures, their heires and assignes, and that for such and the same lands, tenements, cottages, and hereditaments, with The enrolling of the deed. the appurtenances onely, as they or any of them now hold, or claime to hold, by copie of Court Roll of the said Mannors or one of them as by the said Indenture (wherevnto relation be And where it is left. had) more plainely and at large appeareth.
Memorandum, That the said Indenture of the twentieth of Iune, together with a duplicate therof were acknowledged by the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth the 21. day of Iuly 1617. before Sir Mathew Carew Knight to be enrolled, and is enrolled in the Chauncerie accordingly. The one part of which Indentures is left in the custody of the company of Goldsmiths in the Citie of London: And the other in the custody of the Brethren of the Trinitie house at Ratcliffe, In trust and to the vse of the said Copyhold tenants named parties to the said Indentures.
The ninth day of Iuly 1617. in the said fifteenth A statute of 12000. pound for performa^ce of couenants. yeare of his Maiesties raigne, to the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth acknowledged a Statute of the summe of twelue thousand pounds of lawfull money of England, vnto Alexander Prescot, and Iohn Gore, Aldermen, Thomas Iones, common Sergeant of London, Francis Fulner and Ceorge Whitemore Esquires, and Robert Mildmay Grocer, In trust for and to the vse of
 the vse of the Copyholders warned in the said Indentures, and thereof is a defesance by Indenture The Defeasance. dated the same day to this effect (viz.) That if the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth doe performe the couenants and agreements contained in the aforesaid Indenture of the twentieth of Iune: Then the same Statute to be void, and that the said Conusees shall deliuer vp the same Statute to the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth his heyres, executors, administrators, or assignes, so soone as the said act of Parliament shalbe procured, according to the intent and true meaning of the said recited Indenture. To this end the Where it is left. said Statute and Defeazance are left in the Chamber of the Citie of London, to be kept in such sort as that the said Conusees may haue the same to be deliuered according to their couenant. And the Chamberlaine of the said Citie hath charged himselfe with the receipt thereof, by order of the Court of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, bearing date the two and twentieth day of Iuly 1617. Leman Mayor, Fish Chamberlayne. In Trinitie Terme, in the said fifteenth yeare of The proceedings in the Chauncery. his Maiesties raigne to a Bill of complaint was by the Copyholders named parties to the the said Indenture of the twentieth of Iune, exhibited against the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth in his Maiesties high Court of Chancerie, whereto the said Tho: Lo: Wentworth did appeare, and by his answere confessed the contents of the said bill to be true. Wherevpon a perfect Decree with the free consent and agreement of the The Decree.
 said Tho: Lo: Wentworth, bearing date the two and twentieth day of Iuly, in the said fifteenth yeare of the raigne of our Soueraigne Lord King Iames was obtained. And by the same the said free customes, orders, immunities, etc. and all and whatsoeuer contained in the said Indenture of the twentieth of Iune, and the Schedules vnto the same Indenture annexed, are for euer established and confirmed. The said Decree is likewise there enrolled. The true copie of the said Schedules followeth.



14 SCHEDVLES containing the free Customes, Orders, Immunities, Discharges, Benefits and priuiledges of the Mannors of Stepney alias Stebunhuth and Hackney in the County of Middlesex, agreed vnto the approued, allowed, and ratified, as well by the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Wentworth Lord of the said Mannors, as also by his Lordships Copyhold, or customary Tennants or reputed Copyholds or customary Tenants of the said Mannors, or of either of them, named parties to the Indenture whereunto those Schedules are annexed. By which all and euery the same Copyholders or customarie Tenants, their and euery of their heyres and assignes, are to hold, vse, and enioy, inherit, alien, demise, or dispose all and euery or any the Lands, Messuages, Tenements, Cottages and Hereditaments, which they euery or any of them respectiuely doe hold, claime, or enioy, by force or pretext of any grant heretofore made by the Copy of Court Roll of the said Mannors or either of them, the day of the date of the said Indentures, That is to say, the twentieth day of Iune in the yeeres of the raigne of our Soueraigne Lord Iames by the grace of God of England, France and Ireland King, defender of the faith, etc. the fifteenth and of Scotland the fiftieth.
IN primis, by the customes of the said Mannors These copyholds are of inheritance held of the Lord by the rod according to the custome. and either of them, all the Copyhold Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, which the particular persons, (named parties to the Indentures, whervnto
 these Schedules are annexed) doe hold or enioy, are, and (time whereof the contrarie hath not beene within the memory of man) haue beene Copyhold and customarie lands, tenements and hereditaments of inheritance, demised and demisable by copy of Court Roll of the Mannors aforesaid, or one of them respectiuely, according to the customes of the Mannor whereof the same are holden; and all copies of Court Rolls of the same Mannors and either of them, by all the time aforesaid, for the same lands, tenements, and hereditaments, haue beene made, and ought to be made, to hold of the Lord by the Rod, according to the custome of the Mannor whereof the same is holden, by the rents and seruices therefore due and accustomed. And all the said lands, tenements, and hereditaments haue beene passed and are to passe and goe from such persons, as according to the contents of these Schedules, haue power and are How Surrenders are to be made. See further in the 19 article, enabled to make Surrenders, to any other person or persons by way of Surrender to be made to the hands of the Lord, by the acceptance of the Steward of the Mannor, or his Deputy, for the time being, in Court or out of Court; or by the acceptance of the Reeue of the Mannor whereof the same are holden, or by his Deputy, within the same Mannor, or elsewhere, in presence of sixe customarie Tennants, or by any Headborough of some Towneship or Hambler within that Mannor in presence of sixe customarie Tenants, in or out of the same Mannors; which Surrender or Surrenders haue beene, and shall and may be to
 the vse of any person or persons, and their heyres for euer in fee-simple, or any person or persons in fee taile, or for life, or liues, with Remainders, or without Remainders, as lands may be assured by the course of the common lawes of this Realme, or else to the vse of the last Will and Testament of the Surrenderers or of any other persons according to the intent and limitation of such last Will and Testament.
Item, the rents of all the Tennants both Freeholders 2 Quitrents are to be paid yearly at Michellmas. and Copy holders which hold any Messuages, Cottages, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments of the said Mannors or of either of them, are yearely payable only at the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangell to the Lord and his heires, the same to be collected by the Reeues of the said Mannors (seuerally and respectiuely to be yearely chosen, as hereafter is expressed) or their Deputies; And all and euery the said customarie or Copyhold Tenants to pay the seueral yearely rents, now yeerely due and payable for their seuerall Copyholds: and if any of the said Copyholds for which any interequit rent is now pa^d shall hereafter come into seuerall hands, the rent thereof An entire quitrent come into seuerall hands shalbe apportioned. shall be then apportioned by the homage, at the Court of the Mannor whereof the same are holden, and so much onely as by the homage shalbe appointed to be paid (prorata) shall be paid to the Lord for the time being.
Item, All and euery Copyhold Tenant of the 3 At what Courts Tennants are bound to appeare* said Mannors or either of them, which now be, or hereafter for the time being shalbe, ought to appeare
 yeerely at two generall Courts holden for the Mannor wherof his lands or Tenements are holden vpon warning, as hereafter followeth: And also so many of them at all other set or appointed Courts, set, appointed and kept for the said Mannor wherof their lands are hold^n vnder the numb^r of eighteene, as shall be for that purpose especially warned therevnto by the Reeue, or his sufficient Deputy for the time being: And ^he said Tenants shall there doe their suites, and seruices, according to their tenures, except they be essoined, licensed or haue some other lawfull excuse, vpon the paine hereafter following; which two generall Courts haue beene commonly kept, and are to be kept yearely the one of them on Tuesday, the ninth day after Easter day, and the other about the Feast of Saint Andrew the Apostle vpon reasonable The two generall Courtes yearely held. warning, That is to say, in the Churches and Chappels w^thin the said Mannors openly vpon the Sunday seuennight, or Sunday fortnight before the day of such Court to be holden.
Item, If any of the Coppyhold or customarie 4 Tennants f^iling to appeare, and not essoyned: or reason able excuse: shalbe amersed. Tennants of the said Mannors, or of either of them doe or shal make default of their appearance at any of the said two generall Courts, to which their suites shall be due: Or if such Copyhold Tenants as shalbe especially and lawfully warned to appeare at any of the said set Cou^ts, in forme aforesaid, yearely to bee holden doe make default (to which the said suite^s or shalbe due) and warning openly giuen as aforesaid of the day and place of the holding of the same generall Courts,
 and vpon speciall and lawfull warning to be giuen for the said seuerall set or purchased Courts, that then they that shall so make default (except they be essoyned, or haue some other lawfull or reasonable excuse) shalbe amerced by the Homage of the said Court to be taxed and affered, by two afferors of the said Court, That is to say by two Tenants of the Homage, whereof the Steward of the said Mannors, or of either of them, for the time being, hath alwaies vsed to choose, and shall choose one for the Lord, and the residue of the homage haue chosen, and hereafter shall choose the other.
Item, If any Tenant be summoned to apeare at 5 What the tennants are to be allowed at set Courts. any set Court, or Courts to bee holden within the said Mannors, or in any of them, and doth appeare vpon the said Sommons, he ought, and is to haue for his paines foure pence, and his dinner, or eight pence and no dinner, which ought and is by the said custome to bee paid by such person or persons who shall be the cause that any such Tenants doe appeare for his or their matter, so it be not any matter or cause that concerneth an enqu^rie or presentment to be made onely concerning the Lord for the time being his heires or assignes.
Item, The Coppyhold Tennants of the said 6 The like allowance for view. par^icions and and other summons. Mannors; and of either of them, ought to haue euery of them like allowance vpon euery view by them to be made, and vpon euery petition by them to be made, or vpon other Sommons to appeare betwixt Tenant and Tenant, when they bee appointed thereunto by precept from the Steward of the said Mannors or of either of them for the
 being, or by his sufficient Deputie.
Item, The homage of the Court of the said 7 How tennants may be righted against encroachments, annoyances etc. Mannors or of any of them, may appoint sixe or seuen Tennants vpon any complaint to them made by any person or persons being Tenants of the said Mannors, or of either of them, in open Court, that hee or they bee wronged by any incroachment, or any other annoyance to their Copyhold Tenements, which Tenants shal after the said Court view the same encroachment, annoyance and impediment, or place whereo^ any such complaint shall be made, and therevpon to present or notifie the same by a day to the Steward, or to the homage at the next generall court, that there may be set a paine or amerciament, or both for the same, by the Homage at the said next court, according to the qualitie of the offence.
Item, The Homage of either of the said Mannors 8 The Homage at euery generall cou^t is to present deceased tennants. are to make presentment at euery generall Court, to be holden for the said Mannors, or for either of them, of all the customarie or copyhold Tenants that they shall know shall bee deceased after the Court then last past, at or any time before the said court, whose deaths were not then found and presented, and that held any copyhold or customarie or reputed copyhold or customarie Lands or Tenements of the said Mannors or of either of them: And also as neere as they can present With their lands and heires. what Lands euery of them dyed seized of, and of what estate, and when he dyed, and who is the next heire or heires to the same person or persons so dying seized, and of what age or ages the said
 heire or heyres shall then bee of, as neere as they can.
Item, The Homage likewise ought to present 9 Also they must present the deaths of Free-holders etc. the deaths of the Free-holders, and when they dyed, and who be their next heyre or heyres, and the ages of their heires which held any Lands or Tenements of the said Mannors, or of either of them, and the nature of their tenures, so neere as they can, to the intent the Lord may haue his reliefe, which is but the value of one yeeres quitrent of the Tenements holden of the said Mannors, or of either of them by Socage tenure.
Item, If the Homage at any of the said Courts 10 What shall be donne, if the next heire be not knowne. of either of the said Mannors shall not know who is next heyre or heyres to any of the said customarie Tenants so dying seized, when they shal make their presentments, That then they shall make their presentment so accordingly, and then vpon the said presentment at the next generall Court then after, the Steward of the said Mannors of either of them, or his Deputy for the time being, within the said presentment shall so be made, shall cause a Proclamation to be made in open court to the intent euery such heyre or heyres may haue knowledge to come and take vp the Lands and Tenements of his or their auncestors, and so the Steward or his Deputie shall cause a Proclamation to bee made from generall Court to generall Court, vntill three open and publique Proclamations Three Proclamations shal be made in two yeares space for the heire to take knowledge etc. be made in full Court, at three seuerall generall Courts, which generall courts by the said custome are vsed to bee holden commonly one halfe
 yeere after another, or thereabouth: So that from the presentment made by the said Homage of the dying seized of the said last Tenant, vnto the last proclamation, shal be fully two yeres: And if there shall come no heyre of the said Lands or Tenements, nor any for him or them, before the end of the court next after the court, whereat the last of the said three Proclamations shalbe made, to make his or their claime, and proue himselfe or themselues to the Homage of the said Court, in such sort as they or the greater part of them shall allow of to be the next heyre or heyres of the whole bloud to the said Tenant deceased, or to haue title to the Lands and Tenements, nor to shew and proue as aforesaid who is or ought to bee next heyre or heyres of the whole bloud to the said Tenant deceased, or next heyre or heyres expectant vpon any estate determined; Then the Lord of If none appeare the Lord may then sease the land. the Mannor whereof the same Land is holden for the time being, shall and may after the next court next after the said three Proclamations so to bee made, seize the Lands and Tenements which were the said persons so dying seized, whose next heyre or heyres, or such as shall haue title therevnto cannot be found, or shall not come and make his or their claime and proofe as aforesaid; and the same Lord then to take the issues and profits And keepe it vntill an heyre doe come. thereof to his owne vse vntill such person or persons come that shall proue him, or them next heire or heyres to the said person or persons so dying If no heire com w^thin three yeeres after the third proclamation, the land seized. And if none shall come in, within three yeeres next after the third and last Proclamation
 made as aforesaid, that shall and can conuey and proue him, or them to be next heyre or heyres of the whole bloud, or shew, or proue who is or ought to be next heyre or heyres, or to haue title as next in Remainder or Reuersion as aforesaid: sh^ll escheate to the Lord. That then the said Lands and Tenements bee forfeited or shall escheate vnto the Lord of the said Mannor or Mannors for the time being. Except that if the said Lands and Tenements, shall or ought immediately, to discend, remaine, reuert, or come to any woman Couert, or Infant within the age of one and twenty yeeres, or to any person or 1 Except woemen couert baron 2 Infants within age. 3 Prisoners. 4 Persons non sanae memoriae. 5 Persons out of the Realme. persons being in prison, or any person or persons not of Sanae memoriae, or that shall not bee within the Realme at the time of the death of the said last tenant dying so seized, or at the time of the first, second or third Proclamation to be made as aforesaid: That then in euery such case, the Lord for the time being shall haue but the profits of the said Lands and Tenements vntill such persons, or his, her, or their heire or heires, shall come and make their claime, So the said claime be made by the said woman or her heires within fiue yeeres Fiue yeares. next after the death of her said husband, or by her husband and her selfe, during the time of her Couerture. And by such person being within age or his heires before he shall or should accomplish his full age of one and twentie yeeres, or within fiue yeeres then next after he shal or should accomplish his full age of one and twentie yeeres. And by the person of non sanae memoriae, within fiue yeeres next after he shall recouer and become of Sanae memoriae
 and by the heire of such person of non sanae memoriae within fiue yeeres next after the death of his said Auncestor or before: And by the said person that shall be so out of the Realme or his heires within fiue yeeres after he shall returne, or if hee shall not returne by his heires, within fiue yeeres after his death: and by the said person or persons in prison within one whole yeere next after his 11 No dower for woemen: ^or Courtesie of England for men. or their enlargement from such imprisonment.
Item, In the said Mannors or either of them women ought not to haue Dowers of any customary lands or tenements within the Mannors aforesaid, nor in any of them, nor men to haue any estate as Tennants by the curtesie of England.
Item, If any shalbe seized of any customarie 12 Estates of inheritance shall discend according to Gauelkynde. lands or tenements holden of the said Mannors or of either of them, of an estate of Inheritance, and shall haue two sonnes, or three sonnes, or more, or hauing no sonnes, shal haue diuers daughters, or hauing neither sonnes, nor daughters shal haue diuers Collatterall heires in one neerenesse of bloud, or that are to make their resort, from those that were of the same neerenesse of bloud to the Tenant dying; They shall be all co-heires to their said Father, Mother, or other Auncestor, touching the said customary lands and tenements, according to the custome of Gauelkinde.
Item, If any man or woman die seized as aforesaid 13 Touching discents where the tennant left issue. of any customarie lands or tenements of any estate of Inheritance holden of the said Mannors or of any of them, and shall haue issue two or three sonnes or more, whereof one, or two, or more of
 them shall be married, and haue issue in the life of their Father or Mother, and shall die before his or their said Father or Mother, or hauing no sons shall haue diuers daughters, whereof one or more shall be married and haue issue, and dye in the life of the Father or Mother, That then the said issue shall inherite, and be co-heire with the said sonne or sonnes, daughter, or daughters that shall suruiue his, her, or their said Father or Mother that so shall die seized as is aforesaid, whether the said issue be male or female, according to the custome of Gauelkinde.
Item, If any person or persons die seized as aforesaid, 14 How lands shal discend to those of the whole blood where the tennant left no issue. and shall leaue behinde him neither sonne, nor daughter, then the next of his or their kinne, being of whole bloud, shalbe heire or heires to the said perso^ or persons so dying seised, That is to say, his, her, or their brother or brothers, brother or brothers children, or childrens children, according to the custome of Gauelkinde, and so forth as long as any of that issue shall be on liue, being of the whole bloud; and in default of such issue the sisters, and sisters children, according to the custome of Gauelkinde, and so forth so long as any issue shalbe on liue, and of the whole bloud, and for lack of such issue, the Vncles and their issues being of the whole bloud, so long as any issue shalbe liuing. And in default of such issue, the Aunts and their children, so long as any shalbe liuing of the whole bloud, and for lacke of such issue the next of kinne of the whole bloud, according to the custome of Gauelkinde.

Item, If any person so dying seised as aforesaid 15 Males et Females of one venter cannot ioyne to be coheires. without issue of his body, and hauing diuers brothers of the whole bloud, whereof the one or some of them shall haue beene married, and shall haue issue. and after issue had shall die, before the said brother dying seised as aforesaid; That then the issues of the said brother or brothers so dying before him that dyed seized as aforesaid shall ioyne and be co heire with the brother or brothers that suruiueth the brother that so dyed seised, as aforesaid, whether the said issue be males or females: But males and females of one Venter cannot ioyne to be co-heires together, So that the course of discents is to bee obserued by the said custome, according to the custome and nature of lands in Gauelkinde.
Item, Likewise shall the issue of the daughter 16 Touching discents. that shall die in the life of the Father or Mother be co-heire with the Aunt that liueth being of the whole bloud.
Item, Likewise shal the Vncles and the Vncles 17 Discen^s. brothers children being of the whole bloud be coheires together as aforesaid.
Item, Likewise shall the Aunts, and the Aunts 18 Discents. sisters children ioyne and bee co-heires as aforesaid, and so forth of all further degrees, of all Collaterall heires being of the whole bloud, which may conuey themselues to bee any Cozens and heires of the whole bloud to any person or persons dying seized of any of the aforesaid customarie lands, or tenements, according to the custome of Gauelkynde.

Item, By the custome of the said seuerall Mannors 19 How Copyholders of inheritance may Surrender. euery copyholder of Inheritance in fee-simple, may Surrender his said copyhold lands and tenements, or any part, or parcell thereof vnto the Lord to the vse of any person or persons, and to his and their heires for euer, or to his or their heires, of his or their bodies or any otherwise in See also in the first article. and in the 20 21 etc articles. taile, or for life or liues, or yeeres, or to any person or persons, and his or their heires; To the intent the said Copyhold Tennant may declare his last Will and Testament vpon the same Lands, and Tenements, or to any other vse, or vses, vnlesse it be to any corporation or corporations, or bodies pollitique or corporate, and euery copyholder in taile, or for life, liues or yeeres, of either of the said Mannors may in like manner by the customes of the said Mannors, and of either of them Surrender their Copyhold lands tenements or hereditaments or any part thereof, according to the nature of their estates so the same Surrender be made according to the custome concerning Surrenders as afore in these presents is specified, or hereafter ensueth; And all the same persons to whose vse euery Surrender shalbe made, are to haue their copies made to hold of the Lord by the Rod, according to the custome of the Mannor, whereof they beene holden by the Rents and seruices therefore due and accustomed. Vpon euery of which Surrenders the Fine and Fines for the same hereafter expressed, is by the said custome to be paid, and to The fines must be entred into the Coppyes. See act^: 26. be entered into the seueral copies, or the margents of them.

Item, By the custome of the said Mannors, and Surrenders taken by the headborow or Reeue in presence of 6 tennantes. of either of them, euery Surrender taken out of the Court by the Headborow, or Reeue, or his Deputie, and in the presence of sixe customarie Tennants of the Mannor of which the said lands or tenements Surrendred shalbe parcell witnessing the same surrender of any person or persons of his or their customarie Lands or tenements holden of the said Mannors or of either of them, and being of the full age of one and twentie yeeres or vpwards, (except women couert Baron, and such as are not of perfect minde) to the vse of any person or persons, are and ought to bee as good, as if it were taken in open Court by the said Steward of the Mannors or of either of them, so that such surrender be by the Homage presented as hereafter followeth.
Item, The Surrender by a woman couert Baron 21 Surren of woman couert baron, in extremitie of siknesse. being of the age of one and twentie yeeres made together with her husband of the lands, tenements or hereditaments, whereof she is seized or estated is, and shalbe a good Surrender of her lands, tenements, and hereditaments holden of the said Mannors or of either of them the same Surrender being made in her extreamitie of sicknes or likelihood of death by the acceptance of the Reeue of the Mannor whereof the lands and tenements so surrendred are parcell and his Deputie or either of them in the presence of sixe customarie tenants or by the acceptance, of the Headborow in the presence of sixe customary Tenants, But if any such woman Couert Baron so surrendring,
 doe after that recouer her health, and do not at the next generall Court then following ratifie and confirme the fame, before the Steward or his Deputie in the presence of the Homage: Then the same Surrender is, and shalbe voide, and all other Surrenders made by any woman couert Baron All oth^r Surr: by woemen couert baron. (except before the Steward of the Mannor or his Deputie, where shee shalbe soly examined, or in extreamitie of sicknes as is aforesaid are and shalbe voide.
Item, All Surrenders taken of women as aforesaid, 22 All Surrenders taken dy the Reeue or Head borough must be p^esented at the first or second next generall court. or of men by the Reeue or his Deputie, or by a Headborough for the time being, and in the presence of sixe customarie Tennants as aforesaid shalbe and ought to be by the Homage presented, at the first or second next general court holden for the Mannor whereof the same is holden after the taking thereof, or within one yeere and a day next after the taking of the same Surrender, if any such generall Court be holden, within a yeere and a day next after the same Surrender so taken: Or else if no such generall Court bee holden within a yeere and a day, then to be by the Homage presented at the next generall Court to be holden for the same Mannor, next after the same yeere and day, is and shall bee a good Surrender as if the same had beene taken by the St^ward or his Deputie of that Mannor or woman examined as aforesaid in open court or otherwise, all Surrenders taken by the said Reeue or his Deputie, or by a Headborough, Or else they shalbe voide. and in the presence of sixe tenants and not presented by the said Homage in manner and forme
 aforesaid are and shalbe voide: But when any when Surr: to the vse of the last will, must be presented. Surrender shall be made by any person to the vse of his or her last Will and Testament, to the intent that he or she may thereby or therevpon make and declare his or her last Will and Testament: That Surrender is to be presented at the first or second next generall Court of that Mannor happening next after the decease of the partie so Surrendring perfectly knowne and not before. But if the same be not at the first or second court next after the death of the same partie presented: Or if the same party hath before in his life time made any Or else voyde. other Surrender of the same Lands or tenements and the same to be presented: Then the said Surrender to the vse of such last Will and Testament is and shalbe voide. 23 The homage must write Billa vera vpon their presentments and good Surrend
Item, The Homage must write Billa vera vpon euery Surrender by them presented when they finde the same Surrenders agreeable to the custome, and also vpon euery other of their presentments shall make Billa vera when they bee agreeable to the said custome: Or else if the said Homage receiue any Surrender or other bills to them exhibited, which be doubtfull or repugnant to the custome of the Mannor whereof the land is holden vpon euery such Surrender or Bill Ignoramus shalbe made, or the like superscription to the intent And Ignoramus on the contrary it may be knowne to be doubtfull or naught or else returne the same naughtie Surrenders or Bills backe againe to the parties that exhibited the same. 24 Woemen couert baron may turrender with heire husbands etc.
Item, Euery woman being Couert Baron of
 the age of one and twentie yeeres or vpwards, hauing any customarie lands or tenements to her, or her heires or for life, liues, or yeeres, and holden of the said Mannors or of either of them, may together with her husband by the hands of the said Steward, or his sufficient Deputie Surrender all her said Lands and Tenements, interest and terme of yeeres to the vse of her said husband, or to any other person or persons, at their will and Soly examined before the Steeward or deputie. pleasure: So as she be solie and secretly examined before the Steward or his sufficient Deputie.
Item, All Surrenders taken out of the Court by the Steward of the said Mannors, or of any of 25 Surrenders taken out of court by the Steward or his deputie. them, or his sufficient Deputy of any person or persons, being of the full age of one and twentie yeeres or more, and of Sanae memoriae of any of their customarie lands, and tenements holden of the said Mannors, or of either of them, be good by the customes of the said Mannors, and of either of Must be presented at the next generall courte. them, and the same ought to be published and notified to the Homage at the next generall Court; Or else those Surrenders are also voide.
Item, All the Fines vpon admittances, for any 26 The fines are certaine and not arbitrarie. the now lands, tenements, or hereditaments, of all and euery the persons named parties to the said Indenture holden by copie of Court Roll, are and ought to be certaine, and not arbitrarie or at the will of the Lord. And the Lord or Lords of the said Mannors, or of either of them, ought to haue and take Fines vpon admittances, as hereafter What fines are due. followeth, and not other or greater, That is to say, vpon the admission of the heire or heires after a
 discent, for euery acre of land of what nature or kinde so euer sixteene pence, and so after that rate for greater or lesser quantities of Land. And vpon admission of one person onely after any Surrender the like somme of sixteene pence for euery acre, and so after that rate for euery greater or lesser quantitie of land; But if more then one person be admitted after or vpon any Surrender: Then If more then one Person be admitted then etc. euery of the same persons are to pay halfe so much as one person ought to pay and not more. Likewise vpon admission of the heire or heires, after a discent for euery Messuage customarie, with the Courts, Yards, Easements, Orchards, and Gardens therevnto belonging, for a Fine the somme of thirteene shillings foure pence, and not more. And for a dwelling house called a Tenement, with the Courts, Yards, Orchards, Easements and Gardens therevnto belonging, the somme of ten shillings, and not more: and for a cottage vsed for dwelling, with easements and gardens therevnto belonging, or without garden, and not demised for more then three pounds by the yeere, the somme of twenty pence: But for a building not vsed for a dwelling house so much onely as according to the quantitie of the land after the rate of sixteene What fine for a building not vsed for a dwelling house. pence the acre: And for greater cottages vsed for dwelling, and which shall be let for aboue three pounds by the yeere, with the Courts, Yards, Orchards, Gardens, and Easements therevnto belonging, the somme of ten shillings. And the like is of Messuages, Tenements, and Cottages hereafter to be built: And vpon or after any Surrender,
 at the admission the like Fines are to be paide for one person. But if any Surrender be made by Admission of man and wife, a whole fine. any person, or persons, to a man and his wife, then a whole fine is to be paid for the husband, and halfe a fine is to be paide for the wife: And if more persons be admitted vpon one Surrender, then euery of the same persons are to pay for Fine halfe so much, as one person ought to pay, and not more. All acres are to bee acco^pted according to the statute or ordinance de terris mensurandis, and orchards and gardens not belonging to such Messuages, Tenements or Cottages, are to pay as lands according to the quantitie thereof, according to the rate aforesaid. And parts of Messuages, The fines must be entred in the margent of the coppies. see article 19. parts of Tenements, and parts of Cottages are to pay for Fines respectiuely, in regard of the whole, according to the rate of the whole. And all fines paid are to be set downe and expressed in the copie of the Court Roll thereof, or in the margent of the same copie. And if any question or doubt shall hereafter arise, about the discerning and true estimation, what or which be, or ought to bee accompted a Messuage, and what, or which a dwelling house called atenement, and what or which a Cottage; The same is to bee referred to the Homage of the Mannor at the next generall Court, and by the same to be tryed. ordered, determined, and presented, and according to such presentments, fines are to be paid. 27 The Lord is to allowe of all Surr: made according to thes articles.
Item, The Lord or Lords of the said Mannors or either of them, and their and euery of their Stewards for the time being shall and ought to accept
 and allow of all and euery Surrender and Surrenders to be made of any the lands, tenements, or hereditaments, whereof any of the persons named parties to the said Indenture, are seised as copy holders, according to the tenour, intent and true meaning of these Schedules, and the Articles therein contained. So as the parties Surrendering, be not before that time by the Homage of the same Mannor presented, and found to haue made or committed some matter of forfeiture of those lands and tenements so Surrendred, contrarie to the customes and articles in these Schedules expressed, or some or one of them. And the Lord of the same Mannor by his Steward for such fine as in or for such things is before expressed shal grant the same copyhold Lands Tenements and hereditaments so Surrendred, according to the tenor vse and intent of the same Surrender. And shall duely admit such person or persons to whom, or to whose vse, such Surrenders shalbe made.
Item, If the Lord or Lords of the said Mannors, 28 If the Lord refuse to admi^^ then etc. or either of them, or his or their Steward for the time being shall refuse to admit any person or persons, to whom or to whose vse such Surrender. as in the precedent Article is expressed shalbe made, or shall refuse to admit such person or persons, to whom any of the said copyhold, or customarie, or reputed copyhold, or customarie, lands, tenements, or hereditaments, shall discend according to the custome of the said Mannors, and true meaning of these Schedules. Then the person s^ not admitted paying or tendering to the Lord or
 his Reeue, fine or fines for the same, according to the true meaning of these Schedules, shall and may into such Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments so surrendred, or discended respectiuely enter, and the same quietly haue, hold and enioy as freely and in such sort as if he or they had beene therevnto lawfully admitted, and not otherwise.
Item, If any man make a Surrender onely to 29 Surren: to make the wife a ioincture the intent to make his wife a ioynture, or to assure it to his wife for terme of her life, or during her widdowhood, not altering the estate of the Inheritance, then for the fine of the same, or any admittance therevpon, there shalbe paid but halfe a fine for the same, things so Surrendred; That is to say, halfe so much as one person should pay vpon admittance, according to the true meaning of these Schedules: And the like is to be vsed where the husband and wife make a Surrender of the lands of the wife, to the end only to make an estate thereof to the husband ioyntly with his wife, or to the husband for terme of his life in possession or Remainder: And likewise by the said custome for euery Tenant that shalbe admitted in Reuersion, or Remainder expectant vpon the estate of any particuler Tenant for life, in taile, or for yeeres, granted by copie, the same is but halfe so much as it is vpon other admittances, vpon alienations, Surrenders, or dying seized as aforesaid.
Item, Euery person that exhibiteth or deliuereth 30 Duties to the homage and tennants for billes and Su^: any Surrender or Bill to the Homage, ought to giue and pay to the same Homage for euery such Surrender or Bill foure pence; and euery of the
 said sixe Tenants, and also the Hradborough or Reeue which shalbe at the taking of any Surrenders as aforesaid ought to haue foure pence a peece of the parties that make the Surrender, if the same Surrender bee taken within the said Mannors, or in either of them. But if they goe out of the said Mannors or either of them for the taking of the same, then to haue eight pence a peece, and their charges if they shall goe further off. And the partie that procureth the said Surrender ought to giue to the said Tennants foure pence besides the said fees, which foure pence is to be deliuered with the said Surrender, or else he that bringeth in the said Surrender without the said foure pence, shall pay it of his owne purse to the Homage.
Item, If it chance at any time vpon the death of 31 Though an heire be admitted yet vppon a new claime the homage shall enquire etc. for a coheire. any Copyholder or customarie Tenant, that there is an heire or heires found and presented by the Homage, and after is or are admitted to the lands or tenements of the said Copyholder, and at that time no other heires shalbe knowne, and after it shall chance that one or other commeth, and claimeth to be co-heire with the said heire that is admitted, then the homage ought thereof to enquire, and if they finde his claime true, they ought to present the same, and then hee or they so claiming shall be likewise admitted and pay his Fine, and haue his part of the premisses notwithstanding the former admission.
Item, If any man be admitted to any possession, 32 Wher tennan^s is admitted, and after that an other claimeth the whole, the Homage is not bound to enquire but he is driven to his fuite. or to any Reuersion, or Remainder of any Lands or Tenements, whether they be to him discended
 as shalbe supposed or to him Surrendred by any other person, and after that commeth another person or persons who pretendeth a title to the whole premisses, or to any part thereof, and desireth that the Homage may enquire thereof. In this case the said Homage is not bound thereof to enquire, but he or they are driuen to his or their suite or plaint, whether his or their title be right or wrong Exceptin such case where any person or persons shall claime as in the next precedent Article. And yet if any shall require the Homage to finde whether he or they were the sonne or sonnes or daughter or daughters of such a one or no, and the homage knowing or well informed of the truth, that he or they shal be the sonne, or sons or daughter or daughters of him or her that dyed seized of the lands then in question. The Homage ought therein to present the truth But not to present whether he or they ought to haue the premisses or any part thereof to the which another person is already admitted. But in such case he or they shalbe driuen to his or their suite or plaint as aforesaid for the recouery of their said right if any right they haue; Except in such case where any person or persons shall claime as in the next precedent Article.
Item, After the death of euery person being a 33 How lands discended are to be taken vp. customarie Tennant of the said Mannors, or of either of them, the next heire or heires ought to come and take vp the Lands and Tenements whereof his or their auncestors so shall die seised At foureteene ^ee^es he is to be admitted in his owne person. of what age soeuer he be of. And if he or they be of the age of foureteene yeeres or vpwards hee is
 to be admitted in his owne person within a conuenient At foureteene yeeres is to be admitted in his owne person. time after hee or they shalbe presented: Or else if hee or they bee vnder the age of fourteene yeeres, then to come and take it vp by his Gardian Vnder 14. yeres by Gardian. vntill he be of the age of fourteene yeeres as aforesaid, and to pay for his fine according to the rates expressed in these Schedules, and the Gardean to Gardian 3 shill^ngs 4 pence. pay but three shillings and foure pence at the most for his fine for the Gardeanship or lesse, as the Steward or his Deputy shall thinke fit. And for Lands discended from the part of the Father, the Who shalbe Gardian. next Cozen of the part on the Mother not able to inherite those lands, ought to be Gardean. And if See ariicle. 37. the lands came from the part of the mother, then the like cosen of the part of the Father ought to bee Gardean if that person will accept thereof; and vpon their refusall or not praying to bee admitted Gardean, at the first or second Court after that infant ought to be admitted; then may the Steward admit any other of the kindred of the Infant to whom his Lands cannot discend to bee Gardian. And if none of the kindred will accept of the Gardianship, then may another be admitted. And euery The Gardian shall accompt. Gardian shall accompt to the heire of the profits, and repaire the Copyhold Tenements of him whose Gardian hee is, And vpon admittance shall be bound to the Lord for the time being, with And shalbe bound to the Lord to performe the same condition for performance thereof in such summe as the Homage of the said Court, or the greater part therof shal like off. And of the lands of euery Infant vnder fourteene yeeres of age that shalbe a purchasor a gardian shalbe admitted and shall so
 demeane himselfe in such manner as for the Gardian of an Infant hauing Lands by discent is limitted and appointed.
Item, Euery person to whose vse any of the said 34 They to whose vse Lands are surrendred, ought within 3. yeares after the presentment to take them vp. Lands or Tenements shalbe Surrendred ought to come within three yeeres after the same bee presented and take vp the same by himselfe if he be of age, and to be admitted as aforesaid, and to pay his fine or else by his Gardian as aforesaid.
Item, If any of the said heires, Alienees, or Gardians 35 The Lord may distraine for the Fines. Or by de fault of distrese selfe the lands. doe not pay their Fines within one moneth after the same fines be extracted, and the extracts deliuered to the Reeue or his Deputie for the gathering thereof, and by them or either of them demanded, then it shall bee lawfull for the Lord or Lords of the said Mannor or Mannors for the time being, or his or their officers to distraine; and auow as for rents, and for want of distresse to seize the Lands and Tenements for the which the said fine or fines are to be paid, and to enioy the same to his or their owne vse, vntill he or they shalbe fully satisfied and paid the said Fine or Fines to bee paid by him or them that so ought to pay the same.
Item, If any customarie, or copyhold Tennant 36 The like he may doe for non payment of the quitrent. of the said Mannors or of either of them, shall not pay his rents for his copyhold for which the same is due, and demanded by the said Reeue, or his Deputie: Then it shall b^e lawfull for the Lord or Lords of the said Mannor or Mannors for the time being or his or their Officers to distraine and anow, and for want of sufficient distresse to seize the lands and tenements out of the which the same
 ought to be paid, and to take and enioy the rents issues and profits of the same to his or their owne vse, vntill he or they shalbe fully satisfied and paide the same rents by him or them that so ought to pay the same.
Item, That when any Tenant dyeth seized leauing 37 Who shalbe Gardian. his heire vnder the age of fourteene yeeres the next of the kinne to whom the said Lands and Tenements cannot discend shall haue if hee shall require it the custodie of the heire, and of his lands and tenements committed vnto him for the vse of the heire vntill he come to the age of fourteene yeeres as is aforesaid, and then he to choose his own See article. 33. Gardian, and the former Gardian at any time after vpon reasonable request to yeeld accompt to the heyre of the profits of his lands receiued.
Item, If any person or persons be disposed to let his or their customarie Lands or Tenements to any other person or persons, and to their executors 38 Tennants may let leases for 31 yeeres and foure months without any lysence or Fine: and assignes for the terme of one and thirtie yeeres, or lesse, the same person or persons haue and shall haue full power and authoritie to set or let to farme his or their Copyhold Lands or Tenements to any person or persons, their executors administrators and assignes, for the terme of one and thirtie yeeres, and foure monethes or lesse, in See the abstract of the indenture. pag. 7. possession from the time of the making thereof, by writing, without any licence to him or them to be granted, and without paying any fine to the Lord, or incurring any forfeiture, or seisure of or for the same. So as the same lease doe not exceede one and thirtie yeeres and foure monethes from the
 time of the making thereof. But such lease is and If such leases be not pres^nted to the homage within on yeere after the making they shall be void. ought to be presented to the Homage of the Mannor whereof the Lands or tenements so leased are held within one yeere after the making thereof, or else the same lease so made, and not presented as aforesaid shalbe void, and of none effect.
Item, The custome of the Mannor is to giue to 39 Either mannor is vpon euery chaung of Lord to pay fiue pounds for recognition money. the Lord of euery of the said Mannors, vpon the change of euery Lor^ at the next Court after the first entry bona fide ten pounds of lawfull money of England, That is to say, out of each Mannor fiue pounds for the Recognition and* acknowledging the seruices which is to be leauied and collected by the Reeue for the time being, amongst all the Copyholders of the said Mannors respectiuely according to the rates they shalbe taxed at by the Homage at the next Court to bee holden after the comming of the new Lord.
Item, The Homage of euery of the said Mannors 40 How the Reeue of either manor is to be chosen. ought yeerely at the generall Court to be holden next after Michaelmas to elect and choose seuerall Reeues for euery of the said Mannors: That is to say to elect and choose two customarie Tenants either of the said persons named parties to the said presents their heires or assignes, or of others not named to beare the Office of the Reeue for each of the said Mannors, namely he that was before in election if he be aliue and one other, or if he be dead two other, to the intent the Lord of the said Mannors, or of either of them or his Steward may appoint, the one of them so elected for one whole yeere, that is one to serue for each of the
 said Mannors. So hee be appointed within that Mannor of which he is a tenant, and for which he shalbe so chosen, which Reeue being so appointed He shall serue one whole yere ought to take vpon him the said Office for one whole yeere then next ensuing, to execute the same by himselfe or his Deputie for whom he shall answere, and to be subiect to accompt and answere What sine he shall pay if he refuse. for the same, as in the said presents is set downe: And if a Copy-holder shalbe duely chosen and appointed by the Homage to bee the Lords Reeue as aforesaid, and according to his turne presented by the Homage and shall refuse to serue the said Office by himselfe or his Deputic, then euery such person so refusing within the said Mannor of Hackney, shall pay for a fine sixe pounds thirteene shillings and foure pence. And euery such person, so re^using within the said Mannor of The homage shall chose another vntill one doe accept and serue- Stebenhuth shall pay for a fine ten pounds to the Lord of the Mannor whereof his Lands are holden. And the Homage of the same Mannor shal be charged from time to time, to choose another Reeue in the place of him that so shall refuse, vntill such time as for the same Mannor one bee chosen, that shall and w^ll serue the said Office. And euery Copyholder that shalbe chosen and appointed to the said Office as aforesaid and shal refuse to serue the same office shall pay the fine aforesaid to the Lord of that Mannor for his refusall the one halfe The halfe of fines payd by refusers shalbe allowed him, who next shall serue. of all which fine or fines of Tenant or Tennants so refusing to accept and execute the said office of Reeueship, according to the true meaning of these Schedules, the Lord or Lords of the said Mannors
 or either of them of whom respectiuely such tenant or tenants so refusing shall hold ought, and shall from time to time allow vnto such person or persons as being chosen and appointed to be Reeue as aforesaid, and shall and will next after the refusall of any one or more of the said tenants so chosen, accept and serue the said office, the moyetie of the said Fine or Fines respectiuely to be by him defaulked and retained in his accompt, and by the Lord of that Mannor vpon the same Reeues accompt And be by him retayned at his accompting. whensoeuer he shall accompt for the same to be allowed.
Item, If any Copyholder that shall accept and 41 In what cases the Lord may seese the Reeues lands. execute the said office of Reeue shall refuse to satisfie and pay vnto the Lord the yeerely quitrents and Fines for admittances vpon alienations or discents wherewith such Reeue shall or may be lawfully charged by and according to the true meaning of these presents; Or shall refuse to accompt with the Lord within two moneths next yeerely after Michaelmas hauing had the Rentall and estracts of Fines vpon admittances as aforesaid for that yeere by the space of two moneths. Euery such Reeues lands and tenements that shal refuse so to accompt, and pay the said rents and fines which he shall or may haue collected as aforesaid, shalbe seized into the Lords hands, and the Lord shall and may take to his owne vse the issues and profits of his said lands and tenements, vntill he shall pay vnto the Lord, the rents and fines aforesaid, and vntill he hath also satisfied, and paid the Lord for And what he shall pay for his offence. his said offence (viz.) being Reeue of Hackney, sixe
 pounds thirteene shillings and foure pence. And being Reeue of Stebunhuth ten pounds. Neuerthelesse the Reeue ought not, nor shall be charged, or chargeable to answere any quitrents contained in any rentall or estracts, vnlesse it appeare vnto him He is not to answere any quitrents, vnles he know the tennant or where the land lyeth. by the rentall of the former Reeue, or otherwise be made knowne vnto him by some of the Lords officers who is the tenant, or where the land lyeth, for or in respect of which the same quitrents ought to be paid.
Item, No copyholder of the said Mannors or of 42 No Reeues within this co^position, shallbe charged with the Leet, or court baron otherwise then in the 41. article. either of them, being named parties to the said Indenture nor their heires or assignes ought or shall at any tune bee charged to collect or gather any of the amerciaments, fines, or other issues or profits of the Courts Leetes, or Courts Baron holden within the said Mannors, or of either of them, or be chargeable to answere or accompt for the same, to the Lord of the said Mannors, or of either of them, otherwise then in the last precedent Article is mentioned, nor to prouide or allow for any dinners, Nor prouide for any dinner^. either on the day or daies the Court Leete shalbe holden vpon, or on the day or dayes of the two generall Courts. But are and shalbe thereof for euer freed and discharged. Except that such tenant Except etc. or his heires shall hereafter purchase or haue other customary lands then those that the said persons named parties to the said Indenture, or some or one of them the said persons doe now hold, which shalbe worth to bee sold at the least two hundred pounds of lawfull money of England, or shalbe of the cleere yerely value of twenty pounds of like money.

Item, Euery one of the said customarie tennants 43 What tennants may be chosen Recues. named parties to the said Indenture whose lands Tenements and Hereditaments holden by Copie of Court Roll of either of the said Mannors, are worth sixeteene pounds of like mony as aforesaid by the yeere to be let, or two hundred pounds to be sold, by the estimation and presentment of the Homage of the same Mannor shall beare the office of Reeue of and for such of the said Mannors whereof he shalbe a Tenant by copie of Court Roll, and for which hee shalbe chosen and appointed Reeue as aforesaid, when his or their time and course doth come.
Item, Euery of the said Reeues, is to be allowed 44 What allowances the Reeue is to haue of the Lord. of the said Lord or Lords for the executing of the said office for one yeere as followeth: (viz.) the Reeue of Stebunhuth three pounds sixe shillings and eight pence, and six shillings eight pence more for and in respect of an allowance of a coate cloth to the said Reeue. And the Reeue of Hackney fiftie three shillings and foure pence, and sixe shillings eight pence more, for and in respect of an allowance of a coate cloth to the same Reeue, and all other commodities due and incident to the said office, for either of them, or vsed heretofore to be paid to the said Reeue, by any the Tenants of the said Mannors respectiuely.
Item, The Reeues of the said Mannors, and of either of them shall at the next generall Court, after 45 The Reeue to deliuer the Rentall to his Successor. To be amerced his yeere of seruice expired deliuer the rentall by which hee made his accompt to the Reeue that shall next succeede him vpon paine to bee amerced
 or fined by the Homage if hee shall not so doe.
Item, All the customarie Tenants of the said 46 Copyholders may breake and digge their grounds, fell downe timber and woods: suffer howsen ^^ decay: without forfeicture. Mannors and of either of them may breake and digge their copyhold grounds holden of the said Mannors and of either of them at his and their pleasure, and fell and cut downe their timber and woods growing, or that shall grow vpon the same, and conuert it to their best vse and profit, and may also suffer their Copyhold Tenements and houses to decay without incurring any seizure or forfeiture of their estates therefore, or other paine, and may take and pull downe their said Tenements, and erect or set them vp againe, either where they stood before, or vpon any other lands holden by copy of Court Roll of the said Mannors, But may not pull downe howsen to set them vpon free hold land or of either of them. But they may not, or shall not take or pull them downe to set them or any part of them vpon their owne Free-holds, or vpon the Freeholds of any other. 47 Copyholders may lopp trees growing vpon the wast before their howsen.
Item, Euery of the said copyholders, or reputed copyholders named parties to the said Indentures may lop and shred all such trees as grow before their houses or Tenements vpon the waste ground, and the same conuert to their owne vse May dig grauell etc. vpon the wast. without any offence so the said trees stand for the defence of their houses, yards, or gardens, and also may digge grauell, sand, clay and lome vpon the said waste grounds to build or repaire any of their copyhold Tenements within the said Mannors, or in either of them without any licence. So alwaies as euery of the said copyholders doe fill vp so much as shalbe digged by him or them.

Item, If any person or persons being Tenant Letting of lands for more then 31 yeeres 4 months is a forfeicture. customarie shall without licence by Indenture or other writing or otherwise let his said customarie Lands or Tenements for more yeeres then one and thirtie yeeres and foure moneths, it shalbe a forfeiture of his estate by the custome of the said Mannors, and of either of them being found and presented by the Homage, or else otherwise lawfully and sufficiently proued.
Item, For Treason or Felony whatsoeuer that shalbe committed by any Copy-holder of the said 49 For what offences these copyholders shall forfeit their estates. Mannors or of any of them for which hee shalbe lawfully attainted, hee shall forfeit his Copyhold Lands and Tenements to the Lord of the said Mannor. And for all other offence, or offences, act or acts whatsoeuer, for which a Free-holder ought by the common lawes of the land to forfeit his free-hold lands and tenements, there a Copy-holder of the said Mannors, or of either of them shall forfeit as a Free-holder ought to forfeit in like case his Free hold. But if a copyholder be out-lawed for any cause sauing Treason or Felony, the Lord Outlaw^ie, vnles for treason or felony, shalbe no forfeiture shall not haue the issues or profits of his lands. And if a copyholder make a Feoffement of his copyhold, gift in taile, or lease for life or liues by Deede or without Deede, by liuerie and seizin therevpon, or shall suffer a Recouerie at the Common More forfeitur of estate. viz. making a Feoffements guift in tale, lease for liues, suffering a Recoldy at the common law. law* leuie a Fine, or wilfully refuse, and deny to pay, doe, or performe his rents, fines, suites customes and seruices at any time hereafter due to the Lord or Lords of the said Mannors, or of either of them, for their said copyholds, the same wilfull
 refusall being presented to the Homage by the Leuijng a fine or willfull denying to pay the rents, fines etc. oathes of three customarie Tennants with the Reeue or his Deputie, (the said Tennants or Reeue, nor his Deputy being none of the Lords seruants) and being found and presented by the homage, the same shalbe holden and reputed a forfeiture of his estate, whatsoeuer hee shall haue by copy of Court Roll, at the time of any such act, committed or done in so much of his and their copyhold Lands and Tenements as hee shall haue committed any such act and onely for so much of his lands and tenements out of the which the said quitrent and other duties is demanded, and shalbe due, and wilfully denied by the said Tenant or tenants as aforesaid. Or if any copyholder shall in the Or disclaiming to hold of the Lord. Lords Court or elsewhere in any Court of Record disclaime to hold his said copyhold Lands and tenements of the Lord of the Mannor whereof his Lands and tenements are holden, or shall by pleading in the Lords Court, or other Court of Record Or claiming their copy-holds to be free holds. wilfully claime their copyholds to bee Free-holds, or willingly and wittingly pleade in any Real action at the common law in chiefe as a Free-hold Or plead wittingly in a reall action at common law in chiefe as a Free-holder. Tenant or shall willingly and wittingly doe any other act, or things in or concerning his now Lands and tenements which shalbe a disseisin or disinheritance of the Lord or Lords of the said Mannors, or of either of them, their heires or assignes Or doe any other act which shalbe a disseisin of the Lord. (other then such acts as in these Articles are especiall mentioned or dispensed withall) that then hee shall forfeit his and their estate of and in the same Lands and Tenements so disclaimed to
 be holden or claimed to be Freehold, or for which he shall pleade in chiefe or doe any such other act or thing as is aforesaid. Finally, the Lord of the said What other forfeictures the Lord shall haue. Mannors, or of either of them shall haue all such other forfeitures, issues, profits, and aduantages of the said Copyholds as sha^l grow due to him by any Statute, Lawes of this Realme being not against and contrarie to these Articles and customes heere expressely set downe.
Item, If any person or persons hauing any estate 50 The act or neglect of tennant for liues or yeeres shall not preiudice those in remainder. of any copyhold lands or tenements holden of the said Mannors or of either of them for terme of life, or liues, or for terme of yeeres, or in the right of their wiues of any estate although he, she, or they, shall doe or suffer, or neglect to doe any act or acts, during the time aforesaid, in or vpon the said Copyhold Lands, or Tenements, which may or shal be contrary to the custome of the said Mannors, or of either of them. The same act or acts, so being done shall not preiudice or be hurtfull vnto the next person or persons to whom the said customarie Lands or tenements should or ought to remaine, reuert or come, nor to the said wife or her heires, not being partie in Court, or consenting in Court to the said act or forfeiture, nor that the Lord of the said Mannors, or of either of them shall take any longer aduantage, issues, or profits of the same Copyhold Lands or Tenements then during the time of such estates as is aforesaid, of the partie committing, doing, or assenting, to such act or acts. So that after his or their decease or estates determined the said Lands and Tenements shall
 remaine, reuert, or come to the next person or persons, or to such person or persons, to whom the same should haue comen or remained, or goe, or reuert immediately after such estate or estates ended or determined, as though there had beene no such act or acts done, contrary to the tenor or true meaning, of these presents by any such person or persons.
Item, The particular or priuate act or acts of any 51 The priuat act of any tennants contrary to these articles, shall not extend to be a breach of the customes to the hurt of the rest. customary Tennant or tenants of any of the said Mannors which shall happen to be done* wilfully by or betweene them, or any of them, and the Lord or Lords of the said Mannors or either of them, and his or their Reeue, or of either of them, contrarie to the Articles, and true meaning of these presents neither doth nor shal extend to be co^strued to bee a breach of the ancient Customes of the said Mannors or of either of them, to the hurt or preiudice of the rest of the customarie Tenants but of themselues onely doing the said particular act. 52 Tennant for life or yeeres, making wast, shalbe fined by the homage.
Item, That if any Tennant for terme of life, or liues onely, or for terme of yeeres of customarie Lands shall make any waste, Then hee shalbe fined by the Homage, the third part of which fine, shalbe to the Lord, and the other two parts shall come to him in the Reuertion or Remainder of the said copyhold.
Item, The Lord for none payment of amerciaments 53 For non payment of amerciame^ts the Lord may distraine, but not seise. may distraine his said Tennants parties to these presents, and auow for the same as for Rents. But hee cannot seize any of his or their Lands or Tenements parties to these presents
 for non payment thereof vntill he be paid.
Item, Vpon the admission of any co-heires, ioint Tennants, or Tennants in common if they cannot 54 How partition is to be made betweene co-heires ioynt tennants or tennants in common. agree to occupie their Lands and Tenements together, or to make partition among themselues, then hee or they that bee grieued may by the custome of either of the said Mannors haue a precept from the Steward directed to seuen customarie Tennants, or more of the said Mannors within which the said Lands and tenements doe lye; and they shall make partition thereof, and the same returne to the Steward of the said Mannors againe to be inrolled in the Court Rolls of the said Mannors, whereof the said Lands or Tenements beholden. Whervpon the said heires shal go to the Steward of the said Mannor within which the said lands or tenements shall lye. And then elect and choose their parts in forme following (That is to say, the yongest sonne to choose first, then he that is next to the yongest to chuse next, and so after that rate vnto the eldest (how many soeuer,) which eldest shal chuse last. And likewise the same order is to be obserued amongst daughters if there be no sonnes. and amongst all other degrees of heires touching the customarie Lands and Tenements holden of the said Mannors or either of them. And vpon euery such partition, they shall pay for a fine to the Lord two shillings and sixe pence or lesse at the discretion, of the Steward, according to the quantitie of the Lands or Tenements so parted betweene tennants in common, and ioynt tenants for the like fine the said deuision to bee by the said
 Tenants without election of the parties themselues but by casting of lots, if they cannot otherwise agree.
Item, If any customarie or free Tenants cattell, 55 These copyholders shall pay but one penny for poundage. or the cattell of their Farmers, bee brought to the Lords pound. The said Tenant or his Farmer shall pay for all his cattell if they bee a hundred heads or vpwards or vnder for the poundage thereof but one penny, and he that is no Tenant shall pay for euery distresse of cattell so pounded foure pence. 56 Cattell impounded to be deliuered by two copyholders.
Item, If any cattell bee impounded within the Lords pound, by any person or persons being a customarie Tenant or Tennants of the said Mannors or of either of them for any trespasse committed or done, within the said Mannors or in either of them vpon their Copyholds, that all such Cattell being so impounded may by two of the said customarie Tenants of such of the said Mannors, or of either of them wherein the said trespasse shall bee committed which will answere for such Damages and costs as shalbe recouered in the said Court against the owners of the same Cattell for the said trespasse be deliuered out of the said pound vnto the owner of the said Cattell, by the custome of the same Mannors and of either of them.
Item, No customarie Tenant shall sue, vexe, or 57 No su^tes for title of copy-holds out of the Lords court withou^ licence. trouble any other customary Tenant for any Title of lands or tenements lying and being within the said Mannors, or in either of them being copy-hold lands or tenements of the said Mannors, or of either of them, out of the Lords Court, without
 the speciall licence first had and obtained of the Lord of the said Mannors, or of either of them, or of his Steward for the time being. If any person doe the contrarie, hee shall haue his Lands or Tenements seized into the Lords hands, vntill hee pay a fine to the Lord for the same offence, (viz.) such fine as shalbe ceassed by the Homage at the next generall Court of the said Mannor or Mannors.
Item, That no customarie Tenants of the said 58 Cattell offending shalbe driue^ to the Lords pound. Mannors or of either of them, for any offence to be done by any mans cattel within the said Mannors or in either of them, shall driue the same cattell to any forraine pounds, but to the Lords pound being within the said Mannors or in either of them, if any man doe the contrarie to bee amerced at the next generall Court by the Homage. So alwayes as there be asufficient pound of the Lords there.
Item, That no tenant or any other person shall 59 How stakes markes and mears between tennant and tennant ought to be set. set any stake, marke, or meare, betweene tennant, and tennant, or betweene tenant, and any other person that lyeth next vnto him, without the parties doe therevnto agree, vnlesse an order bee appointed by the Homage, or the greatest part of them that it may be first viewed, by twelue Tennants of the said Mannors, or of either of them where the stake, or meare is to be set, and there to set the stake or marke indifferently betweene both the said parties, and so to continue it vpon paine of amerciament by the Homage. 60 Driuers of commons when to be chosen,
Item, The Homage doe and shall yeerely vse at the next generall Court holden the Tuesday the
 ninth day next after Easter day to Elect, and chuse out of the Hamblets within euery of the said Mannors certaine customary tennants to bee driuers and viewers of the wasts and commons of the said Mannors and of either of them for one whole yeere, which tenants so elected haue authoritie by the said custome to driue the commons at any time when they finde it surcharged, and to impound the cattell by them so taken, and no other to driue the said common then the persons so chosen as aforesaid.
Item, If by their driuing the surcharging cannot be remedied, then they ought to inform the homage 61 How surcharging the common is to be, remedied. thereof at the next Court, that they may amerce the offenders, whether the offenders be tenants or no tenants And also to put a paine or an a merciament vpon their heads, that they shall not likewise offend.
Item, If the said driuers receiue by the said poundages 62 The driuers shall accompt to the homage. and more money then they spend in their trauell, the rest shalbe imployed to the scowring of the common Sewers, which be vpon the said wast grounds and commons, and laying of bridges ouer the said common Sewers, and shall make their accompt in that behalfe to the Homage at the generall Court, when the yeere for which they were chosen shall expire. 63 The homage may make Bylawes which shall binde the tennants.
Item, The copyhold and customarie Tennants may make by lawes at their generall Courts when neede shall require, which custome shalbe so continued, and the said by lawes so by them made shall binde all the Copyhold Tenants of the said Mannors or of either of them, so the same bee not
 contrarie to the true meaning of these Articles.
Item, By the custome of the said Mannors, and of either of them Tennants in taile of customarie 64 Recoueryes may be suffered to barre intailes. lands and tenements may suffer common recoueries within the said seuerall Mannors with single or double vouchers or by agreement forfeit the said lands and tenements into the Lords hands for the cutting of the estate taile, which custome by these Articles shal haue still continuance, and such Recoueries and forfeitures, are and shall bee good to bare the said in-taile.
Item, Whensoeuer there shalbe any Court or 65 Tennants not appearing at set courtes shall not be amerced aboue 4 pence, Courts Baron (or other then the said two generall Courts) kept within the said Mannors or either of them no copyholder ought nor shall be amerced aboue the summe of foure pence for any default of his apparance at any the same Court or Courts (except the said two generall Courts) neither shall incurre any forfeiture, or seisure of his Copyhold lands or tenements, or any other Damage for any such default. And the said Amerciament to bee taxed by the Affurors tenants of that Court.
Item, The Steward or his Deputy is to haue 66 The Stewards fees. such Fees and allowances as hereafter are expressed, (viz.) for euery Surrender taken out of Court fiue shillings, and nothing for any Surrender taken in Court, (for euery woman couert Baron) that shalbe examined, sixe shillings eight pence, for euery admittance of euery person two shillings, for entering euery Surrender and making the copie of Court Roll therevpon sixe shillings eight pence, for euery precept for a view of partition
 and entring the same, and the returne thereof vpon the Court Roll, and the copie thereof two shillings sixe pence. And if it exceede two sheetes of paper then for euery sheete ouer and aboue two sheetes twelue pence more. For searching the court Rolls for euery yeere foure pence. For euery purchased Court thirteene shillings foure pence: For entring a note of a Lease granted of any Lands or tenements containing the date, quantitie of lands or tenements, and certaintie of terme and to whom the same shalbe granted, and for a note thereof to the party sixe pence. For these things before expressed the Steward shall haue onely such Fees as before is declared, and for all other things hee shall haue as formerly hath anciently beene vsed and not more.
Item, All Messuages, Tenements, and Cottages 67 Buildings to be erected, shall pay fines as those allreadie built. that shall hereafter bee built vpon any the copyhol Lands, whereof the customes are hereby meant to bee declared, shalbe held and enioyed by the copyhold Tenants thereof vnder the same customes and Articles herein declared as the Lands whereon they shal be built are holden and enioyed. (But shall pay such fines) therefore as is before declared for Messuages, Tenements and Cottages 68 The Lord shall not seuer from the mannor any of these copyholds, to any persons in fee simple, or other estate of freehold etc. that shalbe new built.
Item, The Lord of the said Mannors, or of either of them, their heires or assignes shal not at any time hereafter grant or conuey seuered, from the Mannor wherof the same is now holden, or ought to bee holden any of the Messuages, Cottages, Lands, Tenemements or Hereditaments whereof any of the said persons named parties to the said
 Indenture herevnto annexed is now copyholder or customarie Tenant to any person or persons in Fee-simple, Fee-taile, or for terme of life, or other estate of freehold, or for any estate, or terme other then by copie of Court Roll, according to the customes of the said Mannors, and true meaning of these presents, and the Iudenture whereunto the same are annexed, except the Freehold to be granted or seuered at the petition and desire of such person or persons as then shalbe copyholder thereof, according to the true meaning of these presents. And it the Lord hath granted away the Freehold of any the copyhold Lands or Tenements wherof the custome is hereby ment to be declared, hee shall get, and take the same backe againe, and the same shall notwithstanding such grant or alienation be annexed to the Mannor whereof it was, or is held, and shalbe held and enioyed by the Tenant his heires and assignes thereof, by copie of Court Roll of the same Mannor vnder the rents, seruices and customes in these Articles expressed, and not otherwise. And also that the Lord shall admit by his Steward or his Deputy, all such Tenant and Tenants that ought of right to be admitted vpon the presentment of the Homage.



AN ALPHABETICALL TABLE OF THE NAMES OF THE COPYHOLD TENANTS OF THE MANNORS OF STEPNEY alias STEBVNHVTH, and HACKNEY for whom the said Decree concerning the customes aforesa^d was made in Chancerie the two and twentieth day of Iuly in the fifteenth yeere of the raigne of our Soueraigne Lord King Iames against the said Right Honorable Thomas Lord Wentworth then Lord of the said Mannors.

A
VIncent Amcots Limehouse.
Iacob Ashley Limehouse.
William Adams Limehouse.
Will. Ardington White Chappel.
Thomas Abbot Popler.
Iane Alder Popler.
Nicholas Ask with Hackney.
William Alder of Ratcliffe highway.


B
William Bygot Ratcliffe
William Barnet White Chappell.
Robert Borne Pop.
Hugh Bullock and vxor.
Henr. Banister Esquire Hackney.
William Bird and vx. Hackney:
Nicholas Burton Hackney.
Edward Browne Hackney.
Gyles Bynckes Hackney.
Gyles de Budt Hackney.
Edmond Barbor
Oldford.
Henry Barbor
Francis Barbor.
Tho: Baxter and vxor, Bowe.
Michael Bonner, Bowe.
Iohn Briggs and vxor, Bowe.
Christopher Baker
Ratcliffe.
William Browne
Robert Benns
Peter Baker
Alice Bland
Raph Bowers
Thomas Best.
Quescell Bratost, alias Lee
Limehouse.
Iohn Ball
Iohn Bennet
Robert Bradshaw
Mathew Barret

 Richard Bromfield
Elizabeth Bedford
Iohn Bigot.


C
Thomas Commins.
Nicholas Cosens
Thomas Crane.
Richard Catcher.
Edward Catcher.
Thomas Croxall.
William Cooke and vxor, Walter Henley in Reuersion.
Thomas Catcher
Hackney.
Iohn Catcher
Richard Cheyney
Francis Clerkevid.
Iohn Catcher
William Catcher
Thomas Catcher.
Iohn Cowper
White Chappell.
Tho: Coxan.
Walter Cooke
Ratcliffe.
Walter Coale.
Peter Croxall.
Mary Cope
Limehouse.
Elizabeth Clerke.
Marion Crispe
Popler.
Mary Carpenter.
Iohn Chandler
Bowe.
William Clarke
George Cooke, Inholder
Isaack Cotton.
Richard Catcher, fil. Tho:
Iohn Coleman; White Chappell.


D
Nicholas Diggins, Mileend.
William Dickinson
Hackney.
Iames Deane
William Dauis.
Nicholas Dickens, Stepney.
Hugh Dauis, White Chappell.
Alexander Dauison
Popler.
Iames Dauies
George Dethicke
Gilbert Dethick
Henry Dethicke.
Iohn Day, Bowe.
Rachel Dauison.
Robert Dixon, White Chappell.


E
Iohn Eaglefield, and Iane his wife.
Bow
Richard Edwards
Alexander Elcock.
Richard Elcock.
George Edwards, Shorditch.
William Ewens.
Limehouse.
Iohn Euans.
Iohn English.


F
Raph Flauell, Ratcliffe.
Iohn Flint, Limehouse.
Iohn Forster, Bow.
Iohn Fell, Hackney.
Fuller widdow, Ratcliffe.



G
William Gough, Bow
William Goddard
Vincent Goddard.
Iohn Garland
Bow.
Richard Gouge.
Iohn Graues
Limehouse.
Michael Geere.
Iohn George.
Roger Gunston
Ratcliffe.
Roger Glouer
Iohn Gunston.
Thomas Goddard.
Iohn Gruit and vxor.
Richard
Glouer.
Iohn
Francis
Robert
Thomas


H
Sir Ferdinando Heyborne
Hackney.
Gresham Hogan
Henry Haynes
Thomas Hawkes
Richard Harrison.
Sr Tho: Hardresse Mileend
Mileend.
Robert Hart
Thomas Hogge
Will: Herendin
Robert Hunt.
Richard Hoskins
Limehouse.
Walter Hendley.
Richard Hale
Ratcliffe.
Robert Henricke.
Iohn Howland
WhiteChappel.
Cord well Hamond
Geor. Houghto^ and vx.
Thomas Halbrooke
Nicholas Hallam
Thomas Hartis
Waiter Hallyley
Elizabeth
Hide.
Dorothy
Iohn Hils.
Popler.
Iohn Harbert
Rob. Hickes
Will: Hanford.
Robert Hudson.
Iohn Hether, Bowe.
Francis Hollyday.
The heyres of Haggis.
The heires of Tho: Hardcastle.


I
Sir Iohn Iowles Knight Bowe.
William Iuie
Limehouse.
Roger Iones
Margaret Iorden.
Michael Iones, et vxor Bowe.
Thomas Iones
Ratliffe.
Iohn Ienks
Ionas Iames.

 Nicholas Isack.
Adam Iohnson Shoraitch.
Iones widdow, Limehouse.


K
Iohn Key Miles, Hackney.
Iohn Killingworth, Shorditch.
Iohn Knowles, Popler.
William Kattle.
Iohn King, Limehouse.


L
Robert Linage.
Robert Lambard
Bowe.
Iohn Lowden.
Thomas Lawrence
Ratliffe.
George Linum.
Richard Leigh, et vxor.
Dame Margaret Lake.
Richard Lowfield.
Iohn Lowfield.
William Lowfield.
Humfry Lowfield.
Iohn Linkes.
William Lyones
Mil^nd.
Iohn Lyones.


M
Sir Wil: Martin Knight
Hack:
Elizabeth Mackeris.
William Mansbridge.
Richard Mills,
Iohn Maynard
Limehouse.
Iohn Mynshawe
Isabell Moore
Iohn Moore
Michaell Merrial.
William Millar
Shorditch.
George Michell.
Thomas Mould
Stepney.
Edward Mathewes.
Thomas Maning, Ratliffe.
Henry maybancke
whitechap:
Samuell Marsh
Thomas Marsh.
Eme Melsham vid.
Thomas Michell.
Anne Michell
Popler.
Iohn Manshippe.
Francis Moore, Bowe.
Richard Merrit.
Tho: Marsh Esquire
Milend.
Thomas Milton.
Ioane Manly.


N
Iohn Newet
Hackney.
William Newman
Iohn Nichols
Barbara Nichols.
Edward Nichols, Ratliffe
Laurence Netmaker, Shorditch.
Thomas newport, Limehouse.
Thomas Nichols Shipwrite.


P
William Phillips sen: Bowe.
William Philips iun.
Lime:
Richard Parkes
William Pond
William Peacocke
William Pointell
Giles Patricke, et vx.

 William Palmer, Bed. Greene.
Thomas Peirepoint, Whitechap:
Thomas Peirciuall, Bowe.
Henry Parsons, et vx. Shorditch.
Henry Parsons
Hackney.
Miles Pressick
Vincent Parrit, Popler.
Iohn Pettit.
Thomas pinnock.
Richard Pointell.
Thomas Pye.
Christopher Potkin, Hackney.


Q
Mathew de Quester.


R
Samuell Rowley
Whitechap.
Roger Robinson
Anne Riland late
wife of Wil: Haggis.
Richard Rooding, Bowe
William Roberts.
Henry Reynolds, Popley.
Edward Russell
Ratliffe.
Robert Rickman
Edmund Rolfe
Iohn Rolfe.
Thomas Railton,
Popley.
Catherin Rushbrooke
Henry Riuers.
Richard Rowe, Hackney.
Iohn Rowe.
Iohn Rich
Limehouse.
Edith Read.
William Reeue
Elizabeth Rider
Bridget Rider
Katherin Rider
Grissingon Rider.
Roger Rose, White Chapple.
Roger Rose and
Hackney.
Iohn Rose.
William Swaine
Hackney.
Iohn Steward
Iohn Shelley
Iohn Snape
Barthol. Smith.
George Saris, of London, Limehouse and Ratliffe.
William Simons, Limehouse:
Peter Sumner
Bowe.
Thomas Salter, et vx:
Thomas Scorier
Edward Smith
Iames Short, Shorditch:
Thomas Saunderson
Ratliffe:
Iohn Sadler senior:
Iohn Stokes:
Richard Simmes, milend:
Iohn Smith
Popley.
Samuel Soame
Iohn Swaine:
Robert Sheffield
Ieremy Swanley.


I

 Iohn sweete, Bednall greene.
George Smith
White:
Iohn Smith his sonn:
Anthony Skinner:
Paul Smith, White Chap:
Iohn Sadler iunor:
Nicholas Simondson, Rat:
Samuel Sayers, Hackney.


T
William Thorne
Popley.
Iohn Thorne
Robert Thorne:
Edward Thickins
White:
Henry Tyler:
Morgan Thomas, Shorditch:
Henry Troutbeck
Bow.
Iohn Thorowgood
Stephen Trafford:
Richard Tiler
Limehouse.
Peter Tailor.


V
Thomas Vsher
Hackney:
Thomas Valentine.


W
Iohn West
Popley.
Thomas Wats
Iohn Walden
Thomas West.
Edmond White, Hackny.
Tho: Walker
Barthol: Walker
Eliz: Walker
Margaret Walker.
Milend.
Emery Wilson.
Eliz: Wilding wid.
Iane Wilding
Iane Willson.
Iohn Watts.
Ratliffe.
Wattkyns Wid.
Abraham Wakefield
WhiteChappell
Thom. Wilson et vx.
Laurence Wyneall.
Alice Williams:
Iohn Wilde, Shorditch.
Elizabeth walker
Lime:
Henry Walker
Iohn Walker
Mathew Woodcott
Anne Woodcott, vid.
Walter Whiting.
Thomas Whitebread
Bow.
Andrew Wilmer:
Iohn Wilkinson:
Smith Wilkinson:
Henry Watley:
Iohn Watley:
Iohn Wright:
Edward Wyborne:
Iohn Wyborne.


Y
Thomas Yardley, White Chap:




ANOTHER TABLE ALPHABETIcall, for the ready finding of the seuerall customes, priuiledges and note-worthy matters, contained in this Booke.



ACte or neglect of tennant for life or yeeres shall not preiudice those in remainder,
article 50.


Acte priuate of any tennants contrary to these articles shall not extend to be abreach of customes to the hurt of the rest,
article 51.


Admission denied by the Lord,
see article 28.


How lands discended are to be taken vp,
article 33. 34


See Dissents, and Surrenders.
 


Amerciaments, the Lord may distreyne for, but not seise,
articles 53.


Annoyances, how to redresse,
see article 7.


Appearance: at two generall Courts yeerely,
article 3.


Fayling to appeare shall be amerced,
article 4.


Fayling at any Court (other then the two generall Courts) shall not bee amerced aboue foure pence
article 65.


Buildings hereafter to bee erected shall pay no other fines
 then in these articles,
art. 67.


Bylawes, may bee made by the Homage which shall binde the Tennants,
art: 63.


Courts, see Appearance.
 


Commons surcharged how to remedy,
art: 61. see Driuers.


Courtesie of England, none for men heere,
art: 11.


Clayme by diuers, and suite for Copyhold,
art: 31. 32. 57.


Chaunge of Lord, see Recognition.
 


Coheyres, see Discents and Partition.
 


Copyholders, may not pull downe housen to set them vpon Freehold land,
art: 46. See Forfeitures.


Copyholders May breake and digge their grounds.
 


May fell downe timber and woods.
 


May suffer housen to decay without forfeiture.
 


May loppe trees vpon the wast before their housen.
 


May digge grauell, sand, clay and loame vpon the wast to build or repaire,
art: 46. 47. See Leases.


Discents.
art. ^0. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 33.


Dower n^ne,
art: 11.


Dryuers of the Common,
art: 60. 61. 62.


Enchroachments and annoyances how to redresse,
art: 7.


Escheate to the Lord for want of Heyre,
art: 10.


Estates of Inh^ritance,
art: 1.


Fines due to the Lord vpon admissions,
art: 19. 26. 35. 67.


Forfeitures of Estate,
art: 48. 49.


Fees to the Homage,
art: 56. 30.


Fees to the Steward,
art: 66.



Gardian of the Heyre vnder age,
art: 33. 37.


Gauelkinde.
art: 12.


Homage, their charge and dutie, etc.
art: 8. 9. 23. 31. 62. 63.


What fees are due to the land,
art: 5. 6. 30.


Heyre not knowing what shall be done,
art: 10.


Headborough may take Surrenders
art: 20. 22.


Last will and Testament. See Surrenders.
 


Leases, Tennants may let for thirty one yeeres and foure moneths in possession from the making without Lysence art: 38. but may not let for longer time vpon paine of forfeiture,
art: 48.


Leet: these tennants (beeing Reeues) are not to be charged with the  Leet booke,
art: 42.


Marckes, Meares and Stakes, how to set betwixt Tennants,
art: 59.


Partition, how to make betwixt Coheires, Ioint-tennants, and tennants in common,
art: 54.


Pownd of the Lord and cattell impounded how to deliuer,
article 55. 56. 58.


Quit-rents when to be paide, etc.
art. 2. 36. 41.


Reeue, to take surrenders,
art: 20.


Surrenders taken by him when to be presented.
22.


How to be chosen,
40.


How long to serue,
Ibidem.


His fine for refusing to serue,
Ibid.


A new to be chosen vpon refusall,
Ibid.


The succeeding Reeue shall haue halfe of the fine of the former refusing and detaine it in his accompt.
Ibid.



His lands shalbe seised for not paying rents and fines.
41.


His forfeiture for not paying,
Ibid.


He is not to answeare any quit-rents vnlesse hee knowe the tennant or the land.
Ibid.


Discharged of the Leet booke, Court Baron and dinners.
42.


Who may be chosen Reeue,
43.


What allowance and fees he shall haue for executing the office.
44.


He must deliuer the Rentall to his successor or shall be amerced.
45


Recoueries to barre Intailes,
art: 64.


Recognition, money at the Caunge of the Lord,
art: 39.


Surrenders, how they are to be made,
art: 1. 19.


How to bee taken before Headbrough or Reeue.
art: 20.


How to be taked of women couert baron,
art: 21. 24


When surrenders are to be presented,
art: 22. 25.


Surrenders made according to these articles are good,
27.


Surrenders to make the wife a Ioincture.
art: 29.


Those to whose vse landes are surrendred ought within three yeares after the presentment to take them vp,
art: 34.


Stakes, marckes and meares betwixt tennants,
art: 59.


Stewards, fees particularly set downe,
art: 66.



Seuering, the Lord of the Mannor may not seuer any of these Copyholders to any person in fee,
art: 68.


Titles in controuersie how to decide, see Claime.
 


Woemen couert baron, see Surrenders.
 


Wast, tennants for life or yeares making wast, shall be fined by the Homage,
art: 52.



FINIS.

