


A PASTORAL Charge.

ACT. 20. 28.
Take heede therefore vnto your selues, and to all the flocke, whereof the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers to feed the Church of God which he hath purchased with his owne blood.

THe Church of God and Spouse of Christ, (right Reuerend, right worshipfull, and worthily regarded) is by the princely Preacher Salomon Cant. 6. 3. rightly Cant. 6. 3. termed and entituled, Castrorum
 acies ordinata, an army well marshalled, where euery company hath his Captaine, and both Captaines and companies vnder one cheife co^manding Generall Christ lesus, are well and wisely ordered. For the preseruation of which order by the corruption of times much decayed, and for the reformation of such enomorties as in the declining ages of the world haue greatly increased, not onely oecumenicall Counsels for whole Christendome, and nationall Synods for seuerall Regions and Countries haue beene constituted and ordeined, but also Episcopall Visitations for peculiar Diocesses, and particular Countries, haue beene appointed, kept, and obserued. Of all which visitations and convocations of the Clergy, howsoeuer some supercilious Critickes either preiudicating the sinceritie, or vnder-valuing the sufficiency, or maligning the superioritie of Church-gouernours, haue too peremptorily
 concluded what Saint Paul once and but once 1. Cor. 11. 1. Cor. 11. 17. affirmed of the Corinthian assemblies, that they met together (...), not for the better but for the worse, not for the grace and emolument, but for the dis-esteeme and detriment of and detriment of the Church and Church-men too: yet the discreet and godly wise, not transported by passion, or sinister suggestion, both know and acknowledge that as the vse of them hath somerimes beene and ought alwaies to be wholsome and profitable, either ad medelam, to cure the maladies, or ad cautela^, to preuent misheifes in the body Ecclesiasticall; so the authoritie of them is and certainely hath beene most auncient and excellent and immediately grounded vpon practise Apostolicall, viz: vpon the practise of the blessed Apostle S. Paul recorded in Act: 15. 36. and Act 15 36. and in the 17 verse of this 20 Chapter, whence my text is taken, where
 S. Paul is said to haue summoned and called together the Elders or Ministers of Ephesus in Asia, to whom when they came (as they came willingly and obediently, reuerencing the graces of God in him) hee made a graue and vehement Oration. Wherein hee declareth the integrity of his humble and harmles conversation amongst them, the painfulnes which he endured, and faithfulnesse which hee vsed to testifie the gospell of grace, and to shew the whole counsell of God vnto them, the constant resolution which hee had to fulfill his course, and the ministration receiued with ioy, whatsoeuer dangers or difficulties might befall him, and the certaintie of his departure neuer to see them more: after which departing wolues should enter into the flocke and seeke to deuoure them. From the due consideration of all which premises, as President (if I may so say) of that convocation, he commendeth vnto the care
 of the Pastors assembled the good gouernment and incolumitie of the Churches, and earnestly presseth vpon their consciences the most necessary duties of their calling in this pithy and powerfull exhortation, Take heed therefore vnto your selues and to all the flocke etc. which words being the select subiect of that discourse which vpon your iniunction (right Reuerend Father) I am this day to commend to your christian consideration (right well-beloued brethren) seemes not vnlike the sound of a loud claryon or voice of a shrill trumpet able to moue those that are musing, to rouze those that are slumbring, to awake those that are sleeping, and is in effect as if in more words the Apostle had thus pathetically and emphatically expressed his meaning, and excited the Pastors of Ephesus, and in them all Ministers of the Gospell to the more watchfulnes, diligence and faithfulnesse in their calling.
 My brethren, freinds, and fellowlabourers, Paraphr: T^^: so it is that I must now depart from you without hope of euer visiting you againe, and I protest before you (such is my confidence to God-wards, and the clearenes of my conscience witnessing for me) that I haue opened to you the whole will of God concerning the saluation of mankind, and the true way to life euerlasting, and haue beene wanting to you in nothing (oh that all Prelates and Pastors could truly say the like) I haue with sinceritie and sedulitie done, with meeknes and humilitie suffred whatsoeuer to the vttermost of my power and patience and grace giuen to mee might be suffred or done, to publish the puritie and to promote the peace and prosperity of the pretious gospell preached amongst you. And now sith I can be no longer present to instruct, counsell, comfort and encourage you, therefore in the bowells of Christ Iesus I earnestly beseech
 you to supply by your owne extraordinary care and diligence whatsoeuer may bee wanting through my absence. Watch, stand 1. Cor. 16. 13. 1. Pet. 1. 13. fast in the faith, gird vp the loynes of your minde, quit your selues like men, bee zealous in the way and worke of the Lord, and iealous ouer your selues with a godly iealousie, Take heed to your selues, make sure worke for your owne soules, that yee be not corrupted or seduced, and take the like care and thought with an equall bent and extent of good-will and affection for the flocke, the whole flocke, wherof (not the authority of man, or power of Angels, or any priuate spirit of your owne, but) the Holy Spirit of God hath made you ouerseers; suffer not this flocke, or any part thereof to pine for want of spirituall prouision to be wandring, wounded, wearied, wronged, but see that it be fed, refreshed, cherished, preserued: For herevnto are yee called, not to be loyterers
 but labourers, not to be idle speculators, but painfull Pastors to feede with wholesome foode in due season the family of God, Gods Church, Gods chosen, Gods people, a precious people bought and redeemed with a price, a rich price, a price of infinite value, euen with bloud, with Gods bloud, with Gods owne bloud, for so by reason of the hypostaticall vnion of two natures in Christ that which is proper to the one is attributed to the other, per (...), as we speake in schooles, Take heede therefore to your selues and to all the flocke whereof the Holy Ghost hath made you over-seers etc. Suffer not the sheepe of Christs pasture, his peculiar, his cheife treasure, so much set by, and so dearely purchased by the vnvaluable price of his most precious bloud to perish or miscarry through your default or negligence. For if you doe, I call heauen and earth to record against you, that both the bloud of
 Christ shall bee charged on your heads, and the bloud of his people perishing required at your hands. O terrible blast like the sudden sound of a mighty thunderclap, or the roaring of many waters able to make the two eares to tingle, and the heart-stringes to tremble of all euill and idle Pastors, which either cannot, so great is their ignorance; or doe not, so little is their conscience; or will not, so graceles is their negligence, feed the flocke of Christ and take heed therevnto. And thus hauing somwhat fully and freely by way of paraphrase opened and enlarged the coherence, sense and substance of this parcell of Scripture; for my more orderly proceding therein, let me intreat you to obserue with me by way of diuision, two principall parts thereof.
 The first a strict charge and iniunction what to do, actuated and enforced by this illatiue particle [Therefore] h. v. Take heede therefore
 to your selues and to all the stocke.
 The second an important cause and consideration why it is to be done, in the words following, because the Holy Ghost hath made you over-seers to feede the Church of God purchased with his owne bloud.
 The charge it selfe (to omit the ordinarie circumstances of the person giuing it, and the parties to whom it is giuen) containes a twofold substantiall caveat or caution, the one intrinsecall, (...) Take heed to your selues, neglect not the care of your owne saluation, for sibi nequam cui bonus? hardly will he doe good to others extensiue, that is not good for himselfe intensiue.  The other extrinsecall, take heed to the flock, (...), to all the flocke and euery part thereof, strengthen the weake, reduce the wandring, raise those that are falne, confirme those that stand. For this, and all this, and more then this vnder this allegory and
 comparison of a minister to a shep heard is comprehended.
As for the cause and consideration, that consisteth of a threefold reason.  The first drawen from the author of their sacred function, viz: the Holy Ghost which had made them Over-seers, importing their calling to be not an humane inuention, but a diuine institution, wherein they were assisted by the presence, protected by the power, directed by the wisdome of Gods Spirit.
 The second from the end and burden of their office, in that they were made overseers non ad deglubendum, sed ad pascendum, and as the originall (...) will beare it, Reu. 2. 17. ad regendum, not to fleece, but to feede the flocke of Christ pabulo coelestis doctrinae and orationis, not to greiue but to gouerne the Church of God pedo disciplinae and exemplo conversationis.
 The third and last sharp-pointed reason from the dignity of the
 Church, and the qualitie of the flocke which is to be fed, namely, (...), as S. Peter calls it, a peculiar people purchased (as it 1. Pet. 2. 9. is in my text) with Christs owne bloud, hee hath paide full dearely for them, hee hath best right vnto them, he sets highly by them, and therefore will call those to a strict account which take the charge of them, Take heed therefore to your selues, and to all the flocke, whereof the Holy Ghost etc. These (right Reuerend and worthily regarded) are the seuerall branches of my text, and the bounds and limits of my intended meditations, by the very surueigh whereof, though I doubt not, but you (Fathers and brethren) may readily apprehend and praeconceiue before I speake the summe and effect of all that I haue to say; yet sith it is no disparagement to learning to heare what we know againe confirmed, no preiudice to a well ordered priuate life and publique gouernment to
 heare and see what we doe, and ought to doe often preached, pressed, and approued, I will now by Gods assistance and your continued patience descend from the superficiall pointing of them out vnto your view for obseruation, vnto a more substantiall prosecuting of them in their order for your better vse and application. And first of the first, viz* the charge or iniunction, and therein of the first intrinsecall caueat or caution contained h. v. Take heed therefore to your selues etc. Our blessed Sauiour Christ Iesus that good and great shepheard of soules seeking the breed of his spirituall flocke out of all the heards that fedde on the mountaines of Iudah, got vnto himselfe in a short time the number of twelue Apostles. All which though they did eat of their Masters morsels, and drinke of his cupp, and enioy his company, yet receiuing as euill through the fleshes weaknesse, what Christ gaue
 to them as life through the spirits goodnes, they became reprehensible both in doctrine and manners. In doctrine, for they doubted whether Christ were the Messias, and were ignorant of the resurrection; In manners, for some of them were chilling cold in charitie, others exceeded in the heate of ambition. To which maladies that there might be the fittest medicines applyed, our Sauiour (Mark. 9. 50.) as a skilfull Phisition Mark. 9. 50. proposeth a soueraigne potion, wherein for the rectifying of their knowledge, he prescribeth salt to sauour them, haue salt in your selues, and for the tempering of the heat of their ambition and coldnesse of charity, he warneth them to haue peace the queller of factions and co^pounder of co^trarieties, Haue salt in your selues, and peace one with another. But first haue salt in your selues, that is the acrimony of true knowledge and godly wisdome, that hereby you may the better season
 others, as here in my text it is, Take heed first to your selues, that you may the better attend to the flocke, whereof the Holy Ghost hath made you Ouer-seers. For as Philosophy telleth vs of a twofold action, the one, immanent; and the other transeunt, and withall teacheth vs that immanent actions, whereby some Action 2. good thing is wrought in our selues are waies to the transeunt, whereby wee leaue the end and effect of our well-doing in others; so diuinitie approuing this distinction of her handmaid philosophy groundeth herevpon this conclusion, which is the first doctrinall point of my text worthy your obseruation.
 That all men, especially Ministers and Magistrates should haue that really and actually in themselues, which they would haue to be wrought and effected in others. Charity and true zeale in her ascendent begins with it selfe, and it is meete that we be as cesternes to
 hold cleane water in our selues, before wee become as conduits to convey the same to others. Timothie ought first to take heede to himselfe, to walke warily in the pathes of holinesse and righteousnesse for the furtherance and assurance of his owne saluation, and then he must attend diligently to his doctrine and teaching, that as much as in him lyeth he may saue others 1. Tim. 4. So the Elders and 1. Tim. 4. 16. Ministers of Ephesus are here enioyned first to looke to themselues Act: 20. 28. and to make sure worke for their owne soules, and then to attend to the guidance and direction, to the safety and protection of the flocke of Christ. The Cocke first clappeth his owne winges to rouze himselfe, and afterwards croweth aloude that others may be awakened; so surely all they whose labours God imployeth in drawing others to any good dutie and well-doing ought to bee such themselues* and to shew themselues
 such as they would haue others to be. He is too nice a Phisition, saith S. Ierom, either for the body or the soule, that prescribeth fasting to others, and is sicke of a surfet himselfe, si vis me flere dolendum est primo tibi, if thou wilt worke powerfully on my affection, thou thy selfe must not be voide and exempt of passion. When Abimelech Iudg: 9. 48 had cut downe Iudg. 9. 48. boughes and carried them on his shoulders, then saith he to the people, what yee haue seene mee doe doe the like: so our blessed Sauiour Ioh: 13. hauing washed Peters feete, Ioh: 13. forthwith telleth his disciples that therein he had giuen them an ensample to do as he had done; and in the 11 of Matthew, where he vseth that gratious call, Venite ad Mat: 11. 29. me omnes, Come vnto mee all and learne of me; he saith not, learne of mee because I talke of humilitie, but learne of mee because I am humble and meeke, and walke in humilitie, and am a patterne of
 that which I giue in precept; and such he was beyond all exception, his birth and education, his life and conuersation, his death and passion being altogether a pageant of humilitie. So likewise S. Paul Philip 4. 8. 9. from his owne example and precedency commendeth to the pursuit and practise of the Philippians, whatsoeuer things are true, are honest, iust, pure, pertaine vnto loue, and are of good report, willing them to bee followers of those things euen as they had heard of him and seene in him, they had heard his doctrine, they had seene his vertues and vertuous life agreable thervnto; both these must go together, if we will take heede to our selues, as here wee are enioyned to doe. And here to begin with our selues of the Ministry, this ought to be our first and principall care to keepe diligent watch and ward ouer our owne hearts, as Salomon aduiseth Prou. 4. to keepe Pre. 4. 23. this pretious vessell from all fraud
 and violence safe and sound, locked with the key of faith, barred with resolution against sinne, guarded with supervisiting diligence, and to take heed that no pleasures, profits, or preferments cause vs to make shipwracke of a good conscience, which is the casting away of all other excellencies, it being no rare thing to note the soule of a wilfull sinner stripped of all her graces and by degrees exposed to shame; The more serious must our studie and vigilancy be with often and earnest prayer vnto God, that the peace of our consciences and purity of our hearts may be preserued, and consequently our conuersation so well and warily ordered, and inoffensiuely guided, that intus puri, extus boni, vtrinque sani vitam Deo gratam, gregi acceptam, omnibus probatam agamus, being sincere in heart, and vpright in life, our whole comportment may be accepted of God, approued of men. Omnia, saith Ierom, in sacerdote Hieron.
 debent esse vocalia, all things in a Minister, Vestis, gestus, manus, mensa, mores, his coate, his countenance, his gesture, his diet, his discourse, his priuate as well as publique behauiour must preach sanctification and holinesse: thus integrity of life as he is (...) a disciple and sheep of Christ, is first required in euery worthy minister; and secondly soundnes of doctrine and assiduity in preaching, as he is (...), a teacher of Christians, and a Pastor of Christs flocke with his personall graces, (...) to walke vprightly and circumspectiuely, Gal. 2. 14. the gifts of his Gal. 2. 14. ministeriall function, (...) to diuide the word of truth with diligence and dexterity, with modesty and grauity, 2. Tim. 2. must bee 2 Tim. 2. 15. tempered and conioyned, and both these implements, or rather complements of a godly minister are typicallie and liuelie represented to the eyes of our vnderstanding by the two Cherubins in Salomons
 Temple, Chron. 2. 3. by the mysticall creatures Chron. 2. 3. which had hands vnder their wings, Ezek. 1. and by the Ezek. 1. 8. Vrim and Thummim in Aarons brest-plate, and by the golden bels and pomgranates in the skirts of his garments, Exod 28. which two Exod. 28. 34. whosoeuer shall carefully and conscionably ioyne together (as all of vs should doe) both obseruing and teaching to others the commandements of God, he shall not onely be great, but shall haue the honour to bee called great in the kingdome of heauen, Mat. 5. 19. Such a one, Mat. 5. 19. and amongst others, a singularly eminent and excellent minister of the Gospel, and preacher of repentance, did Iohn the Baptist shew himselfe to bee, of whose worthy praise, that praise-worthy testimonie of our Sauior (who being truth itselfe, Ioh. 14. would not flatter, could not lie) is registred for all posterity, Ille erat lucerna ardens and lucens: he was a burning and shining lampe, Iohn. 5. 35. Lucerna praedicationis Iohn. 5. 35.
 beneficio ardens charitatis incendio, ardens and lucens virtutis exercitio, burning inwardlie with true zeale and charity, outwardly shining by the luster of his liuely preaching, burning and shining with the continuall exercise of vertue, of whose singular graces and vertues, wee of the Ministery (men, fathers, and brethren) should bee studious emulators and followers, that so like men of God, tam magisterio virtutum quam ministerio verborum, as well by the example of our good workes, as by preaching the incorrupt 2. Tit. 7. and wholesome worde, wee may better and benefit the people of God; and with Basil the great, whom Nazianzene emblazeth, doctrina Naz. tonitruantem, vita coruscantem, thundring in his doctrine, glistring and shining in his life may be enabled (...), euery manner of way at all ^as. hom. 6. in ^ex. times, in all places, amongest all persons, to edifie the Church, (...)
 in preaching, practising, by practise preaching, as Clem. Alex. pithily Clem. Alex. streom. writeth. And the reason for all this is very good, which Saint Gregory in his pastoralls yeeldeth, quia exemplaris vita est concio optima, illudque cum imperio docetur, quod Rat. Greg. in pastor. prius ag^^ur quam docetur, because (saith hee) the exemplary good life is the best sermon, and that is taught with authority, which is first acted by our selues, before it be giuen in charge to others: semenque verbi facile germinat, etc. and the seede of Gods word, and of wholesome instruction doth easily bring foorth increase, when the godlines of the Preacher doth water and moisten the same in the hearts of the hearers. And so much of the duety of Ministers, in taking heede vnto themselues, that by composing their liues religiously, and by proposing Gods word reuerently they may go before the people with the lampe of life and doctrine, to the heauenly Canaan, and land of the
 liuing. Which duty of selfe heede-taking, not onely concernes ministers, that beare the Lords arke, but Magistrates also, which weare his armour, and weilde his sword, and all inferiour houshold gouernours too, who in the feare of the Lord m^st looke to it, that they be good, and well affected themselues, if Offic. mag. and pat. fa. they will worke the like effect in others, which belong to their charge: they must with Dauids resolution say, Psal. 39. I will take heed to mine Psal. 39. 1. 101. 2. owne waies: and Psalm. 101. I will walke with an vpright heart in the middest of mine house. They must resemble the snuffers in the Tabernacle, Exod. 25. 38 which beeing ordained Exod. 25. 38. to purge others, were made of pure gold themselues. It is a rule or ouerruled case in Philosophy, that the braine is sencelesse, though the fountaine of sences, and that the vniuersall causes haue not actually in themselues, what they produce in their effects: howsoeuer this be, sure I am, it ought to bee
 farre otherwise, not onely with ministers, as I haue in part shewed, but with Magistrates also, with Parents, Masters, and all Domesticall Gouernours, with whose wisedome and welfare, it stands much to bee circumspect in their doings, that by the staid gouernment of themselues, they may impresse deepe characters of good behauiour in all those which depend and attend vpon them, who Lycurgus like must make their liues the example of their Lawes, and their Lawes, precepts and iniunctions, must bee as sound axiomes drawen from the integrity and vprightnesse of their liues, that so their inferiours their hearers, their children, seruants, and followers, may as well by that which they see in them, as heare from them, be instructed and edified. This kinde of instruction both by doing and teaching, is that twoedged sword, which proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lambe, Reuel. 1. able to diuide betwixt the Reuel. 1. 1.
 marrow and the bones, betwixt the soules and the bosome darling sins of those whom we would and should amend: With which double edged sword, sharp and keene on the teaching side, and cutting deepe on the doing side, If Prelates and Preachers in their assemblies: if Iudges and Iustices in their circuites and countries: if Magistrates in their townes and cities: and Masters in their houses and families would resolutely fight withall against sinne and vngodlinesse, certainelie they should preuaile farre more then they doe in rep essing of iniquity, and redressing of abuses and disorders: neither could presumptuous impiety long stand out, and beare vp the head against them, but they would soone nip it in the blade, smite it on the head, yea pearce it to the very heart. But alas, the condition of these times is much to be lamented, wherein Ministers and Magistrates, which should ioyne hand in hand, and vnite
 their forces to see iniquity punished; are for the most part; eyther in their iudgement or affections so diuided, that whereas the Priests lips should preserue knowledge, and the magistrates hands keepe good order, the one denounce Gods iudgements against sinne, the other execute them, and both combine their strength, like Moses and Aaron, Dauid and Ionathan, Iudah and Symeon, to reforme abuses, in Church and common-weale: little or nothing (God wot) is by them amended, whether through the wilfulnes and corruption of the one, the pride and couetousnesse of the other, or the cowardlinesse and slothfulnesse of both, or rather throgh the Churchwardens and sworne mens neglect to present faults for feare, fauor, or affection dangerously dispensing with their oath, I leaue it vndetermined; neither is it my part or purpose to publish the ouerthrow of the mighty in Gath, or the faults and 2. Sam. 1.
 fallings out of great ones, in the streetes of Ascalon, least the vncircumcised should triumph. I will rather lay my finger on this scarre, so farre forth as the trueth of my loue may not preiudice the loue of truth; only this betwixt shame and sorrow I must say; that for want of the Lawes iudicial execution, both the vnbrideled lusts of mans corruption in spirituall consistories remaine vncorrected; and the wicked attempts of mans presumption in temporall courts remaine vnrepressed, and the originall of both defaults and defects is this, that some officers in eyther, doe too much resemble the Idoll Molech, Leuit. 18. 21. liuely described, or are Leuit. 18. 21. not much vnlike those Giants which called themselues Rephaims Phisitions and reformes of vices, whereas they were Zanzummims, Deut. 2. 20. most distempered, vicious and flagitious themselues, as in the 20. verse of the second of Deuteronomy, it is plainely and pregnantly noted.
 O that my words were in an Apostrophe. auncients mouth, that gray haires might giue grace vnto them: then would I the more boldly beseech you, right reuerend Father in God, that (according to your wisedome and grauity, place and dignity, power and authority, being armed, with the compleat armour of temporall and spirituall iurisdiction) you would with vndaunted courage and resolution, strike at the very roote of those enormities. And sith in this course of reformation, you haue the prayers, helpe, and approbation of all good men, and the assured assistance of God himselfe, who will reward your care, and crowne your diligence; O goe on with the spirit of fortitude, well tempered zeale, and godly constancy, to brandish the sword of iustice against the faces of presumptuous idolatrous Papists, of miscreant irreligious Atheists, of prophane Neutralists, and seditious Priscillianists, and alother enemies
 of God and his Church, and with the speare of reproofe, and seuerest castigation, run through (as I may say) the very heart of farre spreading Popery, of whoredome, drunkennesse, bribery, extortion, contempt of the Ministery, periury, blasphemy, sacrilegious Church-robbing, and of other grosse corruptions, wherof the Church wardens (whom I againe, and againe, aduise to make conscience of their sacred oathes) shall make presentation. Magna quidem est in illa seueritate piet as per quam tollitur peccandi Sen. libertas. O make the truth heereof to appeare by your seuerity, in giuing a downe-right blow to those offensiue euills which cry for a mighty stroake, that they may no more stalke by you, much lesse stare vpon you vncontrolled, but that by your two staues of bands and beauty, in imitation of the great shepheard of Israell (Zachar. Zach. 11. 7. 11.) that is, of doctrine and discipline of coactiue and correctiue iurisdiction,
 either with an oportet haec facere, or decet haec fieri, with a prohibe, or cohibe; a caueat or a capias; with an (...), Tit. 2. a cut Tit. 2. 13. off, a put downe, or shut vp, the authors and actours of these ranging, raging, roaring sinnes, in Cleargy and Laity, may be seuerely censured, and as much as in your Lordship lieth, vtterly suppressed. For the better accomplishing of which needfull worke (to returne to that from which I haue a little digressed) it is of vs all (Deare Christians) to bee heartily wished, and by all good meanes to bee endeuoured, that such alway bee placed in the Magistracy and Ministery, as may not onely by the duty of their calling, seeke earnestly the reformation of those things which are amisse, but also may by their well-ordered holy liues, be lanternes and spectacles of vertue and godlines, patternes and presidents of well-doing grace, and goodnes to all others. That the people by them as
 by a glasse (euen as the youth of Greece did by Epaminondas) may learne to timme and adorn themselues with al vertuous ornaments; This, this, is the most hopefullest course to rectifie things that are depraued, to vnite things that are diuided, to set in order and reforme things, which had neede to bee amended. I doe not deny but that multi multis prosunt dicendo quae non Aug. tract. 46. in Ioh. faciunt: but I also auerre with Saint Augustine: that longe pluribus prodessent faciendo quae dicunt, and without taking this course of making our lippes and our liues, our hands and our hearts, our wordes and our works, our profession and practise to agree together in a competent commendable manner, little amendment in publique or in priuate, is to be expected, though the complaints of Ministers concerning their hearers prophanesse and ignorance; of Magistrates concerning their peoples stubbornnesse and disobedlence; of Parents and
 Masters concerning their children and seruants wantonnesse, faithlesnesse, and negligence bee neuer so much aggrauated, neuer so often reiterated. For when, I pray, will a leaud seruant bee dissuaded from his drunkennesse and whoredome, by the words of a luxurious and licentious Master? when wil a handmaid be reclaimed of her folly by the perswasion of a loose Mistresse? when will disordered people, and dissolute parishioners be reformed of their vaine and vile courses, by the counsell or threatnings of vnruly rulers, and carnall careles Ministers? But it is high time for mee to shut vp this poynt, (for I haue a long way to goe, and but lirtle time to spend) and therfore I humbly beseech you all, Men, Fathers, and Brethren, beloued in Christ, that you would seriously meditate on so necessary and profitable a Christian duety, as hath now by way of doctrine of generall exhortation, and particular application,
 been commended vnto you,  let it haue its due entertainment in your soules, and take deepe impression in your hearts for the amendment of whatsoeuer is amisse, eyther in your own persons, or in your publique assemblies, or priuate families. Againe and againe I say vnto you all, Take heede vnto your selues, and more especially, to you my brethren in the ministery, who by your callings are captayns of Gods army, dispensers of Gods mysteries, stewards of Gods houshould, builders of Gods Church, sheepheards of his flocke, and therefore should bee couragious, faithfull, skilfull, watchfull, Take heed to your selues, and looke to your families, that there be not sound in them an Hophue or Phineas to make the Lords sacrifices abhorred as it fell out in the time of Eli, 1 Sam. 2. beat 1 Sam. 2. downe the body of sinne in your selues and others, that you may grow vp in the spirituall strength of your soules, be much in conference
 with God and practise of holy duties, pray much, reade much, meditate much, preach often and earnestly; and least by any meanes after, you haue preached vnto others, and prepared an arke for their safety, you your selues should be reproued, and perish with Noahs carpenters, in the floud of your owne iniquity: Take heede, abandon all impiety and scandalous irregularity, and as S. Paul exhorteth Timothy, 1 Tim. 6. Flee couetousnes 1 Tim. 6. and noysome lusts, and follow after righteousnesse, loue, patience, meekenesse, and labour alwaies, amongst all persons, to manifest a laudable congruity and correspondency betweene your good teaching, and godly liuing. Let that prophane prouerbe (doing and saying be two mens offices) be verified among the Heathen, as for vs (beloued) which would bee accounted good Christians, and indeed should bee approued patterns of Christianity: Let it be our principall care and studie
 that our wordes and workes, our doings and sayings, our profession and practise may agree together in one tune, and draw in one line, as it becommeth the Gospell of Christ Iesus, which is truly called the Gospell of Peace, 2 Ephes. ^ Ephes. whose author is the God of Peace, 1 Cor. 14. whose ministers are messengers ^ Cor. 14. Rom. 10. of Peace, 10 Rom. whose followers are the children of Peace Luke 10. whose duety is the studie Luk. 10. of Peace, Rom. 12. and end that Rom. 12. Peace which passeth all vnderstanding, Phil. 4. and all to moue vs to Philip. 4. haue Peace amongst our selues, and as much as in vs lieth with al others that so liuing in Peace, and spending our daies holily, wee may die in peace, and end our daies happily, and after this mortall pilgrimage ended, may passe by the life of grace, to the life of glory, and immortality which neuer shal haue end. And so much, if not too much (in regard of the precise modell of time alotted for me to speake, and
 you to heare) bee spoken of the first intrinsecall caveat, Take heede to your selues.
Now it followeth, and that by a necessary consequent (for Christianitie extendeth both her charitie and industry to the good of others) Take heede to all the flocke, which I terme the extrinsecall caueat or caution; wherein before I descend to the distinct duties of Ministers in particular, without any other curious induction, I obfurther this doctrine in generall.
 That all Christians which by taking heede to their waies and walking after Gods will haue tasted the sweetnesse of Gods graces in themselues, are or ought to be witnesses of the same graces of God vnto others, and workers of them in others, as much as in them lyeth. The gifts of Gods spirit, and profitable employment, may not be separated; in whomsoeuer the graces of God be they must be seene in doing some spirituall good according
 to their place and calling who are endued therewith. It was said to Peter, Luk. 22. when thou art Luk. 22. 32. converted strengthen thy brethren; and it is said by S. Paul, Gal. 1. 16. Gal: 1. 16. that it pleased God to reueale his Sonne vnto him, that hee might preach him to the Gentiles: and in the 2. Corin: 14. that God did 2 Cor: 14. comfort him in all his tribulation that hee might be able to comfort others in their affliction. And hence it is that hee giueth that generall charge, 1. Thess. 5. 11. exhort 1. Thes. 5. 11. and edifie one another as yee doe, admonish the vnruly, comfort the feeble, etc. and in the 10 Heb. 24. Heb: 10. 24. Let vs consider one another to prouoke vnto loue and to good workes. and Rom: 15. 2. Let euery man please his Rom. 15. 2. neighbour in that which is good to aedification. and to this purpose the commandment of S. Peter, 1. Pet: 1. Pet: 4. 10. 4. 10. is very expresse and pregnant, Let euery man as he hath receiued the gift minister the same one to another as good disposers of the manifold graces of God.

 Euery one is Gods steward, not to ingrosse the gifts and graces of God to himselfe, but to imploy them to a common benefit. And the example of God himselfe that eternall essence, whose perfection must be the patterne of our wills, teacheth vs so much, whose immanent operatio^s though they might cleare him from preiudice, working vpon so good and infinite an obiect as himselfe, yet would hee not rest, in that which was excellent, but passe to that which was most gracious, and his eternall essence would giue to euery thing a being or entity, and his truth verity, and his existence an vnity, and his perfection goodnes, and his happinesse faelicity. If then we will be conformable vnto him, wee must not content our selues in the excellency and pleasure of our owne contemplation without casting an eye downeward vpon our brethren; neither must the receipt of infused graces purchased by christ,
 rest vpon our selues alone, but when we are in some measure filled, wee ought to looke vpon others that are lanke and leane, till they be as full as we; being enlightned our selues, we must seeke to make others wise vnto saluation. Peter Antaeus-like hauing gotten strength by his fall endeuoureth to breed the same qualitie in his brethren; and Paul being converted addicteth himselfe wholy to the converting of others, and Rom: 1. 14. acknowledgeth himselfe a debter Rom: 1. 14. both to Iew and Gentile in that behalfe. Dauid Psal. 12. prayeth to be holpen and saued himselfe, but Psal: 12. 1. so as the word (Hoshignah) in the originall importeth, that he might helpe and saue others. The true lights of the firmament are euer in motion for the good of others, whilest comets and blazing starres fed with corruption from below, stand at a stay and vanish away. And surely this is a property of euery righteous and holy man,
 that hauing his owne heart possessed with the true feare of God and vnfained loue of religion, hee hath his desire also enflamed to draw others therevnto, and it is the ioy of his heart to see others as good as himselfe; yea hee thinketh the framing of others to conformitie with himselfe to be a most necessary operation of the life of grace,  infused into his soule; and nature it selfe inioyneth him this dutie arising from the necessary relation ^etweene his lippes and feeding, as it is liuely expressed Prov: 10. 21. Prov: 10. 21. the lipps of the righteous feede many, the righteous man who hath obtained pardon of his sinnes by the bloud of Christ, and hath his righteousnes imputed to him, and in assurance hereof endeuoureth with a sincere heart to please God in all things, and hath the good treasure of his heart filled with all spirituall wisdome, the word of God dwelling plenteously in him; such a righteous man hoordeth not vp
 his treasure as the miser doth his corne, and the couetous his riches, but lets it passe through his lipps thereby to feede, not a few but many, and to spread abroad knowledge Pro: 15. 7. so that from the Prov: 15. 7. righteous mans treasure (and such a man especially euery Minister should bee) the ignorant hath a portion, and that is instruction; the perfract and obstinate hath a portion, and that is reprehension; the wanderer a portion, and that is admonition; the penitent a portion, and that is consolation; and it cannot well be otherwise. For if it be a true Maxime that euery instrument worketh dispositively at the command of the principall agent, then since God hath giuen lipps to serue the soule as principall commander, either there must be little store of grace in the heart, or else out of the store thereof the lipps will vtter it, and from the abundance of the heart speake abundantly. To be short, the spirituall
 good of those with whom the righteous man liueth, and whom he loueth, taketh vp a chiefe room in his affections, hee seeketh their conversion and saluation, this is an imployment worthy his loue, his labour, his prayers, his paines. Herein hee sheweth himselfe the childe of God, and his wishes accord with Gods; Oh (saith the Lord Deut: 5.) that there were in Deut: 5. 25. my people an heart to feare me; Oh (saith the righteous christian) that there were in my frends, kinsfolke, neighbors, and acquaintance, an heart to feare the Lord and keepe his commandments, that it might goe well with them. Would to God, saith Moses Numb. 11: all Gods people were Prophets: and Numb: 11. 29. Paul Act: 26. wisheth that not onely Acts 26. 29. Festus the President, and Agrippa the King, but all that heard him were as he was, not in bands, and captiuitie, but in grace and christianitie. Seldome shall you heare these or the like voyces amongst
 worldlings; I wish others were as rich as I, as learned as I, and in as good credit as I am; for these things make men earthly-minded, base selfe-louers, and priuately affected; but grace and holinesse is of an excellent royall nature, and enlargeth the heart wherein it is with such loue to other men, that nothing more contents the righteous man then to make others as good as himselfe, and to see them goe in his Masters heauenly liuery. Hee taketh heede to himselfe, hee taketh care of others, tanquam sidus clarum and beneficum, as the Sunne in the firmament is beneficiall to all.
 Wherefore to make some vse of this point. Rouze vp your selues (o yee Christians) which heare me this day, vp and be doing, and the Lord will be with you; suffer not this doctrine to passe vnregarded, vnpractised, but as you would be accounted the holy and righteous seruants of the Lord, quickned and
 enlived with the spirit of grace and power of godlinesse, so shew your selues to bee such by communicating the good graces you haue receiued to the benefit of others, lay aside all hypocrisie in seeming to be what you are not, and remoue all slothfulnes in not appearing to be what you are, and as the elect of God put on the bowells of mercy, and with cheerefulnes and alacritie spend those talents wherewith God hath enriched you, and adventure them for your Masters best advantage, and vse your gifts as Dauid Psalm: fitted for the good of all which may be or desire to be benefited by them. Bee not spare in spending, what God hath been bountifull in bestowing, make knowne your selues to be not onely like the good tree which bringeth forth its owne good fruit in due season; but like the fire, and Psal: 1. 3. the fire, non in silice, sed in sinu, not in the flint, which will hardly bee beaten out, but in the bosome
 which cannot be concealed, but will soone shew it selfe, and hauing matter to worke vpon, will send out a flaming light to direct and comfort others. O consider from what misery by nature you your selues are freed, and to what an excellent estate by grace yee are translated, and be not so thanklesse to the authour of your happinesse, or hard hearted to the good of your brethren, as to neglect to pay to either what you doe owe them. You owe glory to God for his manifold mercies vouchsafed vnto you, and the greatest thing wherein you can glorifie him is to be the meanes of drawing others to his kingdome; you owe loue vnto your brethren, and the greatest thing wherein you can shew this loue, is to seeke their freedom out of the bands of sinne and Sathan, and to bee instruments of sauing their soules O set then close to this worke, vse all the good means of prayer, counsell, conference,
 comfort, and admonition, and commit the successe vnto God. Petitur avobis cura non curatio, as Bernard speaketh: God requireth Bern: lib. 4. consider: not at your hands that you should cure your brethren, for that is his immediate worke, Hebr: 13. but that you should care for them, and doe what in you lyeth to procure not only their temporall, but especially their spirituall and eternall good. Blessed and beloued Christians, wee are all and ought to bee one anothers keepers, and it was but Cain a murtherer which made question to the contrary, Gen. 4. Gen: 4. 9. Wherefore as brethren, sonnes of the same Father, seruant^ to the same Master, heires of the same promise, fellow-trauellers bound for the same countrey, let vs make on an other partakers both of our temporall goods, according to the rule of Salomon, Prov: 5. Let thy Prov: 5. 16. fountaine flow forth, and thy riuers in the streetes; and especially of our spirituall graces, instructing, counselling,
 comforting, and aedifying one an other in an holy faith and godly life. It is a true saying, (...), a good man is a common good. Oh then let vs shew our selues to be such good men and louing Christians indeed leauing behind vs in all plaees where wee liue and haue to doe some tokens of our goodnesse, some monuments of our godlines, some sweet sauour of our virtues; especially as occasion is now giuen, let vs expresse our bounty for a common good, namely in furthering (by our willing contribution therevnto) the honorable plantation of Virginia, for the reducing Virginia. of pagans vnto Christianitie; and the praise-worthy erection of the Colledge of Controuersies, Chelsey. for the speedier refuting of the errors, and repressing of the insolencies of malignant popish aduersaries. Those worthies which are imployed in these famous workes cry vnto vs as the Angell
 of Macedonia did vnto Paul, Come and helpe vs. Let vs then be helpfull Act: 16. 9. vnto them; and as profitable members in the Bee-hiue of christs Church, let vs bring by our loue our largesse; by our prayers, paines, or practise, wax or hony therevnto, for the benefit of many; and not be like those haughty vngentle spirits, in whom the grosse humours of pride and couetousnes haue bred such an obstruction of liberalitie and kindnes, that neither good workes, nor gracious words at all proceed from them. Solon in Plutarch. in moral. Plutarch made a law that if any one had digged 20 foote deepe in his owne ground and found no water, his neighbour should permit him to draw water out of his Well: Doe then such and such men labour to liue, and endeuour to learne, and yet want some maintenance and learning, which God in some greater measure hath afforded vs; why then we are bound to giue vnto them of that little
 which we haue, and to teach them of that little which we know, and to doe them what good wee can; if we doe, God will reward vs; if we doe not, the heathen man will rise vp in iudgement against (...). In the 26 of Exodus, you may Exod: 16. 20. read how that Manna being hoorded vp for priuate vse continued not sweet two daies, but being potted vp for a common remembrance lasted many yeares: So if we keepe vp our goods and graces for our selues alone, they will rot, decrease, or be diminished; but if we dispose them as we ought for a common benefit, they shall last long, and increase, and for them shall we be rewarded: for the mercifull man rewardeth his owne soule, Prou. 11. and the Prophet in Psal. Prov: 11. 17. 112. hauing said that the righteous man is mercifull and distributeth, the next newes we heare of him is, that his righteousnesse endureth for euer, and his borne shall be exalted, Psalm: 112. 9. Thus and thus shall they
 be rewarded, which honour God in bestowing for the publique good, those gifts and graces where with God hath honoured them. Which being a duty that concerns all Christians in generall, doth in a more peculiar manner appertaine to vs Ministers in particular. For to vs of the Ministry, who are Embassadors of Christ, dispensers of his secrets, corriualls of his spouse, watchmen of his Citie, ouer-seers of his seruants, pastors of his flock, and therefore deserue audience, reuerence, loue, obedience, and that which is most denied, or enuied vnto vs (by such as would bring on vs verissimos labores, certissimam egestatem, vnstinted paines, vndoubted penury) liberall maintenance. To vs (I say) this charge of superuisiting diligence is chiefly directed, Take heed to all the flocke, and as it followeth in my text, to feede the Church or familie of God, etc. which being things in sense and substance well agreeing, deserue
 ioyntly to be handled, as on the contrary, things that differ, deserue to be distinguished.
 The point then to bee considered is this. God who is absolutely good, and doth nothing but to very good purpose, hauing made vs men to resemble his image, and called vs to be men of God (...), to partake of his homage, hath withall precisely enioyned vs this taske, to take heede to his flocke, to feed his family, to preserue and protect his heritage. To watch ouer his owne soule is euery mans duety, but to watch ouer the soules of others, is a more especiall bounden seruice of ours, who are called men of God by a kind of excellency. This is our worke, as conduit pipes of grace to conuey to the thirsty soules of our hearers, the liuing water of Gods word, and to be as the mesaraicall veynes in the boby naturall, through which the spirituall foode must passe, whereby the members of Christs body mysticall
 are to bee nourished vp vnto euerlasting life. This is our worke, and as the Apostle calleth it, ^ Tim. 1 Tim. 3. 1. 3. a worthy worke; If any desire the office of a Bishop, of a Prelate or Pastor: he (saith the Apostle) desireth not a good dignity, a good delight, good riches, great reuenues, a good and gainfull office, but a good duety, a painefull great and worthy worke. For the better and more beneficiall accomplishing whereof, three principall vertues, as implements and ornaments in vs which would bee accounted his 3 Vertues req. in godly min. workemen, are necessarily required. First, skilfulnesse to beginne. Secondly, faithfulnesse to goe on. Thirdly, zealousnesse to continue couragious vnto the end. 1. Skilfulnesse, and dexterity, bene preesse. 2. Faithfulnesse and sincerity, semper prodesse. 3. Zeale and constancy, nunquam dcesse aut deficere. First, 1. Skill. euery Minister, and Pastor, ought to be skilfull and dexterous in teaching, knowing as the wise steward,
 Luke. 12. how to giue Gods Luk. 12. 42. houshold their portion of meate in due season, and how to diuide the worde of truth aright, that all may be edified, 2 Tim. 2. being not only 2 Tim. 2. 15. learned himselfe, implyed in that speech, Mal. 2. The Priests lippes Mal. 27. should preserue knowledge, but also (...), 1 Tim. 3. apt to teach 1 Tim. 3. 2. others, which was signified in the old Testament by the golden bells which hung on the skirts of the Priests Garments, the sound wherof was to be heard when hee went into the holy place, and came out vpon paine of death, Exod. 28. and Exod. 28. 35 in the new Testament by the descension of the holy Ghost vpon the Apostles, in the likenesse of clouen tongues, Acts 2. 3. not of Acts 2. 3. hands, whereby to ouercome the world by worldly force, or of feete, to flee from the rage of persecuting Tyrants, nor of eyes and eares fit instruments to learne, but of tungs to teach them their duety in teaching others, and what else doe their
 names and Titles declare? why are they called the light of the world, but that beeing enlightned themselues, they should blaze foorth the Math. 5. 13. 14 beames of trueth, to giue light to those which sit in the shadow of darkenes, or the salt of the earth, but that beeing sauory themselues, they should season with wholesom doctrine the weake soules that bend to corruption; or builders of Gods house, but that with Bezaleell and Aholiab, they should be skilful in the worke of his sanctuary; or Captaines of Gods army, but that they should know to order and marshall his hoast, and to destroy the stratagems of the enemy.  The more lamentable is the state of our Church in many corners and quarters of this land, which being diuided into seuerall congregations, as an army into seuerall companies, hath more then a good many of such captaines and leaders as haue not such tolerable knowledge and skill as their place and office requireth:
 For whereas they should bee as the keepers of Salomons bed, Cant. 3. All valiant men of Israell, Cant. 3. 7. all handling the sword, and expert in warre: these on the contrary, are as Ieroboams Priests, of the reuersion and refuse of Israell, altogether 1 King. 12. 31. vnskilfull in managing the weapons of this spirituall warfare, rurales Nomades, and as Pindarus terms them, (...) not (...), fitter to be any thing, then that which they take vpon them, to bee spirituall shepheards. It cannot bee denied, but that in many auncient Councells, as also in our late Church-Canons, it hath been decreed, that none should enter into this sacred function, but such whom morum innoce^tia and literarum scientia reddiderunt insignes. The more scandalous to religion, and disgracefull to the Ministery it is, that such should now adayes be both admitted, and permitted, sacra mysteria tractare, quos moru^ petulantia and literaru^ ignorantia reddunt infames, by whome
 this Priestly order which in it selfe (as Chrysostome at large sheweth) is Cbr. l. 3. desacerd. dig. most holy and honourable, is made (...), ridiculous and contemptible, by whom God is dishonoured, good Lawes are deluded, holy things are prophaned, the Church stained, the people starued. This, this, Fathers and Brethren, is a sore which had neede to bee deepely launced. I would to God it might this day begin to be cured; In hope whereof, and in hearty prayer for the same, I passe ouer this vnrelishing reproofe of wilfull and vnskilfull ministers, and passe to the second good quality, implement, or ornament required in euery godly Pastor, to wit, faithfulnesse, 2. Faithfulnes. which importeth both sedulity in respect of the matter taught, that we should be (...) 1 Tim. 5. laborious in the word and 1 Tim. 5. 17. doctrine, and sincerity in the manner of teaching, that we should not bee (...) hucksterers of the word, 2 Cor. 2. Either adding 2 Cor. 2. 17.
 thereto, or distracting there from, or adulterating the sence thereof. He that hath my word, saith the Lord by the Prophet Ieremy, chap. 23. let Ier. 23. 28. him speake my worde faithfully: for what is the chaffe to the wheat, saith the Lord? The trueth then, not lyes; Scriptures, not fables; the precepts and worde of God, not the dreames and dotages of men are to be spoken: and the word of God is to be deliuered as the word, not 1 Pet. 4. 11. cockishly, corruptedly, or vnfruitfully, but grauely, modestly, piously, profitably, as the religious silence of the people, the reuerence of the place, and the greatnesse of our office doth require. Of this faithfulnesse, both in respect of the matter and manner, S. Paul shewed himselfe an excellent patterne, not onely teaching openly and in euery house, Acts 20. ther's his industry; Acts 20. 20. but in declaration of the truth, approuing himselfe to euery mans conscience, in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4. there's his sincerity, 2 Cor. 4. 2.
 which hauing thus carefully practised himselfe, he giueth the same in charge to Timothy, with a seuere 2 Tim. 4. 2. kinde of adiuration, charging him before God and Iesus Christ, the Iudge of quick and dead, to preach the word in season, and out of season: in season, volentibus and propitijs, for aworde in due season, is like apples of gold in pictures of siluer, Prou. 25. out of season, nolentibus Prov: 25. 11. and iratis, for charit as ad saluandum est violenta, charity is earnest to saue all. And the like charge doth Sen: 55. 11. ep. our Sauior with a thrice ingeminated expostulation, giue vnto Saint Peter, Iohn 21. If thou louest mee: Iohn 21. If thou louest mee: If thou louest mee: Feed, feed, feed, my sheepe, my lambes, my flocke. Whereupon S. Bernard sweetly, Si me ames Bern. plusquam tua, plusquam tuos, plusqua^ te, pasce oues meas, pasce agnos meos, and pasce in pascuis pinguibus vbi est copia alimoniae, ibi in docendo assiduitatem, pasce in pascuis salutaribus, ne inficiantur tabe, hic in docendo sinceritatem,
 pasce in pascuis discriminatis (vt oues in gramine adulto and laetiori, agnelli in tenera and molliori herba exspatientur) hic in docendo prudentiam postulat: I know how the time passeth, and to whome I speak, and therefore forbeare englishing. And the same charge, with a statute of addition, S. Peter co^mendeth to al his successors, and to all faithfull Pastors, 1 Pet. 5. saying, feed (non dicit 1 Pet. 5. 2. Beza in Locu^. (saith Beza) offerte pro viuis and mortuis and peregrina lingua centones male consutos cantillata) But pascite feed, (not your flocke, but) the flock of God which dependeth vpon you, caring for it, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready minde, not as domineering ouer Gods heritage, but exhibiting your selues patternes of weldoing to the flocke.  Which duety of faithfulnesse and watchfulnesse infeeding defending and attending Christs flocke, sith it is so often and earnestly charged vpon all that are ministers of the Gospell, what then remaineth
 as a portion for faithlesse Pastors that receiue Gods wages, and doe not his worke. For faithlesse Captaines that receiue the Lords pay, and fight not his battailes, but the doung of disgrace and doom of woe: Woe vnto the shepheards which cloath themselues with the wooll and feed not the sheep, Ezek. Ezek. 34. 2. 3. 4 34. which see the flocke to putrifie, and yet haue salt, and sauour them not: to faint, and yet haue Wine, and comfort them not: to wander, and yet haue light, and guide them not: to bee besieged of sinne and Sathan, and yet see the danger, and warne them not: to bee euen hungerstarued, and yet haue bread and refresh them not. If such as preach not in conscience of their wants, are to bee reprooued, then those which for want of conscience, rather then knowledge, remaine dumb and open not their mouths, are more deepely to bee censured. Woe vnto me, saith S. Paul, 1 Cor. 1 Cor. 9. 16 9. if I preach not the Gospell, for
 why, a necessity is laid vpon mee^ and is it not likewise on you Fathers, on you Brethren, on vs al^ Ministers? Yes surely, Vt discamu^ inuit at nos veritatis suauitas, vt doceamus cogit, nos charitatis and officij necessitas. Whereunto that earnes^ exhortation of Saint Bernard in ser* Bern ser. 76. in Cant. 76. mainely tendeth, Attendite pretioso deposito quod vobis concreditum est: ciuitas Dei est, vigilate ad custodia^^ sponsa, studete ornatui: oues, attendit^ pastui, educite e lacu miseriae, conducite perviam iustitiae, perducite ad pascula Vitae.  Wherefore farre bee i^ from vs, (beloued) to suffer our Ardens post. gifts to bee wrapped vp in an idle braine without practise, as Goliah^ sword was in a cloath without vse 1 Sam. 21. or to suffer the fountaine of our knowledge, like Labans well, 1. Sam. 21. 9. to bee shut vp with a great stone of security or saturity, as some doe which make the Court with Diotrephes, or the Vniuersity with Cleanthes, a sanctuary for their idlenes and non-residency. Rather let vs stir
 vp (...), as S. Paul aduiseth 2 Tim. 1. 6. Timothy, and euen blow vp with a paire of bellowes (as the originall importeth) the graces of God in vs, and striue to shew our selues truly learned, and to the flocke of Christ truly louing, by truely labouring in the diligent instruction and edification thereof, labouring so to nourish infants with playnnes, that wee deny not to feede great ones with profoundnesse; descending so in our ordinary doctrine, to the meanest capacity, that at somtimes we speake aloft, as beseemeth Gods Maiesty, so vsing a sanctified kinde of sauce, to succour some mens weaknesse vpon extraordinary occasion, that at most times our spirituall prouision bee fitted for the better appetites of the whole congregation. Beleeue me, brethren, idlenesse in action, argueth emptines in affection, and I leaue you to iudge what he is that hath an head full of learning, and a mouth full of nothing; sure am I, that hee can
 hardly be said to haue the spirit of grace in his heart, which beeing a Minister, and learned too, hath no worde of Prophecy at all in his mouth. From which fearefull censure that we (Fathers and Brethren) may be freed, let vs hereunto bend all our studies, and extend the vttermost of our endeuours, both by our diligence and faithfulnesse in dispensing the word, by our discretion and wel aduisednesse, in handling the worde, by our obedience and carefulnesse in framing our liues according to the worde, to shew our selues gratious Ministers. And that wee may be compleat (as farre as is competent to humane frailtie) to our skilfulnesse and dexterity, to our faithfulnesse and sincerity.
In the third and last place zeale 3. Zeale. and feruent constancy must also bee adioyned, which by the rod of correction (that was reserued in the Arke of the Testament, with the Manna of refection, and Tables Exod. 37.
 of direction) is liuely prefigured, and by Gregory in his pastoralls Lib. 2. past. c. 6. plainely intended h. v. sit and districtio virgae quae feriat, and consolatio baculi qui sustentet, sit p^etas sed non plus quam expedit parcens, sit zelus sed non immoderate saeuiens; where he requireth in euery Minister, as well a zealous disposition, as a pious affection. And what else was signified by the donation of the Holy Ghost in fiery clouen tongues, but a zealous hot and piercing ministry, such as will enter into, and quicken the hearts of Gods children, and like a purseuant dispatchd from heauen will attach a wicked man by the shoulder, yea and catch him by the bosome too vnlesse hee amend. I confesse there is no working in mettals without very hot fires, nor in distillations without soft and slow fires, yet there is fire in both, for else how should the one bee melted, and the other distilled? So in truth, there ought to be the
 fire of zeale more or lesse in all Gods ministers, and the more the better if discreet: As for that vn^^screet zeale of those which can endure nothing read or said or sung, but what agreeth with the consonants of their precise Alphabet, which wrangle about formes and shadowes, cauill about ceremonies, and slight the Sermons, and censure the persons of those which will not do the like, making the Pulpit often-times a Pasquill to ease their spleenes, and to traduce superiors; I account it to be schismaticall. But the zeale of godly Pastors, which with a good conscience in Gods cause for the good of his people are as earnest in the pursuit of sinne, as Eleazar was of the Philistims 2. Sam: 23. cleaning 2. Sam: 23. 10. as fast in their hearts to the word, as his hand claue to his sword, I both loue and approue as spirituall. Such was the zeale of the Prophet Dauid Psal: 69. where he saith, the Psal: 69. 10. zeale of Gods house had euen consumed
 him. Such the zeale of S. Peter, when hee so pricked the hearts of his hearers with the razor of the word, that they came to him and the rest of the Apostles with weeping eyes, and mournefull voyces, saying, Men and brethren what shall we doe that we may bee saued, Acts 2. Such the zeale of Acts 2. 37. Iohn the Baptist, when he so pierced the hearts of his hearers by his powerfull preaching of repentance Luk. 3. that they came to him by Luk: 3. 4. seuerall companies according to their seuerall callings, as so many wounded souldiers to a Chirurgian, saying, What shall we doe then? what shall wee doe? Such likewise was the zeale of S. Paul Acts 24. Acts 24. 26. when preaching of righteousnesse, temperance, and the iudgement to come, hee made the bribe-taking Gouernour Foelix, if not to blush for shame, yet to tremble and shudder for feare. O let vs (Fathers and Brethren) whether wee be young, as Samuel and Timothy;
 or old, as Paul and Eli; whether we haue ten or fiue or two Talents, striue to attaine the like zealous vehemency, and to expresse the like godly earnestnes in our effectuall preaching, not onely in obscure Bethania, our priuate Parishes, but also in eminent Ierusalem, in more publique places, if wee be called therevnto. What if the mountaines being touched doe smoake? what if greatnes being taxed for want of goodnesse doe fume, fret, swell, sweat? what if for rebuking of sinne iustly, yee be depraued and maligned vniustly, yet dicatur veritas, rumpatur invidia: Rebuke (saith S. Paul) them that ^. Tim: 5. 20. sinne openly, euen to their face, that the rest which are witnesses hereof may stand in awe and feare. It becommeth not those free and ingenuous spirits, to whom Christ hath committed the dispensation of his glorious gospell to feare the face of man, to be dulled, daunted, dispirited. Be wee then what wee
 ought to be, not onely luciferi, as Bern. Bernard speaketh, and scientia fulge^tes, hauing some lights of knowledg in our heads, but also igniferi and zelo flagrantes, hauing the fire of true zeale in our hearts. And that our discourses be not weakned by vngraciousnesse, or by any dullnes, and flatnesse of spirit, and so proue like morall philosophie Lectures, and the collations of the Scribes and Pharises, cold and comfortles, let vs ioyne with our doctrine generall exhortation; and to our exhortation adde particular application; and in our application speake home to the conscience, and vse a feruent feeling affection. To conclude, as skilfull, faithfull, and zealous pastors our ioynt care and study must be that our Sermons and publike meditations may so well be sorted, that (the loue of truth conceiuing them, the truth of iudgement forming and framing them, variety of learning amplifying and exemplifying them, modesty
 of stile and distinct vtterance deliuering them) the plaine and powerfull euidence of the spirit may be seene in them, the congregation may vnderstand them, feele the benefit of them, receiue instruction and comfort by them. This, this is to be worthy preaching pastors; of whom it may bee truely said, that the Holy Ghost hath made them Ouer-seers. Which title of ouer-seeing Ouer-seers. and superintendency importing the dignitie of Ministers should now bee considered. But on your patience I haue already too much presumed, and therefore will reserue this taske for some other time and place. In the meane time let vs all make our retreit to the throne of Grace, beseeching Almighty God to multiply his graces vpon vs all, that at all times, in all places, amongst all persons, we may behaue our selues as faithfull and zealous Ministers of the gospell of grace, and in the midst of our ouer-seeing and ruling here
 may remember our account and reckoning hereafter, and so passe the time of our dwelling here in his feare, that when wee shall passe from this earthly habitation to an heauenly, in his louing fauour, wee may be brought in peace, with a good report, especially a good conscience to the bed of the graue, that after the sleepe of death, in the morning of the resurrection we may awake to blessed immortality,
Amen.
FINIS.

