


OF ARROGANCE.
ARrogance, is the assuming to a mans selfe, the Titles of Vertue, Learning, Honour, Riches, or the like, without the possession, or (if with the possession) without the euidence. For not onely hee that speakes of himselfe more good then is true, but hee also that sayes more then he is sure will bee beleeued, iustly deserues the name of Arrogant.
This Vice is offensiue more to equals, then to Superiors, or inferiours, because they be seldome, the one sort or the other, competitors
 with a man in praise: And more, when it concernes the gifts of the minde, especially Wisedome and Valour, then when it touches onely vpon the fauours of Fortune, or abilities of the body, Prerogatiue in these being lesse esteemed. Nam cum omnis arrogantia odiosa est, tum illa ingenij atque eloquentiae molestissima. Quamobrem nihil dico de meo ingenio, etc. Whereas all Arrogance is odious, that of a mans owne wit, and owne eloquence, is most tedious. Wherefore I will speake nothing of my owne wit, etc. saith Cicero. Likewise it is worse in mediocrity then extremes (though in most vices it be otherwise) because it becomes by excesse ridiculous rather then hatefull, and so passeth with better toleration.

 Pretending to sufficiencie, argues the want of it. The claime it selfe is a plaine conuiction that there wants right to the thing claimed. For where Vertue is really, her owne light discouers the owner. Vino vendibili suspensa hedera non est opus. Good Wine needs no Bush. So that hee need not bee his owne Trumpet that is truely vertuous, but rather hee that is not, but onely in his owne conceit: which opinion makes him also by not pursuing that which hee supposes he hath already obtained, to bee out of all possibilitie of gaining the same.
Honour found out Cincinnatus digging in his Garden and made him Dictator. And many that in their owne dispositions desired to liue obscurely, haue been against
 their wils exposed to the toyle of great affaires, by the lustre of that vertue which they neuer boasted. If to admire any thing argue defect of knowledge, much more to admire a mans selfe, which al men ought best to know, and are most familiar withall.
An Arrogant person, if hee ioyne in the performance of any laudable action, with men of modest natures, deales with them in the sharing of the praise, as the Lyon in the Fable did with the other beasts, diuiding the prey they had taken; who making of the whole, foure parts, pleades a title to three of them at least, and if they yeelded him not the fourth of their owne goodwill, he would bee no longer friends. And such a nature can hardly hold friendship,
 that admitteth not the Piller thereof, which is Parity, but thinks himselfe superiour to all, if not in Fortune (at which he therefore grudges, taunts her with her blindnesse, and rayles at her with Apothegmes,) yet in all other worth and desert.
Hee is so puft vp, that to men in estate beneath him (for feare of contempt, which howsoeuer he cannot auoid) hee will neuer speake familiarly, seldome any way, as if there could be no greater disparagement, then not to obserue the distance which he holds to bee betwixt them. Which being to the meanest sort vnpleasing, causeth him to want not only the respect hee looketh for, as due, but euen that (if any bee so) that is due indeed.

 Hee commonly commiserates his equalls for their weakenesses, and loues to teach, rather then learne the thing hee knowes not. Giue him but such a handle, and hee will bee sure to hold it till one be weary, and will instruct with such confidence, that though he produce no reason, a man must beleeue him on his word, or hee'le be angry. If hee write or speake a discourse of any length, he cannot forbeare but hee must make knowne somewhat of his owne custome, or humor, or life, With I was this, or did this, or like this, or thus am, or was wont: belike, supposing that all men would be glad to make him the patterne of their life and actions.
As hee is distastfull to, so he distasteth all men; for according to
 his owne estimate, he must needs hold himselfe vnder-valued, euen by those that prize him aboue his iust worth, then which nothing more vexes him. For though when himselfe detracts, he thinkes the detracted ought to beare it, as a righteous censure: yet if another be but sleepy in his discourse, or when hee talkes, be taken from him with any businesse, hee is presently grieued thereat, as a high neglect.
If hee reade anothers writings, hee findes somewhat to correct, but nothing to prayse, and so in their actions. Himselfe being in his owne Iudgement beyond censure. If hee meete with one of his owne nature, there's presently warres, and it will appeare that he detests himselfe in the person of
 his enemy, more then another can do him in his owne. But meeting with modesty, hee deuoures it, makes it his prey, and nourisheth his Arrogance with such food; for whatsoeuer the one shall in modesty lay from himselfe, the other will take, and yet thinke too little.
But it is best when hee encounters a cunning Flatterer, for such a one will spurre him on, and blow his folly vp to madnesse, and set him out to the laughter of them hee most contemned. Or as the Foxe serued the Crow, make him to let fall the meate from his mouth with attempting to sing. Or put him forward to seeke an emploiment, which hee, not knowing his owne strength, will bee alwayes ready to take
 vpon him, and so ruine him. For such a one will not feare to vndergoe, what hee does not vnderstand. All which be the fittest traps for this Vice.
Some are Arrogant (as one may say) indirectly, and will extoll such a man in such a faculty, as the hearers allow him to be better in, then the party so by him praised. But it comes all to one purpose; for the face of Arrogance, howsoeuer painted, is not without deformitie. Yet I would not wish a man to bee so much affrighted with it, as to start to the contrary vice Pusillanimitie. For a man should not derogate from himselfe, there beeing too many, ready enough for that office, at least to beleeue him, as one that best knowes, what hee most wants. And certainely hee
 that doth Sentence himselfe, hath no colour for an Appeale, nor person to appeale vnto, vnlesse it be from his words, to his deedes, which need then to bee very remarkeable. Howsoeuer, he must acknowledge it to bee great folly, to haue denyed that ability in himselfe, which hee desires to haue made knowne.
But such men bee seldome found, that say not of themselues full as much as they can doe.



Of Ambition.
IT is an vnlimited desire, neuer satisfied. A continuall proiecting without stop. An vndefatigable search of those things wee wish for, though want not. No contentment in a present state, though fortunate, and prosperous.
An Ambitious man is in a kinde of continuall perambulation, or perpetuall courting of aduancement, not respecting the meanes, Bribery, Flattery, Humility, Popularitie, seeming Seueritie or Austerenesse. Any of which, so they conferre, and conduce to his owne ends, whether for Titles, or Preeminence, or Estimation, shall bee disguises good enough for
 the present occasion.
The Scripture saith, Quise exaltat, humiliabitur. Whosoeuer exalts himselfe, shall be humbled. Not hee that is worthily exalted by others, and whose merits bee the cause of his rising, but he that will Ambitiously exalt himselfe, hee shall bee abased.
That disposition, which is naturally infected, with this Leprosie (which is a spreading disease) can not foresee the ineuitable dangers and euents, that be incident therevnto. Phauorinus speaking of these kinde of men, said they were eyther ridiculous, or hatefull, or miserable. Aspiring ambitiously to places beyond their worth, makes them scorned: obtaining, hated: and missing of their hopes, wretched.

 If the current of their Ambition bee once stopped, like an impetuous torrent, it beates and breakes the bankes, growes dangerous, and many times causes inundations. Therfore Princes respects, if they be fixed vpon such natures, are tyed not only to a continuation, but an addition of fauors; for the least surcease makes declination in seruice. So that these dispositions should bee auoyded: if discouered, sequestred from imployment, as pernicious and incendiary.
Ambition was the first temptation by which the Diuell wrought vpon our first Parents, to encite them to a desire of knowing good and euill equally with God.
It is a strange insinuating affection, for whosoeuer is once therewith possessed, neither Reason, nor
 Impediment, nor Impossibility can stay his extrauagant desires. For though Nabuchadnezzar enioyed all greatnesse possibly incident to man, yet his Ambition stopt not, he would be worshipped as God. It was not Vertue nor Reason that counselled Sylla and Marius, Pompey and Caesar, to enterprise their domestique warres, but a disordinate loue of flattering Ambition; being in their owne opinions not great enough, which caused the ruine both of themselues and Countrey. And as this was theirs, so it is the generall and principall motiue to all seditious, and trecherous attempts. But these men whilst they tosse all, bee themselues most shaken, and inwardly feele the torture of this pernicious fury, wherewith they haue offended others. Therefore
 it is Apocrypha to thinke that any man can become truely happy by the way of an other mans misfortune, if for his owne particular hee be the contriuer.
When Ambition seazeth vpon a man, peraduenture his first ayme will be but vpon designes within his reach, or fit for his capacity, which if obtained, is the way to conduct him to higher cogitations, and so by degrees, from step to step, the more Ambition is fed, the more appetite it hath.
It is in a kinde the Ape or imitater of Charity, saith a Father; for Charity endures all things for Eternall, Ambition for Transitory happinesse. That is liberall to the poore, this to the rich. The one suffers for Verity, the other for Vanity. So they both beleeue all things, and
 hope for all things, but in a different kinde.
I cannot more fitly resemble an Ambitious man, then to one that should haue a fancy, to take a iourney East-ward, to the place where the Sun seems in rising to touch and to be ioyned to the earth, in hope to arriue within the reach of the same, alwayes going forward, but not comming neerer to his desire; still progressiue, neuer at an end, being impossible to finish it, but the further that he goes, the more earnest he is and impatient of protraction, and delayes. So that I may conclude such natures to be punished with Tantalus torture, of whom it is said, that that he desired, euer seemed to bee neere him, yet neuer within his command.
Some haue similized these kind
 of men with the Camelion. As that hath nothing in the body besides the lungs: so the badge of Ambition, is only windy, and boysterous ostentation.
It is a dangerous thing for men to loue too much, or thinke too well of themselues. The selfe-louer is the Arch-flatterer. Wisdome and caution may auoid the insinuatio^s of other men, but when a man begins to admire and applaud himselfe, there is no defence. Therefore this partiall estimation, or false glasse of a mans owne worth and merit, is the true cause of Ambition. In, or by this wee looke vpon our selues with our owne eyes, which are so quick-sighted in discerning and reading the infirmities of others, that they turne dimme when they reflect vpon our selues, according
 to the Scripture. A moate is easily spyed in the eye of our neighbour, but a beame in our owne is hardly visible.
Next to this Idolizing of a mans selfe, I cannot seuer it from the company of Enuy. For as the nature of Ambition is to commiserate our selues, for that wee seemingly want or desire: so when wee see another man possessed of that, that our endeuours aspired vnto, presently Enuy breaks forth, priuately maligning, publikely detracting what we can, both from his person, and actions.
Againe, if a Vacancie should happen of that place, wherevpon our whole course hath beene bent, then if another step betwixt vs, and home, Ambition changes into a malicious, and violent hatred against
 him that possesseth against his friends that opposed vs, and against the giuer, that conferred, or bestowed it. And then vpon this we grow auerse, and sullen in all our actions, and venter vpon any mischiefe of the highest degree, or largest extent.
Besides these, it is impossible for an Ambitious man to iudge, and estimate the parts, and qualities of another, in respect of his owne: for his opinionated sufficiency makes him vndervalue, and his malice, to vndermine euery man besides, and either to find, or out of his malignity to faine whatsoeuer is done contrary, or vnknowing to him, to be deficient.
But if it happen (as it doth rarely) that their owne consciences conuince them of another mans
 desert and merit, presently they suspect opposition in their greatnesse, and that their eminency may be eclipsed. Wherefore they striue and straine by all possible inuentions to put disgraces vpon his person and parts, thereby to hinder his rising. For whilst he is out of imployment, finding that he cannot so publikely expresse his worth, they still labour to keep him in obscurity, to the end that themselues may seeme and appeare more glorious.
But if this emulation happen betwixt them and one of as publike note, or equall estimation with themselues, then in all ioynt actions and consultations, they will endeuour to take from him, and adde as much to themselues in the opinion of the world, as either industry
 or Art can deuise. Which kind of contention is pernicious to all well-ordred Commonwealths. For when euery one seeks to be principall, or to engrosse all within his owne Circumference, and to compasse the rest with subiection, or affects to make himselfe the encreasing figure, whilst the rest serue but for supplyes, faction in businesse, confusion in directions, do necessarily follow.
And what be these men that so extremely affect Superiority, and Primacy in all affaires? Do they good to the Publike, or is their seruice equiualent to their preferment? Do they shew by their actions that this was the principal motiue that caused them to desire greatnesse? No. For an Ambitious man, so soone as he is aduanced, remembers
 no more the duty, but the precedency of his place.
Some of this sort that thinke themselues most cunning in their trade, will not plainly professe Ambition, but maske, or shadow it with other colours, whereby they hope they may more safely passe, vndescried, vndiscouered. They will propound their owne merit and ability, or defect in others, and protest they haue no particular ends, but publike reformation; for which only cause, they are content to deuote, and enthrall themselues; when the truth is, the spurre that pricks them forward to these designes, is glory, and command aboue others.
Therfore there is no way to keepe this desire concealed, but vtterly to extinguish it.

 If we doe but view these men that haue their desires, and enioy their wishes, certainly we should not think it so glorious, and happy a thing, as it is giuen out for. Vexation, and trouble continually attend it. And besides they bee not much more burthensome to others, then grieuous to themselues. Long to continue at the height, is seldome seene. Extraordinary fauours be vncertaine, and slippery. Retire they cannot without staggering, nor descend, if not precipitately. Light burdens bee easily taken on, or cast off, without feeling; but if wee bee ouer-loaden, wee seldome faile but fall or sinke. And no man proceeds so happily, but sometimes hee is crost, the trauels and wayes of this life be so
 mixt and confused. Therefore Ambitious men had need prefixe a certaine limit to their increase, and not to attend the retyring of Fortune.
To affect superiority aboue others, when a mans desire is predominant ouer his reason, argues distemper and weakenesse.
Some great men that haue, or haue had great Offices, complaine of the paines and vexation they suffer, or haue suffered, with the weight and burthen of their charge, being worn in yeeres, and decayed both in spirit and strength. If therefore according to this they would, or could haue beene content to withdraw, or retire themselues, in respect of weaknesse and debility, from Publique affayres, it would haue expressed an excellent temper,
 and moderation. But few such voluntaries bee found. The traines of Ambition, Profit, and Pompe, detaine them, and whilest they say they hate the trouble, they shew by continuing, that they adore the glory, and gaine that followes it.
But lest we may confound Ambitious, with worthy desires, take these few differences, or distinctions. For the desire of glory in it selfe is not ill, but it is the excesse, or defect that makes it so. The meane betweene both cannot be exprest in one word, yet is commendable and allowed for a Vertue. So saith Aristotle, Laudatur habitus qui modum adhibet in expectanda gloria, etiamsi uacet nomine. Shewing the affecting of glory to be matter both of Vertue, and Vice, according as
 it is gouerned, as well as any other passion of the minde.
The vndergoing, or vndertaking of Publique businesse, so it be more for the generall good, then a mans priuate respect, is euer profitable to the Common-wealth; but to affect it too much in any kind whatsoeuer, is alwayes taken in the worst sense.
For men of place, or Fauorites to bee zealous in the streame, or generall course of businesse, is commendable, but to be violent, or singular, in the particulars, vnsufferably dangerous.
To desire precedency aboue others in respect of ones seruice, or merit, is a good emulation. Nam honos alit artes, omnesque incenduntur ad studia gloria, saith Cicero. For aduancement nourisheth Learning,
 and all men are enflamed to study, by the hope of honour and glory subsequent. But to aspire vnto it without either, intolerable Arrogance.
To bee hunting after all preferment, to follow euery shadow, shewes a man to be inconstant, and expresseth leuity: but to refuse Honor when it is offered, which as Seneca saith, is Fructus verae virtutis honestissimus, the honestest reward of Vertue, argues Pusillanimity.
If a man seeke or labour to attaine fauour, and preferment, with this onely intention, that by that way, he may haue better meanes to doe good, to reduce ill Custome, to the most ancient, and commendable formes, and to amend breaches, or intrusions, or decayes, with particular respect to this,
 without the least tincture of vaine-glory, or any other selfe-desire, this kinde of Ambition I admit as a Vertue, and in this case, I allow it to be generous.
Our first thoughts should be to make our selues worthy to receiue dignity, and employment; thesecond, that the world should haue a good estimation, and opinion of our merit; and (that which generally with others is the first) with vs should be the third, fruition of that wee thinke our selues able to discharge, and the world thinkes vs worthy to enioy, and not that which our priuat respects, and particular Ambition makes vs forward to desire. According to Pliny in an Epistle: Omnia metir ^ dignitate malim quam ambitione.
Scientia quae est remota a iustitia,calliditas potius quam sapientia est appellanda, saith Plato. Knowledge separated from that which is vpright, is rather called craft, then wisedome. So a mind that is prepared and ready for any great action, neuer so worthy, or full of hazzard, if the inducement to this be onely his owne particular ends, or profit, and not the publike, or common good, this certainly is better termed in him impudent and rash Ambition, then either Valor, or Vertue.
To conclude, men that haue good aymes and ends in aspiring, are not so expressely Votaries to the Publique, as that they bee secluded (by honest and iust wayes, free from scandall, importunitie, vexation, and tax) euen by the meanes of the present fauour, and
 place they enioy, to raise or encrease their Fortune^, to honor and aduance their Posteritie, so it bee done with moderation, and modestie.


Of Affectation.
AFFECTATION is an ouer-serious loue, to ordinarie, and minute qualities: or, the putting on the abiliments of sufficiencie on the body of Pride.
It is a vanity, that shame forbids to bee acknowledged, yet folly permits not to be concealed. For howsoeuer a man may appeare to himselfe more complete, and full, in the vestiments of Vertue, by their largenesse; yet in the eye of another, their disproportion will make him seeme the more slender.
 None being fit to weare the coat of Hercules, but such as haue strength to weild his club. Nor shall he euer bee thought to haue Caesars spirit, that much careth to scratch his head like him with one finger.
It argues a desire of honour, but no action towards it: for whatsoeuer the wishes of one that vseth affectation ayme at, yet his attempts reach no higher then to the imitation of certaine gestures, and manners of speech, which being comely, facile, and naturall, as they haue the second place to reall Vertue; so if they be vnsuteable, forced, or counterfet, they come no lesse neere to Vice, and diminish more the estimation, then some great crimes.
For whereas some such vices
 as be notorious, make a man more welcome into some societies, and some make him to be feared. This vanity causeth him to bee desired in no company, but scorned, and contemned in all.
I esteeme it a great vexation to see one affect a grauity in behauiour, as hee will looke vpon you with the stayednesse of a Statue, and obserue^ a set distance betweene euery word, like the Images that strike the Clocke at euery quarter. And some againe with more gesticulations then an Ape, to seeme to daunce about you. Some will carry their heads as if they vsed a bridle, and some so loosely, as if they needed one. Some had rather bee lame of a hand, then not seeme so, that they may weare a Scarfe. Or of a legge,
 then lose the grace of carrying a French sticke.
It appeares most in some that returne from Trauelling, who being vncapable of other proficiency by their obseruations of gouernments of Nations, situation of Countreys, dispositions of People, their Policy, and the like, these things not vnderstanding, or not knowing how to apply, which to the bettering of our iudgement, and manners, is the right vse of all we finde either in reading, or trauell, they in their stead bring home onely fashions of behauiour, and such outward apparances, that a man must guesse they haue trauelled (for there is no other way) by a Legge, or a Peccadill, or a Pieadeuant, or a new block, or a mangled sute, or words all complement, and
 no sense, or mincing of their owne language, or making new and absurd deriuations, such as yet the world neuer heard of: or in euery period of their discourse, to say something of Paris, and Orleans, Bloys, and Tours, and then conclude that the Riuer of Loire is the most nauigable of the world; or to talke of their Mistresses, and protest that the French Damoiselle is the most courtly, most complete, and for exquisitenesse in behauiour and fashion, may be a pattern to all the Ladies of Europe: and from hence they will take occasion, to fall into a digression of their loues, and to tell what hazzards they haue past, with the Wife of such a Merchant, or the Daughter of such a Gouernour, or Mistris of such a Prince.

 All which fashions, obseruations and wonders, be collected with being a few moneths in France. And thence being wafted ouer, the first man they meet, is sure to know (if this halfe yeere in France hath not made them to forget their English tongue) the dangerousnesse of their passage, how neere shipwracke they were, and talke as learnedly and seriously of Nauigation, onely by the experience they haue gotten in this double passage in a little Barke, to and fro, as the best Captaine can doe that hath been three times in the East-Indies.
But all these things before rehearsed, and diuers more of the same kinde, are not onely their first month, or halfe yeeres imitation, and discourse vpon their returne,
 but continue to their dying day.
At London being arriued, they are sure to make their first apparance with their last sute vpon the Stage, there practice, their complement and courtesies vpon all their acquaintance, make three or foure forced faces, thence vpon their Curtoe, with a Page and two Lacqueys all in a Liuery, goe to the Tauerne, finde fault with all the Wine, and yet be drunke: in which disguise they post to their Sisters, or Aunts, or Grandmother, where they will bee admired for their absurdities, and almost made madder then they are by their praises.
These be affected Monsieurs: but they that passe the Mountaines, and leaue all this leuitie behinde
 them, what doe they obserue? How doe they returne? (I meane still affected Trauellers) Of the two the worse, and the more absurd, because the more graue. For a light foole is alwayes more sufferable then a serious.
The forced grauity of these, so set them forth, as any man may discouer them with halfe an eye, especially hauing the dependances of an Italian Sute, Spanish Hat, Milan Sword, N^ds in stead of legs, a few shrugges, ^^ if some vermine were making a Progresse from one shoulder to another, and the like.
This for their outside: but their discourse makes them euery where ridiculous. The name of an English Gelding frights them, and thence they take occasion to fall into the commendation of a
 Mule or an Asse. A Pasty of Venison makes them sweat, and then sweare, that the onely delicacies be Mushrums, or Caueare, or Snayles. A toast in Beere or Ale driues them into Madnesse, and so to declaime against the absurd, and ignorant customes of their owne Countrey, and therevpon digresse into the commendation of drinking their Wine refreshed with Ice, or Snow. So that those things which in other Countries be vsed for necessity, they in their own will continue, to shew their singularity.
It were not hard in this discourse to point out the men, and it were a good deed to giue you their names, that they may bee publiquely knowne, lest some ignorant of their manners,
 bee by their outside misledde to admire them. But this may suffice, by which you may see, that the leuity of the French, and grauitie of the Transalpine Traueller, bee equally ill in the way of imitation; for nothing can shew well that is forced. Besides that, they imitate but imperfectly, and with lesse grace, like the Stars, that shew vs the Sunnes light, but with lesse splendor.
And they so extremely loue to be thought well dyed into Italian and French, as their eyes are offended at whatsoeuer hath any colour of English. And to be esteemed familiarly acquainted with other Countries, will seeme, and thinke it an honor to haue forgotten both the fashions, and language of their owne.

 But one sort of affectate Trauellers yet remaine, and they be the seeming Statesmen of the time, empty bladders repleate with nothing but winde, such as being abroad, though it be but in some butter Town of Holland, wil make their first enquiry after such as professe to reade Theorie of Statisme; fellowes that swarm in most places abroad, especially in Germany, or those places where the Dutch most vsually frequent, that nation being easie and apt to be gulled by these Impostors; beggerly Cheaters, that will no sooner vndertake to teach, but these co^stantly belieue to learne. In the space of sixe moneths (for that is the longest time strangers vse abroad to stay in one place) they will make them able, and when the time is past,
 they will so beleeue themselues to be, or peraduenture sooner (they are so fruitfull in their owne conceits) that they may declare their abilities to be fit for the employment of the greatest Prince, State, or affaire in the world.
And this wonder by their professor of State, is thus miraculously wrought by reading vnto them, with some most pittifull obseruations of their owne, and diuers repetitions of the same things, as they vse to deale with Schooleboyes, a piece of Gallo-Belgicus. Some discourse in Tesoro politico, a part of Sleyden with Pezelius notes, or the like, as, if by reading onely, a man could apt himselfe for publike employment such a Master, such a Reader, such fragments, so short a time would enable him therevnto.

 Following this in all places where they come, the very name of a Manuscript rauisheth them, though it bee but copied out of some absurd booke, printed the last Mart; which once knowne, as it will be, by their often enquiry for things of that kinde, (any thing, it's no matter what, neither doe they know more then in generall the name of a Manuscript) few mornings passe, that some poore Scribe or other doth not coozen them in that kinde.
Meeting with any of their owne Nation, they will endeuour to make them beleeue that they are as well acquainted with the counsell, proiects, and policies of that State or Court where they liue, as any that be there, though of the highest employment. They will
 tell what wayes they haue found out in Cyphring, and what charge they haue been at for Intelligence, which is demonstrated by hauing some papers wauing in their hands, though emptie, or at least but filled with their Hosts last account.
They will protest their entirenesse and inwardnesse with the men of the greatest name and employment in those parts, though peraduenture they neuer saw their faces, nor neuer heard them spoken of, but by a Mountebanke in the Piazza.
But for the great Ones, in their owne Country, what is it not they will say, to make vs beleeue they are with them the onely great and entire men of the world? Which familiaritie betwixt them they will
 endeuour to expresse by shewing their names to letters, though counterfaite, and Coppies of letters they pretend they haue writ to them, though neuer sent.
They will further tell you, that they are absent thus long abroad, (the State at home taking knowledge of their abilitie) because they would yet reserue some libertie to themselues, and not bee wholly taken vp (as they be sure, if they were returned they should bee) with publike employment.
And then they will returne to generalls, and speake of Intentions, and Treaties, and Things, where they will stop with a shrug, or a Desunt nonnulla, and so referre you to the Starres for a consequence: as if these things
 were too secret, too deepe for your knowledge, or to make you beleeue that the multiplicity of affaires and State-businesse distract and trouble their minds; when God knowes, the most that they thinke or ruminate vpon, is to get the estimation and opinion in the world, of that which they haue no colour to pretend to, viz. Witte.
Againe, being abroad, they will tra^slate the very Gazzette, the most ordinarie and vncertaine newes in the World, to send ouer by whole bundles into England, which some particular friends of theirs, that know no more of forraigne busines, then their letters infuse into them, by this means are made to beleeue that the senders are serious, intelligent, and graue, and so they
 looke too, when they come home; but thats all. And better vse I know not which way to put them to, then as a signe for those things they outwardly, yet vnhandsomly imitate.
That little which they speake, or thinke, or doe, smels of State. For to get but the name of an employment abroad, they will engage themselues, their friends, and fortunes. That is the vttermost of their Ambition.
But that small reputation which report gaue them heere, their owne presence at their returne, doth vtterly make to vanish. And by this meanes, which no other way could euer bring to their knowledge, they finde the fruit of their ostentation, and those vaine imaginations which before possessed them.
 And thus much briefly of an affected Statist. Now to other sorts.
It's Affectation in one, though naturally an elegant Speaker, not to descend a little to the capacitie of such as he conferres withall. For to some Country Husbandmen, one were as good speake Latine, as good English.
To vse, in discoursing of an ordinary subiect, words of a high, sounding, and Tragicke straine, is as vnseemelie, as walking on stilts, where one may as well goe in slippers.
Likewise Rusticitie in speech, and base popular phrases, in themselues shew want of education, but affected, discouer folly to boote.
Old Antique words, such as haue beene dead, buried, and
 rotten in the time of our Great Grand-fathers, would become the ghost of Chaucer on a Stage, but not a man of the present time.
Likewise, New words, like a new Coyne, will not easily be receiued, till both their weight, and stampe haue beene examined. To which may be referred the saying of Pomponius Marcellus, who finding fault with some thing that was said in an Oration of Tyberius Caesars, Atteius Capito contrarily affirmed, that if it were not now Latine, yet it would bee heereafter. That is not so (saith Marcellus) for though Caesar can giue naturalization in the City of Rome, to men, yet he cannot doe so to words. For they can neuer be admitted, till Custome haue allowed them.
 That must bee referred to publike vsance, not to Caesars power.
There bee others that delight in figures, and their words fall in, one after another like sequents; which they bring in, in spight both of perspicuitie, and sence. And commonly, where a speech is all figures, you shall finde the matter a meere Cypher.
Like to these, are such as out of a poore Ambition to obtaine the grace of some good and decent word, or Metaphore, will not sticke (so they may get it into their writing) to write that which before they neuer intended, nor is perhaps to the purpose, or to alter the whole frame of their discourse. And for the
 most part such words, as they are sought with much paine, so they are placed at little ease, and trouble either the matter, or the method, or the stile, for want of elbow roome.
The worst Affectation of all other, is to affect horrible oathes in speech, which some doe, thinking them orname^ts, or signes of a great spirit, as indeede they are signes of such a spirit as they would be frighted to see appeare.
Or telling of wonders and Miracles, whereby expecting to beget admiration, they carry away the reputation of liers.
Lastly, there is a sort of people, that as in all things they loue singularity, so in this, that they will subscribe to no word that sauours not of the Catechisme, accounting naturall and good Speech, as Ethnicke,
 and vnsanctified: But this were better called Hypocrisie then Affectation.



Of Detraction.
IT is the tongue both of Enuy and Arrogance, which two, though they differ in their nature, yet concerning the good name of another, they speak both one language; equally striuing to diminish, or takeaway the reward of their Vertue, which is Reputation and Honour.
This, and Charity be directly Antipodes. The glory of the one is to couer, of the other to discouer infirmities. Charity interprets all things to the best, the other in the worst sense: the whole respects of the first, are to do good to others: but in the Detractor, all things are referred to himselfe. Many other dissimilitudes might be found, but
 these suffice to shew how contrary they be; which at the first view, sets but an ill glosse vpon Detraction, when it is opposite to Charitie.
From Contumelie, it is no otherwise distinguished, then as a thiefe on the way, from him that picks your purse, or priuily filches your goods in your absence. The first is more violent, but the second more frequent and more damnifying.
It hath little force where vertue is eminent. For there Imputation is reuerberated, and made to returne on the Author, who deprauing the fame of a man of knowne desert, workes no other effect in his hearers, then an opinion of his owne priuate malignity, like a tempestuous Sea, beating against a firme Rocke, which though it
 shew much fury, workes no dammage.
The Detractor, to anie laudable atchieuement, will be sure to finde out wrong causes, and to good things, wrong names; as if a man be liberall, hee is prodigall: if parsimonious, couetous: if magnificent, ambitious: if courteous, then hee is of a weake and seruile spirit: if graue, then proud: if considerate in danger, then a Coward: if valorous, rash: if silent, cunning: if a discourser, then one that loues to heare himselfe talke. When Iohn Baptist came neither eating, nor drinking, they said hee had a Deuill: and when our Sauiour came eating, and drinking, they said, Behold a Glutton, and a wine-bibber. And so forward, that there is almost nothing that a man can bee or doe,
 which a Detractor wil not peruert.
Though to praise any thing, be against his stomake, yet hee will magnifie Fortune when shee hath any hand in an enterprise, that Vertue (to which he giues the name of the confining Vice) may the lesse appeare.
They are the very moths, that corrupt and canker in euery Common wealth; how they worke, and weare, and eate into euery mans good name, experience witnesseth. They bee of a poysonous quality, and deuourers of mens reputations, and therfore aptly described by the Psalmist, Their throate is an open Sepulcher, with their tongues haue they deceiued, the poyson of Asps is vnder their lips. A Sepulchre indeede: for mens fames and good reports are in a manner buried in those
 graues, their deceitfull tongues are the instruments, and the poyson vnder their lips the materialls, by which so much mischiefe is wrought.
And wheras men that bereaue vs of our liues, do rarely passe without the encou^ter of some or other condigne punishment; shall these that depriue vs of that which is inestimably dearer, passe vnpunished? No. For we see that publike Iustice doth often meete with Libellers, and Defamers, and there is no Co^monwealth, or Kingdom, in which they be not branded. Neuerthelesse anciently, and in popular States, the liberty of euil tongs hath been more tolerated then now it is, when they haue not onely pointed at, on the Stages, but also vsually named with derision, and taunts, the men of
 greatest dignitie, and that in presence of themselues so touched. And indeede in manie Commonwealthes, it hath beene a bridle to the lice^tiousnesse of Greatnesse, in their morall conuersation, though that were but an euill remedie. But in a Monarchie, the same would but haue beene as a spurre to seditions and tumults. For it is not so much euery particular man that suffers by these mens rancor, and malice, as the whole Fabricke of the Republike.
The actions of great men, their liues, their orders, be most seuerely and strictly viewed. That which they do for the publike, these will pretend to bee done for priuate ends. If things according to former consultation succeed wel, they wil take the praise wholly from them,
 and bestowe it vpon chance; if otherwise, they will take it from chance, and lay it wholly vpon their consultations. In briefe, they will misconstrue and mis-apply all manner of acts, and whatsoeuer tends to the peace, and good of the State, they with their best subtilties will oppose, but howsoeuer, disapproue.
In which respect they iustly deserue the punishment that is layd vpon them, Ecclesiasticus 28. verse 13, 14. Curse the whisperer and double-tongued, for such haue destroyed many that were at peace. The backbiting tongue hath disquieted many, and driuen them from Nation to Nation. Strong Cities hath it pulled downe, and ouerthrowne the houses of great men. This so fully touches the danger that the greatest men, and Nations
 fall into, by suffering this kinde of people, that I need not in this point further to illustrate it.
In the next place it will not bee amisse by way of example, to shew that by this meanes, the worst causes doe alwaies set themselues of, in disgrace of the better, which rule will neuer faile. One instance I will giue. The Separatists, or Sanctified, as they terme themselues, what doctrine haue they more frequent, what point more vrged, then for the propagation, as they say, of the holy cause. First, with the Pharise to magnifie themselues, and their own opinions, then with termes vnfit to be heard, talke of Ecclesiasticall functions, Ceremonie, and Gouernment, with that disdaine and reproch, that they graffe in their followers such an opinion
 against them, that they thinke all of the contrary opinion, children of Perdition, in the state of Damnation, sonnes of Belial, vnsanctified, lewd, profane, and vngodly persons. But leauing this path that hath been so often beaten, let vs view it in other colours.
Commonly if hee heare any man out of discontent, or choller, let slip a word to the derogation of another, he presently takes his aduantage, and his Exordium thence, for some malicious Oration. Which with that person confirmes the ill opinion already conceiued, strengthens his malice, increaseth his hate, and makes him glory with himselfe, that hee goes not alone, but hand in hand with other company in his erroneous
 conceits, and that which priuate respects made him formerly to dislike, that now hee thinkes the others merits might as well prouoke.
By this artifice the Detractor would bee thought but a second in the point, whereas hee is indeed the first, or rather onely deprauer.
Sometimes hee will professe loue to a person, whom notwithstanding for truth and sincerities cause, hee will pretend not to be able to praise, and so fall into an inquisition of his life, and manners, like the fellow in Horace.
Me Capitolinus conuictore vsus, amico-Que a puero est, causaque mea permulta rogatus Fecit, and incolumis laetor quod viuit in vrbe. Sed tamen admiror quo pacto Indicium illud Fugerit. Hic nigrae succus loliginis, haec est Aerugo mera, etc.

 Hee deales with a man, as the stone in Nabuchadnezzars dreame, mentioned in the second of Daniel, did with the great Image which it ouerthrew. But thus, it medled not with the gold, nor the siluer, nor the brasse in the Statue; but the lower parts, the legges and feete, which were of iron and clay, those it brake in pieces, and so ruined the rest. In like manner the Detractor touches not the Gold, that is, a mans Vertue, which shines like it; nor the siluer, which is a mans wisedome, and iudgement, and resembles it; nor the brasse, that is, a mans Nobility which glisters like it; but the iron and clay feete, that is, a mans infirmities, weakenesses, errours, those with an vncleane tongue they wound and strike, and by that meanes ouerthrow
 his Honor and Fame in all other parts and qualities, though neuer so eminent, in the meane time no body forcing him, without cause to vtter that truth, to the preiudice of another, that charity would haue concealed.
Here it will be pertinent to enquire something touching the liberty of censuring, with what cautions it is limitted, and how farre to be allowed.
A Censurer, is more the^ any other, obnoxious to Ce^sure, for he thrusteth himselfe into the office of a Iudge, by which eminency he conuerteth mens eyes on himselfe: and because hee is to be supposed lesse faulty then the reprehended, they are therefore also inuited to a more strict consideration of his life, and no lesse, but rather much more to
 censure him, then he another.
Yet vpon occasion giuen, or vrged, when a man is freely to speake his opinion, the concealing, or couering, or blanching a knowne, or publique errour in any man, confirmes and strengthens him that is vicious, and by this approuing, or at least not blaming, incourageth others to the like, and withall greatly darkens our owne reputation: for conniuency in this kinde, makes men beleeue, that we our selues bee subiect to the same fault. But this liberty of censuring I do thus farre onely allow, that it be amongst such, as do particularly know that mans deformities, and not others that be strangers vnto it. For then we should encrease rumor, and cause an ill opinion to be had of him.

 Next, the liberty of loue, and respect, will freely allow a man to doe it priuately to his friend; but the^ let not any foole be his friend, lest he take the benefit for an iniury. And it must be without any bitternesse, or spleene, which will rather gall, then correct him, that we so speake vnto.
If the particular errours of any one doe, iudicially and pertinently to the cause, come in question, there is no doubt but the blemishes, especially in Publique, bee to be taxed with all manner of aggrauation: but the man, in charitie is not to bee triumphed ouer, though this cannot but reflect vpon him. Yet humane frailety which is co^mon to vs al, is inducement enough, so long as no preiudice follow by the example, to
 make the best interpretation that so ill a cause, so ill a man, can deserue. And certainly there is a great deale of caution, and sparing to be vsed in this kinde of ripping vp a mans life: but if necessity bring such a man before you, and that he cannot scape a censure, yet vse no opprobrious, or disdainfull words against him.
Sometimes such as haue receiued iniuries from a man, and in that respect be dis-affected to him: they will be often glad to take aduantage, at his life and conuersation, in heate and choller, by that meanes to bee reuenged of him. But though this be against the rule of Charitie, yet in the strictest sense it cannot come within the bounds of Detraction. For the one is impelled, the other voluntary; a certaine
 habit of doing mischiefe, without cause giuen.
All truths be not to be spoken, (especially if we receiue them but by report) but a man may bee forced to discouer such a truth, as may preiudice another, and yet be free from Detraction.
Sometimes a man may seeke into, or discouer anothers infirmities, either vpon his own, or friends cause, and yet not detract, for these respects. If such a man doe an iniury, it cannot but accidentally fall, in a mans Iustification, to shew what a kinde of man he is, from whom he hath receiued it. Or suppose a man haue a cause iudicially depending, and the most dangerous thing against him be the deposition of such a man, the ciuill Law then allowes, that a man may, to
 weaken or take away his testimonie, bring what he can possibly against him that may touch him in life or conuersation.
Againe, though a man neede to haue a doore before his lips, and to vse a great deale of discretion and moderation, in whatsoeuer he shall say, yet if he should chance to fall vpon a man, a little too boldly in the way of censuring; certainely if it proceede but from rashnesse, and no will, or purpose in himselfe to doe the other hurt, I cannot aptly call it Detraction. There may bee named other particulars of this nature, yet I cannot presently thinke of any very materiall, that will not bee included within some of these. But to goe forward to his description.
Hee inueigheth much against
 Flattery, and glories that he is free fro^ it, making that a cloake to shrowd his calumniation. And though it be commendable in euery man else to auoyd Flattery, yet it is not so in him, because it proceeds from a peruerse crookednesse of nature, that cannot endure anothers praise, though iust.
He likewise protests against dissimulation. But if he discourse of any mans actions but his own, you shall easily obserue him to dissemble that which makes most for his reputation. For, in reckoning vp persons expert in some faculty, to leaue out one of the best, and most marked in that kinde, or, in commending a mans smaller vertues, to forget his better and greater parts, is a dissimulation as deprauing as the bitterest Inuectiue.

 Also hee that giues willing eare to a Detractor, Qui non defendit, alio culpante, solutos Qui captat risus hominu^, famamque dicacis, Hor. or applaudes the Satyricall conceits of such a one, is an Accessary to this crime, if not a Principall. For as the one hath the Diuell in his tongue, so the other in his eares. Heare but a Detractor willingly, and you encourage him to speake; whereas, if you but shew an auersenesse to him, he then learnes vnwillingly to speake, that which he knowes you doe not willingly heare.
So that though his teeth seem placed only in his tongue, yet he hath diuers wayes of biting, as Dauid complaines, Psal. 57. verse 4. My soule is amongst Lyons: and I lye euen amongst them that are set on fire, euen the sonnes of men, whose teeth are
 speares, and arrowes, and their tongue a sharpe sword.
The persons that bee the Detractors obiects, are commonly greater then himselfe, and therefore though hee may darken their Fame, yet he can neuer totally eclipse it. Yet his endeuour is especially against such, because their brightnesse darkeneth and obscureth his. Like as the Moone, in coniunction with the Sunne, cannot shew her owne light, but can oft hide from vs part of his.
Some delight so much in speaking euill, that they will detract from the dead, though neuer offended by them. Such spirits as these, if they haue neuer spoken ill of God himselfe; haue onely this excuse, that they neuer knew him.
The scope of them is commonly
 the disgrace of another, but sometimes also, the shewing of the acuity of their owne iudgements, in discerning of mens actions, or sayings; as if they had beene placed here as a Chorus on the Stage, to censure and comment, or were the generall Inquisitors of the world. But it fals not out as they expect: for they discouer not acutenesse, but acrimony, nor are esteemed sharpe apprehenders, but bitter reprehenders.
Sometimes by depression of anothers merit, they ayme at the aduancement of their owne, finding themselues absolutely worthlesse and nothing, but contending to be somewhat by comparison.
Lastly, the Detractor, though he sow but words, oftentimes reapes seuerer requitals, or at least a plentifull
 haruest of his owne graine. Dehinc vt quiescant porro moneo and definant maledicere, malefacta ne noscant sua. Terent. For he shall be sure to heare as much euil as he speakes, and howsoeuer hee put his faults behinde himselfe, yet they hang before on the shoulder of another.



Of Selfe-will.
WHereas in euery man there bee two faculties of the reasonable Soule; namely, the Vnderstanding and the Will: this Vice will admit but one, giuing the whole administration of mans life into the hands of the latter; which doth so much tyrannize ouer our reason, that it makes vs wholly incapable of apprehending, when we heare good counsell: so resolued we be in our owne opinions, though neuer so bad, that we leaue no space for maturer directions, neuer calling to minde the possibility of the rule, that Standers by, oftentimes see more then those that play the game. And as this so opinionated conceit of our
 owne resolutions, continues the mist before our vnderstanding, making vs impatient to receiue any good counsell: so consequently, it deterres our friends from giuing it, as an vnnecessary and thanklesse office, they being out of hope that their endeuours shall preuaile, and also in feare to hazard the ill opinions of those they desire to continue for friends: as hauing in themselues altered the receiued definition of man, who being Animal ratione praeditum, should this way be Animal voluntate praeditum. Self-willed men being alwayes violent and impatient, if one endeuour to alter or crosse their resolutions, which though grounded vpon little consideration, and sudden rashnesse, yet they be generally so obstinate, and wel-conceited of themselues,
 that whatsoeuer they conceiue and purpose, must be peremptorie, and without alteration. For Selfe-will is nothing but a kinde of will that vsurpes the place and office of reason, giuing Antecedence to her actions, before those of the Vnderstanding: as to Resolution, before Deliberation; Execution, before Counsell; and the like. For it is not reason that guides this wil, because they can giue you none for it, except you will take this for one, I will, because I will: which is an absurd, womanish, and childish Iustification, and an argument of so smal force, that it is a shame to vse it.
And this is that depriues most enterprises of good successe, but alwaies (howsoeuer be the euent) the enterpriser of commendation. For good euents depending
 ordinarily vpon good counsell, they seldome chance without it; when they doe, it is by fortune, whence can arise no glory to the doer, but must wholly be attributed to some chance. And if any crosse accident interpose it selfe, this takes away all excuse. For as it is seemly in no man after a chance, to say, I did not thinke; so it is inexcusable in him, when the cause is his refusing of good counsell, or hearing and neglecting it, following none but his owne. Like a bad Logician, it layes the conclusion downe first, and seeks the premises and inducements after; or as a worse Iudge, decrees at home, and after heares the parties at the Barre.
A man so conceited of himselfe, can bee no companion in deliberatiues, but rather precipitates
 them, and is altogether of a nature vnfit for businesse, as comming with preiudicate opinions, so vsurping vpon our reason, that we will heare none from any else. And therefore if this violence and selfe-conceit be so dangerous in a Councellor, it is farre more in a Iudge. For in the first there is equalitie of voyces, and a man cannot so easily sway. But in a Iudge, if the will resolue before, with a kinde of settled opinion, notwithstanding any thing that can be vrged to the contrary by the Councell at the Barre, I see no vse of pleading, farther then to draw the Iudges inclination, and for formality.
It takes away also from a man both his sight and his guide, and yet hastens his pace, which must needs cause precipitation. Whereas
 receiuing of good counsell, is to one both a light, and a guide, and a staffe, and assures him more then the wall, and the watch doth a City.
A Selfe-will'd person most commonly stops his eares to aduice, as to an enchantment, and when hee is content to heare it (which is seldome) hee doth it either as onely for custome, bringing with him a resolution what to doe, whatsoeuer shall be said, and (knowing that strong and euident reason hath in it selfe a kinde of violence) hee therefore armes himselfe against it with obstinacy: or else admits of counsell, out of a desire to act his owne deuices, as Xerxes, who began a speech to his Councell with this, That hee called them together not to aske their opinions,
 but to haue their confirmation of his.
Two things make this disease seeme incureable. The first is, that it keepes out the Physician that should open such passages, as being stopt, hinder recourse from the will to the iudgement. For hee that will admit a friend freely to giue him counsell, and to shew him the true causes of this vice, might easily auoid it. The second is, because the poyson of flattery is his ordinary food, and few dare oppose the violence of his Appetite.
Yet on the contrary, me thinks in time, a Selfe-willed person should bee cured, and become very wise, because no sort of men doe more often, or more
 deepely repent, or buy their repentance more dearely, then they doe. Yet such, if they come to amendment, are beholding for it more to their enemies, then friends; for they punish them for their follies, and by seeking aduantages, teach them to seeke defences for their safety, and flye to counsell. But as for friends, they be not likely to haue them many, nor wise; for who hauing iewels of that price, as wisedome, and ability to giue counsell, will be content to remaine and conuerse, where hee dare not vtter them, or they bee not at all set by? For as there can be no greater contentment to a wise man, then to haue his counsell made vse of; so there is no greater scorne and vexation, then to haue it neglected.

 This vice proceeds from two causes, which are first Arrogance, and next, a debility of the mind, possessed with an earnest desire to some pleasure or appearing contentment. The first cause works vpon stiffe and seuere natures: the latter, in women, and men of soft and effeminated affections. The first maketh the vnderstanding by preiudging, vnfit to discerne of good aduice: the latter disableth the will to follow it. The first makes it more dangerous: The second more incurable.
Yet betwixt Selfe-will and Affection, a man must distinguish as much as betwixt a setled resolution, and a wish, as one many times desires prohibited things may bee lawfull, though hee approues them not to bee so, and
 so followes not, but bridles his inclination.
Besides, notwithstanding all this, I hold it better for any man that hath a mediocrity of iudgement, to be wedded to his owne will, then to the will of any one man besides, the danger being equall of both sides; for as the aduenture is great, wholly to depend vpon our own wills, so inconstancie is farre worse, when a man will bevaried and disposed with diuers, or single opinions. It is better to subiect our selues to our owne appetites with little reason, then to another mans with lesse. The meane is, neither to resolue without apparance of reason, nor to be altred, vnlesse with better; neither to bee subiect to the will of another, nor too peremptory in our
 owne. It is the Counsell of diuers, and wise men, (amongst whom a mans selfe should bee of the Quorum) that most easily conducteth our actions to their desired ends.



Of Masters and Seruants.
THis part of Oeconomicall Iurisdiction is in abstract, a representation of a more publike Gouernment. To be vnexperienced in the first, argues much disability for the latter. Hee that cannot rule his owne familie, is much more incapable to gouerne a multitude.
In this description I accept not Seruants as bound, nor Masters as absolute, but take them in those degrees as with vs they be generally receiued, where there is left to both an equall libertie, and free election. And as a Seruant is bound in obedience to his Master, which is the part hee must act; so a Masters power is limited,
 that hee cannot impose vpon him dishonest employments, nor exact a strict performance of his seruant in any action of that sort. Wherefore, where commands be lawfull, obedience is due, otherwise not.
In your choyce, first, the occasion is to bee knowne, next, the man. For to affect extraordinary multitudes, expresseth ostentation.
If your owne knowledge acquaint you not with a seruant for your vse, then venter vpon anothers recommendation, but cautelously. First, know his integrity, and next, his iudgement; lest out of his affection he preferre one, for his preferment, and not for your vse; or that through ignorance he presume one to be fit, that is a mere
 stranger to such employments as your occasions require. And to take a man of his own word, is the worst of all. For many will promise for their owne sufficiency in those very things they vnderstand not.
To take a seruant, though capable of any impression, yet wanting experience, is more fit for a Master that hath employment in expectancy, then present, though certainly in time, such do proue the best Seruants, and follow onely the method of their Masters directions; for they seldomest varie from his very thoughts, and make such businesses as passe their hands, to be euen done by himselfe. But this way is laborious, and requires both an apprehending Seruant, and an intelligent Master.

 In matter of businesse, neuer thinke it to bee so well done by troopes, as few and able Seruants; for in dispatch numbers euer breed confusion, where affaires bee alike, and equally distributed. For your Seruants either trust too much one to another, or emulate, and so it rests vndone; especially if there be not one Superintendent, that gouernes and directs the rest. But if you haue businesses of diuers and sundry natures, then it is good to diuide the^ into such parts and degrees, as one man may not depend vpon another: for where one is full of employments, he must of necessity ranke his Seruants according to the diuersitie of his busines, conditionally, that he be sure himselfe often to take a particular account of their seuerall dispatches, which vsing,
 or omitting, prouokes either diligence, or carelesnesse in his seruant. More especially in the particular of employing your seruant in matters of account, and expence, you ought often to reuiew, and giue allowance of those things that passe vnder his charge. For first, you may trust one whom you thinke honest, though he be not, and then you are sure without great care to be deceiued. Next, if you be negligent in taking his accounts, and not remembring euery particular, you may suspect him that is honest, and without a cause; so that both for your owne sake, and his, this course will be necessarie.
Now in this great trust, that Masters be as it were of necessity tyed to conferre vpon their seruants, one whose integrity you are most
 confident of, is the man, that with the generall bulke, and burden of your affayres, I would haue you communicate, especially concerning those parts require secrecy, either in respect of your selfe, or others. If you should omit this, and referre all to your owne memorie, somethings might be forgot, others mistaken, when you are pressed both with multitudes, and varietie of businesse. Yet a Master need be very precise, what, and how much trust he reposes in a seruant: no man but is subiect to some faults, which they ought rather to hide, then to reueale. Communicating then of them to our seruants, doth not onely decrease respect, and opinion in them, but also subiects vs to their da^ger; if either vpo^ discontentment, malice, or trechery, they
 haue at any time a minde to doe vs an iniury; or, if their easinesse, and facilitie make them liberall in disclosing of trust, or else out of a hope to gaine grace and reputation, they bragge of the confidence reposed in them, which must be expressed by seeming to know those things of vs, that in reason we ought to conceale. And if a man cannot be so true to himselfe, as to keepe those things hee would haue secret from the knowledge of his seruants, why should hee expect more secrecy in a Seruant, then he findes in himselfe? For as we, out of some conceiued good opinion, lye open to them, it is likely, they also may haue some acquaintance, whom they equally esteeme, and may be as confident in disclosing their owne, and your trust
 to them, as you were to your man, and that friend may haue another, and so in time, our most concealod actions, become publique.
In particular and seuerall businesses, you must apply your direction to those that haue the dispatches of that kinde. For such as require consideration, and debate, I would haue you consult in generall, with all those you haue selected for businesse: and when you haue both discussed the difficulties, and resolued on the course, then for the expedition, referre it to the particular care of him, whose part is to deale with the affayres of that nature.
In this domination that Masters haue ouer their Seruants, two extremes are to be auoided. Seueritie,
 and Facilitie. One makes them to feare, the other, to presume too much. The first, brings them too neere the nature of Bondmen; the second, of Fellowes. This breeds hate, that contempt. But obserue the golden mediocritie, both to command, and not be feared; to be familiar, and not scorned.
Let your conuersation be such, that your seruants may take a patterne from your actions, of vertue, and not deformities. The liberty and licentiousnesse of Superiours doth not onely prouoke, but nourish vices in lower rankes. Men be naturally enclined to a pleasing and voluptuous kinde of life: and when they see those that be aboue them, to liue loosely without any manner of restraint, they thinke ^^ lawfull to imitate, and be ambitious
 to follow the fashion, as it were by president. Besides, this inconuenience happens to Masters themselues, that they cannot with iustice blame their Seruants, for those faults, whereof themselues be as guiltie, and for the example more blameable; especially, if they vse their seruants to base and dishonest employments, which must needs turne to their Iustification, if euer they fall into any errours of that, or the like kinde.
Alter your seruants rarely, and but vpon extraordinarie occasions. Doing otherwise, argues weakenesse in your first choise, leuitie in your change, and shewes you to be of an ill disposition.
And lastly, for those seruants that be of chiefest employment about you, as their businesse and
 trust is greater then the rest, so should their exhibition be: it doth not onely reward their merit, but makes them more diligent. And yet I would not haue you to be at once so liberall-handed, as that they should take that for their last reward: but vpon new occasions, and seuerall merits, expresse something of your bounty. And in your preferments, if your place can giue you leaue, they that way may be plentifully recompenced in subordinate employments vnder you, and so together both serue you, and profit themselues. If you haue not this way to preferre your Seruants, but that it must come out of your owne priuate state, then your businesse being the lesse, your traine may be the shorter. For as it expresseth ingratitude, not
 to reward feruants, So it shewes little foresight, if in indeuoring to raise the fortunes of too many you empaire your owne. But howsoeuer, when a seruant depends vpon you, as you ought not to defend him in doing of iniuries, so you are bound to protect him from receiuing them. Men of qualitie and place, they may, and must haue seruants, as well for Honor, as businesse. In appearing abroad, and entertainments at home, they be necessarie, and adde respect. But leauing the numbers, I will now descend to the description of such seruants, as the wisest Masters should affect to choose, and in what kinde he ought for to vse them.
And first in their choise, I would haue them to auoid all, of whatsoeuer present state, or fame, that
 had beene noted for, or branded with any notorious crime. It is seldome seene, that either punishment, or shame, reduce men to good, but rather confirme them in euill, and dissolute behauiour.
Neither would I take a man that presumed too much on his owne sufficiencie, or that seemed to bee extreme wise in his owne conceit. Such a disposition is fond and ridiculous in all sorts, but in a seruant most intolerable. For whatsoeuer he doth, will smell of Ostentation and Arrogance.
Men that bee married, they bee euer lesse diligent then others, and therefore he that can keep but few seruants, had best make choise of those that be single.
Such a one as is alwayes preaching to you of preferment, begging
 of Sures, and putting you in minde of his merit, is a seruant meerely for his own ends, and not at all for yours, and is euer accompanied with the spirit of impatience, and presumption.
Such as affect Principalitie in your employments, and Primacie aboue others, be of busie, enuious, ambitious, and factious disposition, and therefore vnfit for seruice.
Such as are too officious, and instruments of dissention in a house, by doing ill offices, betwixt a Master and the rest of his Family, in flattering of him, censuring or slandering of them, those natures be made of too crooked timber for this building.
Those that will be prying into your most secret affayres, censuring
 your actions, murmuring at your rebukes, be most pernicious, and incorrigible.
And lastly, I would auoid such as haue past through the hands of many Masters: for, as that may be a signe of some ill qualitie that they haue, so it necessarily expresseth them to bee of inconstant and giddy dispositions.
But such as be diligent and constant in their duties, faithfull in their seruice, trusty in their places, and louing to their Masters, be the seruants of whom you are to make election, resolution should be to keepe, and will to preferre, according to their merits, and your own abilitie.
A Masters part is to command, and a Seruants to obey: wisedome is required in the one, and duty
 in the other. Masters should so liue with their inferiours, as they would wish their Superiours should doe with them; and they know best how to gouerne, that know how to serue.
Put not your seruants to base offices, nor make them not the instruments of your licentiousnesse, and luxury.
Neither tyrannize ouer them with strokes, for that argues intemperance: nor rebuke them with publique checkes, and scornes, which be both insufferable, and disgracefull.
Suffer your seruant sometimes the freedome of speech, and let not his lips be euer sealed in your presence. They that speake least to you before your face, seldomest speake good of you behinde your
 backe. Such seruants as speake most freely before their Masters, bee most reserued in disgracing his person, or publishing his errours.
Thinke not your seruant, your slaue. Fortune hath as much power ouer the one, as the other. You haue no certainty of not being transferred to the same, or a worse degree. You are borne after the same manner, enioy the same ayre, eate the same bread, breathe, liue, and dye alike with them. Therefore insult not too much, and reduce them not to ouer-great subiection. For loue can neuer suffer mixture with feare. And thinke not that there is so great a distance betwixt you, and your seruant: for there bee few Masters, that serue not either Pride, or Women, or Ambition
 or Feare, or Couetousnesse. And these kindes of seruitude, which be most voluntarie, are alwayes most reprochfull.



Of Expences.
EXpences doe naturally diuide themselues into actions of Honour, Charitie, and Necessitie: the first requires a Great man: the second, a good man: the third is common to both. Honourable expences bee commendable: Charitable, religious: and Necessarie, forced. The first addes respect: the second, loue: and the last, shewes our humane frailty. Inaptitude to the former, shewes a man to be of a poore and ignoble spirit: backwardnesse in the next, expresseth an Atheisticall, and heathenish nature: and not promptnesse to the third, argues a most peruerse, and couetous disposition. But on the contrarie,
 to vndoe a mans selfe with publique, and magnificent charge, is the badge of a Vaine-glorious man: to cloath another, and goe naked himselfe, is a signe rather of Fryerly Hypocrisie, then of Charitie. To limit our whole expence for our selues, and to bee couetous in respect of others, and prodigall in our owne particular, is the true marke of a Licentious, Luxurious and Selfe-louing condition. Let not therefore Honourable expence bee stayned with wasting: neither let Pharisaicall ostentation bee ioyned to our Charitie: and take heede that superfluitie choake not either. And loue not Riches, more then your Reputation, the Poore, or your selues: but let your honour be maintained without Pride: the poore
 relieued without Arrogance: and nature satisfied without Excesse.
Expences should euer be limited according to the occasion, and our own ability. For vnnecessary charges be as vaine as the other dangerous. They that spend more the^ they haue, want gouernment: they that spend all, Prouide^ce. And as a man should take an account of his expences past: so hee ought to make a rate of what he meanes to spende. For incertainties of this kinde be neuer good. As expences bee proportioned, so the reckonings should bee certaine, otherwise, a man walkes in the darke. But this is to bee vnderstood of such as haue a competencie, bee come to yeeres of ripenesse and iudgement, and that haue not been by any casualtie, or accident put
 behinde hand in the world. All which though they do not auoid the mischiefe, yet they extenuate the error.
Riches be ordained for our vse, but neither to bee adored, nor contemned. A Prodigall runs thorow his estate, and is so entangled to other men, that hee is neuer master of himselfe: this is the fruit of the Contempt. A couetous man, as he is farre from benefitting others, so he is loath to accommodate himselfe, but liues in the state rather of a Steward for another, then master of his owne. And this is the benefit of the Adoration. So that in this there can be no other mediocrity, or better composition, then to spend with discretion, that that you haue honestly obtained. Liberality is a Vertue, and so is Parsimony
 within their seueral bounds, but the error is, when the one steps, or the other declines too neere the contrary.
Those men that bee blest with great and fortunate estates, I thinke to bee tyed euen by the law of Nature, to a more publike appearing, then those that bee below them, either in degree, or estate, to a willingnesse in relieuing the necessities of others, proportionably according to their abilities, and so to prouide for their posteritie, that they may rather finde encrease then diminution of any part of their patrimony.
A man ought to moderate his expences, and keepe them within certaine limitations; for he is bound to encrease and better
 the fortune of his Family, to maintaine, and marrie his children, to be of a reasonable ability, not to refuse, when that which he loues and likes, may chance to be offered vnto him, to haue meanes to maintaine himselfe from wrongs and iniuries, to keepe him from being contemptible in the world, and many respects more in the same kinde. But for a man to suppose too great a necessity in these or the like occasions, and make that a colour for extremitie of couetousnesse, I cannot imagine a man so rich, that may not that way pretend an occasion for as much more, if it were possible to be had; so that there is no end in coueting, if the more a man enioyes, the more he desires, though in a mans fortune I thinke it better for ones
 consideration, to fixe vppon the competencie, then superfluitie of his estate.
In priuate expences it is good to be neere, in publike, magnificent, being poore and base to spare in honourable expences, to the end they may the better spend vpon their priuate pleasures. Therefore hate Couetousnesse, but endeuour Thrift, despise Prodigality, yet loue to bee liberall.
To spend vpon backe and belly too sumptuously, too deliciously, cannot bee reckoned in the number of honourable expences, but mere effects of Pride and Epicurisme. And I am perswaded that indeede there bee none more auaricious then these gorgeous spenders. Honest expences they thinke makes no shew, and honourable,
 they find giues no taste; wherefore they neglect them, striuing couetously to lay vp, whereby they may feede their sumptuousnesse and delicacie. And you shall commonly see in expences of this kinde, more desire, more zeale then in any sort besides, as being gouerned by the square of irregular passions, and neither by the rules of Honour, nor Honesty.
And it is not good to haue our liberality wedded to some kinds of expences, and in others of as great account to grow miserable, as to be bountifull to our horses, and keepe a beggerly house, to be sumptuous at our Misers feast, and then liue like Farmers all the yeere after. These extremities be not good, but according to euery mans meanes, an equality is to be kept. Vse pleasures,
 yet forget not your profit; you may be liberall, yet hurt not your state.
I haue knowne some, and very rich, who all their life time haue not beene accessary to one good and charitable act, and yet, after their death, giue order to dispose of their estates more liberally in this kinde then any other, which shew of Charitie I esteeme not: for it is necessitie of leauing, and not desire to doe good, that enforces that act. Or, peraduenture it proceeds from custome: for they who all their life haue neuer benefited any of their friends or kindred, are loth to alter or differ from this habit in their death; and not knowing else what to doe with their estates, be after a manner forced to this poore Charitie, in spight of
 their hearts. For if it were possible to haue themselues and their money buried together, I verily beleeue that they would rather incline to that way.
It is not the meere doing of good, but the willingnesse and cheerfull proceeding that crownes acts of this nature. The very deferring and protraction argues it to bee an action rather strained then voluntary. And besides, benefits thus bestowed, when we are dead, deserue neither the Attributes of Charitie nor Liberalitie, for that that wee then part withall belongs to another owner, for it neither appertaines to vs, nor is in our possession.
If a man would truely enter into a contemplatiue consideration of riches, certainely he would find
 them extremely ouer-valued, and in themselues worth nothing, but that estimation makes them so; so that they haue rather gotten a name and reputation in the world by opinion then merit. For it is impossible for the most carefull prouider to foresee the fortune of his wealth, whether continued, encreased, dispersed, or lost. The first stocke one may ghesse of; but to presume of farther assurance, is vaine, and vncertaine.
Riches be therefore well placed, when a man can as contentedly leaue, as enioy them: which euery man will easily doe, that esteems them not beyond their vse, nor is deceiued by their lustre.



Of Visitations.
FEminine thoughts, bee for the most part enemies to Meditation; yet in this Subiect, a helpe. For it is an idle, womanish, and therefore vnnecessary, and no masculine habit, though their weakenesse in this kinde hath entred farre into our sexe, as it were by imitation; from whence may be discerned the force of ill examples, when so weake ones from weake women can draw vs to ridiculousnesse, being an outside quality, and expressing nothing of mans inward abilities. And yet it is a wonder to see what multitudes there bee of all sorts, that make this their only businesse, and in a manner, spend their whole
 time in complement, as if they were borne to no other end, bred to no other purpose, had nothing else to doe, then to bee a kinde of liuing walking ghosts, to haunt and persecute others with vnnecessary obseruation.
It is an argument either of folly, or deceit, for any to bee more ceremonious then reall, which is necessarily implyed in these vnnecessary visits. For they expresse either Simplicity, or Flattery, the one the weakest, the other the basest quality that can bee incident to any. Wise men will not view such persons but with scorn, nor respect the^ but with disesteem; for men of ability, and iudgement vnder-value, rather then praise them, for these needlesse complements, as being the practice of light and fantasticall,
 and not of wise men, because these vnnecessary visits, interrupt actions of more valew and worth, with making businesses, where there is none.
Some goe abroad, and God knowes, the Visited be not beholding to them. For if these giddy goers bee forced to giue a reason for their wheeling vp and downe the streets, their answere is, they know not else how to passe the time. And how tedious it is, for a man that accounts his houres, to bee subiect to these vacancies, and apply himselfe to lose a day with such timepassers, who neither come for businesse, nor out of true friendship, but onely to spend the day, as if one had nothing else to doe, but to supply their idle time: how hard a taske this is, those that be haunted
 with these spirits, doe so sensibly feele, that I am loth to inlarge their torture; but onely aduise them to let those know, who make a profession to passe their time, with the losse of mine, that as their visitations be vnprofitable to themselues, so they bee tedious, and burthensome vnto me. And if that serue not the turn against their vntimely visits, then bolt my doore, or hide my selfe, which shift I haue known many put to for want of other defence.
And besides, when these spirits walke abroad, it is rather to shew themselues, then to see any, which for the most part is neuer in the Morning; (and especially on Sundayes, because it is the best day in the weeke) all that while they bee building themselues, and viewing
 their owne proportions, feeding in stead of a breakfast, vpon how braue they shall appeare in the afternoone, And the^ they go to the most publique, and most receiued places of entertainment, which be sundry, and therefore they stay not long in a place: but after they haue asked you, how you doe, and told some old, or fabulous newes, laught twice or thrice in your face, and censured those they know you loue not, (when peraduenture the next place they goe to, is to them, where they will be as courteous to you) spoke a few words of fashions, and alterations, whispered some lasciuious motion, that shall be practised the next day, falne into discourse of liberty, and how it agrees with humanitie, for women to haue seruants besides their husbands,
 made legges, and postures of the last edition, with three or foure new and diminutiue oathes, and protestations of their seruice, and obseruance; they then retire to their Coach, and so prepare for another company, and continue in this vocation, till the beginning of the next day, that is, till past midnight, and so home: when betimes in the morning, the Decorum is, if it bee a Lady visiter, to send her Gentleman Vsher, to see if all those be well, that shee saw in perfect health but the night before.
This hath beene more to shew the Deformitie of it, then the Danger, which I would rather auoid, then vnmaske, because it touches too many particulars; but in generall this. It is the Index of an idle
 and vnprofitable disposition, a taker vp of time that may be better disposed; and such a spender of time, that in few actions it can be worse employed. Many an vnlawfull bargaine is concluded vpon this exchange: contrarie purposes bee concealed vnder this vizzard, and few bee practique in this art, whose manners and liues bee not corrupted. Besides, this vaine custome once begunne, induceth a habit not easily lost, therefore not good to begin; and once practised, it is not so safely left: for begunne, and not continued, makes the leauing of it off, esteemed a neglect: which otherwise would bee neuer claimed as a due.
There be of this Family, or Sect, that are so punctuall, and methodicall in their art, that they turne Critiques,
 and censure those that be not as pertinent, in impertinencies, and spit not with as good a grace, or speake not to as good a tune (for all their words be but sound, and no sense) as themselues, when such as are truely intelligent, thinke this scorne, their praise: for no man that hath any thoughts worthy consideration, will bestowe the labour to speake, or to entertaine argument in such a case, vpon so barren, and worthlesse an occasion.
And these kinde of ceremonies, be equally tedious to the Complementer, and Complementee, if they reciprocally respect not this fond and dissimulate kinde of conuersation: and though it often happen, that in some places where they visit, their tedious society be well accepted, (which then must onely be
 allowed to such, as are of the same occupation, and are euen with them in the same kinde;) yet somtimes it fals out, they thus running ouer all kinde of company, they be to many so vnwelcome, and troublesome, in distracting, or diuerting their better employments, that oftentimes those they come to, conceale themselues vpon purpose, or suppose some necessary businesse that cals them away, with intention onely to get rid of them. From which tediousnesse, if no better employment of their owne can diuert them, yet the consideration of the vnseasonable trouble they put those to, whom they visit, should euen shame them from frequenting so bad a custome.
Yet custome hath so farre preuailed, that I dare not prescribe a totall
 neglect: but counsaile to auoid frequent and assiduall practice of so superfluous, though receiued a fashion.
Those that duty, loue, respect, businesse, or familiaritie bind vs to, wee must obserue, and visit; lest they interpret our absence to be either in contempt of their persons, or a carelesnesse, and dis-esteeme of their fauour, and friendship.
And howsoeuer, with a non obstante, I doe not by this seclude society, and conuersation: for such a solitary, and vnsociable disposition, I hold to be worse then this Gadder.



Of Death.
NOthing is more certaine then Death, and nothing more vncertaine then the the time. Euery man is to pay this debt, though few bee ready at the day; life is but lent vs, and the condition of the obligation is Death, yet not without a penalty, if in this wandring and vncertaine state wee make no preparation.
Life then being so short, Death so certaine, a man should not confine his thoughts within the small circle of the present being, but dilate them to more high and worthy considerations; and one is the immortality of the soule, which without comparison is the chiefe and only happinesse; the next is,
 perpetuating of a good name; which according to the actions of our life good or bad, continue in memory and fame after wee bee dead: and surely, a man that hath any affinity with Vertue or goodnesse, and is not only borne for, but buried in himselfe, as he should desire an honest report and memory to continue of him, so he should feare the contrary. Euery man naturally desires to haue his name continued by children and posteritie; and certainely it is a great blessing, yet surely the actions of a great mans life, if they be good, make his name, when dead, more durable.
Beatitude is neuer seene in this life, but by a false light; wee must bee dissolued, transformed, and changed, before wee arriue to fulnesse
 and fruition, which cannot be confer'd in this, but a higher habitation. Many examples, especially if common or vsuall, conuert into precept, yet these which bee most visible, least auaile; for though wee daily see our acquaintance, friends, and children taken from vs, yet wee prouide and prepare for this life, as if we were irremouable, and thinke of death no otherwise, then as a tale that is reported to fright vs, till the stroke come home to our owne dores. So fond, so vnsettled be our cogitations. For a man in nothing more shewes the goodnesse, and greatnesse of his spirit, then in contemning and not fearing Death; for it must come, and feare cannot preuent it. And me thinks therefore, the certainty of it should abate timidity:
 therfore relie not so much vpon so vncertaine and transitory an estate.
And the continuall passing away of our children, and kindred, and friends, by this gate, are but so many guides and forerunners to vs, and the neerer one is either in affection, or alliance, the application should bee more particular to our selues. Some thinke to deceiue, or preuent, or delay this blow, and attribute the cause of it rather to accident, then prouidence; as if the rules of dyet, or Physicke, were able to oppose fate; though I dispute not against those meanes the which God hath appointed for the preseruation of life; but I esteeme them only as helps, and not causes of continuance.
 All men in this life be subordinately gouerned: we are naturally bodies, and liue not by miracle, but sustentation: so that it is as ill to auoid those helpes, as to trust to them.
It is a strange, but vulgar error, for men to say, counsell or temper would haue preuented such a mans death; might they not consider the seuerall, sudden, and strange accidents that leade to this end, that there bee not more men then wayes that conduct to this condition? Children die before Parents; strong, before weake; sound, before sickly; which as often happen by small and vnobserued chances, as great diseases: as a man goes well to bed, and is smothered before morning; is well at the beginning of a meale, and dead before
 the end; now in a serious discourse, and dead, in the midst of a word. He that's a friend to day, proues a murtherer to morrow; a pillow may stifle, smoke may suffocate, a Fly may choke. This, if it were to be illustrated by examples, would plainely shew, that there is no action, nor instrument so small, or vnobserued, that is not master of our life.
Therefore to esteeme life aboue the price, or to feare death beyond the rate, be alike euill. No man can bee in loue with this world, that is not in some doubt of the next. He that respects life, expects little beyond death. But then it may be demanded, Are those the best men, that be most weary of this life, and therefore hasten death with their owne hands?
 Certainely no. For euery act in that kinde, shewes that it was not in respect they hated to liue; but because of want, feare, punishment, ignominie, and diuers other causes, that these examples do dayly publish, and are notoriously knowne. Man is created by God, therefore not to be his own executioner, but to wait for the time, and expect the houre of his Call.
A mans Peregrination in this life should be employed, but as a harbinger for Death, nay rather, life: for whilst we liue, we die; but liue not till death. Yet good men, may in a sort religiously feare death, in respect of the cause of it. For the wages of sinne, is death. In respect of not knowing the place of our being after death (wee our selues being altogether vnmeriting)
 these, and the like considerations, may iustly make death seeme terrible. But to goe on.
How can a man think himselfe happy in this world, without the expectatio^ of a better? If a man enioy that his heart can wish, if hee know not want, haue plenty in abundance: these things may sometimes make him glory in himselfe, and in a kinde of scornefull pitie to commiserate those that be below him; yet the consideration of Death, and the little while hee hath to enioy these temporary happinesses, turnes all his pleasures into melancholy, his sweetnesse, to gall. This is the happiest condition, that the happiest man can haue, that thinkes there is no happinesse beyond this life.
But if you view other men,
 and see what cares, what hazzards, what iealousies, what sicknesse, and what miseries, they endure in all kindes, onely to preserue and please themselues in this short, troublesome, dangerous, suspitious, and wearisome life, you would think them rather dreames then substances, fictions, then men.
But so liue, as neither the pleasures of this world may possesse, nor the miseries confound you. Boast of nothing in your selfe, but that you are a liuely representation or Image of your Creator, which you deforme, if you look to earth, or those things which bee below. The benefits which God hath heere bestowed vpon you, vse according to his direction, but not contrarie to his command; and
 feare not, but welcome death, as beeing the end of your vnhappinesse, and beginning of your ioy.
Many men without the knowledge of Religion, haue excellently expressed their contempt of Death, but that may bee reduced some of these causes: peraduenture they had a kinde of vncertaine opinion that some greater happinesse followed, then accompanied this life: or, in respect of the dayly examples of their mortalitie, custome extinguished feare: or lastly, to perpetuate their memories, or publish their fame to succeeding ages, haue for the liberation of their Country, or Friends, or Honour, voluntarily exposed themselues to a certaine and present death.

 There be few lingring diseases, or sudden paines, that be not more sensible and painfull then Death, and the recouerie fro^ them, is but as a short reprieue. Therefore I see little reason why a man that liues wel, should feare death much more then sicknesse.



Of a Country Life.
TO write of a Country Life in what respects it is necessary, or vnfit, for all degrees of men, would too much lengthen this part, in the resolution of sundry questions, which I now doe purposely auoid; I onely intending to write in the praise or discommendation of it, so farre as it hath relation to men of great qualitie, and estates. So that in this description, I banish all that may referre to any other kinde and rankes of men, either for their vse, or necessity, of liuing in the Country.
This kinde of life hath beene more familiar with vs, then other Nations; so that we haue in a kinde appropriated it to our selues; more
 Southernly people, as rarely vsing the country, for retirement, or variety, or ayre, as our Country Nobility and Gentry, were anciently vpon extraordinarie businesses driuen to the towne. But different people haue seuerall formes of liuing and behauiour: that which is necessarie in one place, is ridiculous and pernicious in another. In these cases therefore wee must not guide our selues by precedent. It is as easie to introduce one common language, and reuerse the confusion of tongues, as to paralell all men in one kinde and fashion of life. Rigidly to keepe vnseemly customes, because we receiue them from antiquity, and ancestors, no man will defend. Time as it hath a qualitie in some cases to degenerate, and corrupt; so in others it hath to clense: but to
 alter so good a custome as this, whereof we haue had so long experience and benefit, vpon pretence only of imitation, appeares in my iudgement, to be altogether void of reason. And yet this, taking it for a generall question, I will at this time neither dispute nor resolue, either by the numerousnesse of ancient precedents, and example, or force of reason and argument; onely as the case stands, with vs in the particular, conclude, That it is neither good, nor safe, to innouate, or alter old and approued customes.
But as in the choyce of any indifferent action, mens affections and fancies predominate and gouerne, they haue equall power, and worke the same effect in the election either of this, or any other kinde
 of life: but what reasons in this should induce vs either to the one or other, that which fals accide^tally by the way, passing, I will touch.
By a Country Life, I do vndersta^d such an habitation as impliesa retirednes from the presse, busines, and imployme^t either of city or court; the distance and that course of life secluding them from those kind of troubles: and how a man of qualitie is to behaue and direct himselfe in this way, shall be my first enquiry.
To make liuing in the Country a veyle, or shadow, for base and sordid sparing, becomes not the thought of such a man as I propose, whom I name not, as driuen to liue there for necessity, and neerenesse, but for honourable and vertuous endeuours. Amongst which his first should bee to expresse freedome
 and Hospitality in his house, and bountifull liberality towards his poorer neighbours: these be the true orname^ts of a Country housekeeper; an honourable custome, so peculiar to our Nation, that that way we haue out-gone all others; and howsoeuer of late it hath been declining and decaying, yet it is worthy of renouation, being so great a stay to the Country, such a releefe to the poore, so honourable for themselues, and exemplary for posterity, the very knot which contracts society and conuersation, a receptacle for ones friends and children, which be the chiefest solaces of a mans life, and the surest way to make a man be loued of those that know, and esteemed by all that heare of him. To set downe a particular rate and order in keeping
 of such a house, is not now my purpose: that it ought to be gouerned regularly and religiously none doubts; and not replete with those confused disorders, and riots, which some licentious and prodigall dispositions haue allowed. That makes it rather a snare and inuitation to nourish lewd, and base affections, then to bee either a stay, or releefe to the Country where they liue.
Next, vnder pretence of this noble and free life, for a man to take too much vpon him, expressing Arrogancy and Pride to those below him, in his owne opinion, creating in himselfe that greatnesse and power, which is not his due; squaring his actions by his will, not reason; forcing to his ends by the way of greatnesse and authority,
 not equity and Iustice; awing his neighbours with his countenance and power; turning law into affection, and reason to appetite; these should be none of the ends in a noble and good nature, when he chooseth a country life; but contrarily, a purpose to expresse such moderation and modesty in all his actions, that he may be vsefull, not oppressing; seruiceable, not burthensome; loued, not feared in the Country where he liues.
And hauing heere, and thus setled him, his life must not be wholly reserued to his owne quiet, and particular pleasures; but in that place wherevnto he is called, and destined to liue, to apply himselfe, and seruice, for the common and publike good; which in such a life as this, will principally consist in
 these particulars. The disordered and vnruly life of those vnder his authority and command, (setting aside those outrages of Murder, Theft, and the like which the law punisheth, and imposeth also a duty vpon his vigilancy) he ought besides, not only to suppresse, but preuent all bold and contemptuous behauiour of one neighbour towards another, all seedes of seditions and quarrels, and such common means as in the Country vsually prouoke them. Generally also, all manner of distemper in the Country ought to be qualified by his iudgement and discretion; a^ in the better sort, if any faction or emulation arise, then the vertue of his authority must appeare in equall moderation. Wherin he is chiefly to take heed, that when factions be sided, his Greatnesse
 vphold not one faction, to the decay and ruine of the other; but contrarily to euen and compound them in mutuall amity and agreement.
Againe, in this place, he is not only to preuent il, but to do good, and that, first by his example, in equally bearing part of the burthe^ in country seruices, with the rest of the gentlemen, (though in quality below, and in akind depending vpon him) and this not onely in the priuate execution of his dutie and place, but also in the sollemne and publike meetings, for distribution of Iustice; which will bee a verie great encouragement, and inuitation, to awake others diligence, as also an excellent restraint of partialitie and fauour, in the seuerall votes of the rest, which oftentimes
 respect persons, more then causes, or spleen then truth; this good will follow the endeuours of so great a man, if he carry himselfe euenly, and without priuate ends, in the businesses of the Country; otherwise the mischiefe will bee more dangerous in awing the Country, then the benefit necessary in gouerning it: but if he be of a condition prepared with integrity; then to declare his ability in Country seruices (I doe not say alwayes to engrosse them) will make the rest more wary in their steps, and diligent in the vprightnesse of their endeuours. But allow his carriage neuer so cleare, if it bee either affected, or smell of ostentation, so that one may discerne either of them to bee the spurre of his endeuours, his labour is lost, will bee
 imputed to him for vain-glory, and put vpon the account of his disgrace. But yet the censure of this must not be left to the vngouerned tongues of the ignorant multitude, and enuious people; but to men of quality, indifferencie, and discretion.
The next means of doing good in the Country, wherein mens endeuours should neuer slacke, nor their labours seeme troublesome to themselues, is in composing of differences and discontents, betwixt one neighbour or friend, and another: it is the principall act of Charitie; by this, they not onely doe, but preserue it: This is the proper work of a superiour power, mens passions will not be so much misgouerned, nor reason blinded before them, as betwixt themselues,
 or more low arbitrators. It is impossible for men to be competent iudges in their owne causes, their affections will encline, and iudgments leane to their particular pretensions. This peruersenesse is it that brings men so often to the hazzard of censures, and suites; which may bee manifested in the still continuance of their peeuishnesse; for the murmure remaines when the cause is sentenced, which is the ground of an ill Prouerbe, that Losers may lawfully complaine. And this misery of imputation is it, which Iudges are forced to suffer; wherein, in doing iustly (for that I admit) impartiall iudgements will bee so farre from finding fault, that they loue their integrity; for a Iudge is to sentence according to the merit of the cause,
 and not to arbitrate in respect of collaterall circumstances. But I will no farther digresse. It is the best worke wherein a man in the Country can employ himselfe, to bee a Peace-maker, and ender of controuersies; it confirmes friendship; expells malice, auoids needlesse and extrauagant expences; shuts the gate against those bad instruments that moue and stir suits, to make their liuing vpon that prey; expedites causes; and makes a more indifferent and satisfactory end, then the Iudge in his place can doe. This common good succeedes so worthy an endeuour. And why it is not more commonly practised, I rather impute it to the vnwillingnesse of interposers, the^ a common peruersnesse in the parties interessed, to submit their
 differences to an vpright and vnpartiall neighbour; which his own actions, if conuersant in this kinde, will sufficiently assure: and I see not such difficulty, but it may bee possible this way to giue satisfaction to both sides.
But if eithers mistrust cause them not to yeeld to so easie and quicke an end, the merit of his endeuours and good will cannot bee taken away. And if it fall out, that the busines be of such a nature, as may iudicially afterwards come before him, let not the parties ielousie, before in referring it, wrest or wry his iudgement in the least degree to preiudice. I will enlarge this no farther, these particulars last touched being onely in the power of men of degree and authority; and heere ends my first enquiry,
 how a Noble man in the Country ought to carry and gouerne himselfe. I now descend to take a short view of the more peculiar delights, and healthfull conueniences, incident to them that liue in the Country, then in any other place.
All field delights, as Hunting, Riding, and Hawking, commendable, if vsed with moderation, are properly belonging onely to this life, and certainly they greatly inable, and actiue mens bodies, making the difficulty of enduring labour, and other accidents, that in times of warre, a man may be subiect vnto, more easie then any other preparatiue, or imitable practice that I know. The vnseasonablenesse of the times, early, and late: and so the vncertainty of the weather, heates, and cold, and wet: of
 dyet, little, or none, or course, and at houres vnlimited, and not set, assured also and ready in his horsmanship, by so often occasions of practice, which is no small aduantage. So paralelling these, with the chances, and necessities in time of seruice; the often vsing of these exercises, will make the labour lesse difficill, and hard, when necessity of employment shall require it, and the body more agill, and healthfull, free from those infirmities, that rest, idlenesse, and full feeding doe bring men into. This is the good that followes the vse of these exercises, setting aside the delight which drawes most men to follow and entertaine them; which surely, though not alwayes discerned by wise men, yet may by good reason be proued to be delightfull.

 If I should breathe the country ayre, and digresse into the commendatio^ of it, in respect of health from that cause, I thinke the whole Colledge of Physicions would subscribe to my opinion: for without doubt, it is freed from those noysome vapours, and consequently infections, which thronged and populous Cities doe produce. And this dayly practice makes manifest: for in those Countries where towne-dwelling is most frequented, yet euery Summer the better sort retyre, onely for the freedome, and libertie of the ayre, to their Palaces, and Villaes, as they terme them; which shewes there is a necessarie, and impulsiue cause for their health, that driues them thither. And heere with vs, those that be most in loue with the towne, in
 Summer euer fly into the Country: and the generall reason of it must onely be, to change a bad ayre, for a good; wherein though the Country doth alwayes predominate, yet in Summer the ayre of the Citie is so farre from good, that it is neither tolerable, nor indifferent.
And being now in a meditation of health, to say truth, the helpes, and furtherances of it are much more appropriate to a Country then a Citie life, which I will but touch, without robbing the Poets at this time, by falling into the praise and pleasures of Gardens, Riuers, Fountaines, Woods, places of privacy, and retyrednesse, or the like: of most of which, though all Cities haue a shew, yet it is but forced, and counterfet, in respect of them in the country, which is the
 proper element for those delights. But to return to my consideration of health, the Country is the place most free, fro^ that easy, and sedentary life, which men in Cities be forced to entertaine; there all exercises for the health, and agilitie of the body bee in dayly practice; as Riding, Shooting, Bowling, Walking, Hunting, Hawking, and the like: which though some towne-liuers, sometimes make hard shift to practise, yet there, there be so many other diuersions, that there are very few liuing in townes, who can either take or finde opportunities for that purpose, which must needs greatly decay, and disable both a mans health, and strength. Of this argument much more might bee said, but I purposely auoid it: and indeede would haue left it out, but
 that I was forced to it in completing the description, for feare of falling from my Title. But I now hasten to other obseruations: and first, of those aduantages and benefits, a man gaines by liuing in the country.
A man in the Country is retired out of the crowd and noise of factions, and emulations, dependencies, and neck-breaking of one another, which Court, and Town, do too often yeeld, and though a man in his owne inclination bee free from, and not busie, yet if present, can hardly be a neuter: or if he be one, will yet scarcely be thought so, and suspected of either side for affection to the other. But take him allowed for a neutrall, hee then commonly is so farre from the affection of the sides, that they both
 turne his enemies, because he is neither of their friends. These straites by being away, and by liuing in the Country, men often escape from.
Next, he is free from those tempestuous winds of businesses, and multiplicitie of vexations, wherewith many haue beene tossed; the calme of the Country being void of those stormes, and troubled waues, that commonly accompanie a towne, or Court life, where mens desires and ambitions so abound, that they bee alwayes in hopes, and proiections, wherein many times they doe so outstraine and ouer-graspe, that in reaching too high, they ouerreach themselues, in seeking a new fortune, lose their old, and so conuert their substance into pretensions, their certainty into nothing.

 Againe, no man can expect to liue in the same, or equall reputation, out of the Country, and his owne dwelling. In Towne, or Court, he is as it were, in a throng, wanting elbow roome: there bee so many his equals, and superiors, aboue him both in place, and merit, that he is reckoned for number, not weight; one of the troope rather for shew, then vse. Those Nations therefore who affect this place, out of vaine-glory, and pride, to shew themselues, and get opinion, if they compare their estimation heere, with their reputation at home, they will finde cause quickly to change their minde and place, to goe thither where they shall be sure to finde that, which they so affectedly desire, and that is to their owne Country; aske but
 Northerne men, or Welshmen, they will sweare to you this is true.
Besides, I beleeue, if it went to voices, most would opine, that the stabilitie of a Country fortune were lesse subiect to declination, and the cataracts of aduersitie, then that whose onely foundation is built vpon the present fauour of the time. They who raise their estates aboue, the Hauen they striue for, is a Countrey fortune, that is the end of their ambition. When a man therefore hath that which the Courtier onely aymes at: why should hee fix himselfe in that spheare vpon purpose, to looke after those things, which hee hath alreadie? If that be not his end, and no other iust cause can bee alledged, I cannot free him from the
 imputations of lightnesse, and vanitie; who besides the neglecting of that good he may doe at home, offends first, against his owne estate, and next, against the Crowne and state of the Kingdome, in seeking reliefe there, for that which he hath vainely, and inconsiderately spent; when neither his own abilities, nor fauour of the Prince, haue forced the necessitie of his attendance.
And writing now as well to honest, as wise men, if through their owne infirmities they finde themselues subiect to the temptations of high, and ambitious desires, and desire to abate them: there is no such correctiue as a retyred country life. For though in it selfe good and great places, where they meete with men that be fit for them, may,
 out of honest ends, and for good purposes, bee both desired, and kept: yet when these be only wished, for the greatnesse, and dignitie of the place, it is an inordinate, and vnruly passion, and ought to be suppressed. If a man therefore in his owne arraignment, finde himselfe guiltie of such thoughts, and withall bee not ignorant of his owne inabilities, let him auoid those occasions that may renue his desires.
Moreouer, a man that liues in the Country, is more out of the way, and lesse obuious to the malice and enuy of busie and rauenous men, such as build vp their owne fortunes vpon others decayes: curious inquisitors into mens liues, and false interpreters of their actions, by that way to lay a
 ground for ruining them, and so rayse a step to their owne aduancement. And though a Country Life do not totally conceale a man from these that be so quick-sighted; yet he that takes that course, makes them seeke farther off, and they often goe not downe, when they finde worke neerer home.
And lastly, this kinde of life giues a man more free houres, for reading, writing, and meditation, then the publike towne-liuers can possibly allow themselues; their time in the Country being neither so taken away, nor distracted, as vnauoidably in towne it must often be: both by seuerall occasions, to which their owne wils inuite them, and also by often bestowing themselues, and time, vpon others, out of affection, and respect, which
 accidents of diuertion, doe more rarely happen in the Country, men being there more free masters, both of their houres, and disposing of them, then they can be in the other place. Many more aduantages might be found; but it sufficeth me, if I haue said enough, though not all. But seuerall formes, and actions, of our Morall life, haue as well their disaduantages, as commoditie, and so hath this; wherefore to deale, and distribute, my opinion equally, my now search must be to set downe the disaduantageous inconueniences that accompany a Country Life.
As in the choise, and reading of good Bookes, principally consists the enabling and aduancement of a mans knowledge, and learning; yet if it be not mixed with the conuersation,
 of discreet, able, and vnderstanding men, they can make little vse of their reading, either for themselues, or the Commonwealth where they liue. There is not a more common Prouerb, then this, That the greatest Clerkes bee not alwayes the wisest men, and reason for it, being a very vneuen rule, to square all actions, and consultations, onely by booke precedents. Time hath so many changes, and alterations, and such varietie of occasions, and opportunities, interuening, and mingled, that it is impossible to goe new wayes, in the old paths; so that though reading doe furnish, and direct a mans iudgement, yet it doth not wholly gouerne it. Therefore the necessitie of knowing the present time, and men, wherein we liue, is so great,
 that it is the principall guide of our actions, and reading but supplementall. Now this knowledge, which is obtained by conuersation, and acquaintance, must bee sought where it is, and that is in Cities, and Courts, where generally the most refined, and iudicious men, be likeliest to be found: and as reading formes a iudgement, so conference must perfect it, or else it will be lame.
It must then follow, that a meere Country life; if men looke as well to the enriching of their minds, as fortune, is not the way to purchase abilitie, and iudgement; for it both secludes vs from the knowledge of the Court, and gouernment there, and also eclipseth from our acquaintance, the Great men, and guiders of the State, which any
 man who desires to store his vnderstanding, will finde to be as necessarie to be looked vpon, and turned ouer often, as the most vsefull bookes.
And this will appeare, if any occasion or necessitie of businesse, force them thither: for they will be then so to seeke, and imperfect, so incongruous in their behauior, and discourse, that they scarce know how to doe their businesse, nor they that they goe to, what they would haue. And in this negotiating, such cannot possibly guide themselues, by their owne iudgements, but must submit to the direction of others, who many times for want of iudgement be ill chosen; or for want of honestie, be worse aduisers. So that if any occasion happen, it is vnpossible for
 Great men alwaies to want them, they be by this long absence, both vnknowing, vnknowne, and vnable to dispatch their owne businesses when they happen.
Besides, if a man by his experience, and reading, haue gotten much sufficiencie, and abilitie, in the knowledge of affaires, then a totall sequestration in the Country, doth not onely hinder him of that preferment, and honor, which in all likelihood he may arriue too, but robs the State and Commonwealth where he liues, of an able, and fit minister, to doe it seruice. Wheras if a man in his own iudgement findes that hee may be vsefull, and that his first looke is at his Countries seruice, in that case the wilfull retyring, and obscuring of a mans selfe, must needs be accounted
 a fault: for wee are not borne for our selues, and to please onely our owne fancies, but to serue the publike in that kinde, and in those places, we be thought most fit for.
So then as it is ill for men, that know their owne strength, voluntarily to conceale and hide it: it is also certain, that continuall absence from the face of the world, causeth an impossibilitie in men, though of neuer so good wits, to haue capacitie, iudgement, or experience, to vndergoe the charge of any publike employment, either at home, or abroad, if they should be called thereunto: which forceth the state oftentimes to fix their greatest places vpon men low, and meanely descended, and though their industry can neuer bee sufficiently commended, who wanting
 those meanes, that in all likelihood the nobler degrees might haue had, and haue notwithstanding made themselues more vsefull, and able for their Countries seruice: yet it cannot but be interpreted as a disgrace, and must reflect vpon the ill education, and weakenesse of knowledge in our Gentry, and Nobilitie; who, mee thinkes, for that onely respect should striue, that as they precede others, in degree, and birth; so at least to equalize them in sufficiencie, and iudgement.
Moreouer the great trade, and commerce of the world, is in giuing, and receiuing of good turnes, (I meane amongst men of equall condition.) But a Country Life absolutely solitarie, makes a man neither capable to receiue, nor of abilitie
 to doe one, and so they runne out their dayes vnprofitably both to themselues, and all men beside, as if they neither had friends, nor were friend to any, which is a hard condition for a man to liue in.
Also it cannot be denyed, but that a mans long absence from the Court, and Towne, makes him a stranger to all passages, and alterations of the world, both at home, and abroad: for a man there will get that by conuersation, hee will neuer learne either by Letters, or report. Who knowes not, that wise men to their friends will say that, which they will neuer write to them? Besides, if a man hold correspondency abroad, hee is tyed to the Towne, being very hard to keepe it, and liue in the Country. Those therefore that thus desire to
 informe, and enrich themselues, must either liue where it is to bee gotten, or else be content with lesse knowledge, then other men haue. And so for the necessities, and conueniences, that may induce a man to liue in towne, for the present these shall serue. Now in a word, still supposing as I begunne, the man that should either liue, or not liue in the Country, to be of qualitie and degree, I will giue my opinion, how, and in what manner, he must dispose himselfe, and then end.
In the forming of this sentence, I will be very short; but first lay this foundation, that no man is, or ought to be so absolutely master of himselfe, as to take the liberty of electing that course of life, which onely his owne will, and inclination,
 gouernes and desires: but to follow and direct himselfe in that way, which his owne abilities, and Countries seruice, make, and thinke him fit to be disposed vnto: it being one principall end of a mans being in this world, to be seruiceable in one kinde or other, to that Kingdome, or Commonwealth where he liues.
I will therefore first select those, whom necessitie and conuenience, seclude from a Country Life: who are such as be in the place of necessarie attendance about a King, or Prince: or such as finding their presence there well esteemed of; doe for the encrease, and continuation of their fauour at Court, giue their attendance: but that obseruance then ought to proceede rather out of respect, and dutie, then particular,
 and priuate ends: for he is very vnworthy of a Princes fauour (which is freely bestowed) if in his loue and hearty affection, hee truely, and reciprocally, returne not the best of his seruice. Others also that sit at the Helme, and haue the charge of great affaires, and guiding in the State, are bound to continuall residence: and so such as bee appointed to any iudiciall places, and Magistracie, or any other office, that forceth their presence in towne: or if a man haue any tedious businesse, or suite, that calleth them vp, and requires there their frequent attendance. And lastly, it is conuenient, for such to liue about the Towne, and Court, who haue neither settled state nor calling in the Country, because a man that hath there nothing to do,
 and little to liue on, can hardly be tyed to a worse place; whilest in the meane time liuing abroad, they make better vse of their time by conuersation, and knowing of men, as well as bookes, by that way to inable their sufficiencie, for any employment, publike, or priuate, in Towne, or the Country, that the state, and their owne indeuours, may in time aduance them vnto.
And so these excepted, I thinke that notwithstanding the conueniences, allurements, and aduantages, which cause most men to be so much in loue with liuing about the Towne, and Court, the Country to bee the proper spheare for all of qualitie besides. In that place they may doe most good, as well by their gouernment, and direction,
 as hospitality, and house-keeping. For men of equall rankes, can not altogether bee of equall employment, in that they must submit, to the choise and opinion of the Prince, and State, and goe on in that path, that they direct them. And though it be true that the greatest businesse of the State, is commonly directed and concluded aboue, yet most they there consult vpon, is for the common good, and that is the good of the Country, which then ought not to be abandoned, and left naked. Once allow but that libertie, and there are few Noblemen, or Gentlemen there of qualitie, who will not pick an occasio^ to liue out of their country. Those therefore whose seruices be found to be of vse, and necessity there, and haue no other calling to
 diuert them, are bound not to relinquish that confidence, and trust, which the State hath reposed in them.
But yet it seemes very hard, so strictly to confine and imprison a man of ranke, and qualitie; and truely in my opinion, I cannot thinke it to be either reasonable, or conuenient: for by that meanes their former endeuours would bee lost and experience abated: therefore I mitigate thus. Their settled houses and family must needs bee in the Country: but for to make themselues altogether strangers from the Court and Towne is too strict, and withall not very safe for such men to lose their friends, and acquaintance at Court, for the keeping of home. Though a man bee not tyed to a continual attendance,
 yet he is to some, and if he be but now and then there, his estimation, and respect, will bee rather more, then lesse, when hee comes but seldome. So I conclude, such a man should neither be a Plebeian, nor Citizen, more in the Country: sometimes at Court; mixed together, but as the Frenchmen doe allay their drinke, three parts water, to one of Wine.



Of Religion.
THere was neuer yet Nation; or people, either Ciuill or Barbarous, that accounted not a Prescript or Law, for a kinde of diuine thing; and such vnruly and vntamed desires, as would not be restrained by that bridle, haue beene euer esteemed worthily to suffer such punishments, whether Corporall, Pecuniary or Capitall, as the lawes haue inflicted. If the lawes then of men doe deserue, and indeede worthily, such reuerence, without doubt that Law which a mans Maker layes vpon him, doth beyond the degrees of comparison merit a farre higher valuation: the particulars whereof be diuers, but the generall head that comprehends
 the rest, is Religion, a blessed and most sacred name, in the right vnderstanding whereof, is concluded the whole labour of a Christian.
But this word, and the reuerence also due vnto it, hath gone farre; for the very heathen are subiect to the power of some Religion, and submit themselues thereunto, as experience, and a number of voluminous writers doe manifest. So it seemes all people haue with one consent ioyned together, to make this the ground, and Basis, of all their other actions, and lawes, and the foundation or principall Pillar to vphold the rest, but sometimes out of Policy, as well as Deuotion: for grant the multitude were awed with the reuerence, and number of their Gods, yet sometimes the wiser
 Heathen, though they thought it good wisedome to nourish their opinions, yet had not so little wit as to beleeue them.
Briefely now then to know what is meant by Religion: It is the true knowledge, and true seruice of God, in these two consists Piety: without them it is maymed and defectiue. The knowledge of God is reuealed in the Scriptures, and wrought by faith, which is not true, vnlesse it be certaine, and not mixed with errour, or doubts. And the true seruice of God, is a kinde of restrained veneration, within certaine Lawes and Ceremonies, and that either inward, or outward. Inward, when a man powres out his soule in Prayers, and Thanksgiuing. Outward, in the seuerall rites, gestures, and ceremonies of the Church.

 Those men therefore, whose onely ioy consists not in this life, and the period of whose hope lies not vpon their death-beds, will be assured that their first choise should be, the true knowledge of Religion, which assures them of an infinite addition, and continuation of happinesse in the life that is to come. This is the house built vpon the Rocke, this is the corner Stone of the building, this is the Pillar that will not be moued, in a word, this makes a man vnlike that Reede which will bee shaken with euery winde.
The seate of Religion must bee in a mans heart, conducted thither by the meanes of faith, and knowledge, grounded vpon Scriptures, and the consent of the Church. It is a mans heart that iustifies him
 before God, his outward workes before men, by which they may guesse, but not conclude, such a one to be a godly, and religious man. For if workes alone could iustifie; the Heathen in their moralitie haue out-gone vs, very Hypocrites and Impostors goe beyond vs, the Catholike glorifyers of works in their blinde zeale exceede vs. Wherefore as it is vnpossible to iustifie a man by his workes, so it is desperate to iudge a man for his not so frequent working, or not working at all, to our knowledge: for keepe true Religion within his bounds, that is, in the heart of a man, it is possible for one to doe the acts of a good man, and yet not to be seene, or marked, for feare of being his own Trumpet, and that so his good deeds may either taste of vaineglory,
 or least that his owne heart, (considering the frailety of humane nature, and that himselfe hath sometimes had temptations, and ticklings that way) be puft vp with Pride by the Plaudities of other men. This case I onely put, not to abridge men of their good and publike acts of charitie; but to abate the ouer-bold, and common censuring that is vsed. And I resolue thus, that as all the best, and good deeds, that can be imagined, or were yet euer done, auayle nothing towards a mans saluation, without they proceede from a touched and religious heart, yet no man can be truely Religious, that expresseth not his faith by his works. By which it is plain, though works be nothing without Religion, so Religion cannot be without
 works; they are so vnseparably linked together, they cannot bee seuered.
There is nothing, if duely considered, that ought to be more deare, and of greater comfort, and hope, to mankinde, then the true sence, and Religious application, of diuine mysterie: wee now are, anon are not, when all leaues vs, and we leaue all the world, it is the true ioy wee conceiue by this knowledge, which doth strengthen vs in death, and immortalize our soules. How miserable were a man, and little aboue the fortune, and happinesse of a beast, being of so short, and vncertaine continuance, if hee put not a difference betwixt passing and remaining happinesse? and if he knew not that the knowledge, and seruice of God were the onely
 way to lead to so happy an end.
The inward thoughts, in the high and reuerent estimation of God, is the first degree of Religion, for onely the formalitie of it, which is but hypocrisie, and outward apparance, is as ill as Atheisme. Then as we thinke well, so neede we to know truely, lest our good thoughts, and religious meditations, be mis-placed by mistaking.
And let no man perswade himselfe, that there is any action, or vertue, comparatiuely, in this world, of equall estimation, and power, with Religion. It was the commendation Saint Ambrose gaue the Emperour Theodosius, that vpon his deathbed, and in extremitie of weakenesse, hee tooke more care for the state of the Church,
 and preseruation of Religion, then of his owne extreme dangers and infirmities. And Iustinian in the preface to his lawes, disclaimed all confidence in the greatnesse of his Empire, number of Souldiors, aduice of his chiefe Commanders, and Councell, but relyed onely vpon that prouidence and mercy of God which Religion had taught him; knowing, the neglect of this duty vvould otherwise awake Gods Iustice and wrath: according to Horace; Dij mult^ neglect^ dederunt Hesperiae mala luctuosae.
It was the policy of the Roman State, and they pretended so much reuerence, to their made, and borrowed religion, that, as I finde cited from Varro, whensoeuer the Se^a^emet, the first thing propounded, had alwayes relation to Religion,
 and no cause of the greatest weight, or that required the most sudden expedition; could precede this; because (it seemes) as in al their other actions, they dedicated the beginning of it to religious and diuine worship, so they would not vary from that custome in their consultations. And certainly, if an imaginary religion were of so great power with them, much more ought we, in the height and certainty of this knowledge, to submit our selues thereunto.
It is excellently obserued by Salomon, Prou. 29. verse 2. When the righteous are in authoritie, the people reioyce: but when the wicked beareth rule, the people mourne. For certainly the prosperitie, and decayes of States, do very much depend vpon good, and religious gouernments:
 morally good, I dare say all stories will witnesse, and that is a handmaid to Religion: and so I vnderstand righteous, and wicked, in this place, as denominating vertuous, and vicious persons. But for to affirme, that the prosperitie of States hath been euer in those places onely, where Religion is truely professed, I dare not goe so farre. For God did heretofore confine, and yet doth not much enlarge (in respect of those secluded) the knowledge of Religion to multitudes.
But where God hath declared himselfe, there good gouernments, if not Religious withall, doe commonly precede some stroke of Gods Iustice, Knowledge reuealed alwayes requiring obedience therunto, which should awake the diligence of Superiours, to see the
 seruice of God, and true substance of our Religion, not in name onely to agree, but in truth to bee answerable to our profession: not that God stands in neede of our deuotions, and worship, but proceeding from his abundant loue to mankinde, to supply our naturall, and spirituall necessities, which commonly comes not vnbegged, nor stayes not vnacknowledged: and this you shall euer find, where Religion is not truely esteemed, and had in due respect, mens manners turne so depraued, that the force of other lawes can hardly restraine them.
This is a law that workes as well vpon the restraining of inward thoughts, as outward actions, working vpon the minde, and inclination: but our corrupt desires, and
 deeds, if Religion be wanting, nothing but the curbe of lawes, can keepe within bounds: and in actions that be forced, there is little assurance; so that we may conclude, All the vicious, and disorderly behauiour of our conuersation, springs from our simplicitie, and neglect in Religion. Primae scelerum causae mortalibus aegris naturam nescire deorum. So saith Silius.
Without this there could be no safe commerce, and conuersation amongst men. The best can but bee enclined to doe good one to another, but this tyes all sorts to doe it: take away this bond, and we plunge our selues into a sea of al kinde of mischiefe. No man, no Prince, no State, can be confident one of another, though wee haue often seene pretenders to Religion,
 who make it but their countenance to disguise their deceitfull purposes, and corrupt thoughts: and yet these, me thinks, if they entred into the consideration of their mortalitie, and the vastnesse of eternitie, with the succeeding happinesse, or miseries they must endure, they would be more circumspect in the wayes of their liues, which causeth and continues all the good present, and to come, they can desire, or expect. Aspiciunt oculis superi mortalia iustis. So Ouid: and Horace, Qui terram inertem, qui mare temperat ventosum, and vrbes regnaque tristia. This acknowledgement was yeelded to Religion, euen in Paganisme.
The pure, and primitiue part of Religion, ought to bee kept cleere, and vnspotted, and they who innouate therein, are to bee cast off,
 and constrained to recognition, not onely for Gods cause, whom whosoeuer neglects, disclaimes all interest in his mercy, and fauours; but euen in Policy also: for innouation in Religion, commonly precedes alteratio^ in Gouernment: and generally, most seditious and conspiring actions, haue their cause, and pretence, from different opinions, and establishments of Religion; which euen the Heathen were so carefull to auoid, and found to bee of so dangerous consequence, that both the Athenians and Romans had particular lawes, against such as introduced new opinions in Religion: for attempting of which, Socrates was condemned at Athens, and both the Iewes and Caldeans banished Rome. Let it then be the endeuour of all good men, so to
 establish this vnity, that it may bee said of them, as of the people mentioned in the Acts 4. verse 32. And the multitude of them that beleeued, were all of one heart, and one soule.
It was the politick aduice of Maecenas to Augustus, as Dion notes it, that in matter of Religion, hee should shew all outward deuotion and reuerence, according to the Law, and forme of his Country, and force others to do the like, and that as well in forme, as substance, in which case men are alwaies tyed to the rule of the Law, and bound to obserue it: which caused Seneca with more affection then religion to write, that sapiens seruabit ea tanquam legibus iussa, non tanquam Dijs grata. By which you see, the maintaining, and continuing of vnity in Religion, was held a point of
 gouernment and policy. But though it be true, we cannot force religion, because no man is constrained to beleeue, whether hee will, or no, and that I subscribe to Saint Bernard, that sides suadenda est, non imperanda: yet, there is no doubt but that in all Christian good gouernments, the people haue been forced to yeeld their outward obedience to the religion publikely professed; otherwise ineuitable confusion would follow, and Religion would grow into contempt. To preuent which, it is better for a time to force men to outward co^formity though mixt with Hypocrisie, then suffer them to continue refractary.



Of reading History.
OF all studies, either for ornament, or vnderstanding, I preferre History, because by an exquisite expression it doth shew vnto vs the Acts and Councels of precedent times. And it is certain, that where neither Affection, nor Flattery, nor Feare beare sway, you shall finde perfectly delineated the image of truth, without obsequiousnesse, or detraction, committed to perpetuall memory the most worthy, and noblest Acts of Great men, without colouring their defects; but leauing both their good and euill to posteritie, the one for a patterne of Honour, and Vertue, the other for a direction that wee may not follow their steps where
 they tread awry, lest wee leaue to our selues nothing but an euerlasting memoriall of infamy, the true property of an Historian being, Vera, non falsa, scribere sine ostentatione.
Of Histories some are Naturall, some Ciuill; of Ciuill, some concern the state of the Church, and some, the affaires of the Common-wealth. To them both appertaineth the History of places, which is Geography; of times, which is Chronology; of descents, which is Genealogy; and of actions, which is that I now am to speake of, and is principally, singly, and by a kinde of prerogatiue called History. And the other three, namely, Geography, Chronologie, and Genealogie, are but assistants to the same. This kinde of History therefore wch I hold most necessarie, and profitable, may bee written either
 by way of Commentaries, which are only a meere relation of things done, without either the Councels, occasions, pretexts, speeches, or any other circumstances of action; or else more completely, by ioyning together both times, persons, places, councels, and euents. And this is that History that addeth (if it be read with attention and vnderstanding) so must strength to a mans knowledge and iudgement.
But not to reiterate the so many and so much decantate vtilities and praises of History, nor to prescribe the best way to an Historiographer (the one being a vaine, and needlesse; the other, a presumptuous taske) but onely to shew the meanes how by reading them, to reape most benefit for a mans priuate instruction, I thinke that the
 first considerable point, is the end wherfore History is to be read and held in estimation.
And that is (as is the end of all humane knowledge,) to make a perfect man, namely, of an vnderstanding well informed of what is true, and of a Will well and constantly disposed to that which is good. For whosoeuer is so, wanteth no vertue, or abilitie of the minde that can be imagined.
To the obtaining of which perfectio^, though this be not the only meanes, yet is it the aptest, containing in particular and applyable examples, what many sciences together, in generall precepts, and such as haue innumerable exceptions, can hardly comprehend.
And besides, though Morall Philosophy haue the same scope and
 ayme, and hath beene anciently learned, for the prudent, and vertuous gouernment of a mans life, and actions: yet at this day the bookes of it afford matter rather to dispute of wisedome and vertue, and to define and distinguish of their natures, and sorts, then to make a man either wise or vertuous.
And though heretofore they were accounted good Philosophers, that could straine, and slacke the bridle of their passions, when, and where they ought: that fear'd turpitude most of all things, and death least: that in their deeds could distinguish betweene two vicious extremes, and walke euenly in the midst, not for feare of one Vice, running backe as farre as to the other, and finally, that were able to
 master all their affections whatsoeuer, yet now such pretend to that Title, as can doe none of these, but onely Syllogize of them, as if they thought it were, Summum Bonum, to define Summum Bonum; or Wisedome, Valour, and Vertue, to know what those notions meant. Whereas hee that by reading of Historie, desires to learne the Art how to gouerne himselfe in the passages of this life, shall finde no occasion to dispute: but either to imitate, or eschew.
It was the cou^cel of Demetrius Phalerius, to Ptolomy K. of Egypt, Vt sibi pararet libros, de Regno, deque militari imperio, and bello gerendo tractantes, eosque euolueret. And what better bookes can a Prince haue for that purpose, then good Histories? Hee that would seeke such knowledge
 in bookes of Theory, written by such as keeping themselues at home in their studies, neuer once saw an Armie in the field, nor the face of an enemy, is as hee that would goe to the schoole of Phormio to learne the Art of Warre, rather then to the campe of Hannibal. But in Histories are those things written, which King Ptolomy might apply to his owne vse, and which none else durst tell him of. And though a mans experience of his owne times, may giue him much helpe and direction in all his actions; yet the knowledge of former times, and applying those accidents which then past to the present occasions, must needs be the greatest helpe to inable vs for action, or councell; and is of such profit, that one saies, Historia, si adsit, ex
 pueris facit senes, sin absit, ex senibus pueros.
The benefit that the Vnderstanding receiueth thence, ariseth two wayes. First, it becomes enformed, as it were, with matter of fact, by the direct Narration of things past, in manner as they fell out. And in this respect, History is said to be, Testis temporum, Lux veritatis, nuntia vetustatis. Secondly, it is enabled by particular examples, and by the euents of humane counsell, (as by so many rules and patterns) to take the wisest course in conducting our affaires to their right ends. And for this effect, it is called Magistra vitae.
For the will of man, it is also enclined to goodnesse thereby, when it heareth recounted the commendation, and vituperation; the reward,
 and punishment; the honour, and ignominie; the happy, and contrarie estates, and successes, of good and euill persons, and enterprises.
Now that the Vnderstanding, touching the bare Narration, may the better apprehend, and the memory retaine, what is recounted vnto vs of the men and matters of such times and places as are remote from vs, and the faces of things couered ouer, and sullied with the dust of Antiquity, may appeare brighter to our apprehension, there must bee ioyned to our reading these helps.
First a good method; as namely, the Historie of what Age and Country you will begin with, and with what follow. In which point, this is my opinion, that a man shal with best successe begin, at the beginning
 of time, and so discend with it. And for the principall reading, to take the History of those Nations, that from time to time liued in most flourishing, most extended, and most ciuill estates: then as it were collaterally, of those people that were the same age in ascent: and lastly, of such as were then declining, and of lesse marke, vntill one come to the beginning of the Chronicles of his owne Country. And then it will bee best to make that his principall reading, and the rest as secondarie or incident.
Withall, if there be in the bodie of any generall Story, some notable actions registred in volumes apart, or described by occasion of writing the life of some great Captaine, or States-man, or particularized in the Letters of eminent,
 and wise men; these would bee especially, and carefully read in the places where they fall in. As in reading the second Punique warre, written by Liuy, I fortifie my knowledge, by reading the liues of Hannibal and Scipio, in Plutarch; or strengthen the Story of Caesars time, with the reading of Cicero's Letters to Atticus; or in reading the volume of the French Story, when I come to the life of Lewis the eleuenth, I ioyne thereto that which is written of him by Philip Comines, and the like in like cases; being commonly more exactly, and with more pertinent circumstances in these manners deliuered. This beeing done, recourse should againe bee had to the body of the History. Notwithstanding, I would not wish
 a man to bee so long abroad, or a stranger at home, till hee had read all that precedes the Records of his owne Nation, but rather both in, and besides the set course spoken of, be conuersant in them at all opportunities.
As for Epitomes, or briefe vniuersall Chronicles, for one that meanes to goe through all the singulars, they seeme quite vnnecessary: and for my owne part, I should lesse remember the Epitome, which is for the most part a iuycelesse Narration, then I should the actions, with their needfull circumstances, set down at large in a complete Historie, which in the best Epitomes, may rather be said to be lopped of their best parts, then contracted in the totall.
Secondly, there is required a
 due, and diligent obseruation of the times and Chronologie, when you finde it mentioned, and the Histories of the same age, one to be conferred with another in euery point of it; otherwise there will want, not onely credit sometimes to the Author; but also light to the vnderstanding of that which is read. For Relations concurrent, if they agree on the time, both strengthen and enlighten each other, like diuers witnesses vpon seuerall occasions, deposing one and the same truth. And as the sense perceiueth nothing without the circumstances of time, and place; so the vnderstanding (which is the more perfect, as it hath more sensible information) without the description of them, conceiueth no businesse cleerely. For they be such circumstances as
 make things past and gone to come againe, and as it were be represented, rather then related.
And therefore also Cosmography in the third place, is necessarily to be adioyned, as a speciall helpe to vs in the reading of History, thereby to know the formes and situations of the Regions, Seas, Riuers, Hils, Lakes, and the like, euery where mentioned, and the postures both of one in respect of another, and of each in respect of the heauens. For the constitution, complexion, manners, and proprieties of their seuerall inhabitants, depend not a little thereon. And oftentimes the qualities of the times, and places, discouer the reason of an euent, when the Author does omit it. So in these three obseruations, namely, of method, time, and place,
 is contained all that in reading History is considerable, so farre forth as it serues to informe the vnderstanding in matter of fact.
But now for the other more principall vse of it, that is, to enforme and enable the iudgement, and furnish a man with discretion, and wisedome; these things are to be regarded.
First, the election of Authors, wherein I will not presume to compare, and preferre one Author before another, (except the soueraign compiler of holy History, between whom and men there is no proportion) by their seuerall names, which were a thing both tedious and distastfull. But yet we must be carefull in our choyce, and haue a speciall regard to the persons that haue written, lest by too
 much credulity wee be led into errors. For some haue written for fauour partially, for feare falsly, for spleene spightfully; but a discreet Reader may easily trip them. And in generall, such as you shall think to write most truely and most fully, vpon the passages of euery Age and Region, you should labour to finde out, and reade ouer. For where truth is wanting, the iudgement shall want a foundation, whereon to frame to it selfe any precept, for institution and instruction of life: Truth being the forme and essence of History, without which it is but the worst kinde of Poetry.
And though it would be hard to finde any one History, (much lesse a sufficient number for all ages and places) wherein there be
 not some vntruths, yet this ought not either to deterre the Reader, or disgrace the Author, where the mayne and best part is truely set downe, but onely to moue a man to choose Caeteris paribus, those that haue fewest fables, and most sinceritie in the maine drift. And seeing that euery relation is a story, a man may runne ouer those passages, which are false, and fabulous, without preiudice to the profit he shall receiue from the rest. As for example, though he lightly passe ouer the many superstitious Narrations of miracles, and prodigies written by Liuy, and other good writers, yet he may gather excellent recompence of his labour, by carefull obseruing their principally intended scope; namely, the true, and ample Narration of the
 deeds of whom they writ.
Another thing to make choise of in a Writer, is fulnesse. Herein hee is not most to bee commended that hath most words, but rather he that relates most in fewest words: for some are large by digressions, discoursing vpon, and censuring the actors, and acts, as they leaue the Stage. Some mislike this, as proceeding (it may be) from vaine-glory, or presumption, to anticipate the iudgeme^t of the Reader, to whom, and not to the Writer, that part belongs. But I am of this minde, that if it bee done by a wise Historiographer, and such as hath been exercised in great affaires, whatsoeuer his intent is, (which is to be iudged to be the bettering of his Reader) a man should esteeme himselfe obliged to him the more, as to one that
 goes out of his owne way, to shew another his. Besides, so many ancient and wise compilers of great Histories, vse thus to digresse, that for a man of this age to tax them for it, were to taxe himselfe of Arrogance.
Some fill many leaues together with Orations, which though they are but the inuention oft-times of the Writer, and therefore declare not what was said; yet they shew what might be fitly said for such a purpose, entring herein the confines of the Orator, for our instruction, which is the thing the Reader should ayme at, and not the censuring of the composer.
But those, whose volumes grow, by a care not to omit any necessarie circumstance that accompanieth great, and remarkeable enterprises,
 should be your chiefe election. For this diligence in Histories is so needfull, as without it there ariseth no profit at al to the Reader. As for examples sake, Where it is registred, that such a King in such a place, such a time began his reigne, reigned so long, builded such Cities, and was succeeded by such a ma^, I cannot imagine what benefit I should draw hence for my instruction, or how I am the wiser for it; onely I may receiue the contentment of knowing so much, which is a very small purchase.
But the description of armies set in array, after this, or that manner, the placing of Ambushes, the celeritie of Marches, the taking in, or preoccupying of aduantageous places, the beleagring, oppugnation, expugnation and defending of
 strong holds, the diuersities of stratagems, and such like, in matter of Warre: the occasions, and effects, of good and euil lawes, the stirring, the maintaining or appeasing of seditions, and conspiracies, the policy or imprudency of wise, or vnwise Senators, in consulting, or treating, the humours and customes of Princes, and great Commanders, and swayers of State, and the like, in administration of Republikes, being truely and liuely related vnto vs, are the things that so much conferre to the enabling of our vnderstanding.
And not barely to know the first and last day of a Kings raigne, or what Cities he built, no nor how great a slaughter was made at such a battell, or who killed most with his owne hand. For this the Poets
 doe best, who because they wholly take away from men, the precedent councels, attributing them to the gods, whom they call to Senat, vpo^ almost euery great action, are held nothing so vsefull as the Historian, though they set downe the fact itselfe neuer so truely.
For if, as Homer shewes, the Troians gaue the Grecians many ouerthrowes for this cause onely, that at the entreatie of Thetis, to shew what need the Grecians stood in, of the presence of her sonne Achilles, Iupiter was pleased to make Hector appeare more terrible, then is here nothing imitable, and by consequence nothing profitable: but if they ouercame as choosing fit seasons, and places, and other aduantages of fight: the^ there ariseth much for a mans instruction, and imitation.

 Hauing in your hands a good Author, the better to receiue benefit by him, there would bee requisite assiduitie in reading, or at least, times chosen that may bee freest from interruption. For to leaue any particular complete Narration in the midst, or too much intermission in a generall Historie, are both of them very preiudiciall to the memory: and in this especially is verified the Prouerbe; Not to proceede, is to fall backe.
Besides, as no great vertue can be attained without labour and diligence according to Petrarch:
Non a caso e virtute, an^ie bella arte.
Vertue is not obtained by chance, but it is rather a great Art; so in this particular it is so necessary, that whosoeuer out of irkesomnesse, or haste, or impatience, in expecting
 the issue of any Relation, shall runne ouer a History in post-haste, shall be sure to lose the best part of the profit, which with attentiue consideration hee might otherwise reape.
He that reades, as it were for a wager, though he misse neuer a word, shall misse almost all the matter: whereas the studious, and insisting Reader, reades more then peraduenture a hundred others.
Another necessary helpe, is the referring of those things that are worthy obseruation to certaine heads, and common places in writing, thence to bee sought againe with more ease, as a man shall haue occasion to vse them. In this case euery mans own Method commonly sorteth best to his owne profit: and diuers men haue their diuers
 wayes. As some, considering that all humane actions fall vnder one of these three heads; Thoughts, Words, and Deeds; to them, and to their subdiuisions, doe referre all their obseruations. And by this way, no question, may aptly bee comprized whatsoeuer there shall because to note; except some Stories of strange effects of Nature, or the like, which no way appertaine to humane power; which being rare, may be referred to their places, in the History of Nature or naturall Philosophy. Or there may be made these three places for referring of Historicall obseruations; Deliberation, Execution and Euent. Deliberation grounded vpon propositions certaine, or coniecturall, both concerning mens manners, or actions. In execution, to distinguish
 whether it bee defectiue, excessiue, or equall, compared to what was deliberated. In the euent whether contrary, or conformable to expectation. Whether caused by the prouidence, and execution precedent, or by accident. Which things vpo^ euery story being noted, a man shall straightwayes finde, if a thing hath wel succeeded, where was the councell, or if euilly, where lay the errour. In this compasse also falleth all that can bee gathered out of Historie, for the institution of a mans life.
But for more ease, if neede be, all these particulars may be subdistinguished diuersly, and placed in a booke accordingly for that purpose.
Some thinke it vnnecessary to haue for the common places of Historie
 any particular booke by it selfe, because they may bee all properly referred to their place, in some part or other of Philosophy. For how many rules of life so euer be fetched from History, they are but so many Philosophicall precepts; Philosophy deriuing authority from the matter, and examples thereof; as Grammar may doe from the language wherein it is written.
Lastly, to compare the ages, and places one reades of, with that he liues in, and when occasion is giuen to make in a mans minde application of things past to the present, and to consider whether, and why, they hold, or hold not, is a kind of imaginary practice, to confirme, and make a man the readier for reall action, though farre from the perfection, that vse it
 selfe, and imployment in great affaires would bring forth.
Thus much shall suffice to haue been said of the meanes to benefit the iudgement and vnderstanding by reading History.
The will of man comes to be enclined to vertue, by the examples which are registred of good men, and good acts; and their commendations, rewards, and ends; or of euill men, and euill deeds, with their reproches, punishments, and euents; which beeing well deliuered, enflame the minde with loue, and desire to imitate, or with detestation, and horror, according to the merit of the thing.
And though Philosophy be an Art that aymes onely at this scope, yet all the precepts therein, will not so soone teach a man fortitude, and
 constancie of minde, seueritie, and militarie discipline, temperance, and all other vertues, as will the examples of Mutius Scaeuola, the Decij, Manlius, Fabritius, and other such noble Romane Citizens.
But herein a man ought thus sarre to haue a care, not to suffer his ^^^ection to cleaue too easily to euery thing, that an Historian shall through humane frailety, and peraduenture erroneously commend, nor contrariwise presently hate what he reuileth, driuing and cleauing to euery Rocke, according as the tempest of the writer shal stirre him. But to remember this, not to think well of any thing how much soeuer extolled, if it be contrary to Christian Religion.
For praising of things, though neuer so euidently blame-worthy,
 if it be done by an Author of regard, either directly, or indirectly, by a magnificent relation in termes and words most receiued in the best sense, will insensibly, and secretly bring on a loue to the euill so praised; and likewise dispraising, will nourish a mislike of such things, as deserue commendations.
FINIS.





A DISCOVRSE VPON THE BEGINNING OF TACITVS.




A DISCOVRSE VPON THE BEGINNING OF TACITVS.
THis piece of Tacitus, which I make the foundation of this Discourse, and to which I haue here confined my selfe, containeth 1. The enumeration of the seuerall formes of the Roman gouernment. 2. The Authors digression touching the qualitie of one that is to
 write a History. 3. The meanes Augustus vsed in acquiring and co^firming to himselfe the supreme and Monarchical authoritie. 4. The prouiding for succession. 5. The plotting of Liuia for the aduancement of her children. 6. The estate of the times after Augustus was fully settled. And lastly, the censure of such as (when Augustus began to grow weake and toward his end) might probably be thought to succeed him. And therefore in this order I begin with my Author.
[Vrbem Romam a principio Reges habuere. The Citie of Rome was at the first gouerned by Kings] The first forme of gouernment in any State is accidentall: that is, according to the condition the Founder happens to be of. If one man of absolute power aboue the rest, bee
 the Founder of a Citie, he will likewise be the Ruler of the same; if a few, then a few will haue the gouernment; and if the multitude, then commonly they will doe the like. And it is but iustice, for euery man to haue his owne worke subiect to his owne will. So here Romulus built, and ruled; was the founder, and was the King. The building of this Citie was about 800. yeeres before the Natiuitie of Christ; and consequently from that time to this present, about 2420. The Contemporaries of Romulus reigning in Iuda, were Iotham; in Israel, Pekaiah; amongst the Medes, Artycas; in Macedonia, Thurimas; in Athens, Charops, who began the ten yeeres gouernment there instituted; in Lacedemon, Polidorus; and in Italy there were many petty
 States, of might not much vnequal, whereby this new Citie might the safelier grow vp amongst them, and bee the soonerable to match the most of them. For if any of those States had been of eminent power aboue the rest, it is likely, Rome should not haue beene suffered to haue encroched so fast on her neighbours.
Now we haue seene the times in which this Citie was built, let vs next view how many Kings successiuely reigned ouer it, and how long this gouernment continued. ^^r^t, Romulus began, and there succeeded him, after one yeeres interregency, Numa Pompilius, then Tullus Hostilius, after him Ancus Martius, his successor was Tarquinius Priscus, next to him, Seruius Tullius, and last of all, Tarquinius
 Superbus. All whose reignes being gathered together, amount to the number of 240. yeeres, and hath beene compared by Florus, to the infancy of a man, and commonly accounted the infancy of Rome, though I cannot finde that they were much vnder the Rod, till this last Kings Reigne, who, to his cost, found them already growne too stubborne.
The next gouernment of this State, was Consulary. [Libertatem and Consulatum Lucius Brutus instituit. Liberty and the Consulship Lucius Brutus brought in.] Euery one that hath read the Roman Histories, can tell how much this act of Lucius Brutus hath beene magnified, insomuch as they instituted in the honour of it, an Holiday, by the name of Regifugium: and how the
 imitation of it drew another of the same race, and name, into such another action, who came not off with the like applause, though otherwise with the like fate. But I shall neuer thinke otherwise of it then thus; Prosperu^ and foelix scelus Virtus vocatur. For it was but a priuate wrong, and the fact not of the King, but the Kings Sonne, that Lucretia was rauished. Howsoeuer, this, together with the pride, and tyranny of the King, gaue colour to his expulsion, and to the alteration of gouernment. And this is by the Author entitled, Liberty, not because bondage is alwayes ioyned to Monarchy; but where Kings abuse their places, tyrannize ouer their Subiects, and wink at all outrages, and abuses, committed against them by any either of their
 children, or fauorites, such vsurpation ouer mens estates, and natures, many times breakes forth into attempts for liberty, and is hardly endured by mans nature, and passion, though reason and Religion teach vs to beare the yoke. So that, it is not the gouernment, but the abuse that makes the alteration be termed Liberty. This Consulary gouernment began about Anno Mundi 3422. not long after the beginning of the second generall Monarchy, which was of the Persians, amongst whom reigned Cambyses, Xerxes, and Artaxerxes, all within the space of fiftie yeeres, or thereabouts. And in the Athenian State liued Themistocles, and Aristides, in those dayes famous.
Now during this Consulary gouernment,
 there were others intermixt. [Dictaturae ad tempus sumebantur. Dictators were chosen but vpon occasion.] This Magistrate, for power, was limited onely by his owne will. For time, hee had limits from the Senate, and those so short, that their power could doe little hurt, and bred little ambition. They had now authoritie like absolute Kings, and by and by had no more then a King in a Play. But when it came to the hands of such as could not easily be constrained to lay it downe, they found it of that power, that by the colour thereof the people were bereaued of their liberty, and enthralled to Sylla during pleasure, and to Caesar during life. But the Dictatorship is not to bee accounted another forme of gouernment, but onely an Office
 in the Common-wealth, though for the time supreme.
[Neque Decemviralis potestas vltrabiennium. The Decemviri passed not two yeeres.] After the people had deliuered themselues from the authority of Kings, and came themselues to vndergoe the cares of gouernment, they grew perplexed at euery inconuenience, and shifted from one forme of gouernment to another, and so to another, and then to the first againe; like a man in a feuer, that often turneth to and fro in his bed, but finds himselfe without ease, and sicke in euery posture. They that could not endure one King, were soone weary of ten Tyrants, and for their extreame ambition, vexation, and cruelty, as also because of the lice^tious and barbarous lust of
 Appius Claudius, one of the number, (who for the satisfying of his appetite, had iudged a free woma^ to slauery) they soon extirped that authority: but indeed the thing they most feared, was, that they saw those who possessed the power for the present, would not giue it ouer, but sought to make it personall, and perpetuate it to themselues. They were iealous of their liberty, and knew not in whose hands to trust it, and were often at the point to lose it: but at this time licentious and inordinate lust gaue them once more an occasion to shake off the yoke. As afore the Tarquins, so now the Decemviri suffer for the same offence. They for the rauishing of a Wife; these for the intended deflowring a Virgin: the first acted, and her selfe reuenging it on her selfe by
 her owne hand; the second purposed, but preuented by a Fathers hand, in the murther of his owne Daughter. This alteration in gouernment began 58. yeeres after the expulsion of Kings, about Anno Mundi 3500. And 19. yeeres after this time, began the Peloponnesian warres. In these times liued Pericles, Alcibiades, and Thucidides in the State of Athens.
[Neque Tribunorum militum Consulare ius diu valuit. Neither did the Consularie authority in Tribunes of the Souldiers remaine long in force.] After the Decemvirate, they returned againe to Consuls: they were not long content with them, but bestowed the same authority on Tribunes of the soldiers; and weary of these, they had againe recourse vnto the Consulship. For the State
 at that time being young and weake, loued change and variety of gouernments: but the emulation of the Commons, to equalize the Nobility, did giue the principall occasion to these alterations. For on whomsoeuer the commons conferred the supreme authority, the Senate and Nobility still gained in all suites and offices to be preferred before them, which was the cause of most of the seditions and alterations of the State.
[Non Cinnae, non Sullae longa dominatio The domination of Cinna and Sulla did not long endure.] It is true that these men attained vnto supreme power by violence and force, but yet I cannot think that to haue beene the cause why their power was so soone at an end. For though violence cannot last, yet the effects
 of it may; and that which is gotten violently, may bee afterwards possessed quietly, and constantly. For Augustus also tooke vpon him the Monarchy by force, and yet he so settled it, as the State could neuer recouer liberty. These tooke no order, and it may be, had no intention to reduce the State of the Commonwealth to a Monarchy, more then for their owne times, else they might peraduenture haue found waies how to haue mollified or extinguished the fiercer, allured the gentler sort, prepared the whole State to a future seruitude, and what they had obtained by armes, haue assured to themselues by politike prouisions: which not doing, was the cause that their authoritie came the sooner to an end.

[Pompeij, Crassique potentia, cito in Caesarem. The power of Pompey and Crassus soon passed into Caesar.] This was an authority, in the Romane State, exercised without publike permissio^ only out of their own priuate strength. Of these Crassus was the most wealthy, Pompey the best beloued of the Senate, and Caesar of most power in the field. Their ambition was equall, but not their fortune, nor their wisedome. For Crassus was slaine in the Parthian warre, the which hee vndertooke onely out of auarice. Pompey, though hee affected the Monarchie, yet hee tooke not the course that was fittest for it; for he then courted the State; when hee knew his Riuall had a purpose to vse violence, and to rauish it. But Caesar knew the Republique to be
 feminine, and that it would yeeld sooner to violence, then flattery; and therefore with all his power assaulted and ouercame it: and so in him alone remained the strength of all the three till his death.
Likewise after the death of Iulius Caesar, [Lepidi and Antonij armain Augustum cessere. The forces of Lepidus and Antonius came into the hands of Augustus.] This was the last change of the Romane gouernment, and was permanent; for now Rome vtterly lost her libertie. For Antony by occasion of Caesars slaughter, beeing himselfe then Consul, hauing taken armes, which the State feared he would make vse of to serue his owne ambition, and to set himselfe vp in Caesars roome: the Senate gaue authoritie to Augustus
 to leuy an Armie, and make head against him. Which he did, and within a while after agreeing with Antony, and taking Lepidus in for a stale, established this Triumvirate, which in the end was also wholly reduced to Augustus. So that hence may appeare, that it is a most dangerous ouersight, to put Armes into such a mans hands for our defence, as may aduance himselfe by conuerting them to our destruction. To which purpose the Fable is also applyed of the Horse, who suffering a rider and the bit, for his assurance against the Hart that fed with him in the same pasture, could neuer after recouer his former libertie.
[Qui cuncta discordijs ciuilibus fessa, nomine Principis sub imperium accepit. Who when the whole Sate waswearied with ciuill discords, receiued it vnder his gouernment with the Title of Prince.] The manifold miseries that doe accompany Ciuill Warres, and the extreme weaknesse which followeth them, doe commonly so deiect and expose a State to the prey of ambitious men, that if they lose not their libertie, it is onely for want of one that hath the courage to take the aduantage of their debilitie. And when a mighty and free people, is subdued to the tyrannie of one man, it is for the most part after some long and bloudie Ciuill Warre. For ciuill warre is the worst thing that can happen to a State: wherein the height of their best hopes can come but to this, to venture and hazzard their own, to ouerthrow their friends and kindreds fortunes. And
 they that are at the worst, haue reason to bee content with, and wish for any change whatsoeuer. This was one occasion which Augustus laid hold of to establish the Monarchy, they were weary, their strength abated, and their courages foyled. Yet he would not presently take vnto him the Title belonging to Monarchy, especially not the name of King, but [nomine Principis sub imperium accepit.] Euery man that hath an office of command, though neuer so meane, desireth a name that may expresse the full vertue of his place, and most men receiue as great content from Title, as substance. Of this humour Augustus retained onely thus much at this time, that hee tooke a title which signified not authoritie, but dignitie before all the rest: as if
 the people of Rome had beene to be numbred one by one, hee thought himselfe worthy that they should begin with him. Also hee knew that the multitude was not stirred to sedition so much, with extraordinarie power, as insolent Titles, which might put them to consider of that power, and of the losse of their libertie. And therefore hee would not at the first take any offensiue Title, as that of King or Dictator, which for the abuses before done, were become odious to the people. And in a multitude, seeming things, rather then substantiall, make impression. But hauing gotten the mayne thing that he aspired vnto, to giue them then content in words, which cost him neither money, nor labour, hee thought no deare bargaine. And
 this was but for the present neither. For he doubted not but that the power which hee had in substance, would in time dignifie any name hee should take aboue the name of King: and in the meane space hee should keepe the loue of the people, which is the principall pillar of a new soueraignty.
Hitherto, the seuerall changes and alterations in the state of Rome, and how the sway thereof, after the space of almost 800. yeere, being now arriued at her greatest strength, remained wholly in the person of Augustus Caesar. He therefore after much deliberation had, whether he should restore it againe to the former libertie of a Common-wealth, or conuert the gouernment into a Monarchy, at length resolued on the latter. The
 meanes he had, and the deuices he vsed to bring the same to passe, are now by the Author likewise touched, and should follow in order. But because Tacitus here digresseth, to shew the faults of Historiographers, and the vprightnesse he purposeth to vse in his owne story, I will also take his words as they lye in my way, and afterwards proceed with the History it selfe.
[Sed veteris populi Romani prospera vel aduersa claris Scriptoribus memorata sunt. But of the ancient people of Rome, both the prosperous, and aduerse estate, hath beene recorded by renowned Writers.] It is a signe of too much opinion, and selfe-conceit, to be a follower in such an Historie, as hath beene already sufficiently atchieued by others. And therefore Cicero said well of the
 Commentaries which Caesar wrote of his owne acts, and intended should bee but the notes, and the ground of an History, to bee written by some that should afterward vndertake that taske, that though that were an acceptable, and welcome worke to some arrogant persons, yet that all discreet men were thereby deterred from writing. So, that as it was here to Tacitus, it should also be cause enough to any man else to abstaine from the writing of those Histories, which are already wisely, and perfectly related. The reason why the times of the Commonwealth haue been better Historified, then those that came after, seemeth to be the liberty that such a gouernment affordeth. For where the gouernour (who is alwayes the mayne subiect of the
 Annales of a Citie) is not one man, but a great many, there personall tax breedeth not so often publique offence.
[Temporibusque Augusti dicendis non defuere decora ingenia, donec gliscente adulatione deterrerentur. And there wanted not good wits, to write Augustus his time, till by the preuailing of flattery they were deterred.] Also vnder Monarchs, so long as their deeds be such, as they can bee content to heare of againe, the Historiographer hath encouragement to follow the truth in his writings; but when they be otherwise, men must dissemble, if they will please, and must please, if they will haue their writings passe vnsuppressed. Therefore the knowne Law of History, which is, Ne quid falsi dicere audeat, neque vere non audeat, that a
 man should not dare to say a falsitie, nor not dare to speake the truth, must needs be abrogated, where Flatterie hath admittance. For there it is more needfull to haue regard to the acceptance, then to the substance of our writings. And hereby Flattery in time commeth to weare out, and consume the able writers in a Kingdome.
[Tiberij, Caijque, and Claudij, ac Neronis res florentibus ipsis ob metum falsae; postquam occiderant, recentibus odijs co^positae sunt. The occurrences of Tiberius, and Caius, and Claudius, and Nero, whilest themselues flourished, were for feare, and after they were dead, out of fresh hatred, falsely written.] It is the condition of most men, hauing been restrained from moderate libertie in any thing whatsoeuer, when that
 restraint is taken away, to become immoderate in the same. For their desires swell, and gather strength at the stoppe, which when it is remoued, they runne more violently then if they had neuer beene hindred at all. Hence it is, that hee which flattreth during the danger, slandereth when it is past, when the truth lyeth betwixt both: so that the same men that would before for feare most haue blanched, are they that when they may doe it safely, will most detract. And from hence it is, that the latter end of Augustus, together with the reignes of the foure here named, had not as then found a faithfull relator.
[Inde consilium mihi pauca de Augusto and extrematradere, mox Tiberij Principatum and caetera, sine ira,
 and studio, quorum causas procul habeo. My purpose therefore is to deliuer to posteritie a few, and those the last things of Augustus, and then the principalitie of Tiberius, and the rest, without spleene, and partialitie, the causes whereof are farre from me.] The defects aboue mentioned, and want of a true History of these last times, caused the Author to take this taske in hand, wherein to auoid the suspition of the same faults hee hath before taxed in others, he putteth in to our consideration that the causes both of spleene, and affection, are farre from him. These causes must bee either feare, or hope, of future good or euill, or else some benefit, or iniury formerly receiued, which euery writer of History should doe well to shew himselfe voyd of, if he can;
 because most men measuring others by themselues, are apt to think that all men will not onely in this, but in all their actions more respect what conduceth to the aduancing of their owne ends, then of truth, and the good of others. Thus much of the digression: now followeth the History it selfe.
[Postquam Bruto and Cassio caesis, nulla iam publica arma. After that Brutus and Cassius being slaine, the Commonwealth was no longer in armes.] Though Cremutius, that called Brutus and Cassius the last of the Romans, writing it in a time which would not permit a man so much as to looke backe at the former state of the Commonwealth, was perhaps worthily punished; yet this may be truely said of them, that they were the last Champions
 of the Roman libertie. For after them no man euer bore Armes for Recuperation of that gouernment. What an aduancement then was it for Augustus that these were slaine? For now the Commonwealth relinquished her liberty, and confessed her selfe subdued. So that his strongest aduersarie yeelding, hee might the easilier deale with the next.
[Pompeius apud Siciliam, oppressus. Pompey defeated in Sicily.] This Sextus Pompeius being the reliques of the Pompeian faction, was defeated neere Sicily, by Agrippa the Lieutenant of Augustus, in such manner, as of 350. sayle, hee fled away onely with 17. So that this was another step to the quiet establishing of his Empire. The first Ciuill warre was betweene
 the Caesarean faction on one side, and Pompey with the Republique on the other, and Caesar preuailed. The next will bee a subdiuision of the Caesareans, that Augustus standing on one part, and Antony on the other, the authoritie may at length settle in the indiuiduall person of Augustus, who hitherto hath had to doe against the faction of the Commonwealth and Pompey, in the warres against Brutus, and Cassius, and against Sextus Pompeius. How hee will now diuide from himselfe the other heads of his owne faction, is next to follow.
[Exuto Lepido, interfecto Antonio Lepidus being put out, and Antony slaine.] Lepidus if hee had remained in the Trium virate, might haue hindred the contention of the other two, by keeping them in
 doubt to whether part hee would encline. Wherefore, as if they desired to try the mastery betweene themselues, they won Lepidus, whose authoritie was least of the three, to dismisse the Legions that were vnder his command, and to lay downe his office. That done, the desire of soueraigne rule would admit no longer friendship in the other two, so they fell to warres: and Augustus following it with all his power, brought Antony (who was already vanquished with effeminate passions, and had his heart chained to the delight of a woman) quickly to destruction, and himselfe remained sole heyre of all their claimes, and interests.
[Ne Iulianis quidem partibus, nisi Caesar dux reliquus. There remained not another Commander, no not in the
 faction of Iulius, but onely Augustus Caesar.] This faction did not diuide as long as Brutus and Cassius were aliue, for then they had soon come to nothing, and the vertue of Brutus might haue had as good fortune, for the maintenance of libertie, as that of his ancestor. But when they had made vse one of another, to aduance both of their hopes, then they parted, and contended who should bee the sole gainer. Which happening to Augustus, hee had afterwards no more to doe, but onely to keepe what hee had gotten; which hee might easily doe. For first hee was alone, and when a mans power is singular, and his intentions are onely of his owne free election, hee is then most likely to reduce them into act. Companions in such affaires
 can seldome be content, that all counsailes, nay almost that any, should tend to the others profit; so constant is euery man to his owne ends. This Augustus foresaw, when he secluded from him those two, that were equall in authoritie and power with himselfe; Antony by force, and Lepidus by deceit. And now hauing power ouer the bodies of the people, he goes about to obtaine it ouer their minds, and wils, which is both the noblest and surest command of all other.
[Posito Triumviri nomine. Laying away the name of a Triumvir.] Hee had three reasons to leaue that Title; the first is of lesse weight, (except in Grammar) and that is the impropriety of that word applyed to him that hath charge alone, being proper onely to such as be three
 in Commission. The second is, because the name was too meane. For till this time, the Triumviri were rather for ouerseeing, then gouerning; sometimes appointed to looke to one businesse, sometimes to another; but neuer had any whole charge of gouernment of the Commonwealth, till such time as Augustus, Antony, and Lepidus, being three men, equally interessed in the State, gaue themselues that Title. But the chiefe cause was this, that the name carried with it a remembrance and rellish of the ciuill warres, and proscriptions, which were hatefull to the people. And a new Prince ought to auoid those names of authoritie, that rubbe vpon the Subiects wounds, and bring hatred, and enuy, to such as vse them.

[Consulem se ferens, and ad tuendam plebem Tribuntiio iure contentu^. Calling himselfe Consul, and content with the authoritie of a Tribune to maintaine the right of the Commons.] This officer of Tribune was ordained anciently, and so alwaies co^tinued, for a protector of the people, and a defender of their rights, immunities, and priuiledges against the violence, and incrochment of the Nobles. The authoritie therefore of this officer, together with the Title of Consul, Augustus tooke to himselfe, that euen of the old offices he might haue those, that were both for name, and effect, of greatest consequence. And for authoritie, there was none now greater then that of Tribune of the Commons. Insomuch as Tacitus saith in another place, Id summi fastigij vocabulum
 Augustus reperit, ne Regis aut Dictatoris nomen assumeret, ac tamen appellatione aliqua, caetera imperia praemineret. Augustus found out that name of chiefe dignitie, that he might auoid the name of King, and Dictator, and yet haue a Title of preeminence aboue other Magistrates. But the main cause why hee affected the Title of Tribune, was this, because hee thought it best to make his faction sure with the Commons, who at that time were the strongest part of the State, by hauing the Title and Authoritie of their Protector. And seeing it is impossible to please all men, it is therefore best for a new Prince to ioyne himselfe to, and obtaine the fauour of that part in his State, which is most able to make resistance against him. This Augustus neglected not. But rather
 vsed all meanes to draw all men to bee contented with his present gouernment.
[Militem donis, Populum annona, cunctos dulcedine otij pellexit. He allured the Souldiers by largesse, the people by prouision of corne, and all men by the sweetnesse of ease, and repose.] Souldiers are most commonly needy, and next to valour, they thinke there cannot bee a greater vertue then liberalitie, from which they thinke all Donatiues proceed; when, if the truth were examined, it would appeare that such gifts came not from the vertue Liberalitie, but were meerely the price of their Countries libertie. But, this the Souldiers were too rude to examine. An open hand drawes their affections more then any thing else whatsoeuer. The same
 effect in the minde of the people is produced by prouision of corne, which if they can buy at a lower price then formerly they could haue done (though peraduenture the measure be as much lessened as the price) they thinke then the State to bee excellently gouerned. How effectuall this kind of liberalitie hath beene, appeared long before this in the same State, when as Spurius Cassius, by distribution of mony, and Spur. Melius, by largesse of Corne, were very neere obtaining to themselues, an absolute soueraignty, and tyrannie ouer the Commonwealth. This is also one of Augustus his designes. Hee steales the peoples hearts by sustenance, and reliefe, as hee did the Souldiers by his mony. Further he pleaseth them
 all with the sweetnesse of ease, and repose. They saw that to beare the yoke of Augustus, was to bee freed of other vexation; and to resist, was to renew the miseries they were lately subiect to. When they were much stronger, they could nor make sufficient resistance, now they are weake, they can much lesse doe it. Therefore being weary, they could not but be much wonne with the present ease, and vacancy of Warre, especially ciuill warre. So Augustus tooke in this, the best order that can be, to assure a new soueraignty, which, is to to afford the Souldier money, the People a good market, and all men ease, and quietnesse.
[Insurgere paulatim, munia Senatus, Magistratuum, legum in se trahere. Hee beganne by degrees toencroach, to assume the businesse, and charge of the Senate, of the Magistrates, of the lawes to himselfe.] Augustus hath hitherto dealt with the State, as one that tameth wilde horses; first, he did beate and wearie them; next, tooke care not to frighten them with shadowes; then, shewed them hope of ease, and made prouision of corne for them; and now he begins gently to backe the State. Hee gets vp by little and little. For it is not wisedome for one that is to conuert a free State into a Monarchy, to take away all the shew of their libertie at one blowe, and on a suddaine make them feele seruitude, without first introducing into their mindes some preuiae dispositiones, or preparatiues whereby they may the better endure it.
 Hastinesse in any action, especially of importance, is most times the ouerthrow of it, and to doe that at once, which must bee done successiuely, is an argument of a rash, and intemperate man, that cannot containe himselfe, and stay for his desires. Also to a people so long weaned from a Monarchicall gouernment, it was most probable hee might gaine by degrees, insinuation, and continuance of time, more then on any suddaine hee could. Therefore hee takes vpon him the businesse, and charge of the Senate, of the Magistrates, and of the Lawes, and begins now to assume, what hee had long looked for, and expected. For whereas all the plots and policies hee had before vsed,
 were to this end, if hee had not also come to fruition, hee might haue beene iustly condemned of leuity, and his actions to haue proceeded from a vaine-glorious, and vnconstant braine, and his authoritie would haue in time come into contempt. For action and continuall managing of businesse, is the onely thing that preserueth the life, and vigour of authoritie. And all men giue their respect, and thinke it due to those, to whom they haue recourse in the dispatch of their weighty affaires.
[Nullo aduersante; cum ferocissimi per acies aut proscriptione cecidissent. No man now opposing him, the stoutest men being falne either in battaile, or by proscriptions.] This encroching on the libertie of the State, in former
 times, neuer wanted opposers: but now the stout Patriots were rooted out. For such men being forwardest, and busiest in Armes, must needs waste sooner then the rest, and finding too much resistance, must therefore breake, because they were of a nature vnapt to bend. And againe, in the proscriptions these onely were they, that were aymed at, whereas the lesse violent aduersaries found safety in contempt. The Proscription here spoken of, being that of the Triumviri, where the heads of the factions ioyning, abandoned, and as it were sacrificed their old friends to this new friendship, it could not be, that almost any stout, and dangerous man, of what faction so euer, should bee left aliue. And it may bee it was no lesse aduantageous
 to the designes of Augustus, that some of his own faction were slaine, then was the slaughter of those that tooke part with Anthony, and Lepidus. For they might haue expected, for the requitall of their seruice, to haue been paid with participation of his authority, which hee might not suffer, or else haue growne auerse, and haue plucked him downe, though they had with his fal crushed themselues to death. But Augustus was now rid of those stubborne companions.
[Caeteri nobilium quanto quis seruitio promptior, opibus, et honoribus, extollerentur; ac nouis ex rebus aucti, tuta et praesentia, quam vetera and periculosa mallent. The rest of the Nobility, as any one of them was most ready to serue, so hee was exalted to wealthand honour, and being enriched by the change, liked rather the present State of things, and that which was safe, then the former, and that which was dangerous.] It is both iustice, and good policy, to reward with preferments those that yeeld their obedience readily, and willingly; for it stirreth emulation in men, to exceed each other in diligence. And on the contrary, to heape benefits on the sullen, and auerse, out of hope to win their affection, is vniust and preiudiciall. For first, they shall lose one benefit after another, through vaine hope of winning them, and not losing the thanks of their first benefit; and then also others will learne, and thinke it wisdome to bee auerse and stubborne, by their example. Also those that were rewarded for their seruice, must
 needs striue to maintaine the present State, and helpe to keepe off the Ciuill warres. For times of tranquillity bee alwayes best for the rich men. In warres and trouble they pay for all, and in desolation their losse is greatest. For Ciuill warre is commodious for none but desperate vnthrifts, that they may cut their Creditors throats without feare of the gallowes; men against whom the Law, and the sword of Iustice maketh a fearfull warre, in time of peace. But the rich, and such as were in loue with titles of honour, found more ease and contentment heere, then they could expect in the Ciuill warre, and did accept the present with securitie, rather then striue for the old, with danger.

[Neque Prouinciae illum statum rerum abnuebant, suspecto Senatus populique imperio, ob certamina potentum, and auaritiam, magistratuu^; inualido legum auxilio, quae vi, ambitu, postremo pecunia turbabantur. Neither did the prouinces dislike this state of things; for they mistrusted the gouernment of the Senate and people, because of the contention of great men, and couetousnesse of the Magistrates for the ayd of the Lawes was weake, being infringed by force, canuassing, and lastly by mony.] The Romane State did not consist in the magnitude of that one City of Rome, or in the extent of Italy alone, but in the multitude, and greatnesse of Prouinces, that were subiect vnto it. And therefore it much concerned the surety of Augustus his gouernment, to haue also them content with this
 alteration: which they were for two causes. First, a Popular State, if the great men growe once too mighty for the lawes, is to the Prouinces not as one, but many tyrants; so that not knowing to which faction to adhere, they procure the enimitie alwayes of some, and sometimes of all, and become subiect to the rapine of whosoeuer first seazeth it, and to be the prize of their contention. At home they are commanded by contrary factions, contrary Acts, so that they can neither obey, nor disobey without offence: but are hurried, and haled, somtimes to this faction, and sometimes to that. Those that were deputed to do iustice amongst them, must not administer the same according to the Law, but according to the humour of him, whom himselfe
 followeth; which may bee now one, and anon (fortune changing) another. At Rome, if they sued for any thing, though they could all bee content their sute should passe for the matter it selfe; yet the furtherance that one faction should giue it, would stirre vp contradiction in the other, and so crosse it. Therefore it is better for a Prouince to bee subiect to one, though an euill master, then to a potent, if factious, Republique. Next, they found couetousnesse in the Magistrates. For when they expected, that hauing truth, and equity on their sides, their causes, and sutes should not goe amisse, they found contrarily, that by that, their iudgements were not ballanced, but that they distributed iustice rather by weight then measure.
 That purse that was heauiest, that bribe that was greatest, carried the cause Iustice was not seene, but felt; a good bribe was their best Aduocate. Such in those times were the Magistrates, and Iudges. Euery thing was carried by might, ambition, and corruption. He that was not ambitious, was neglected: and he that was not corrupt, was esteemed vndiscreete. In this time the Prouinces would haue beene co^tent with a Monarchy, or tyrannie, rather then to be troubled with so different, and ill humours of diuers men. But there may also be couetousnesse in Magistrates, when one hath the soueraignty, being a fault of the person, and not of the forme of the gouernment. Indeed, there may bee bribing in such a State; but in a factious, and diuided
 Commonwealth it cannot bee otherwise. For where the State is vnited, the Magistrates will haue some respect vnto that; but being diuided, euery one is for himselfe, and must looke to strengthen and enrich himselfe by any meanes how ill soeuer. For faction hath no strength, but from Iniustice, and Rapine. One remedy there is for such an inconuenience, and that is, if the Lawes bee strengthned with authoritie; which also wanted in the former times. For force, friends, and mony ouerthrew their validitie. For what Law was so strong, that the force of Cinna, Sylla, Marius, Iulius Caesar, and others, in their times could not haue broken thorow? Nothing is more prouerbiall, then that Lawes are like Spiders webs, onely to hold the smaller
 Flyes. Then, fauour and friendship, made way euen for the weake men to breake thorow. And lastly, money gaue the easiest passage of all. Wherefore the Prouinces, conceiuing better hope of the rule of Augustus, could not dislike, but were rather glad of the alteration. Thus farre the acquist and assurance of the Monarchy to Augustus: now, his wayes to perpetuate the same, and deriue it to posterity; are to be considered.
 [Augustus subsidia dominationi Claudiu^ Marcellum, sororis filium, admodum adolescentem, Pontificatu and curuli Aedilitate extulit. Augustus, to streng then his gouernment, preferreth Claudius Marcellus, his Sisters sonne, one as yet very young, to the Pontificall dignitie, and office of Aedile.] A Prince that hath raised
 himselfe to the Soueraignty of a State, and is once quietly settled in it, will for the most part haue a desire to make the same successiue, and will take all opportunities that may further such his intention. So Augustus doth now, and adorns with offices, and dignities, all those vpon whom, he thought, he might make the Empire to discend. Prouision of successors, in the life time of a Prince (besides that it is a kinde of duty they owe their Country, thereby to preuent ciuill discord) hath this vertue, that it nippeth in the head, and killeth the seedes of ambitious, and traiterous hopes in those that thinke of alteration: whereas the vncertainty of the succeeder, breedeth, and feedeth Treason in aspirers for many yeeres together. If any man therefore had
 any hope aliue in him, that when Augustus should dye, the State might againe struggle for liberty, or a new forme of gouernment might arise better to their own liking, this prouidence of Augustus doth vtterly extinguish it. First therefore, he putteth his Nephew into these two places of great command, that of Po^tifex, and the Aedileship: whereof the former, in matters of their Heathenish religion, was of supreme authoritie. In places of authoritie, and subordinate command, it is no small policy in the supreme gouernours, and especially in the principall offices, to place such as are either tyed in nature, or necessitie vnto them; that as they themselues haue supremacie in command, so all their vnderministers may bee so fast vnto
 them, that their actions may bee alwayes limited according to the will, and affection of their Soueraigne, by whom they were enstalled, and ordained for that purpose, to the places they hold. This was one stay and strength of his gouernment, to put into the hands of his Nephew (as I may so say) the Supremacy in matters Ecclesiasticall, which is one of the chiefest guides of a Commonwealth.
[Marcum Agrippam ignobilem loco, bonum militia, and victoriae socium, geminatis Consulatibus extulit. Hee makes Marcus Agrippa, one descended meanely, but a good Souldier, and companion with him in his victories, twice together Consul.] After hee had aduanced his Nephew, the next that he exalteth to dignity, was his friend. Wherein
 we may perceiue, that in the opinion of Augustus, when a Prince hath a Minister of valor, and worth, which may make him capable of great place, the meanenesse of his birth ought to be no barre to his rising. Againe, in raising him, first he should not neede to feare that hee might enda^ger him, being one that could presume so little of his Nobilitie. For a man that by his vertue raiseth himselfe from out of the common people, shall more often get enuy from the multitude, then any popular applause, and consequently cannot be very dangerous. So Augustus conferred that honour safely. Besides, Agrippa, in that hee was a good Souldier, deserued to haue the reward of his vertue, which is honor. And lastly, as the companion of his Victories,
 he deserued to participate of some fruit thereof. Which Augustus might also co^sider, not so much for his company in the warre, as in the Victory. For men reward the successe of actions done on their behalfes, rather then the labour, and vertue, or the danger which they expose themselues vnto in the same. The office of Consul was a great place, and had beene in former times of supreme power in the Commonwealth: yet Agrippa being a man, of whose faith, loue, and worth, he had had long experience, and for the reasons before recited, he doubted not to bestowe the same vpon him twice together: and more then that, intends to make him another stay, and hope of the succession.
[Mox defuncto Marcello generum
 sumpsit. Shortly after when Marcellus was dead, hee makes him his son in law.] The greatnesse of this benefit, bestowed on one that could no waies exact, or extort it fro^ Augustus, giueth here an occasion to enquire into the minds of all men in the matter of giuing and receiuing benefits. Tacitus in the first booke of his Histories, saith, Beneficia eo vsque esse laeta, dum exolui possunt. That benefits receiued are pleasing so long as they be requitable. When once they exceed that, they are an intolerable burthen, and men seldome are willing to acknowledge them; for who but a man of desperate estate will set his hand to such an obligation, as hee knowes hee neuer can discharge? This is the reason that Princes are so slow in aduancing some men, that haue deserued it;
 because they cannot easily doe it according to their full merit, or else they thinke it will not be so taken: So that they should, by rewarding them, both pay, and yet remaine in debt. And generally all men, but Princes most of all, hate acknowledgement, and like not to haue such great Creditors in their eye; but will rather bee content to take aduantage against them, as against so many vpbraiders of ingratitude: So that great seruices procure many times rather the hatred then the loue of him they are done vnto. On the contrary, when men can, without lessening of themselues, reward those to whom they haue been beholding, so as to satisfie them according to their owne estimate, they will then ouer-doe it, and heape one fauour
 vpo^ another, thinking by shewing their affection to them, to gaine theirs in the same proportion: but it falls not so out in humane nature; for benefits encrease the loue of the bestower, more then of him that receiueth them: for as it is proprium humani ingenij odisse quem laeseris, the propertie of humane nature, to hate those they haue wronged; so also is it on the contrary, to loue those to whom they haue beene beneficiall. Agrippa had done great seruice to Augustus; but Augustus was now able, without diminution of himselfe, both to requite and surmount him; and therefore leaues out nothing that may expresse his gratitude, but makes him his Sonne in Law, whereby his children might become heyres euen to Augustus
 his owne power, which was the absolute soueraignty of the whole Empire. Which act of Augustus, as it proceeded out of affection, so it also agreed with good policy; for whom should hee more trust, then one whose loue had beene so much shewed, whose fidelity so much tryed? And therefore he sets him neere himselfe, and (Marcellus being now dead) bestowes on him the widdow Iulia, his onely childe.
But heere I must haue leaue to transpose these few lines of the Author, to the end that that which touches the aduancement of the children of Liuia, may afterwards be ioyned together.
After this, hee aduanceth the Children that Agrippa had by this match. [Genitos Agrippa, Caium
 and Lucium, in familiam Caesarum induxerat, nec dum posita puerili praetexta, Principes inuentutis, appellari, destinari Consules, specie recusantis, flagrantissime cupiuerat. Hee receiued Caius and Lucius, the chil-of Agrippa, into the Caesarean familie, and seeming to refuse, most ardently desired to haue them, while they were yet but boyes, to bee called Princes of the youth, and to bee designed for the Consulship.] His sisters sonne Marcellus being dead, and hauing now of his own off-spring to succeed him, hee desires that the people would be pleased to take notice of them betimes, and in his life time, to put them into some possession of their future dignity. Hee would therefore now, whilst they were in their minority, haue them honoured first with the title of
 Princes of youth. This title, did imply as much as Heyres apparant of the Empire. And to giue it, was to admit and openly consent, that the State should be, not only the possession of Augustus, for his owne life, but also the inherita^ce of his desce^dents for euer. Secondly, with being Consuls elect, that they might haue some command of importance, as soone as their age could beare it. Though Augustus had force to bring this to passe, yet hee was loth againe to irritate the minds of his new subiects; and therefore hee would not openly so much as make shew of this his desire touching his Grand-sonnes, lest they who were content to obey him for his owne time, vpon this offering them a Successor, as the perpetuation of their seruitude, might turne desperate,
 and do some such act as might displease him. But he turnes to dissimulation, which was in those times held an inseparable accident of a politique Prince. Hee makes shew of refusing, and yet most ardently desires it; and that desire must also appeare by the refusall. And those that saw him thus refuse, durst doe no other then force his consent, and put these honors on his Grand-sonnes, whether hee would, or not.
 [Tiberium Neronem and Claudium Drusum priuignos Imperatorijs nominibus auxit, integra etiam dum domo sua. And his owne house not yet failing, hee adornes with imperiall titles Tiberius Nero, and Claudius Drusus, his wiues children.] Augustus, to make the succession certaine, and not to haue it depend
 vpon the liues onely of two, and those but young, aduanceth also the sonnes of his wife, men of mature yeares, and seene in the warres, and honoured them with imperiall titles, that if his owne issue failed, hee might leaue a succeeder, such as his owne affection should make choyce of. This course in the generall, is to be esteemed in a Prince both a prouident one for himselfe, and also in a manner necessary for the publike good of his subiects, considering the bloudy and fearfull warres, that haue followed vpon the death of such as haue not prouided a successor before their decease. But yet it falleth out otherwise in some particulars, then according to the intention of him that so nominateth his succeeder; as it did in this: for had Augustus
 thought it should so much haue preiudiced his owne bloud, to aduance those of his wiues, he would I thinke haue left them in obscurity. Therefore it is not good for a Prince in appointing his succeeders, to leaue the reuersion of the State to such as may haue power and meanes to subuert the first heyres thereof. Thus farre he hath beene tying the knot of succession, which now Liuia his wife beginneth on one part to vntye, or rather cut asunder, for the strengthening of the other.
[Vt Agrippa vita concessit, Lucium Caesarem euntem ad Hispanienses exercitus, Caium remeantem Armenia, et vulnere invalidum, mors fato propera, velnouercae Liuiae dolus abstulit. Assoone as Agrippa was dead, Lucius Caesar going to take
 charge of the Army in Spaine, and Caius comming from Armenia, vntimely Death by fate, or else by the trechery of their Step-mother Liuia, tooke away.] As the watchfulnesse of a faithfull, and wise Counsellor about a Prince, often checketh the very thoughts towards treason; so on the contrary, the death of such a one wonderfully facilitates the designes of a traytor. When Agrippa was dead, his sonnes did not long out-liue him, and though Tacitus heere doth not accuse Liuia directly of their death, yet there may bee gathered these presumptions against her. First, her ambitious and plotting humor. Then their hasty and opportune death; as if fate, (if their death were meerly naturall) had beene of Counsell with her. And lastly, the benefit
 which thereby accrewed vnto her owne sonnes. This last is of much importance in the iudgement of men: for to whomsoeuer comes the profit of strange and vnexpected accidents, to him also, for the most part, is imputed the contriuing, and effecting of them, if they be thought able. To Liuia appertaineth the suspicion of their death, because it was good for her that they should dye when they did, and shee was also generally suspected in that kinde of euill.
[Druso pridem extincto, Nero solus e priuignis erat. Drusus being before dead, Nero was onely left of his sonnes in Law.] This was the fruit reaped by the death of Augustus his Grand-sonnes; for hereby her sonne Nero remained the onely man that was likely to succeed in
 the Empire. For his brother Drusus dyed of a fall from his horse two yeares before. So that now hee had no competitor neither of his owne kindred, nor of the house of Augustus to oppose him, saue onely Agrippa Posthumus, who for causes hereafter to be mentioned, was not of much respect.
[Illuc cuncta vergere, filius, Collega Imperij, Consors Tribunitiae* potestatis adsumitur, omnesque per exercitus ostentari, non obscuris vt antea matris artibus, sed palam hortatu. All enclined that way, hee is made his sonne, his Collegue in the Empire, his companion in the Tribunitiall power, shewne to all the Armies, not by the secret artifice of his Mother, as before, but by open perswasion.] Euery man that followed Augustus in his
 strength, now in the declining of his age turne their eyes vpon the next change: for those who had fortunes vnder Augustus, desired the conseruation of them at the hand of the next; and those that had none, began now to hope for estates and honors, vnder his Successor. All men being of this condition, that desire and hope of good more affecteth them then fruition: for this induceth satiety; but hope is a whetstone to mens desires, and will not suffer them to languish. It was wisdome in Augustus to make manifest one certaine successor, thereby not to giue occasion to the ambition of many. But that Tiberius should bee the man rather then his owne Grandsonne, that was certainly the wisdome of his Wife: for not many
 men would depriue their owne off-spring of so faire an inheritance, without greater cause then is expressed, to conferre it on the issue of another. If Liuia had loued her owne no better, the house of Caesar might haue continued much longer then it did. The honour Augustus gaue to her sonne, was to adopt him for his; which was to giue him sole power for the future, after the death of Augustus, and make him Colleague of the Empire, and partaker of the authority of Tribune, which was authority equall to his owne for the present; and then, to cause the armies to yeeld him their respect, and acknowledge him for their next Lord. These fauours Liuia had beene long solliciting for, by insinuation,
 detraction, deceit, and whatsoeuer Art else is requisite to the supplanting of a Riuall in a Princes affectio^. But now the way was so cleere, by reason of the Emperours age fit to be wrought on, and the rudenesse of Agrippa, that shee durst openly moue Augustus to dis-inherit his owne issue, and preferre hers. But the fauour that Liuia shewed to Augustus children, besides the suspition of causing the death of two of them, was cleane contrary.
[Nam senem Augustum adeo deuinxerat, vti nepotem vnicum Agrippam Posthumum in Insulam Planasiam proijceret. For she had so tyed vnto her Augustus, who was now an old man, that hee confined his onely Grand-sonne Agrippa Posthumus into the Iland Planasia.] I haue
 not found so great a defect in Augustus his iudgeme^t, in al his former actions, as in this, so farre to follow her will, as to banish and confine his owne bloud, for the aduancement of hers. But, as Tacitus saith, hee was now growne old, and so the weakenesse that accompanieth old age may excuse that fault, which in his younger, and more mature iudgement, peraduenture hee would neuer haue committed. It was hard for him, being now in yeeres, to want the comfort of his Wife; to liue with her, and not to haue her pleased, intolerable, and against the dignity of an Emperour; and to extinguish her ambition, impossible. So that if he had seene her drifts, vnlesse they had broken out into some violent actions, hee must in a manner haue beene forced
 to dissemble it. For it is contrary to the dignitie of a Prince, to take notice of that fault which he is not able to amend. But hee saw them not: for what cannot the craft of some wiues, through opportunitie, continuall flatterie, and arguments framed with all the Art that can be vsed, worke vpon the weake iudgement of an old man? The place of Agrippa's exile, being a small, and vninhabited Iland, where hee was rather imprisoned, then banished, was in a manner, a sure argument, that hee should not long out-liue his Grandfather: for as the feare of Augustus kept him now aliue, so the feare of his owne Title, would make Tiberius neuer let him escape out of his fingers.
[Rudem sane bonarum artium, and robore corporis stolide ferocem, nulliustamen flagitij Compertu^. Ignorant (to say the truth) of good Arts, and bearing himselfe foolishly fierce of his strength of body, but not detected of any crime.] These are the causes, for which Agrippa was put by the right of his succession, and wanted the respect which was otherwise due vnto his birth. Hee had not good education. That vvas the summe of all his faults. And in a State which might freely elect their Prince, the same had beene a iust cause to passe by him. For it is a great misfortune to a people, to come vnder the gouernment of such a one, as knowes not how to gouerne himselfe. For where it is said, hee was vnfurnished of good Arts, it is not ment of letters, though that also be good in a Prince, and of ornaments the chiefe; for hee
 may want these, rather then iudgement, valour, or goodnesse of nature. But the Art that hee is principally taxed to want, seemeth to haue beene the Art of conforming to times, and places, and persons, and consisteth much in a temperate conuersation, and ability vpon iust cause, to containe and dissemble his passions, and purposes; and this was then thought the chiefe Art of gouernment. And whereas he is said to be vndetected of any crime, that made not much for the matter in hand; for though he might proue no ill man, hee might bee neuerthelesse an ill gouernour. But Agrippa's defects were not the sole cause of his dis-inheriting, though they were the sole iustification of it, when it was done. The hope of succession, notwithstanding the
 care of the Emperour, being reduced by the Art of Liuia, to one only man, Augustus againe takes order for the bringing in of one more.
[At hercule Germanicum Druso ortu^, octo apud Rhenu^ legionibus imposuit, adscirique per adoptionem a Tiberio iussit, quamquam esset in domo Tiberij Filius iuuenis; sed quo pluribus munimentis insisteret. But yet hee made Germanicus the sonne of Drusus, Commander of eight Legions vpon the Rhine, and commanded Tiberius to adopt him, although Tiberius had a young sonne of his own: but this he did, to haue the more supports.] Augustus is still of this iudgement, that the succession ought not to depend on the life of one man, and therefore wil haue more props to establish it. But as the aduancing
 of Tiberius, was thought to bee the ruine of Caius, and Lucius: so now the making of Tiberius to adopt Germanicus, might haue proued the ruine of Tiberius, if the Ambition of Germanicus had beene answerable to his power. For Augustus put eight Legions into his hand, the which afterwards would not only haue beene ready to haue giuen him the Empire, but also went about to put it vpon him by force. Therefore if a Prince raise many to the hope of reigning, he ought to prouide against the emulation, ambition, and mutuall iealousies that ordinarily arise thereof. For else he shall hardly bring any of them to the fruition, or if one, then all the rest to vntimely ends. Augustus here gaue Liuia indeed no occasion to worke against this last choise
 of his, being one of her owne Grand-children; but yet to command Tiberius, who had a sonne of his owne, to adopt another, must needs breed a hart-burning in him, because he knew by himselfe, how much rather men desire to possesse, then expect such authoritie. And fearing therefore; that Germanicus might beare the same minde, he afterwards, as is thought, tooke a course to bring him to his end, wherby may be perceiued in what danger an honest man standeth, being neere vnto one that is ambitious, either before or behinde him, whose nature is to destroy before him, out of hope; and behinde him, out of feare.
After that Augustus had mastered, quieted, and taken order for the succession of the Empire: the Author
 sheweth next the state of the present times.  And first for matter of warres abroad. [Bellum ea tempestate nullu^, nisi aduersus Germanos supererat: abolendae magis infamiae ob amissum cum Quinctilio Varo exercitum, quam cupiditate proferendi Imperij, aut dignum ob praemium. There remained at that time no warre, sauing against the Germans, and that rather to wipe off the disgrace for the losse of the Army with Quintilius Varus, then out of any desire to enlarge the Empire, or hope of worthy recompence.] Warres are necessary onely where they are iust, and iust onely in case of defence First, of our liues, secondly, of our right, and lastly, of our honour. As for enlargement of Empire, or hope of gaine, they haue beene held iust causes of warre by such onely, as preferre the Law of
 State before the Law of God. But this warre against the Germans, was to defend the reputation of the Romane Empire, and was necessary, not for the curiositie alone, and nicenesse, that great Personages haue alwayes had, in point of honour, much more great States, and most of all that of Rome, but also for the reall and substantiall dammage (for some man might account the other but a shadow) that might ensue vpon the neglecting of such shaddowes. For oftentimes Kingdomes are better strengthned and defended by military reputation, then they are by the power of their Armies. For there is no man that doth an iniury to another, and scapeth with it, but will attribute his impunity to want of power in his aduersary, (for there be few that
 want wil to reuenge disgraces) and thereby be the more emboldned to doe him another, and so another, as long as they may patiently bee endured; whereas, when they deale with one whose sword is out at euery contempt, they will bee very wary not to doe him wrong. And besides this, Augustus might finde commoditie in this warre, by employing therein the great and actiue spirits, which else might haue made themselues worke at home, to the preiudice of his authoritie.
[Domires tranquillae. Eadem Magistratuum vocabula. Iuniores post Actiacam victoriam, etiam senes inter bella ciuium nati. Quotusquisque qui Rempublicam vidisset? In the Citie all was in quietnesse, the same names of Magistrates. The yonger sort were all born after the victory at Actium,
 and euen the old men in the time of the ciuill warre. How few were left that had seene the Commonwealth?] After the violent stormes of ciuil warres, succeedeth now the calme of Augustus his gouernment. For it fareth with the body of a whole State, as it doth with the body of one man, that when a Feuer hath spent the matter, and bilious humour, wherby it selfe was nourished, the body commeth afterwards to a moderate temper. Whatsoeuer might haue caused a desire of returning to their former libertie, and bred a grudging of the old disease, was now remoued. Few remained that had seene the ancient Republique. And there is neuer in men so strong a desire of things they haue not seene, as of those things which they haue. And a mans nature is to stirre
 more for the recouery of a good, which they once enioyed, then for the acquisition of what they are ignorant of. As for the longing which might arise in them, through relation, and report, they had therein also some satisfaction. For whereas they might haue heard of the names of Consuls, Tribunes, Censors, and the like, the same they found also in the present State; though the authoritie of them all, remained onely in Augustus.
[Igitur verso ciuitatis statu, nihil vsquam prisci and integri moris: omnes exuta aequalitate, iussa Principis aspectare. So that the State of the Citie being changed, nothing remained of the old, and vncorrupted customes, euery one (equality laid of) attended the commandement of the Prince.] In vita hominum perinde accidit, vt si ludastesseris, etc. Terent. It falleth out in a mans life, as in a game at Tables, wherin when one cannot cast that which is the best, hee must mend the matter as well as he can, by good play. The change being now fully settled, and the ancient customes no more hoped for, they finde, that striuing for equality, is not the best of their game, but obedience, and waiting on the command of him that had power to raise, or keepe them low at his pleasure. For though other vertues, especially deepe wisedome, great, and extraordinary valour, be excellent ones vnder any sort of gouernment, and chiefly in a free State, (where therefore they thriue best, because they are commonly accompanied with ambition, and rewarded with honour) yet in the
 subiect of a Monarch, obedience is the greatest vertue, and those before mentioned as they shall serue more, or lesse vnto that, so to bee had more or lesse in estimation. Therefore they now studie no more the Art of commanding, which had beene heretofore necessarie for any Romane Gentleman, when the rule of the whole might come to all of them in their turnes; but apply themselues wholly to the Arts of seruice, vvhereof obsequiousnesse is the chiefe, and is so long to bee accounted laudable, as it may bee distinguished from Flatterie, and profitable, whilest it turne not into tediousnesse
[Nulla in praesens formidine, dum Augustus aetate validus, seque, and domum, and pacem sustentauit. There being at that time no feare of troubles
 as long as Augustus vndecayed by age, sustained both himselfe, and his house, and the Publique peace.] Although that the principall strength required, to the managing of an Empire, be that of the minde, yet ability of the body is also of such necessitie, that without it a Prince runneth the danger of suffering many disorders that hee would else remedy. The cause hereof is obuious to euery man, namely, that when for weaknesse of age, or want of health, hee cannot be present at the consultations of those he vseth in matters of estate, hee must bee forced to relye on the relations of diuers, and so bee subiect to distraction, or else wholly trust vnto some one, and become lyable to abuse. And in the meane time euery great man, hoping to
 make his priuate benefit out of the publike remissnes, seuerally oppresseth the co^mon people, and withall, keep off their complaints from the Princes care; and thereby draw on the danger of sedition and rebellion.
[Postquam prouecta iam senectus, aegro and corpore fatigabatur, aderatque finis and spes nouae: pauci bona libertatis incassum disserere, plures bellum pauescere, alij cupere, pars multo maxima imminentes dominos varijs rumoribus differebant. But now that hee was growne very aged, and wearied with his sickly body, and that his end and new hopes were neere at hand: some few there were that discoursed in vaine of the commodities of liberty, more feared warre, some desired it, but the greatest number by farre, with diuersity of rumors did descant on those that were to bee their nextLords.] When a Prince draweth neere to his end the peoples minds are all set vpon new hopes, and discourse of nothing that is present, but onely of what is in expectancy. The reason hereof is this, the hopes of Subiects being much built vpon the life of their Prince: whe^ he dyes, they are of necessity to begin againe, and lay their foundation anew in the next. Augustus therefore being ready to leaue his room to another, there could not choose but bee much discourse of the probability of the succeeder. One of these three was of necessity to come in place: Liberty, Ciuill warre, or a new Monarch. If another Monarch then either Agrippa, or Tiberius. For Liberty they had no hope at all, but yet that was also talked of: for men haue generally
 this infirmity, that when they would fall into consideration of their hopes; they mistake, and enter into a fruitlesse discourse of their wishes; such impression doe pleasing things make in mans imagination. As for warre, it was both feared, and desired by many, according as their fortunes required it; for without doubt, those whose estates were whole, would bee afraid, though such as had not a fortune able to sustaine their inordinate expence, thereby to seaze the wealth of other men, would much wish for it. Lastly, touching a Monarch, as it was most credible to come to passe; so which of the two it should be, was now become the co^mon talke of the greatest part of men, who censuring their persons, gathered arguments thence of their
 succession, and of the wel-fare of the estate vnder them; and vsed liberty in their speech of them, more boldly (though neuerthelesse priuately) then in the times that came next after, they could safely haue done. Thus farre the state of those times, wherein Augustus was come to the last Scene, and ready to quit the Stage of this great Empire. And now Tacitus comes to the opinion conceiued of those that were next to enter.
[Trucem Agrippam, atque ignominia accensum, non aetate, neque rerum experientia tantae moli parem. That Agrippa was cruell, and kindled with his disgrace, and neither of age, nor experience sufficient for so great a burthen.] By the weight of these censures, I should hardly thinke they proceeded from the common
 people, but rather that they sprung out of the Authors owne meditation, or else that he means by [pars multo maxima] the greatest part of the Nobility, and men of knowledge in great affaires. Age and experience are necessary for the gouernment of a great Empire; therefore the want of these in Agrippa, was of much importance against him; so also was the fiercenesse of his disposition, the absence of which fault is more desired by subiects in their Prince, then of any other vice whatsoeuer, that concerneth onely morality. But that other note giuen to Agrippa, that hee was ignominia accensus, is a farre greater exception against him then all the rest. The great men had most of them no doubt approued his banishment, and he liued thereby
 in contempt of them all; so that he could not choose but hold himselfe generally iniuried, though his ignominie proceeded but from a few: and opinion of contempt is a frequent cause of cruelty and tyranny. If now therefore they had chosen him for their Prince, they had then giuen him full power to make his reuenge according to his owne cruell inclination, and done contrary to the custome of humane nature; for men more willingly trust him with their liues and fortunes, that hath done them iniury, then one that hath beene or holds himselfe iniuried by them: for from these they can expect nothing but reuenge, from the other they may hope for amends. But this is not alwayes the best course, considering on the other side another
 generall disposition of mankinde, which is apter to remit to such as are vnder their power an iniury receiued, then to make satisfacton to them for one committed; because for the first they shall haue thanks, and the second is held but for a debt.
After the censure of Agrippa, falleth in that of Tiberius. [Tiberium Neronem maturum annis, spectatum bello, sed vetere atque insita Claudiae familiae superbia, multaque inditia saeuitiae, quanquam premantur erumpere. That Tiberius Nero was of ripe years, and of reputation in the warres, but he had in him the old and hereditary pride of the Claudia^ family, and many signes of cruelty brake forth in him, though he stroue to smother them] Ability to gouerne is not all that is to be wisht for in a Gouernour; Tiberius was
 heere thought too able, that is, likely to hold the reynes of gouernme^t too hard, especially ouer a people so lately weaned from liberty: for such are euer more sensible of euery restraint and pressure of Monarchicall rule, then others are that haue beene so accustomed. There are not two more tyrannicall qualities in the world then pride and cruelty; whereof the former imposeth intolerable commands, and the later exacteth immoderate punishments. They argued Tiberius his pride both from his ancestors and education, and of cruelty himselfe made demonstration. Men deriue their vertues and vices from their ancestors two wayes; either by nature or imitation. By the former are deriued all that depend on the temper of the body; the rest are by imitation,
 and do seldome faile. For the reuerence that naturally men doe beare to the qualities of their ancestors, begetteth a liuely imitation of the^, in their posterity. And so pride may passe thorow a Stock by imitation, not that men would imitate that, but by error vnder the name of Magnanimity. Then for his cruelty, by how much the more he endeuoured to hide it, and could not, by so much the more it was feared and abhorred in him. For a passion that can be mastered, is nothing so dangerous as one that ca^not; especially in Tiberius, that knew best of all men how to dissemble his vices. Those things that Tiberius would dissemble, were euil, and those euils he could not dissemble, were great ones; therefore for such cruelty as himselfe was not able to couer, hee
 was iustly to be feared. And yet it is no easie thing to dissemble ones vices, I mean, if the dissimulatio^ must be of long co^tinuance; for, for once a man may ouercome the most violent passion that euer was: but difficile fictam ferre personam diu. Seneca Trag.
[Hunc and prima ab infantia eductu^ in domo regnatrice; congestos iuueni consulatus, triumphos. That the same man was brought vp from his infancy in the house of Soueraignty; that be had Co^sulships, and triumphs heaped on him while he was yet but a youth.] This is another argument of the haughtines of Tiberius, drawn from his education Honors somtimes be of great power, to change a mans manners and behauiour into the worse, because men co^monly measure their own vertues, rather by the acceptance that their persons find in
 the world, them by the iudgement wch their own co^science maketh of the^, and neuer do, or think they neuer need to examine, those things in the^selues, wch hath once found approbation abroad, and for wch they haue receiued honor. Also honor many times co^firmeth in men that intention wherwith they did those things wch gained honor; wch intentio^ is as often vicious as vertuous. For there is almost no ciuil action, but may proceed as well fro^ euill as fro^ good; they are the circu^stances of it (wch be onely in the mind, and co^sequently not seen and honoured) that make vertue. Out of all these things, I suppose, may be gathered, that honor nourisheth in light and vain men a wrong opinion of their own worth, and consequently, often changeth their manners into the
 worse, but especially that it encreaseth their pride and insolence. As for his educatio^ in a house of souerainty, that might put into the heads of these censuring subiects thus much: (for certainly they liked neuer a iot the better of Tiberius for hauing bin brought vp in so high a Schoole of soueraignty as the house of Augustus) First, that what seeds soeuer of haughtines and pride were in him hereditary, and wch he possessed by vertue of his bloud, were now also through long custome sprung vp, and wanted but the season of reigning to bring forth their vnpleasant fruit. Secondly, that hauing by experience, vnder so learned a master in the Art of gouernment beene taught how to hold them vnder as much as himselfe should please, they could not looke for any remissenesse
 to proceede from want of knowledge how to keepe them low, and consequently were sure to find his gouernment euery way vneasie.
[Neijs quide^ annis quibus Rhodi specie secessus exulem egerit, aliquid quam iram, and simulationem, and secretas libidines meditatum. Neither those yeeres that he liued vnder colour of retireme^t in exile at Rhodes, did he meditate anything but wrath, dissimulation, and secret lust.] It is reported of Tiberius, that at the first hee trauelled voluntarily to Rhodes, but being there, he was co^manded to stay. Howsoeuer it was, he obtained the fairename of retirement, to couer the ignominy of banishment. A man would perhaps thinke, that aduersity should rather quench, or at least asswage those passions, which haue their life
 especially from great prosperity, as wrath, and dissimulation, and lust. And so it doth, when the aduersitie is so great, that the hope is lost of reducing their meditations into act. But otherwise it worketh a cleane contrary effect. For wheras anger commonly dyeth, where reuenge is despaired of; dissembling is laid aside, where the labor of it is vain; and imaginations of lust diminish, where they can neuer be acco^plished; whe^ aduersity is but such as they expect to ouercom, it often falleth out, that the hope wch nourisheth such imaginations is enflamed thereby, and men please their vicious fancies for the present, with the co^ceit of what they wil execute with effect hereafter, when they shal haue the power. This was the case of Tiberius, and a cause of feare, and ce^sure in those that
 were to liue in subiectio^ vnder him. [Accedere matrem muliebri impotentia: seruiendu^ foeminae, and duobus insuper adolescentibus, qui Remp. interim premant, quandoque distrahant. That besides this, there was his mother offeminine impotence: that they were to serue a woman and two yong men, that would for the present oppresse the Commonwealth, and might hereafter rend it.] Next to the person of Tiberius, they considered in him those of his Family, that would also looke for seruice, and obedience at their hands, namely, his Mother and two sonnes: Germanicus by adoption, and his owne naturall sonne, and thought them no small grieuance to the Commonwealth. For it is a hard matter to serue and please well one Master: but to please two, or more, when there is, or may be, betwixt
 them competition, or iealousie (leauing out that one of them, is a woman) is altogether impossible. The cause hereof is not, because the diligence and dexterity of a man cannot suffice for the quantity of seruice, but because the quality of it will not permit: for the seruice that the one will expect from you, is most times this, That you displease the other. And this proceeds from the emulatio^ of those that are in the way to autority, that ofte^ labor not so much to outrunne each other in the course, as they do to trip vp one anothers heeles. And the same emulation, when they once draw neere the races end, makes them snatch at the prize, and fall to violence, and warre, and to distract, and draw the Co^monwealth into faction and sedition.
FINIS.



A DISCOVRSE OF ROME.




A DISCOVRSE OF ROME.
IN the sight of any place there bee two especial Obiects, Antiquitie, and Greatnesse; both which none can sooner challenge then Rome: in the very beginning noted for Soueraignty. The continuance of which, in such diuersity of gouernments, as Kings, Consuls, Tribunes, Dictators, Emperors, cannot but shew a diuine power; for
 otherwise so many changes might in all likelihood haue bred confusion, and so consequently suppressed their rising to so great an Empire: which as the last, so it may be truely stiled the greatest that yet the world euer knew, or heard of; obtained onely by the valour of this one Citie, no Commander, and for a long time no Souldier, that came not out from thence. So that it may bee said, the people of this one place, made themselues masters of the rest. Wherevpon they might haue iust cause to esteeme Orbem in vrbe, the world confined in their Citie.
In the height of whose Imperiality, which was in Augustus raigne, Christ came into the world. This as then the chiefe Commandresse of the whole, was the place where
 holinesse, and religion, aymed to haue their principall plantation; where, during the time of the infidelity of the Emperours, till Constantine the great, who was the first that maintained the faith, it is infinite to comprehend the tyrannizing ouer Christians, the martyrdomes they endured, so many, that it is hard to name any who sealed not his faith with his bloud.
But now Constantine was conuerted, to see the ill effects so good a cause produced, cannot but breed admiration. For the Ambition of the Bishops of Rome made this their first step to greatnesse, and subuersion of the Empire. How grounded vpon this donation, I cannot imagine, nor I thinke they yet well defend: but this was the true Originall,
 by which in succession of time the Empire was translated. The zeale of this, and some succeeding Emperours, was so well taken hold of by the Prelates of Rome, that by degrees they assumed more authority to themselues then was due; the other in a manner before they were aware, losing all at Rome but the title. From which pretended power, the Popes now take to themselues supremacie in all causes, through all Kingdomes in the world, and those which were before, their superiours, to bee as it were subiect, and created by them that were their creatures. Which shewes a great contrariety to the pretended arguments of Romanists, for superiority, and rather may bee returned vpon them, that this their greatnesse hath more risen by encroachment,
 then right. Why therefore Princes haue beene so blinded with their pretences for greatnesse, I cannot tell wherevnto to attribute it, except to the fate of this place, that hath euer beene, or aymed to bee the Mistris of the world. First, by their wisedome and power, and then vnder colour of Religion and Saint Peters Keyes.
And now to the description of Rome, as I saw it. In which I will neither goe beyond mine owne knowledge, and fly to the reports of others, nor yet so strictly tye my selfe to a bare description, but that I may vpon the occasions of those particulars I saw, set downe my obseruations, and the conceits I then had; which consist, first, in the situation. Secondly, the Ethnicke
 Antiquities. Thirdly, the Christian Monuments. Fourthly, the moderne Buildings, Gardens, Fountaines, etc. Fiftly, the Colledges, Churches, and Religious Houses. Sixtly, the present strength of the City and Pope, with the description of his and the Cardinalls Magnificence. And lastly, the safety and danger for an English man to trauell to Rome.
 If you obserue the situation, it stands in a place that could neither afford pleasure nor profit to the dwellers, other then that which is forced. Though not so seated, as it may bee said to stand in the Appenine, yet amongst those Mountaines. All the Country about is so barren, except some little, neere the City, which is by labour brought to fertility, that the wildest Forrest
 of England may be esteemed good ground, in respect of this. In some places heereabout, I saw where corne had beene gathered, but by the stubble might perceiue had beene so thinne, that a man would thinke one stalke had beene afraid of another. The wayes thereabout both comming downe the Appenine to Rome, and from thence toward Naples, so vnpassable for a Coach, that a man may think himselfe well blest, if hee breake not his necke from horsebacke.
The sight of this so miserable a Country, wonderfully distracted my thoughts, to thinke how the inhabitants of so wilde a place could euer come to such a greatnesse. And from thence proceeded these cogitations. First, that ease and delicacie of life is the bane of
 noble actions, and wise counsels. A man that is delighted, and whose affections bee taken with the place wherein hee liues, is most commonly vnapt, or vnwilling to bee drawne to any change, and so consequently vnfit for any enterprise, that may either aduance his owne honour, or the good of his Country. Any actions that reach farther then their owne priuate contents, in their estimation bee needlesse and vnprofitable Labours. And it hath many times happened, that whilst men liue in this Lethargie, that Countries, Cities, their owne fortunes and all, haue beene lost through their negligence.
Againe, a life of pleasure doth so besot and benumme the
 sences, and so farre effeminate the spirits of men, that though they bee naturally prone to an actiue life, yet custome hath brought them to such a habit, that they apprehend not any thing farther then the compasse of their owne affections; thinke nothing beyond their present enioyments. A strange Epicurean opinion, that men, who were borne to haue dominion ouer all creatures; should be now subiect to them, and vnder their rule. A meere inuersion of the prime ordinance.
From this consideration I declined to the contrary, that a place of hardnesse, and a life exercised in actions of valour and not idlenesse, hath euer produced the brauest men, and arriued at the greatest fortune.
 Let but the Romane Story be a mirrour to you in this kind, you shall hardly, I thinke, finde in the first times any enterprize of great worth, that the cause of it might not be drawne from this head. For their first pouerty, being men brought to this place by fortune, and rather by forced, then desired election, not knowing where else to settle, in despight of want, their ambitions put them forward; first, to encroach vpon their neighbours, and then, as their fortunes were enlarged, to goe on in actions of greater consequence and more difficulty. Being a race of such men, as could not confine and limit themselues to one place, but successiuely from father to sonne, you shall scarce reade of any, that was not either
 a man of action or direction, though some peraduenture naturally vnapt for the one, yet exquisite in the other: and abilitie to giue counsell, is at least, not inferiour to the former.
To prepare a man fit for both, nothing so much preuailes, as a hard and weary life, such an agitation as will not permit idlenesse, nor the minde to settle too much vpon priuate ends, which being so, could neuer be aptly applyed for Publique. Besides, a continuall working of the mind, which in an actiue spirit, will still grow and labour in production of good effects, if it should be suffered to rest, would soone degenerate. For if a man giue ouer himselfe to an easefull life, the sharpnesse of his sences will be dulled, and grow retyred,
 applying himselfe to his owne contents, and then, can neuer haue sufficiency, nor will to preuaile for the publique, once being confined to his own particular interest, and looking no further. Many men are naturally giuen to such a life, and some by accident fall into it, but certainly their memory dyes with them: for no man is borne onely for himselfe. This is so well knowne, that I will not seeke farther to illustrate it.
A third consideration that came into my minde, at the sight of the place, was to wonder at a sort of men (but either ignorant, or malicious) who from the spirit of detraction thinke to calumniate, the valours, and vertues of men, in disgracing their Country for barrennesse, for pouerty, or the like. These
 men, if they had euer seene this place, and known the story, would neuer haue imagined this a good argument. Cannot vertue and pouertie be together? cannot an vnfruitfull Country yeeld men full of worthinesse, and Valour? a strange marke of an enuious disposition, to taxe the mens vertues, for the vnpleasantnesse of the soyle; as if vertue and plenty could not bee seuered, or that of necessity a hard Country must produce soft and ignoble spirits: but if they would truely looke into themselues, they could not choose but see a wonderfull imperfection, and ignorance, who iudge vertue by means, and men by places. If Noble and worthy Spirits had consisted in these outward respects, the men of this place would haue beene wonderfull
 ignominious; but you may plainely see, by the example of them, that a poore and hard life, a desolate, and almost vninhabitable place, brought forth such men, and they performed such actions, as in this age (we are most of vs so much degenerate) we can hardly heare of without incredulitie. So I wil leaue the place it selfe, and speake of the Country about it.
Not farre distant from the Citie, is the Mediterranean Sea, and the principall Port now is Ciuita vecchia, where since the Church hath had dominion, the Nauy is very small, and chiefely consists of Gallies. But certainly, this was a great helpe, in the time of the ancient Romanes, as well to encrease their dominion, as to fortifie themselues against forraine inuasions: for by
 this meanes men were more easily, and with lesse charge transported to those parts of Africa, and Greece, where they made great conquests, which otherwise could neuer haue been compassed, and they themselues much strengthened against all enemies that could come from those parts, seeing it a matter of great difficultie to surprize, or take any place, that hath so good a defence as the Sea. And to a people who bee strong, and of great power, it is not difficult to defend themselues from the enterprize of any assaylers; and experience hath euer shewn, it is harder to conquer Ilands and places well fenced with the Sea, the^ the Continent.
Thus much for this, and now I will confine my selfe within the walles, which bee the ancient ones,
 adorned in former times with many towers, but now the most decayed, and not very many left. The Riuer Tyber runnes thorow the towne, and within this compasse are those seuen Hilles so famously knowne, all of one side the Riuer, vpon which old Rome was built. And still there bee some Palaces on them; but the Citie, as it is now, is more built in those spaces, as Campus Martius, etc. which before were left vacant.
 But I will now take a view of the ancient Antiquities; and first, of the famous Capitoll vpon one of the seuen Hils, called Mons Capitolinus, whereof almost nothing remaines but the memory. The place where the Senate sate, is now plaine, and couered with earth, onely some steps you may see where they went
 down, and it is said to haue been framed in the form of a Cock-pit. The houses now about the Capitol are assigned for the place of Iustice. Three seuerall ascents there be by staires vnto it; and I haue heard those Romanes, who are descended from the Ancient, doe (though at any price) desire to haue their dwelling hereabouts. The principall of them bee of the Scipioni, and the Camilli. From this place Nero made a Gallery to his Palace vpon Mons Palatinus, whereof there is now nothing remaining, but some few Pillars which bore it vp, very great ones, and of Marble. This place is adorned with many choise Statues, both in the open place, and buildings about it. In the ope^ place you shall see a Statue, lying vpon a Marble stone in a fountaine, called
 Marforius, (Pasquins Intelligencer.) There is also the Statue of Marcus Aurelius in brasse, and vpon horsebacke, not anciently here, but remoued hither from a more obscure place, by Paulus III. P. M. Besides, there is the Statue of a woman Comedian, represented as if she were speaking, and two Auditors listning vnto her, so liuely expressed, that a man not instructed, may easily know they were made for this representation. In the buildings there be also many principall Statues, as one of a Scolding Woman, so well done, as it would almost feare one to looke on it. A Hercules in Brasse. Iulius and Augustus Caesar in Marble. Romulus and Rhemus sucking a Wolfe, in Brasse. Quintus Curtius on horsebacke, in Brasse, and Iupiter in Marble. Of
 Romulus and Rhemus sucking a Wolfe there be many in Rome, and not defaced, being euer left by them that sacked it, to put the people in minde of their base beginning. But it seemes, in this respect, they neuer thought the worse of themselues, seeing they haue in so many publike places made representation of this. There is besides, the Statue of Nero's Mother, wherin her countenance of sorrow is expressed, when the newes of her sonnes vnnaturalnes meant to her was told. There is another in brasse, of a Boy, taking a thorne out of his foot, looking so earnestly, and pitifully, that a man would thinke he had some sense of paine. There be in this place many other Antiquities of this kinde, which to auoid prolixity, I omit to name.

 Descending from the Capitol, there be three or foure Triumphant Arches dedicated to the honour of Emperours, as to Augustus Caesar and Constantine, where be engrauen their principall Acts, and victories: but the most remarkeable of these, is Vespasians erected vpon his returne from Ierusalem, where you shall see the ouercomming of the Citie, liuely set forth, and the holy things which hee brought away from thence in triumph, as the Candlesticks and the rest singularly expressed. Here is also the great Amphitheater, but now extremely ruinate, where the most publique shewes and sports were vsually shewne. Vpon Mons Palatinus, where Nero's magnificent house was built, there is nothing to be seene but decayes, and now
 employed to a Vineyard, which is bestowed vpon the English Colledge. At the foot of the farther part of this hill is the place, where, vpon great Feasts, the Nauall Battailes were wont to be presented. Not far from thence is the Pantheon or Rotonda, in Campo Martio, a place built round and high: at the entrance are many Marble pillars of great thicknesse, and height, hauing one onely light in the top like a Louuer. This anciently was a Temple dedicated to all the Gods, and now conuerted to the honour of all Saints. The two Pillars that be erected as Triumphs to Traian and Antoninus, are of a great height, and exquisitely engrauen vpon the sides, with their acts and victories. Vpon the toppe of Traians, his ashes are said to bee in a
 ball of gold. In the house of Alfonso Suderetti, is the place where Caesar made his Tombe, whereof now almost nothing remaineth but the ruines: this he purposed not onely for himselfe, but his Family; it is a great compasse, built round, and some old pieces of the Tombe yet remaine. In many places of this Citie, there are to bee seene the ruines of the ancient Emperours Baths; amongst which, the most principall are those of Dioclesian, of a wonderfull great compasse. Vpon this, it is said, that for twelue yeres together, multitudes of Christians were condemned to continuall working. Some part of it now is conuerted to a Church and Monasterie. Without Porta Pinciana, there is the Temple of Bacchus, which stands vpon Marble pillars,
 and it is a faire Rotonda. Here his Sepulcher is set about with pillars, and the tombe it selfe is of Porphyry curiously grauen. This temple, is now diuided into two parts, and dedicated to two Saints, Saint Agnes and Saint Constanza, whose bodies haue beene there lately found, and that of Saint Agnes is said to be vncorrupt. This Temple was of late all couered with earth, and but newly discouered. By Porta Ostia there is a Tombe of one Cestius an Aedile, which was an ancient office amongst the Romanes, principally to looke to burialls. This is built in manner of a Pyramis, all of great and broad Marble, halfe in the wall and halfe out. In many places there be Pyramides set vp, which are said long since to be brought out of Aegypt: of these
 you shall see at Santa Maria Maggiore, Saint Peters, and other places. There is moreouer no house of any worth, that is not replenished with infinite numbers of ancient Statues; so that a man might think, in respect of the number, that in ancient time the inhabitants were employed about nothing else. Courts, Galleries, euery roome is adorned with them, and in many roomes heaped one vpon another, there bee so many. And yet, for all this multitude, it is a strange thing to see at what inestimable prices they hold euery one of them; nay, it is almost an impossibility, by any meanes, or for any money to get one of them away, they hold them in so great estimation. Neuerthelesse, euery day amongst their Vineyards, and
 in the ruines of old Rome, they finde more, which, in whose ground soeuer they be found, at a certaine price, doe now belong to the Popes, who distribute them in their own Palaces, to their fauorites or kinsmen, and somtimes as presents to Princes. And this is the cause that the houscs of such as haue beene Nephewes or fauorites of the Popes; bee best furnished with these ornaments.
If a man should make an exact relation of the Anticaglie in this kinde, he must haue seuen yeares time to view, and two mens liues to write them. But for a tast and so away. At the Popes Palace, at Saint Peters, the Statues of Commodus and Antoninus, the Statue of Laocoon, which is written of by Virgil in the
 second booke of his Aeneads; and they say that his very seeing of that Statue, was the cause of those verses: the Statue of Apollo: and in the middest of this place the thigh of a man done in Marble, which the best workmen haue iudged admirable in the true proportions; and they say that Michael Angelo stood two dayes by it in contemplation, and the artifice was so excellent, and beyond his apprehension, that he had like to haue gone mad with the consideration of it. In this place there bee many more Antiquities, the great Pine Apple of brasse, wherein were found Adrians ashes. At the Popes other Palace vpon Mons Quirinalis, before the Gate, there be two other Statues done in full proportion, of Alexander, taming Bucephalus,
 made by those two famous men Phydias and Praxiteles, one in emulation of the other. And from these two Statues being set heere, this place is called Monte Caualli. In the Garden of Cardinall Borghese without Porta Pinciana, there is a Tombe which is said to be Alexanders. In the Palace of Cardinall Fernese, amongst an infinite number of other Antiquities, there be the Statues of the twelue first Emperours, two Tables of the Grecians Lawes, which the Romanes brought from thence, one of the gods which is said to haue giuen answers in the Pantheon, a Statue of the two sonnes of a King of Thebes, after the death of their father, tying his Concubine to a Bull, in reuenge of those wrongs shee had done their mother, (this
 Story is said to bee related by Propertius and Pliny) brought to this City by the ancient Romans out of Rhodes, found in the time of Paulus, III. of the Fernesian family, and by him left as a relique to this house. Heere are besides the ancient Statues of the Horatij and Curiatij, and such another of Neroes Mother as I haue mentioned to be in the Capitoll, but better expressed. In one of the Palaces of Cardinall Borghese, which in former times hath beene the Kings of England, and giuen by Henry the 8. to Cardinall Campeio, at his being heere; now enriched by the best hands of Painters, and the most ancient Statues: you shall see amongst the rest a Gladiatore (or Fencer) admirably described in Marble, and a Statue of Seneca in brasse, bleeding in
 his bath to death, with whom this part also of the Romane Antiquities shall dye.
Now from these ancient ruines of Temples, Trophies, Statues, Arches, Columnes Pyramides, and the rest, there would be required in a curious pen a particular obseruatio^, but I will only prescribe vnto my selfe some generall notes. How venerable Antiquities both bee and haue been in all mens esteem, is so generally known and receiued, as I will not enter into a Laudatory thereof, further then to shew the singular vse and profit that may bee gathered from the knowledge of them.
First, they much illustrate Story, and in some cases illuminate the vnderstanding of the Reader, and serue as a confirmation of that he
 hath read. When actions of note bee registred, the bare after-reading of them, without seeing the place whence they proceeded, is by many men not so constantly retained in memory. For euery man knowes, that if in reading an History (onely by a Mappe) the place bee obserued as well as the action, ones iudgement is better strengthened, and consequently much more when a man sees that which others haue but by description. They that haue read of Antoninus, Traian, and Vespasian, and finde their acts which they haue read, engrauen in Arches, Pillers, and the like, it is hard to expresse what credit they giue to the History, and satisfaction to the Reader. And if in this respect, any place in the world deserue seeing,
 none can sooner claime it then Rome.
Secondly, the ancient Statues of the Romanes, do strangely immortalize their fame; and it is certaine that the men of those times were infinitely ambitious, to haue their memories in this kind, recorded; and such was the benignity of that people, that they willingly yeelded to honour their acts, by publique expression, and in a kind, to Deifie the persons of their worthiest men, wch industry of theirs may bee gathered by the numbers of Statues of Cicero, Seneca, Brutus, Cassius, the Horatij, and Curiatij, Cato, and many more, whose vertue, more then their greatnesse, made them famous. Otherwise if I had onely seen the Statues of the most powerfull men, and ancient Emperours, I
 should haue thought there had been in those times as great Time-seruers, as there be now, where power and authority is more esteemed of, then vertue, or valour. Yet I think, if euer men of any place, in any time desired to haue their names and actions to continue to Posterity, not knowing any farther immortalitie, these were they, and this one consideration produced better effects of vertue and valour, then Religion, and all other respects doe in our dayes. Certainly, therefore, if they had been as well instructed in Diuine, as Morall precepts, no man of any age had euer exceeded them.
Thirdly, the multitude and riches of these Statues, and other Antiquities, do wonderfully argue the magnificence of those times, wherin
 they haue exceeded all that went before, or followed after them; and yet this sumptuousnesse nothing diuerted their minds from a generous and actiue life, but rather instigated them; which now we most commonly finde contrary. For greatnesse and goodnesse doe not alwayes agree together.
Fourthly, the Architecture of many ancient Temples, and Statues, is so singular and rare, that they that euer since haue beene esteemed the best, durst neuer assume, or vndertake, to equalize them in that kinde of singularitie, especially of the Statues, which are so done, that neuer any could come neere the originall for exquisitenesse in taking the Copie: so that a man cannot but gather, that in this
 place, and those times, there were conioyned all singularities together, best workmen, best wits, best Souldiers, and so in euery kinde Superlatiue.
But it may be there are some, who will drawe ill conclusions from these Antiquities, either tending to Atheisme, or Superstition. For Atheisme thus. If men desire to immortalize their memories in this kind after their death, it may seeme the onely happinesse (being dead) they can expect, is by this meanes to continue their fame for those acts which liuing they performed, and haue thought of no other immortalitie then this sort of continuing their memory: and this may seeme to be the end of such as in these moderne times make Monuments, or haue left order for some
 to be erected after their death in their memory.
To this I will not deny, but that these peraduenture might bee the farthest ends the Romanes aymed at. But amongst vs the erection of them is free from the corruption. For first, where the end is out of a religious care to constitute some place for our bodies to remaine in, till the day of the general account, I cannot see what more blame can bee ascribed to any, for adorning these, then their habitations whilest they liue. And besides, in respect that these bee vsually set in publique places, which is an ornament to them, they are therefore the more allowable. Again, in respect of the benefit and vse to such as liue, they be not vnnecessarie; for if they be of such, whose vertues
 haue deserued perpetuity in our memory, they breed a kinde of emulation to imitate; if otherwise, their liues haue deserued co^tempt, it is an expression of Gods iustice, who hath suffered such men, who haue liued scandalously all their liues, so farre to bee blinded, that they perpetuate their shame to posteritie, and by such mens Monuments, those who haue heard of their vices, seeke to auoid them.
Againe, there be others, who to set a glosse vpon their Atheisticall opinions, argue thus. If the Romans of that time, who were euer reputed men of most acute iudgement, and reuerenced for their grauity, and vnderstanding, thought their chiefest happinesse after death to consist in those outward respects, why should it bee thought in this declining
 age of the world, where men for learning, and height of wit, come short of those which preceded, that we should find new wayes of immortalitie, which the elder world neuer dreamt of, and charge those who haue euer beene so much esteemed for their wisedom, with so grosse an ignorance? To this it may be answered: First, that these Romanes had some sence of the immortality of the soule, but in what maner, and way, being only guided by naturall reason and learning, they were vtterly ignorant. For there is none but the foole that hath said in his heart, that there is no God. Again, it is not all the learning or wit of man, can find out the mystery of true religion, without Gods blessing, and holy Spirit to assist the^. But to such as these, who are onely
 learned in naturall sciences, and had no inspiration from aboue: how can they but (as the Apostle saith) count the manifestation of Religion foolishnesse? So that this argument must bee no derogation to the truth of Religion, for that learned men heretofore vnderstood it not.
For the other errour that may be drawne from these Antiquities, enclining to Superstition, which may be defined to be a Religion exercised in false worship. In those times, these durable Monuments tended that way: for either men were so ambitious to expect Deification, or people so foolish to giue it them, ascribing miraculous operation to their dead Images. Which errour needs no confutation: for all men see the Arrogance
 of them that desired, and simplicity of such as gaue beleefe to these vaine imaginations. And yet I cannot but admire at the strange blindnesse of such, who in this cleere Sun-shine of Christianity, haue such a mist before their eyes (imaginary not reall) that they will still turne the image of the incorruptible God, into the likenesse of a corruptible man, which in any naturall vnderstanding, seemes foolish, in a religious, profane. I dare walke no farther in this Labyrinth, for feare of growing too infinite, only this, it is the wonder of the world, that men should bee so farre carried away with this Ideotisme, which is both against Reason and Religion.
 Now in the next place after profane, the religious Antiquities of
 this place deserues co^sideration, in which, I professe a greater breuity, then in that which is past. Of the seuen Churches, to which men goe vpon extraordinary deuotion, the first is Saint Peters, now in reedifying, of a great length, with an answerable breadth. You ascend vnto it by many stayres, where, at the first view, is presented the most goodly Facciata, or forefront of the world, supported with many great pillars of Marble. This Church is very high, and vpon the toppe of the Coppola, or circumference, is a Ball of brasse, which to them below seems no bigger then an ordinary Bowle, yet is of that capacity, that it will receiue at least forty persons. The inside of this Rotonda within the Church, is most curiously painted with the
 acts of Christ and his Apostles. The finishing of the high Altar is vndertaken by the King of Spaine. The lower part of this round is adorned with Mosaique worke, and the Altar compassed about with those pillars of Marble which are said to haue been in Salomons Temple, they being curiously carued and fashioned in the forme of wreaths. On the left hand in a Chappel where the Chanons sing their Office, is the Statue of our Lady, and Christ in her armes, cut in Marble by the most famous Painter and Statuist in the world, Michael Angelo. Within a vault of this Church be the bodies of Saint Peter and Saint Paul. Heere also bee seuen Chappels resembling the seuen Churches which be vsually visited. Adioyning to this Church is
 the Popes Palace of Saint Peters, and from thence a Curridore, or priuate way, to his Castle of Saint Angelo. In this Palace the Consistories vsually assemble, and here is the Conclaue where the Popes be elected. There is also a priuate Chappell of the Popes, where the high Altar is set out by Michael Angeloes curious description of the day of Iudgement. Besides, in this Palace is the Vatican, or famous Library of the Popes, which consists onely of Manuscripts, but of great antiquitie, as well prophane, as diuine. Besides, all correspondencies, and matters of State, that are and haue beene betwixt the Pope and other Princes be here registred. This Palace hath been sundry times enlarged by diuers Popes.

 The second of the seuen Churches is Santa Maria Maggiore, seated vpon one of the seuen Hils, called Mons Esquilinus; vpon which goes this Story, that in the time of the Primitiue Church, there was a vision appeared to a man and his Wife, that very night the same also appearing to the then Bishop of Rome, that presently in that place where that good man and his Wife lay, there should bee a Church built and dedicated to our Lady: and this they say is that Church which was erected for that dreame. This Church is famous for these reliques. The bodies of Saint Mathew, and Saint Ierome, which lye here buried, The Cope of Saint Thomas Becket, which he wore at his death, and sprinkled with part
 of the bloud which hee then lost. And the picture of our Lady drawne, as they say, by Saint Luke. But that which makes this Church now so remarkeable, is the two splendid Chappels, the one built by Sixtus Quintus, where he lyes buried, and the other ouer-against it (but more beautifull) by this Pope Paolo V. where he is to be buried. In that of Sixtus Quintus, there be carued all his Acts, during his Papacy, but especially the expedition of Ferrara, and in the other, besides his owne actions, and Statue, the whole Chappell is most richly and curiously painted, the high Altar standing vpon pillars of brasse, inlayd with Agate, and besides, in many places adorned with stones of inestimable price. To relate particularly, the magnificence
 of both these, would aske a longer Narration then I purpose.
The third of these Churches is Saint Pauls, without the towne, about a myle and a halfe in Via Ostia: here is vnderneath, the grottes or Caues, wherein, as in others about Rome, the Christians in time of persecution were wont to conceale themselues, and make their priuate conuentions.
The fourth in this way also, and without the towne, is consecrate to the memory of Saints Sebastian and Fabian. In one of the Altars here made of Marble, and about a foote thicke, you shall see a little hole, in compasse about the bignesse of a twenty shillings piece. Of which there goes this Tale, that a Priest in the celebration of Masse, and at the time of the consecration, had
 an imagination of the impossibility, how vpon the saying of the words vsed in the consecration, the hoast should be conuerted really into the body of Christ: wherevpon the hoast suddenly and miraculously vanished out of his hand, and made this way specified, proportionable to that bignesse.
The fift without Porta Esquilina, is that of Saint Lawrence, where his body is interred. This Church was built by Constantine the Great, and those instruments wherewith they were wont to sacrifice Christians, be here to be seene, and more particularly, the Gridiron wherevpon it is said Saint Lawrence was broyled.
The sixt is Santa Croce, one of the principallest Churches of deuotion,
 built by Helena, mother to Constantine. The ground vpon which this Church is built, is of the holy earth brought by her from Ierusalem. Amongst other Reliques, there is a part of the Crosse, from whence it tooke the name, and one of the thornes of that Crowne, which was in derision set vpon our Sauiours head.
Now the last of these is that of Saint Iohn de Lateran, where the Lateran Councell was held. The heads of Saint Peter, and Saint Paul bee heere retained for Reliques. The pillars that support the Altar in this Church, are said to bee brought from Ierusalem to Rome by Vespasian. Heere is the Font where Constantine was baptized by Pope Siluester. Besides, the pillars are thought to haue beene taken
 out of Pilates house, and that vpon one of them stood that Cocke, which by his twice crowing gaue Peter warning of his sinne. Heere in the Sanctum Sanctorum, (where women cannot enter) is also conserued the Arke of the old Testament, Aarons Rod, The Sudatorium, which is a Napkin, with which in the way to the Crosse Christ wiping his face, there remained in it his picture, The Table vpon which Christ celebrated his last Supper, and one little Glasse of his Bloud. At the entrance of this Church bee those Stayres, brought from Ierusalem, by which Christ ascended when hee entred Pylates house, some twenty in number, wherevpon dayly many people goe vp, vpon their knees for deuotion, vpon euery one saying a Pater noster, and an Aue
 Maria, and then kissing it. Some also whip themselues as they goe vp. And this Church was also built by Constantine the Great, at the instance of Pope Syluester.
To goe more particularly in the narration of the holy Reliques, and Monuments of Rome, after the description of the seuen Churches, they are so infinite, that I should be too prolixe. This may serue as aview to the rest, onely I will remember one strange tale in the Church of San Pietro ad vincula: Saint Peter comming to Rome, was cast in Prison, and bound with a chaine, which after his death was kept as an holy Relique: sometime after this, the chaine wherewith he was bound in his imprisonment at Ierusalem, being by Christians brought to Rome, and into the
 place where this other was kept, they, as it may seeme, for ioy, being a good distance asunder, leaped together and ioyned themselues, and still remaine so: so was this Church builded in remembrance of that miracle, and herewith I will end this part of my Discourse. Now for my other obseruations, that I gather from these holy Antiquities:
First, I must professe for my selfe, that I am not so credulous, as to tye my beliefe to these miraculous reports; nay, I am so far from it, that I esteeme most of them rather fayned then true; yet such is the Artifice of these popish traders, that they are faine to sell their commodities by this false light, and to set a glosse vpon their Religion, by these and such like Illusions.
So that heere in the next place
 wee are to consider, how easily men are drawne by circumstances, to thinke they embrace certainties, by shadowes to conclude truth, and by outward shew of zeale and Religion, to imbrace impiety. Such is the flexibility of our nature. And by way of digression there can bee nothing more obseruable, then the variation of minds, as well as faces. Some haue such stony hearts and leaden heads, that they cannot conceiue (beyond themselues, and nature, as they terme it) any supernaturall, or powerfull gouernment in their life and actions, nor any heauen, besides their sensuality. Others so beleeuing, and vncertaine, that euery tale, or imagination creates in their braines a new Creator, and forces a false worship.
 Such are these which I now speake of. A false miracle preuailes farther then the written verity, a Monasticall, and seuere-seeming habit more perswades, then sincerity in life and manners; the representation of an image strikes deeper into their affections, then that way whereby God hath made himselfe manifest in the Scriptures. So that they are carried away with euery winde: so great is their corruption, so stupid their sences, so monstrous their ignorance.
By this you may see, it is no difficult matter to perswade these mens consciences to ones owne fancy, and to serue ones owne turne. Alasse, an outward shew of deuotion, and a few good words carries them into admiration, and to imagine that God is better pleased
 with ceremony, then truth, with forme then substance. This trade hath beene so long, and this deceit so customary, that many, though otherwise of strong capacities, are blinded with the same ignorance as it were by prescription: but if they would but giue themselues leaue to review the grounds, vpon which they retaine these opinions, and search to the originall from whence they sprung, they would quickly discouer the deceit. But if men will beleeue impossibilities, and for no other reason, but because other men doe so, and their Fathers did so before them; I can thinke no otherwise of such, then as of blind men, who are to follow their leaders, and may be somtimes drawn into the ditch. A man might spin out a long Discourse of such a
 subiect: but thus much shall serue for this obseruation vpon the Religious antiquities, and Reliques of Rome.
 Now in order, but very briefely, as before, Antiquities profane, and then Religious were considered; so now the present buildings, and pleasures, and next the more moderne houses of Religion be to be discoursed of.
For the first, I will onely for a taste, name some few places, by which you may ghesse the rest. There be in this towne multiplicity of Palaces, which for Architecture, and curiositie, may compare with any Citie of the world, of which, I will but nominate two. The first is a house newly built by this Pope, at the foote of Monte Quirinale, or Caualli, giuen to his
 brothers sonne the Prince of Sulmo (a Principality in the Kingdome of Naples) built round, and standing vpon Pillars of Marble, diuided into three heights, separated by Tarrasses, and euery one standing alike vpon Pillars. The Court, Tarrasses, and particular Chambers adorned with antique Statues, many of the roomes being most curiously painted both vpon the top, and sides, and equall roomes in all three heights, both for pleasure, and vse.
The second is a Palace beyond Porta Pinciana, built by Cardinall Borghese, this Popes Sisters sonne, a house full of pleasure, and spacious, where about the middle, from roome to roome, the doores being open, you may see in a direct line, the whole length of the house, as
 it were a prospectiue, a kinde of curiositie very much followed in the best buildings of Italy.
Now for houses of pleasure, gardens, water-workes and the like; there is that Garden-house (as I may terme it) of Burgheses, neere Monte Quirinale, built in that place where Propertius the Poet liued. This is very pleasant, not many roomes, but three or foure Gardens, enriched with diuers Statues, and Fountaines. Then there is that of the Beluedere by Saint Peters, which is the Popes, and another garden rare for Fruits adioyning to it. That Garden of Cardinall Bandinoes, by the Nouiceship of the Iesuites, towards Santa Maria Magglore, hath Statues and Fountaines in it, and is all vaulted, the better to take the fresh ayre in the heat of Summer.
 Then the Garden ioyning to the Popes Palace at Monte Cauallo, is very splendid: but amongst those, and all the other Gardens of Rome, which be most remarkable, those of Montalto, Maffei, and Lanfranke, be the three rarest for pleasure, beauty, store of banquetting houses, Fountaines, and other delicacies, that can adde ornament to such places: and thus much of this diuision.
From hence I obserue, that as mans life ought to bee sustained with those necessities which most vphold it; so there may be an addition of lawfull delights, and pleasures, to comfort and refresh it. For there is no man, or minde, so retyred, but requires some delight, and pleasure: otherwise the sharpnesse of our apprehension would
 be tyred, and the progresse of our life, solitarie; it being an impossibilitie, and Solaecisme in nature, for a man continually to trauell without intermixture of recreation, because wee be so subiect, as well in body, as in minde, to variation.
And in this kinde I know few recreatiues that possesse vs more, then the humour of building, in respect they both satisfie our owne present inuention, and serue to our posteritie, as perpetuall remembrances, and memorials of their progenitors, adding present content to our selues, perpetuating reputation in the world, remaining as liuing Monuments of our magnificence, and beneficent expressions of our greatnesse.
And although munificency in this kinde, be by many esteemed
 superfluous, I rather hold it conuenient, so it bee of our aboundance, and diminish nothing of the competencie of our estates. If it should doe so, it were too great an argument of our folly, to propose vnnecessary charges. Otherwise these respects might make it allowable.
First, this Art of Architecture is honourable in all mens esteeme, and profitable to our selues. Next, it keepes vs busied in thought, and action, and so diuerts vs from delights more dangerous. Then vpon occasion it enables vs in the vse of fortification. Fourthly, it giues a kinde of extraordinarie delight to our selues, when wee see those things, which before we had but formed in conceit, made visible. Next, it is an addition
 of repute to the Citie where we liue. And lastly, it makes a mans fame to spread both at home, and abroad.
But to descend more particularly to the pleasures of this place, the delicacie of Gardens bee of inestimable consideration, where a mans mind may receiue such content, and his eye such diuersitie of obiects, as in nothing more. If a place of delight and pleasure content our minds, it may here be satisfied with the beauty of walkes, sweetnesse and diuersitie of Flowers, melody of Birds, and the like. If sometimes a man be enclined to melancholy, the priuacy and solitude of this place, the murmuring of the waters, fils vs with a strange kinde of satisfaction. If one would contemplate the wonders of nature,
 here hee may finde all things necessarie, and pleasurable; healthfull, or hurtfull for man. If wee be enclined to any serious study, or meditation, here is the place where our thoughts cannot be perturbed, nor diuerted, nor our sences vnsharpened, because they continually meet with such variation. If you meditate, sit by the fountaine, or walke in the most remote and obscure places. When you would read, or write, then is there Arbors and Banquetting-houses to repose in. And to conclude, if at any time a man would desire to giue himselfe, and some few of his friends, the height of ciuill entertainment, no place can be more apt then this, especially in the heat of Summer, in a Country so subiect to the violence of it as Rome is.

 If a man were Poeticall, then this discourse, he could not finde a better field to exercise his wit. The Houses of these places be adorned with many rarities, but especially painting, the praise and excellency whereof is sufficiently knowne; so that I will forbeare the repetition: and thus I conclude this consideration.
 In the next place, the present Colledges, Churches, and religious Houses come in turne, in which of late yeares, those of the Iesuits be of principall reputation, where in their chiefe Church lyes buried their founder Ignatius, and his Tombe is there to be seene. There be besides diuers Churches appropriate to seuerall nations, as that of Saint Apolinarius, to the Germans, Saint Iames, to the Spaniards, Saint
 Stanilaus, to the Polackes, a Church dedicated to the holy Trinity, built by Lewis the eleuenth King of France, to the French, and another dedicated to the holy Trinity, for the English.
There is their Colledge, and in the Church be the Tombes of Cardinall Allen, and Parsons; vpon the walles wherof be set forth in painting, the Martyrdomes (as they call it) of such as suffered persecution, and death, for their Religion in England. And in this, now amongst the rest are Campian, and Garnet, and the Hangman, and Tyborne, as perfectly described, as if they were better acquainted with the place, and person. Here is also a Library consisting most of Controuersies. To the maintenance of this Church, and Colledge, there bee
 some lands appointed, besides other pensions that they receiue from the Pope, and King of Spaine. The persons here bee all English, and were gouerned by a Rector of the Iesuites order, called Father Owen, lately dead. They are al Priests, and yong Youths, sent thither out of England, to bee brought vp in Philosophy, and Diuinitie, in number about 120. all going in the habit of Schollers, and no sooner come thither, but they take vpon them false and supposititious names, as the Rector himselfe told mee.
This towne is full of Monasteries, and Religious houses, many publique Schooles, where Diuinitie and Philosophy are read in Lectures, and many publique Libraries. Besides, there be sundry Hospitals for strangers,
 maymed, poore, sicke, and madde folkes. The number of the Churches be about 140. And so I will leaue this part.
Now for my obseruation, it is this, to shew the Policy that they vse for confirmation, and establishing of their Religion, and consists, first, in an outward shew of deuotion, with strange expressions of humility, set forth in the poore and austere life of many orders, in their sundry acts of penitence, in their dayly visitation of their Churches, in their outward actions of griefe, and repentance at the celebration of Masse. Wherein is inserted all possible inuentions, to catch mens affections, and to rauish their vnderstanding: as first, the gloriousnesse of their Altars, infinit numbers of images, priestly ornaments,
 and the diuers actions they vse in that seruice; besides the most excellent and exquisite Musike of the world, that surprizes our eares. So that whatsoeuer can be imagined, to expresse either Solemnitie, or Deuotion, is by them vsed.
Their next way, is in their acts of Charitie, wherein they exceed, and imagine this a great argument to make the world beleeue the truth, and certainty of their Religion.
The third is, their boasting of miracles, with which they make such a noise, and would haue them infallible arguments, to vphold their faith: but when a man sees the ridiculousnesse, and finds proued the falsitie of them, they are of great force to perswade the contrary. For example, if a man going down a payre of stayres, by chance
 his foot should slip, he would presently make a miracle of it, and say, that in that instant he called vpon Saint Francis, or San Carlo, or some other Saint, by whose prayers hee was relieued, that otherwise he had maymed himselfe, or lost his life. Or if in riding in a Coach, it by chance be ouerthrown, he presently attributes to some Saint whom he then inuoked, the liberation of him fro^ an imminent danger: and with the expressions of these miracles, all the Churches be hung full. But for others that be more stra^ge, it is certaine, and hath been proued, that many of them are false, and broached onely to delude the people, which may giue a great suspition to the rest. But more, it is the Iesuites doctrine, and they labour to proue it lawfull, to forge a miracle
 for the furtherance of their Religion. By which Position, if any thing happen, which may seeme a wonder, as in the recouery of some desperate sicknes, wound, or the like, in the attribution of it to some particular Saint, or extraordinary operation by their meanes, they diminish the power and glory of God. And if any signe should happen to confirme it, of which they will nominate thousands, as the bleeding of a Crucifix, the speaking of an Image, etc. It may as well shew the now delusiue power of the Diuell, still blinding the eyes of the world in this kinde, as hee hath formerly done by Oracles.
Now the last policy is, in the course of their teaching, and disciplining, which I will onely exemplifie
 by the practice of our English there. First, there shall no scandall passe, that they will not be sure to lay vpon our Religion. And this at the first they beate and insinuate into the eares of their Nouices. Next, they vse all possible Art to magnifie their owne: in the meane time, barring the reading of any defence of our parts, and put them to studie such bookes as bee written against vs; so that they will conclude a Iudgement, before both parts bee heard. But when they haue them more strongly grounded, and they bee sure that their opinion is preiudicated, they will suffer them then to reade some of our bookes (but by the way, this libertie is seldome giuen to Italians) and then for our selues,
 that be so strongly instructed of one side, and strangely opinionated of the other, hee is a rare man, and receiues from God a great blessing, that euer findes the true difference. And thus being wouen in their nets, they be in a manner destitute of all possibility of recouery. And so much for this.
 Now next in order it followes, that somthing be said of the present strength of this place, and of what force it is against forraigne, or domestique enemies. And in my opinion it is of no great power. For examples haue shewed, that it hath suffered diuers surprizes; so that of necessity it must be of lesse ability now to withstand then before. For place of strength, it hath onely the Castle of Saint Angelo, and that also very weake, to withstand any
 strong assault. But the truth is, there be so many Princes in league with this Sea, and ^yed in so diuers obligations vnto it, that it is free from danger, without the Turke should make a warre; and then there is so strong opposition like to be made by the Princes of Italy, and other forraigners, that it will be hard to preuaile against it, if the Emperour, Italy it selfe, the King of France and Spaine, should not cast off their yoke and subiection: if so, then it were impossible for the Bishop of Rome by his owne strength, to oppose, or subsist.
Now for the gouernment of this place, it is wholly subiect to the Pope, which hee holds as a temporall prince, but solely guided by spirituall Ministers; all causes of iudgement in matters diuine are
 brought hither, as to the last Court of Appeale for finall sentences.
For the Popes Reuenue: that which hee receiues from his own principalities, is the least part; the rest consists in the Fayre of Indulgences, liberation from Purgatory, conferring of Church-liuings, sale of Offices, Pensions from other Princes, and the like. The treasure is neuer great, in respect of the changes of their Gouernours, who for the most part haue employed all the Reuenue of the Church to their owne priuate families, and friends. If vpon occasion they bee forced to make any great, and suddaine supply, they make bold with the treasures and ornaments of Churches, which be in Italy of very great value.

 Now to the person of this Pope: he is descended of no great family, an Italian borne, and exercised the former part of his life, before his Papacie, in the office of a Iudge. He was made Cardinall by Clement the eighth, and Pope by the difference of the two great factions, in that conclaue of Montalto, and Aldobrandino; both striuing to make one of their owne creatures, yet finding the other opposition too strong, were in the end forced to make a neutrall. And so by this fortune it lighted vpon this man. His Court is not great (some small guard of Swizers excepted) but hee rather liues a kinde of retired life; the chiefest of his actions tending to the aduancement of his Kindred. He is most gouerned by his Nephew the Cardinall
 Borghese, but for matter of greatnesse in correspondency with the greatest Princes, he is behind none, hauing Embassadors from, and sending to them, more then any other temporall Prince whatsoeuer. And when he shewes himselfe, it is in as great maiesty, and with more ceremony then is vsed to any other Prince, which for exemplificatition shall bee shewed in the custome that is vsed of kissing his feet, and the manner of his carrying in a chayre when he goes publiquely.
For the first, vpon his Pantofle there is a crosse, which people in shew of their reuerence and deuotion, kisse at the time of his giuing audience to Embassadors, or some other publike assembly: and this is to shew the peoples reuerence to
 his person, and to set forth his owne dignity. And the signe of the Crosse vpon it, is to declare that in that action, the peoples deuotion to our Sauiour, as well as honour to him, might be expressed, and in a kinde, for acknowledgement, that Religion is vnder his gouernment, and subiection. For his being carried in a chayre vpon mens shoulders, they vrge this to be vsed as an argume^t of his sanctity, and holinesse, to stirre vp reuerence in the beholders, and deuotion in their hearts, and that as all outward respects be vsed to honour the Princes of the world, so there ought to bee much more to the Pope, beeing head of the Church. In this kinde he is vsually carried, when he goes to Church or Consistory.

 Now to end this part with the Cardinals: it is strange to see their pride, euery one esteeming himselfe of equall ranke with any Prince, and are serued with a kinde of extraordinary pompe, vsing in their roomes of audience, cloathes of estate, as Princes doe, and when they goe to Consistory, you shall haue one of them atte^ded by their friends and followers with 20. or 30. Coaches, and at least 200. or 300. Staffieri or footmen. Some in this kinde exceed other, but the principall bee Montalto, that was Sixtus Quintus, and Aldobrandino, that was Clement the eighth, and Borghese, that is this Popes fauourite. Some others liue more retired, of which ranke Bellarmine is chiefly noted. Most of them bee in faction Spanish, and all receiuing
 bribes and pensions from him. Their creation comes either from the Popes particular fauour, or some great Princes intercession; younger brothers of great families, and all in a manner by the way of the present fauourite, who enriches himselfe, and makes his faction great, by the distribution of these honours. I onely saw them once assembled together, and that was in the Popes priuate Chappell, at Saint Peters, vpon All-Saints euen, when the Pope sang Vespers or Euen-song: there were in number of them about some 30. I thinke, all that were then in Rome.
Where I obserued 3. things; first, their places, all sitting round about the Chappell; secondly, their habits, of Scarlet; thirdly, their reuerence to the Pope, in the time that the
 Antheme was sung, euery one in his ranke, one after another, rising out of their seates, and going to his chayre, which is by the Altar, where they adore him in this kind, by bending their bodies, kneeling, and kissing his garments.
Amongst these Cardinals I principally obserued two: one for his learning, and that was Bellarmine, a little leane old man; the other was Cardinall Tosco, and he, at the Conclaue when this Pope was chosen, was so neere being chosen, that many yet thinke the election went on his side. For of 60. hee had 45. voices. But when he was set in his Chayre, and they comming to adore him, Baronius came in, and said, Will you choose him head of the Church, that cannot speake a sentence without that scurrilous by-word of the
 Lombards (Cazzo) what a shame will this bee in our election? and vpon this diuers of his voyces fell from him, and he lost the Popedome.
Now for that I gather from this place, which shall be very short, it is this; That the sumptuousnesse of the Pope, and the pride of his gouernment, is one token of the falsity of their doctrine; seeing they which pretend to haue rule ouer, and to giue direction vnto others, are tainted with this leprosie. For it is neuer seene that the body is sound, when the head is corrupt, and it is impossible for any to guide another, that stumbles in his owne way, or to bee a directer to others, that stands in his owne light.
More particularly for these Prelates: it is quite contrary to the ordinance
 of God, and different from the example of Christ, and his Apostles, to challenge temporall iurisdiction or superiority, when their charge is onely to instruct. And they who should be examples for others to imitate, in life and conuersation, and in that kind to teach as well by example as precept, what instruction can wee gather fro^ them, but ambitious thoughts, and vnsatisfied desires after the wealth and glory of this world?
Againe, their excesse in this kind is vnnecessary; for what can bee pretended for these Popes and other Ecclesiasticall persons, that they should so violently desire honour, and superfluity in wealth? Are they not, by their owne rules, in a manner, separated from the world, and bard from any
 hope of succeeders in their owne posterity? Therefore one should imagine these so immoderate desires, impertinent. And it could be no diminution either to the glory or progresse of Religion; for the very function it selfe is honourable, and reuerenced; and moderate attributions both of dignity and liuing ought to be ascribed them. But why all should bee included within this center, and wholly referred to the person of the Pope, I neither see for it Reason, nor Religion.
But lastly, this extremity of their pride is adua^tageous against them, and giues dangerous examples euen amongst themselues. When the People be taught moderation and sobriety, and see excesse and liberty in their teachers, none is
 so blinde but must see their deceit. When they are instructed in acts of charity, and perswaded to impouerish themselues to enrich a Priest, who can shadow their cosenage? When they pronounce Indulgences, and we pay for them; what man can think the Pope hath so much interest in God, as to make him pardon vs, for his profit? When they professe sanctity and strictnesse of life; who will beleeue him, when, after he hath gotten to be a Bishop or Cardinal, he is found to be as proud, seditious and couetous as the rest? When the Pope professeth pouerty, and as they say in his procession, when he is elected, being carried publikely to shew himselfe to the world, hurles brasse amongst the people, and vses these words of Saint Peter, Gold and siluer
 haue I none, but that which I haue, I giue vnto thee, what man perceiues not their abusing of the Scripture, and mocking of the people? When the Pope, to shew his humility vpon the Maundy Thursday, washes the feet of the poore, and in the meane time is attended with Cardinals, and Embassadors, some giuing him water, some the towell, others holding his traine, himselfe carried into, and out of the roome, as if he were too good to tread on the earth; what man can bee so stupid that discernes not his pride? Thus you may see what contrarietie there is betwixt their profession and practice. And so I will leaue this obseruation.
 And now to draw to a conclusion: after this description I doe not
 thinke it vnnecessary to say something of the safety and danger for an English man to trauell thither. And I am the rather induced vnto it, because I haue heard from many that haue beene there, such strange tales, and such wonders of their escape, as if they meant to scarre vs with Rome, as children be heere with Hobgoblins.
It is true, that for some persons there can be no place in the world so dangerous for them to come in, as this; and they are such, as haue beene noted either to be extreme persecuters of them, violently addicted against them, or such as haue opposed them by publike disputation, or writing, in matter of Controuersie; for these, it is certaine, if they be found, they shall be either brought into the Inquisition, or
 forced to bee reconciled to their Church. And yet I do not thinke it impossible for any of this sort to make a Voyage thither, and neuer be surprized; but then they must neither publish their purpose nor time; for the English there, haue eyes and eares in all places, and such a man is no sooner gone, or purposes to go out of England, but they heare of it, and he can liue in no place of Italy, but they haue intelligence of him. Therefore the safest course for such a one, is to passe that, before hee settle in any other place, and in the meane time neither to make himselfe, nor intention knowne to any body liuing, for then there may bee a possibility of discouery. And besides it is necessary, that he haue some other Language besides his
 owne, that hee may passe for that Country-man: and amongst some of them hee should troope himselfe, and bee carefull also, that with them hee neuer shew any dis-affection to the Religion; for then they may grow iealous, and discouer him. Besides, I would not haue him stay there too long, nor conuerse with any of his owne Nation.
There bee some others also that may not come hither safely; and they are of this sort, who though themselues haue in no action giuen them cause of offence, yet some of their name or Kindred, either were, or bee professed enemies against them. Others also are endangered heere, if they haue any
 particular enemy, that is great in, or hath interest with any of the Colledge (for no Englishman is put into the Inquisition, vnlesse hee giue some publique offence but by their meanes) then peraduenture he may be brought into trouble, onely vpon reuenge and malice.
But for others, and specially men of Quality, their comming hither may bee with as much freedome, as to any other part of Italy. I my selfe haue, and haue met with diuers that do finde it so, and therefore, I beleeue it, whatsoeuer other men say to the contrary, to grace, or make wonderfull their owne Trauels.
Now after the person, those actions which may bring a man into danger, ought to bee auoided. If a
 man, in his going thither, or being there, conuerse with Italians, and disclose, or dispute his Religion, he is sure, vnlesse hee fly, to be complained on, and brought within the Inquisition. For they hold it an act of merit, to discouer an Heretique (as they terme vs) thinking that by this meanes wee may be drawne from our Religion, and the honour of our conuersion (as they call it) must be attributed to them.
Next, when you are in the Church, or neere any Relique, Crosse, or Procession in the street; you must giue no scandal, nor seeme to to be singular from the actions of other men: but if you be desirous to auoid their superstition, you must forbeare co^ming into their Churches, at Masse-time, or Vespers, and bevvare of their street-encounters.

 Thirdly, in the place where you lye, you must bee carefull to obserue their Fasts, and not be curious in desiring, or seeming to desire such fare as those dayes will not admit.
Besides, it ought to be one of our principall cares, lest in any place where we should reside, before our comming thither, wee shew our selues too bitter and violent against our Nation there, especially in their persons; for that may exasperate, if it come to their knowledge.
Fiftly, it is a meere folly in any man that hath liued publiquely in any town of Italy, before he come thither, to hide and conceale himselfe there, for hee cannot liue vndiscouered: and peraduenture this iealousie of ours, and distrust of them, may produce some mischiefe
 against vs, which otherwise they would neuer dreame of. But some will bee so quicke, that they will come to Rome, and away before they haue halfe slept. And certainly, such dispositions, I thinke, they had euen as good liued in England, with their Nurses, and would haue there got as much experience, I am sure, as much wit.
Sixtly, I hold it very dangerous, for a man that is knowne to bee there, to goe about to cosen the Colledge, and make them beleeue he is a Papist, when there is no such matter. For this dissimulation may cause them to force him to expresse that which he affirmes, by some act, that may foyle his Religio^. And therefore, methinkes, it is a strange Arrogance in those people, to goe about to deceiue them, that know
 their Religion, and Character, as well as themselues.
Next, in your conuersation, shew (and so peraduenture you may haue cause) to expresse a thankefulnesse for those courtesies you receiue: and though they giue you cause to speake something in the defence of your Religion, shew no violence, nor reply not too much, by which you shall argue your owne temper, and giue them lesse cause to vrge you. For heate in disputation, especially where a man comes with disaduantage, shewes folly in vs, and stirres malice in them.
Now the finall caueat is, that by no meanes you goe about to perswade any from thence, though formerly your friend, and neere acquaintance. For you must beleeue,
 that they who dare let him conuerse with you, be sure that he will discouer whatsoeuer you say, and there is not any one thing, will sooner breed a mischiefe against vs, then the attempting to diuert one from their societie.
The last point that a man is to enter into consideration vpon, when hee trauailes to Rome, is the time. First, those times of publique hostility, as in the Raigne of Queen Elizabeth, when the Pope thundered excommunications, and professed himselfe an open enemy to the State, as he did then, it is dangerous. Next, if the Gouernour of the English there, were of so violent and malicious a disposition as Parsons was, there were little safety. Thirdly, in the time of the holy weeke, because then there is an exact
 view, and euery housholder is to render an account of those strangers he entertaines, that they haue confessed, communicated, and the like. Fourthly, if a man should enter into any quarrell, and be apprehended by the Temporall Magistrate, the Inquisitio^ also takes hold of him, and he cannot be deliuered till he be reconciled to the Church. And lastly, if a man should fall sick, during the time of his being there, within three dayes the Physician is to take his oath, that his patient hath confessed, and communicated, otherwise hee must leaue him, and the party be deliuered ouer to the Inquisition before hee depart. And thus haue I briefely, and sincerely discouered my knowledge of this place.
FINIS.




A DISCOVRSE AGAINST FLATTERIE.




A DISCOVRSE AGAINST Flatterie.
FLATTERIE may be described to be a kinde of seducing, or deceiuing by a counterfet, or fained commendation, whereby men are drawne to haue an ouer-good opinion, and liking of themselues; through this false glasse, making an vndue and too great estimate of their owne parts, and actions;
 which, though peraduenture encreased by the subtiltie of Flatterers, yet is nourished, and enlarged by their owne selfe-loue.
Flatterers doe not onely dazle, and deform our Intellectuall parts, but are meere moths in our estates, and liue vpon our spoile, by conforming their words; and acts, to our wils and inclinations; whereby insinuating themselues into our fauour, they draw from vs our vnderstanding, and so reduce vs to be either the scorne of other men, or Tributaries to them; one of which, Malice, or Gaine, must needs be their ayme; the first the more dangerous; but the second more common.
And therefore Chrysostome desines Flatterers to be those, Qui colunt aliquem, vt auferant ab eo aliquid
 boni temporarij. For when they commend any, for that he deserues not at all, or more then he deserues to be praised, for any priuate end, or gaine to themselues, I can call this excessiue pleasing others in words and deeds, nothing else but Flatterie. By that insinuation, they winde themselues into the familiaritie of those, whose fortunes and dispositions appeare to be such, that with probabilitie they may hope to worke and prey vpon, by this sweet infusion of Flattery; all men being naturally inclined to thinke the best of themselues, and to heare of it too.
Now the humorist, that must please, and tickle our fancies, is a smooth and sly enemie, a Wolfe in sheepes cloathing, and so much the more dangerous, and necessarie to
 be obserued, and auoided, fishing with a subtill, and vnseene* bayt, Mel venenatum, or venenum mellitum, sweet poison, or poison sweetned; as colouring treason, with the shew of friendship; disguising dissimulation, with the pretence of libertie, and freedome in speech, and the like. And this seldome but in presence, and commonly to such, out of whom they hope to sucke some commoditie. Wherefore I may say, Quod diuitum sunt asseclae, a man of meanes seldome wants such followers, such shamelesse and fawning creatures, that force can hardly repell them. And I think this to be the reason why Diogenes gaue the Epithete to Aristippus, of Canis Regius, the Kings Dogge, in respect of their course of life, more sit to bee compared with the fawning
 nature of Dogges, then worthy to be honoured with the title of men.
I take Flatterie to be that which the Prophet allegorizeth in the Psalmes, vnder the terme of Oleum Peccatoris. Emendabit me iustus, and arguet me: Oleum autem peccatoris non impinguet caput meum, distinguishing betweene the reproofe of a Friend, and commendation of a Flatterer, choosing rather the seuerest correction of a good man, the^ the smooth and pleasing praise of Flatterers, who tell vs we are happy, in the middest of misfortune, and make vs thinke our selues to be well, when we are most desperately infected. Those therefore that be made proud, and insult, and swell, by the praises of these Dissemblers, and Sycophants, of such
 a one it may be well said, Creuit caput, Impinguatum est oleo peccatoris; a fat and swimming head indeed, when it flowes, and is full of this kinde of oyle.
Flatterie, and Dissimulation be of neere kinred; for all the Art of a Flatterer, is to seeme that he is not: marke but the difference betwixt his outward apparance, and inward desires; his words, and his thoughts; his speech, and his meaning. Before your friends, or your selfe, they giue a Plaudite to al your actions, with a shew of much loue, and respect: but in priuate with your enemies, or such as they may hope to make so, by doing you iniuries, they depraue and detract you with a great deale of libertie, and scorne: in the meane time, peraduenture taking occasion vnder the colour of abusing you,
 and lessening your merit, to fall comparatiuely into their praises, and so at one time, and with one tale, play both the parts of a Censurer, and Flatterer. Such men as these, it were not hard to shew you euery day, whose continuall trade is to abuse the company they were last in, and to praise those they are now withall: such as appeare with the face of frie^dship, but haue their hearts fraught with more malice and venom the^ the stings of Scorpions: such as would make the world beleeue (and so euery man, whom by their close and cunning Flatterie they surprise, doth) that they be the only men that giue good and honest aduice, and discreet cautions, charitable in peace-making, and all other good offices of that kinde: whereas indeed they be the closest
 breeders of mischiefe, malice, and detraction that do vnworthily liue.
These mens minds be truely Hermaphroditized; these be Plinies Androgyni in minde, though not in nature, whose sexe resemble both Male and Female: for you shall haue them vary and change as often as thought. And as the parties with whom they haue to doe, or as their fortunes alter, so doe they. Sometimes also they be so grosse in their Flattery, that they become ridiculous. As for instance; the Flattery of Carisophus to Dionysius, who seeing Dionysius in company laughing and merry, he smiled for company, though he knew not the cause. Dionysius seeing him smile, asked him why he did so? Because (said he) I thinke that which moues you to laugh, is worth
 laughing at. And this kinde of imitation is commonly the note of a Flatterer; but sometimes also the badge of a Foole. And so Clysophus the Parasite in Philip of Macedons Court, when his master halted because he had the Gout, hee counterfeited lamenesse too; and whatsoeuer his Master was forced to by necessity, hee would alwayes affectately imitate, according to Ouids description of a Flatterer, what you denie hee forsweares; what you affirme hee iustifies; if you weepe he is sad; if you laugh he is merry.
So that a Flatterer is a Monster vgly to behold, if visible; dangerous to trust, if discouered; hath the heads of Hydra for any mischeuous inuention, the hands of Briareus for any base or dishonest
 action, the eyes of Argus for any lewd or false intelligence; legs swift as Thalus for any trecherous or wicked designe. This is hee wee dare (and it is a wonder wee dare) admit into our priuacies, appearing with a tongue as sweet as honey, though his heart be as bitter as gall; whence groweth that old description allotted to them, Melin ore, verba lactis, fel in corde, fraus in factis. Yet for the most part, these kind of men ouerweigh, and sway downe the most faithfull and honest friends and Counsels. Aristippus flatterie with Dionysius, out-ballanced the honest freedome and endeuours of Dion the Syracusan. Cleo wrought more into the fauour of Alexander by his Flattery, then Calisthenes could preuaile by his free and honest Counsell.

 Of this tribe and generation were Achabs false prophets; they assured and promised him to bee free from all dangers, certaine of prosperitie and good fortune; but it fell out otherwise, and his Fortunes (which they onely serued) were decayed and lost. Euen so the Flatterers of this age play the false prophets, and alwaies prognosticate of faire weather and good fortunes to attend vs, in the meane time, passing ouer with silence those plaine, obuious, and present errors, that be manifest Symptomes of our certaine ouerthrow, if not suddenly altered and amended. So you may see what a weakenesse it is for any man to trust these vncertaine windes, to build vpon these sands.
Adulatoris verba, saith Trismegistus,
 sunt iniquitas and dolus. The words of a Flatterer bee iniquity and deceit, ouer-growne with canker and rust, incroaching vpon vs: at the first, intruders of small apparance, and by that meanes taking the surer hold. These bee they that with their Syrenicall charmes throw vs vpon the vnauoidable dangers of Scylla and Charybdis. These be those Infernal Spirits, that disswade from all good purposed or intended, and from any thing that hath affinity either with honesty, or goodnesse. But on the contrary, prouokers of all vncleannesse, corruption, wickednesse and obscaenitie, and as Theodoret notes, Incipiunt a Placebo, sed in fine sepeliunt in peccatis.
Some there be of this damned crue, who, so they may please you
 with praises, care neither why nor wherefore they doe it: against which kinde of men, Salomons caution Pro. 27. v. 6. to vs, is worthy the obseruing. The wounds of a Louer are faithfull; but the kisses of an Enemy be to bee shunned. And againe, his malediction to them should serue as a bridle, Pro. 27. v. 14. Hee that praiseth his friend with a loud voyce, rising early in the morning, it shall be counted vnto him as a curse. And for the most part these traders practise this Art, either in hope of fauour or gaine; and that is the reason why they presse into the company of such as be men of dignitie and place. For as no vermine will breed, where they finde no heate; no Vulture haunt where they finde no prey; no Flies swarme where there is no
 flesh: so no Flatterer lurkes where he findes no gaine.
A man may oftentimes finde out a Flatterer by this, that their praises, if you well obserue them, doe oftentimes fall vpon contrarieties. So, it is plaine, that they speake ficte, non vere, fainedly, not from the heart; and that manifesteth their dissimulation and deceit; and their praising of such actions as we know and acknowledge to be naught, argues their ayme to be directly for priuate ends, neither for the benefite of him they praise, nor good example of others. Wherefore I could wish, that all men were of Achilles his minde, who, as Homer reports, Hated not the gates of Hell so much, as hee did those that spake otherwise then they thought. And wee had
 need bee very well fortified and constant in this resolution: for they bee of so seruile a condition, that though you reiect them, they will still obserue; though you banish them your companie, yet they will attempt entertainment againe.
But they wait onely vpon our good fortunes, and the least winde of aduersitie disperseth them; when our meanes fall, they faile; which plainely sheweth them to be of a most base condition. Of this ranke were 2. Kings ch. 9. v. 35. Iezabels Eunuches, who in her prosperitie serued and followed her with all diligence and obseruance: but when fortune turned the wheele, King Iehu had no sooner said the word, Cast her downe, but they did cast her downe. They are most
 diligent obseruers of the time, then to vent their Flattery, when men bee most likely to giue eare vnto them: therefore wee ought at all times to bee very watchfull ouer them; for if once they cast anchor in our affections, they will hardly loose their hold.
Dolus, saith Saint Augustine, duplicat cor, adulatio duplicat linguam. Deceit doubles the heart, Flattery the tongue: these two bee mixed together; for when the tongue saith one thing, and the heart thinketh another; when the thoughts go South, and the tongue North, there is the disease. So that Flattery cannot subsist without dissimulation. And seeing they bee so subtill and cunning to deceiue and entrap vs, wee cannot be too carefull in the choyce of our companie,
 our friends, and aduisers to choose such as loue goodnesse and truth, and such as so desire to please and commend their friends, that they may encourage their constancie and continuance in vertue, not to puffe them vp with ouer-great thoughts of themselues. But seeing such a one is hard to be found, and not easily discerned, this aduice of Ciceroes is worthy the obseruing, who sayes, Amici tibi sint multi, Consiliarius autem vnus. Our friends may bee many, but one Counseller, and hee such as hates this detestable vice. Diogenes calls it Lethale mulsum, poyson in a cup of gold; though outwardly beautifull, yet full of hidden corruption, Masters of that Art which Tully calls Mercenarium praeconium.

Flatterers by Symonides are compared to Cookes; for as they doe sweeten with sawces such kinde of meates as of themselues bee bitter and sharpe: so Flatterers, Verbis Coquinarijs (that I may vse the Prouerb) sooth vs in those things for which wee ought to be reproued, and with their cunning Cookery settle and infuse so good an opinion in vs of our selues, that in aftertime our iudgements be so subuerted, that we esteeme our worst actions worthy praise, and our vices vertues.
Quintus Curtius opinion was not without ground when he said, that More Kings and Kingdomes were ouerthrowne by the means of Flattery, then by publike Hostility. How plentifull Stories be to iustifie this Paradoxe, euery man that will take the
 paines to reade them, may know; for there was neuer yet treason closely attempted, but disguised with Flattery. A few examples I will giue you. Caesar had not been so easily murthered in the Senate, if Flattery and faire words had not assured him of his safety. Alexander the Great, who was poysoned in the midst of his triumphes at Babylon, receiued it not at the hands of a stranger or enemy, but those hee most trusted, his Cupbearer Iola, and Kinsman Antipater. Who could be more cautelous then Cicero? and yet vnder colour of friendship, he was discouered and betrayed by his friend Popilius, in whose defence hee had formerly pleaded, and saued from an ignominious death. But not to weary you with many more
 examples: Was not Iudas his Flattery the apparant and visible means of effecting his treason against Christ, when his embracements and kisses pointed him out to bee apprehended? And lastly, the originall fall of Mankinde may bee referred to the insinuating Flattery of the Diuell in shape of a Serpent, that so hee might become more lowly and humble to disguise his dissimulation, when hee meant to worke vpon the weakenesse and credulitie of the woman; for you shall alwaies finde this way of deceiuing, shadowed with courtesie, treason vnder trust.
But although the infection of this pestilence bee dangerous to all men, yet in respect of the consequence, farre more perilous
 to men of great and eminent place. For as diseases bee euer more violent, where they meete with full and abounding bodies, and the cure more vncertaine: so (the application is at hand) when persons of quality bee tainted with the poyson of Flatterers, besides their owne losse, that folly of theirs, to bee gulled by these Impostors, aduanceth the trade of Flattery, and encreaseth their breed. For all those that serue and depend vpon such, if they hope to obtaine any thing by their fauour, or doe desire to continue in grace, they must worke it by soothing them in all their ridiculous affections, and so slaue them-selues to Flatterie; which, to any honest
 minde is a vice as odious, as truth is a vertue superlatiue; for it is the subuersion of truth, a reprochfull vice, as ill becomming a man, as impudencie a woman, which shamefull and lasciuious behauiour, as you shall find some strange compositions of men delighted withall; so Flattery bewitcheth and benummeth other mens sences, against all probabilitie of reason; acting a worse part then that of a false witnesse; for hee corrupts not, but deceiues the iudgement, producing an ill opinion or sentence against our will and knowledge: but Flattery corrupts the iudgement, inchants the vnderstanding, and makes a man vncapable to take the least impression of any good or honest aduice. So that you see this domesticall enemie of
 ours hath a sting, though hid, and many times hurts vs most, where least doubted.
The credit these Flatterers gaine to themselues, is commonly vnder the title and pretence of friendship, and in stead of withdrawing vs from ill, confirme vs in it: like those of whom Ezechiel speakes, Cap. 13. ver. 18. that sow pillowes vnder our armeholes, so commending our vices, that we may sinne with more securitie, and delight, nourishing and increasing our errours, as oyle addes flame to fire: wherefore it is very dangerous to giue credit to such, who in the person of friends, proue so dangerous enemies, confirming and encreasing all our corrupt affections, by consent, either in conformitie, or application of themselues to the
 same actions, by approbation, in allowance, though not imitation of their precedent, or by extenuation, or rather iustification: as terming anger, seueritie: fury, zeale: rashnesse, boldnesse: pusillanimitie, humilitie: lauish expences, liberality: couetousnesse, parsimonie, or the like. And these be those deceiuers, that in the frontispice, or outside, proclaime the name of friend; but this is only in outward apparance, not inward affection: like those spirits of darknesse, that can transforme themselues into Angels of light.
It is the common practice of Flatterers, to counterfet, rather the^ not imitate, the passions and formes of those they apply themselues vnto, their sullennesse and mirth, as they haue their different variations:
 so they sometimes with the Crocodile of Nile will nothing but weepe and lament, and immediately change that tune, to the mirth and songs of Syrens: now with ioy, sometimes with griefe conforming themselues to that humor, which at that instant they doe think to be most predominant in vs, making themselues voluntary slaues to anothers inclination; in the meane time not caring how vntruely, so plausibly they may speake. So base is their minde, so mercenary their tongue. But when the tide turnes, there is no danger in their power that they will not cast vpon vs, in laying vs open to our enemies, disclosing those secrets they haue formerly by their Flatterie stolne from vs, and the like: supposing by this dishonest
 meanes to stand vpright, though his titular friend be declined; or else expecting no more aduantage from him, hope vpon the ashes of his ruine, to build a new fortune with him that caused his ouerthrow. For as Acteon was murthered by his own dogs: so they, who aduance and cherish Flatterers, are commonly by them ouerthrowne and vndone: all which, by this positiue prouerbe of Salomons, Prou. 26. ver. 25. is confirmed. A false tongue hateth the afflicted, and a flattering mouth causeth ruine. And therfore it is good to follow his aduice, Prou. 26. ver. 29. Though hee speake fauourably, beleeue him not, for there are seuen abominations in his heart And as Saint Bernard speakes of it, Bla^da est, sed aspera; dulcis, sed amara.

 Where Flattery beares sway, honestie is thrust out of doores; where Flattery is aduanced, there truth is banished and oppressed: and where Flattery obtaines friendship, there truth findes hatred. Seeing then, in a manner, the differences be as great betwixt this and truth, as truth and lying, wee had need to pray with Dauid, Psal. 28. ver. 3. That we may not bee drawne away with the wicked and workers of iniquitie, that speake friendly to their neighbours, when malice is in their hearts. Yet now adaies it hath gotten so much the vpper hand of the world, and is growne so common, that he who scornes to Flatter, wil generally be thought to bee either enuious, or proud: for it hath now, in a manner, quite left the name of a vice, and gotten the reputation of
 a vertue. It hath shaken off the old name of deceit, and is now couered with the title of wisedome: it hath quite lost his ancient attribute of cosenage, and hath gotten it selfe graced by the name of Policy. It is necessarie therefore, to reduce it to the former colours, lest the outside deceiue.
Be therefore so farre from it, as to esteeme better of a friends reprehension, then of all the praises a Flatterer can giue you, whose end is to confirme and fasten you in your errours, by his fained commendations, dissembled loue, and affection; subuerting and subduing your minde from any tincture of goodnesse, which iustifies that speech of Saint Augustines, where he sayes, Quod plus persequitur lingua adulatoris, quam manus persecutoris.
 For if the hand of an enemy hurt not so much as the tongue of a Flatterer, much lesse the rebukes of a friend, which will be able to abide all tests: agreeing with Salomon, who saith, Pro. 28. ver. 23. He that rebuketh a man, shall finde more fauour at length, then hee that flattereth with his tongue. Crossing that passage of the Comicall Poet, Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit. Flatterie, procures friendship; but truth, hatred.
But this you may be sure of, that though these disguized and deceitfull praises of Flatterers, presse more vpon the confirmation of our ill, then of our good parts; yet our nature is so fraile, that we are commonly better pleased with the couerers, then the discouerers of our ill affections; not so much
 considering with our selues what we are indeed, as what wee seeme to be to others, carried away with a selfe-opinion, requiring, as it were, the Testimonial of our good parts, not from our owne consciences, but the vaine report of others; nay, though our consciences accuse vs, that those things we be commended for, deserue nothing lesse; yet the Flatterer so surprizeth vs, that we no sooner begin to condemne our selues, but his dissembling praises, and glorious glosses, choake that good meditation. Liking therefore so well, to heare well of our selues, we should endeuour to deserue it. Whence proceeded all those ridiculous and vnnaturall vices of Domitius Nero? whose beginning of Soueraignty, whilest he gaue eare to good counsell, is compared to
 the times of the best Emperors; but when once the reynes of his affections were let loose, what absurd, what cruell, what vnnaturall acts did he sticke at? and yet the viciousnesse of the time so obserued and praised him, that they turned his beliefe into an imagination, that his grosest vices were reputed for principall vertues. Witnesse the thanksgiuing of the Senate to the gods, for the murder of his Mother, and the vaine Plaudites hee expected for his ridiculous Rimes, and foolish affectation, or rather emulation vpon the publike Stage of the part of a Minstrel, and Player; which simplicities of his were by Flattery so wound in him, that when he was, in a manner, certaine of his destiny, yet some flashes of these vanities did still remaine.

 Now the reason, why men against all reason be so strangely ouertaken and blinded with the praises of Flatterers, is, though common, yet vncertaine to ghesse; sure it must be either such a malignitie and disease in our affections, as cannot abide to be remoued, or else a strange and greedy appetite to heare our selues commended for whatsoeuer we doe: or otherwise, a superabounding opinion, and selfe-conceit of our owne abilities and parts, that we can doe nothing so ill, we shall not thinke commendable, and worthy of praise: and so from all, or some of these, it comes to passe, that wee despise friendly admonitions, and are so subiect to the snares of Flattery, by which our vices, if neuer so notorious, be at the least disguized with
 the resemblance of some vertues that be neere vnto them. Wherefore if we stop not the beginnings of this dangerous and vnseen mischiefe, the poyson will grow past recouery, and wholly bereaue vs of the true knowledge of our selues. For it is not the present Flatterie that doth so much hurt, as the reliques and remaines of it in our minds; for though the Flatterer be gone, yet the infection still continues, as for instance, those who heare Musick, though that bee done, yet the harmony, sweetnesse, and sound, doth afterwards possesse and make impressio^ in their minds: so these kinde of praises remaine longer with vs, then the instant of hearing them. And as a sweet and pleasing sound is not easily expelled our fancies; and though wee
 chance sometimes to forget it, yet it oftentimes returneth into our imagination again: so fareth it with the pleasing discourses of Flatterers. Therefore we should be deafe to their voices, and auoid the^ at first.
Yet this seemes most strange to me, when I see men of apparant wisedome, and great parts, such as are able to discerne and enquire of matters of the deepest co^sequence, to bee notwithstanding surprized by the cunning of these dissemblers: but certainly any man that thinks well; and loues to heare well of himselfe, can hardly auoid this trap: for they that Flatter, will shadow it vnder the colour of friendship; as in affabilitie, aduice, free discourse, seeming reprehension, officiousnesse in our businesse, conformitie of manners, and the
 like. All which, though in a true friend, they bee the very tokens of friendship, and loue; yet in a Flatterer they haue onely the representations of it, that thereby they may more cunningly and craftily deceiue such as they haue to do withall. The reason now why this kind of Flatterie is so dimme and vndiscernable, is because that in euery motion of the minde, it is so closely intermixed with friendship, that it can hardly be discouered from it, though if once vnmaskt, it hath no manner of affinitie with it, nor comes neerer it, then as glasse which is dull and brittle, resembles Christall, which is solid and transparent: so this Flattery is onely the Ape of Friendship. Therfore these kinde of men bee farre more dangerous to trust, then profest
 enemies, for from them men expect nothing but the fruits of malice and ill will, whilest the other sort, vnder pretence of loue and friendship, do sooner and more dangerously worke the effect. And the difference of the da^ger, I put, as betwixt those that assault vs prepared, and such as take vs vnprouided, or strike when our backs be turned.
But seeing from meane fortunes expectancies cannot be great, they are not much subiect to this kinde of battery; the siege is laid to such as be men of great meanes and place in the world, thence they hope for fortune, for credit, for preferment; and commonly men of this high ranke doe seldome descend to the true knowledge of themselues, that whatsoeuer they do, it is in such an assured and imperious fashion, that it
 must passe vncontrouled, and whatsoeuer they doe but thinke, or wish to do, must be presently put in act, and whatsoeuer by them is performed, shall be sure to finde whole vollies of praises; and that they doe so certainly looke for, and thinke they deserue, that it is dangerous for any, with such to expresse the true parts of friends. And so it comes to passe, that all about them are professors of this mystery: and to say truth, I see not how this fault, though vsed, can be very much pressed against such as bee followers of these men. For this kind of Flattery is not so much affected, as forced: yet surely an honest mind would be loth to subiect it selfe to so base a trade. And these great men that haue so inured the^selues to to be pleased with the applause
 of Flatterers in all their actithough neuer so bad, can hardly weane themselues from that habit, custome hath so wrought it into them; and notwithstanding sometimes vpon better thoughts and considerations, they oppose themselues against it, yet that hath not long co^tinuance, but for the most part it returnes againe with greater force. Vnde saepe exclusa, nouissime recipitur. Wherfore the danger is the greater at the first, to giue way to this humour which is so hardly repelled.
Now if the danger of this be so great, and the auoiding of it so necessary for all sorts of men, then no doubt, but women, as the weaker vessels, had need to be very careful, and circumspect of giuing entertainment, or hearkening to any of this condition. For besides the generall
 danger, which is common to them with all others, more particularly it doth often precipitate them into worse straits. For there is not an easier, or more ordinary way to corrupt and subdue their affections, then by this meanes, with entertaining and feeding them with the commendation of their person, beauty, behauiour, comlinesse, discourse, or the like; being generally of their own natural inclination, so full of vanity, and desirous of praise.
That which I haue hitherto written of the danger of Flatterie, is, when it is seuerally applyed to particulars: there remaines one other sort which I cannot omit, and that is the popular man, that insinuates and windes himselfe into the loue of the multitude, by pleasing and praysing them in all
 their desires, and by application of himselfe vnto their humours. The end of which obseruance must needs bee, to strengthen himselfe in their good opinions; by that meanes hoping, that in any designe of his against the Prince or State, they would second his attempts. This is the common end of affected Popularity, and that thousands of examples can iustifie. If there bee any other inducement, it must bee referred to a vaine glory. I will onely instance two or three examples of the dangerous effects of this popular Flatterie. The change of gouernment amongst the Romanes proceeded from the fauour and grace that Caesar had obtained amongst the soldiers; and so the way was made plaine and easie to him, for the subuersion
 of that state, and making of himselfe absolute Monarch. And so in all, or most of the changes of the succeeding Emperaurs, popularity with the multitude was the way by which they entred. In our owne Stories, H. Bullinbrooke, whom Richard the second did well enough foresee, was cu^ning in the Art of winning the hearts of the people, and so sought meanes by his banishment to preuent the danger; yet vpon his returne, hee was so strengthened by that meanes, that without all colour of right, he acquired the Kingdome, and assured it to himselfe by the death of the former King. So now, this point I wil conclude with one Story of the Bible, and will onely relate the words of the text. The way which Absolon proposed to himselfe
 in the treason against his father, was to make himselfe popular by flattering of the people. Marke but the Story, 2. Sam. 15. 2. 3, 4, 5, 6. 2. And Absolon rose vp early, and stood hard by the entring in of the gate, and euery man that had any matters, came to the King for iudgment: him did Absolon call vnto him and say, Of what City art thou? And he answered, Thy seruant is of the tribes of Israel. 3. Then Absolon said vnto him, See, thy matters are good and righteous, but there is no man deputed of the King to heare thee. 4. Absolon said moreouer, O that I were made Iudge in the Land, that euery man which hath any matter or controuersie might come to me, that I might doe him Iustice. 5. And when any man came neere vnto him, and did him obeysance, hee put forth his hand, and
 tooke him and kissed him. 6. And in this manner did Absolon to all Israel that came to the King for iudgement. So Absolon stole the hearts of the men of Israel. The steps of this popular Flattery (I thinke) cannot bee more punctually described then in this narratiue. You finde his dilige^ce, He rose vp early; his purposed shewing himselfe to the multitude, He stood hard by, etc. his affability, And euery man that had; his finding fault with the present gouernment, Thy matters are good and righteous, but: a promising of redresse, if power were transferred to himselfe, Oh that I were. A shew of extraordinary respect and loue to the people, And when any man came neere. And this course hee tooke, not with any particular; but applyed himselfe to all the people.
 And in this manner did Absolon to all Israel. And so it came to passe, saith the text, that, hee stole the hearts of the men of Israel. Thus hauing discoursed of the deformitie of this vice, and dangerous consequence of it both applyed to particulars, and to multitudes, I will descend from this point, and giue you some rules and directions how to auoid so great a danger, so dangerous an enemie.
Knowing the ill effects which proceed fro^ so dangerous a cause, a man would thinke reason, sufficient to auoid the occasions of being surprised with the false and deceitfull baits of Flatterers; but experience daily shewes so great a weaknesse in our natures, that wee are apt to fall in loue with our prayses, though farre from our merit, and
 giuen but for priuate respects. Seeing therefore, in this case wee cannot be too surely fortified, it will bee necessary to adde some cautions, to strengthen our resolutions in the auoiding of so great a mischiefe. And the first must be, not onely a professed, but an inward auersenesse, from giuing encouragement to any to thinke they may any way possibly euer hope to catch vs in this snare. For if wee bee found to haue an open eare, the disease is so catching that it wil be hardly auoided. There are few resolutions so constant, that can auoid the mischiefe, if they admit the discourse of Flatterers. The first temptations therefore must be suppressed; which if we doe not in time, will so encrease, that when we would we cannot. For if we be
 content to haue men thinke well of, and praise vs for those things which in our owne co^sciences we doe not deserue, wee shall in time bee so besotted, as to thinke our selues worthy of those prayses, so vniustly layd vpon vs by these impostors, who as Salomon saith, Pro. ch. 20. v. 19. Goe about as slanderers, and discouer secrets; therefore meddle not with them that flatter with their lips. And this may be a second reason to auoid the insinuation of Flatterers, in respect of these two abhorred crimes, of standering, and disclosing of secrets.
Againe, as their cunning, so our care in auoiding them, should encrease; for they bee come to that height and excellency in their profession, that they will colour their Flattery with the shew of Friendship,
 vsurping the offices, behauiour, nay euen carrying the name and counterfet of amity so artificially, in taking vpon them the highest part of friendship, wch is free reprehension, that the shadow is hard to be distinguished fro^ the substance. Their loue will seem so farre to exceed, where in truth nothing is more co^trary vnto it, not iniury, not professed enmity, not detraction.
Seeing therefore the only comfort of society, (wch is in the assurance of true friends) is so corrupted by the intrusion of Flatterers, who would vsurpe a place in estimatio^ so high, deseruing one so low, concealing so dangerous a poyson vnder so wholsome an apparance, wee need discerning spirits to exclude such fro^ our co^uersation, and not to measure our vertues by most voyces,
 but by most desert. So presuming euery man to know his owne merit in those things for which he is commended, we must not esteeme our happinesse to consist in hauing praises, but in deseruing them.
But in these cases of perswasio^, examples many times mouing more the^ precepts, it will not be amisse to view the care that men in former times haue had to represse the encrease and rising of Flatterers. Augustus Caesar, and Alexander Seuerus are reported to haue been so strict against Flatterers, that if any did but extraordinarily bow himselfe, or shew but the least signe of Flattery towards the^, they were prese^tly banished and expelled their Courts. The Emperour Sigismo^d perceiuing one to flatter him grossly, in stead of reward, gaue him a blow. Why strike
 you me, said he? Why bite you me? saith the Emperor. There is a Story of a Nobleman of Muscouia, who being imprisoned, and desirous of inlargeme^t, fained to dream, the K. of Pole was take^ prisoner, and brought captiue to the D. of Moscouia. This dream was told the Duke, who perceiuing it to proceed fro^ an intentio^ to flatter, co^manded he should bee kept more close, til he saw the euent of his dream. Suetonius reports, that Caligula recalling one that was banished in the time of Tiberius, and regrating his liberty, asking him how he spent all the time of his banishment; he answered, he did nothing but pray that Tiberius might dye, and Caligula succeed: for wch kind of deuotion the Emperour co^manded hee should bee put to death. And after this sort was the youngman
 punished by Dauid, who hoping to please him, brought newes of Saul and his childrens death.
So that the neerest way to auoid so bad companions, is so to behaue our selues, that it may appeare to the world how little wee desire, how much we scorne, what small confidence we put in the praises of Flatterers. This course Canutus, once a King of this Iland did take; who as Polidore Virgil recites, walking vpon the shore neere Southhampton, the soldiers that were about him, did palpably, in magnifying, flatter him, calling him King of Kings, and Commander both of Sea and Land; whereat the King being amazed, he resolued demo^stratiuely to shew how grosse their Flattery was, and how little hee was moued with it; for which purpose commanding
 himselfe to bee stript, sate downe close by the water, seeming to speak to the waues in this ma^ner: I command you that you touch not so much as my feet; they keeping their ordinary course, beat vpo^ the shore, and notwithsta^ding his charge, vpon him too: so presently retyring, he returned to his soldiers, and said; You called me King of Kings, and Lord of Sea and Land, yet you see I could not command these waues from touching me: therefore learne, that these titles belong not to mortality; but onely to him by whom all things are gouerned And this was his cou^terpoyson to their Flattery, agreeing with the translation of a verse of Homers,
Nullu^ ego su^ numen, quid me immortalibus aequas?
Alexander, who somtimes was ambitious to be thought the sonne and
 heyre of Iupiter, and wanted not those Flatterers that would indeed haue made him beleeue to haue been so. A hurt brought him back to the knowledge of himselfe, and fall into this speech, Omnes iurant me esse Iouis Filium, sed hoc vulnus me hominem esse clamat. Alsweare that I am the son of Iupiter, yet this wound proclaimes me to be but a man. So experience daily shewes, that where they can get audience and gain, they neuer care how absurd their praises be, laying most co^mendations vpon those vices that deserue greatest reprehension. If we run into ryot, they commend our temperance; when wee expresse our follie, they praise our wit: wch if we did but wel obserue, how our vvorst faults by them are applauded for principall vertues, our own co^sciences would
 tell vs, they bee but Impostors and deceiuers, discerning with Seneca, Vos dicitis me esse prudentem, ego autem scio quam multa inutilia concupiscam, nocitura optem. You say I am wise, and yet I finde, that I haue many vnprofitable desires and hurtfull wishes. Which if wee bee as willing to practise, as capable to know, if our affections abound not aboue our reason, discouering their Flatterie for such things as wee merit not, wee should quickly abandon them our societie.
And hence it will fall into our consideration to obserue the causes and reasons for which wee bee praised, whether they bee for such vertues wherein we haue a part or not, or whether they honour vs for that wee
 doe not deserue, for their owne profit: and this must bee done by the true contemplation of our selues; not suffering our iudgements in our owne persons, to depend too resolutely vpon the opinion of others; but without partiality look your selfe in your owne glasse, and if you meete with any other that bee false, or flatter you, trust them not, but let your owne conscience be your owne prayser, and be not so simple as to be carried away with things that be not, neither bee too peremptory in your owne iudgement; but take so much as your conscience assures you may bee iustly attributed, and no more; for as Seneca sayes, Si vera sunt coram magno teste laudatus es, si falsa sine teste derisus es.

 The way then to prepare and rectifie our iudgements in the knowledge of our selues, is to loue, to desire, to be pleased with the hearing of truth, though it search deep into our own wounds: and if we come once to endure so sharp a corrosiue, it is certaine we shall neuer be delighted with the praises of Flatterers. But it will bee necessary to foresee (which I haue enlarged before) that a Flatterer creepe not in, in the habit of a friend, and somtimes take the liberty to finde fault with our errors, by that meanes to giue a better glosse to the insinuation of their Flatterie: but these, if truely obserued, will bee found like false gold, which onely hath the representation of true, and such as if throughly tryed, cannot possibly abide the touch, notwithstanding
 the ring of the piece be of the purest metall: but if it be not throughout good, the deceit is greater, then if it were plainely counterfet. Let vs count then of friends, as of the salt commanded in the ancient sacrifices; and of Flatterers, as of the hony forbidden in them: for the salt of sound and faithfull reprehension, is the true rellish and best part of a friend, whereas sweet honyed Flatterie, though for the present pleasing our fancies, yet is of a most loathsome and dangerous consequence.
But a mayne impediment that blinds and choakes our vnderstanding, from receiuing any aduice and premonition that can be giuen against the subtilties, and insinuations of Flatterers, is the too great confidence, and too permanent assurance
 of the prosperitie and continuance of this transitory and vanishing life. Thoughts so low, so short, be the grounds vpon which these men do lay their foundation. How can any man Flatter vs more extremely then we doe our selues, relying on, and delighting onely in the pleasures and vanities of this passing world? This Lethargy both Stories and Scripture manifest, to the ruin of multitudes, who liuing in al maner of sensuality, yet discerned it not till all hope and remedy were past, continuing the course of their life in pleasure and idlenesse, neuer considering, how that in the mean time, their arraignment was a making in heauen.
We need therefore to get the victory ouer our selues, and the Art of subduing our own affections; for
 otherwise this selfe-louing inclination wil so stirre, and moue our appetites, and desires, to haue our iudgement concerning our selues, seconded by the applause of others, that it will be impossible for vs to resist their snares, being so desirous of praises, and so willing to receiue them; which is the only aduantage a Flatterer can get, when a man striues to acquire reputation for those vertues of wch he neuer participated, and is most impatient to receiue the least checke for any vice, though knowing it to bee inhabitant within him; a kinde of fancy, which is most certainely neither guided by iudgement, nor reason. And this is it wch layes vs so ope^, and makes vs so subiect to the practice of Flatterers; which if for any thing before said, we desire to auoid, that
 it should neither entrap nor endanger vs: let vs looke diligently into our selues, and make a true Character of our own dispositions, not partially, but really: and then we shall finde so infinit a number of vanities, imperfections, and faults, mixed in our words, deeds, and thoughts, that we cannot choose but see the falsity and deceit of such as haue praised and flattered vs for those vertues, wherein we haue had no manner of share. And so leauing this part, I come to some differences, and limitations, lest in the generall inueighing against Flattery, it may sometimes be misapplyed.
A man is not bound to be so censorious a Criticke, as to take vpon him the disciplining of euery body for their errours and imperfections. The error is in defending or praising,
 not in co^cealing them. A man may be too busie, and where there is no obligation of duty, or respect, too narrow an Inquisition may be impertinent. If wee smother the faults of those that trust and rely vpon our aduice, that cannot be exempted from the imputation of Flattery; but to such as we be meere strangers, and tyed to in no manner of obligation, there as it is most base to praise their defects, so it is not necessary at all to finde fault with them.
Besides, in co^mon ciuility and conuersation, to men though knowne yet aboue, or equall with vs, to whom we haue no bond but acquaintance; as we do not co^mend, so we are not bound to take notice of what we know of their errours. Far be it from vs to vse any meanes
 to settle them: but on the other side to take vpon vs the assurance of remouing them, vpon the strength of our oratory, and perswasion, is many times too high a hope, and decreaseth friendship. Men loue not to haue their faults seen or known, and there is no ground of aduice or direction, when those we conuerse withall, do seeke to conceale their infirmities from vs.
Againe, seeing praising is the Flatterers weapon; it may be demanded whether it bee vnpossible to praise a man, without Flattering him, as hauing a consequence and dependancie the one of the other? Without question no. For if wee doe truely and moderately commend those things in another which they iustly deserue, that tends to their good, encouraging
 them in those vertues for wch they be commended, to the end they may encrease, and that others may be animated by their example, to the imitation of the like. This kind of praising, without any priuat end or respect to our selues, can in no sence be termed Flattery, but Charitie, which is the marke of true friendship, and not of fained loue.
There is now one question to be resolued, whether Flattery can bee reckoned in the number of sinnes, or no. For if it be one, how comes St Paul to say, 1. Cor 10. 32. Giue no offence, etc. 33. Euen as I please all men in all things. Seeing that to please all men in all things, cannot bee without Flattery; for so our praising, and pleasing, may bee referred to the Catalogue of our imperfections. To this, I resolue, that
 neither to praise, nor please, in the^selues can be termed Flatterie, but may be made so by their ends and circumstances. And so Paul in the end of the 33. ver. expounds himselfe, meaning that he would haue vs please all men, so as we seeke not thereby our own glory, and profit, but the good of our neighbour. And so neither pleasing, nor praising can be called Flattery, more then the iust reprehension of him that is faulty, can be called detraction. And now I am arriued at the last part of this discourse, wherein I will lay down some distinct rules, and notes, wherby a Flatterer may be discouered.
In such a man you shall alwayes see a strife and ambitio^, to steale into the affection of those they depend vpon, with more then an ordinary
 pace, too assiduous care, and seruile obseruation, by all meanes, endeuouring not onely to get the start, but to keepe others backe in the good opinion of those they follow, by diligence on their parts, and laying imputations vpon others, so engrossing their affections; that willingly they will suffer none else to be inward, or about them, but such as fight vnder their banner, and be of their own stamp. And then as a shadow continually follows a man wheresoeuer he goeth: so they will imitate and affect whatsoeuer it be that their patrons apply themselues vnto; and there is no vice in them, which from these, will not haue their colour, approbation, and allurement.
And the principall part they act, is either to further ill actions, or so
 to conceale them, as a man shal not see his own imperfections. Arrogance, and Pride, they seek to incorporate in our affections: they will sweare we be the men of only eminency and marke; That those to whom we shew fauour, and respect, are sufficiently honoured, and so praise vs to a kinde of dotage, that we thinke all those who doe not equally obserue, and commend our supposed abilities, neglect it out of ignorance, or enuy; whereas the Flatterer yeelds to, and approues of all his actions, though such as in his own conscience and beliefe be manifestly worthy of reproofe and scorne.
Then if you mark the persons to whom their praises be applyed, you shall seldome heare them giue a good word of any man, but before
 his face, except it bee to such by whom he thinks his praises may be related, and that is his cunning; otherwise slandering and backbiting is as common a trade of a Flatterer, as commending of one in his presence. For in detracting from others, they either hope to please those they now apply themselues vnto, or else take occasion comparatiuely by casting aspersions vpo^ them, to magnifie the contrary vertues of those they be withall: but whether deseruedly, or no, that with them is not materiall.
Againe, you shall find that those actions which they seeme so much to approue, and commend in vs, their owne iudgement and vnderstanding will not allow of: for if a stranger, or a man, whom they purpose not to obserue, shall by way
 of argument, fall into discourse of such and such vicious actions, as they haue formerly allowed, in the person of their Patron, their reason wil force them to disauow and dislike them, except they imagine, this discourse is vpon designe to conuince them of Flattery.
And but obserue whether those praises they bestow vpon you for any action, they onely giue to you, and no other; or to you, and all others; and you shall generally finde, that their praises goe not according to the merit of the action, but affection of the partie: for those things they do now commend you for, they will immediately disco^mend in another, and those things they commend in another, they will as quickly dislike in you.

 Besides, you may note that howsoeuer our actions and affections doe vary and alter, yet their praises be constant, and their opinions will seeme to be the same, though in contrarieties, which is a kinde of Paradox; for let vs but now say or doe one thing, wee shall haue their Plaudites for it: some distance after, if our opinions, and actions chance to change to the contrary, they alter not their praises, they be still the same they were before, they lye as the winde goes; if you change into formes neuer so contrary, they doe so too. For there is no vniforme equalitie in all their actions, and intentions, because they haue no permanent place, or person, to apply them to. Their opinions can in no kinde be settled, because they haue wholly giuen
 ouer themselues to content and please others, and the course of their life is vncertaine, being neuer like themselues, but changeable, and varying from one forme to another.
And if a man would but examine the beauty and deformitie of his actions, by the rule of his own conscience, he shall finde those things, for wch many times hee is so highly commended, to be naught, and of dangerous example; and such vices, as notwithstanding their co^mendations, his owne conscience hath often accused him of, and many times he hath been ashamed of.
Now those that be diligent obseruers, are to be discouered also by their inconstancie: for allow them now the followers of one that is great in fortune, and place, if they
 chance to decline; and peraduenture by the plot and malice of an enemie, or competitor, their seruice fals off too, their expectancies being frustrated, and are of a condition so base, as to apply themselues to the ouerthrower of him they haue haue beene so much bou^d vnto; and peraduenture themselues too haue been instruments of his destruction. But with their new master, whatsoeuer he likes, or dislikes; approues, or disauowes; loues, or hates, they are of the same mind that they seemed to be wth the former, and in a maner do like the Orator, who amongst many other flattering speeches, to Augustus, said that they, who called him Caesar, knew not his greatnesse; and they that called him not Caesar, were ignorant of his humanitie.

 Also in publike assemblies, as Parlaments and the like, some of this sort doe often crowd in, the grosnesse of whose obseruance cannot possibly be concealed; for you shall neuer heare them, but you may see a farre off, their aime is for priuate respects, not publike good; either through Flattery or feare of some person there present, whom they wish may alwaies speake before them, that they may bee sure not to differ from his opinion, and whatsoeuer it be, good or bad, it is by them sure to be seconded. And if speaking before, any thing hath chanced to slip from them that they see is disliked, they then fall to shifts and excuses, to purge themselues, by interpreting their words; or if that wil not serue, acknowledging their ignorance,
 and altered iudgement vpon better information, and so their note is quite changed; but these sorts of Flattery being plaine and palpable, easie to be found out, and so auoyded, are the lesse dangerous; for plainly to affirme, or denie as another doth the same, the grossnesse of that Flattery is easily discerned; whereas they that are more cunning in their trade, are hardly visible, if not vn-vizarded, which is my now endeuour to doe.
You shall finde some to flatter, when they seeme to reproue, and flatter most, when they shew to be most opposite against it. Of this sort of Flatterers was Agis Argiuus, who seeing Alexander liberall in gifts and rewards to a certaine ridiculous fellow, murmured that Alexander would shew such bountie
 to so vnworthy a fellow. Alexander hearing him mutter, asked him what he said. Indeed, saith he, I must confesse that I cannot with patience endure to see, that all you that are descended from Iupiter, should be so delighted and pleased with Flatterers. For as Iupiter kept Vulcan for his mirth, and Bacchus tooke great delight in Sylenus: so such as these, be of account and estimation with you. Tacitus also recites an example, though somwhat more grosse, that may bee referred to this sort of Flatterers. When the Emperour Tiberius was in the Senate, one rose vp and said, It was fit that euery man should speak freely, and in matters belonging to the Common-wealth, no man ought to hold his peace: Tiberius and all the Senate were in expectation
 what so bold a preamble would produce, and then with the Prouerbe, Parturiunt montes, nascetur ridiculus mus, saith he, Caesar, there is a fault wee all blame you for, though none dare take the hardnes to tell you of it, you spend your selfe too much in caring for vs, wearing your body both day and night in labours for the Republike, not valuing your owne safety and health, in regard of our happinesse and prosperity. This kinde of Flattery that goes in the habit of franknesse and libertie of speech, is very obscure. And if this, which ought to bee a remedie, proue the way and meanes more colourably to flatter, without good caution and obseruation, we shal hardly discouer their ayme.
Some againe not vnlike these
 will, by another way of reprehension, lay the ground for their Flattery; as if by chance they spye in vs any small and petty errors, they will declaime with vehemencie and earnestnesse against them; so that their encouragement to, or conniuencie at our great and monstrous deficiencies, by this their seeming seuerity, may in a manner bee ecclipsed. Which kinde of cunning, as Plutarch notes, may be compared to Hercules his club in a play, that seemes weighty, though indeed light, and filled with wooll or feathers. So this reprehending libertie, which a Flatterer vseth, will vpon examination be found weake, and of small force to giue a blow. For instance, if your clothes bee not of the new
 fashion, your beard not of the late edition, your hat not of the last block or the like; from hence, for these they will take occasion with a kinde of seueritie to censure and correct you. But admit you should despise your parents, abuse your wife, neglect your children, scorne your kindred, consume your estate, or fall into numbers of notorious vices, these they will neither moue nor stirre, these they will neither take knowledge of, nor regard.
Others somtimes you shall note, the better to disguise their Flattery, will, by reprouing of men for contrarie vices, confirme those they haue. As if a couetous man once in his life shew a little liberality, or if you wil, inclining to prodigality, (for the Prouerb saith, Whose feast is so great as a mizers?) they will
 vpon this single occasion, seem out of their loue to be much grieued at the vastnesse of his expence, and carelesnesse of his state. And if an enuious slanderer, that neuer loued to speake well of any body, by chance bee so conuinced by anothey mans merit, that hee speake a few words in his commendation, they wil presently impute this for a fault, and an argument of facilitie, for commending of one rather out of easinesse, then desert. And after this manner, those vicious affections which wee haue inhabitant in vs, they doe seeke to confirme, and settle for euer remouing, not by approuing their vices, or alone reprouing the contrarie; but sometimes also by discommending the contrarie vertues: as calling zeale, hypocrisie; liberality; prodigalitie;
 parsimonie, couetousnesse; and so forward: vsing the same Art towards the maintaining of any vice that they thinke a man hath a minde to.
If they happen to meet with one that suspects all praises that be forced or thrust vpon him, such a one they will not commend as from themselues, but inuent some good reports they heard of him abroad, and expresse how glad they were to heare so well; heerein imitating the Rethoricians, who often in their Orations vse the third person for the first. Or, on the contrary, accuse him of some ill they haue heard layd to his charge, which hee knowing to bee vntrue, and so denying, they will finde matter to fall into a laudatory of his abilities, by shewing how innocent
 he was of those vices that the world had taxed him withall. And if these wayes serue not to make him thinke too well of himselfe, they will not in words commend, but in a silent kinde of approuing and good opinion of his parts, will expresse it by seeking his opinion, or relying and trusting to his iudgement and discretion in some things that may concerne themselues; which when deliuered, they will seeme to admire, and preferre before any opinion or Counsell they haue receiued from any other bodie. But if a man could suspect this before-hand, giue them but some absurd Counsell, and so you shall discouer them. For they are prepared to commend it whatsoeuer it be. Seeing then by this before, that the colours of  Friendship and Flattery be so like, and hardly discerned; I will in the last place shew some maine differences betwixt them both, and so conclude.
A friend will neuer be employed in ill, or dishonest actions: but in such as may turne to the good and profit of him he loues, none is more willing then hee: where, on the contrarie, a Flatterer seekes to gaine our good opinion, by being employed in actions of the worst sort, and most dangerous consequence, in respect of our good either fortune, or name; not caring for the euent, so they may raise themselues by our ruine, louing our meate and meanes more then they doe our selues, continuing friends vnto vs, no longer then our purse perswades them therevnto.
 And whereas a true friend imitates our actions in nothing but that which is good; the Flatterer, like a Camelion, that turnes himselfe into all colours but white, can frame himselfe to any likenesse but good; ordering all his actions, not to the good of his friend, but his owne priuate respect, and turnes all to his owne particular benefit; whereas Friendship seekes not so much the good of it selfe.
A Friend reproues his friends vices, and commends his vertues rather to another, then himselfe; whereas on the contrary, a Flatterer alwayes prayses him in sight, as well for his vices as vertues, and behinde his backe, is as liberall in blaming and defamation of him; saying, that hee possesseth him wholly, gouernes him at his pleasure,
 and makes him doe what hee list. So, whereas a true friend preserues the good name and fortune of him he loues, the Flatterer precipitates him to all manner of danger and ruine.
A Friend is alwaies constant and settled in his opinions; the iudgement of a Flatterer being diuers, like waxe, or a looking-glasse, receiuing different formes, praising or dispraysing, euer applying himselfe to the minde and inclination of him that hee flattereth, vexing himselfe too violently in whatsoeuer he doth, in the knowledge and view of him that he obserues; continuall in prayses and offering of seruice. Non imitatur amicitiam, sed praeterit, hauing no moderation in his outward actions, and contrarily no inward affection, which
 is a condition quite different from the nature of a friend.
A friend will neuer commend and approue any actions of ours that be vicious, but friendly and freely disswade vs fro^ them, whereas the Flatterer doth alwayes giue the victory, applauding whatsoeuer we do, ayming no further then to please; whereas a true friend doth not respect so much how hee may please, as profit.
A Friend endeuours alwayes to procure in vs a loue of those things that be reasonable and honest: a Flatterer rather desires to confirme vs in libertie and pleasure. And where all men haue these two desires within them, the one giuen to vertue and goodnesse, the other to licentiousnesse and passion: the true friend alwaies assists the better part,
 in giuing counsell, and comfort; and the Flatterer applyes himselfe to the other, which is voyd of reason, and full of passion; so feeding our affections by deuising of some vicious and dishonest pleasure, that they quite diuert vs from the rule of reason; like some kinde of meat, that neither breeds good bloud, nor engenders spirits, nor ads vigor or strength, but onely breeds fogs and rotten humours that bee neither fast, nor sound: so, if a man looke narrowly into a Flatterer, all the good he shall finde to come from him, is onely the encreasing and settling of our worst and basest affections, wherevnto we seem to haue but the least inclination.
So that, as it is plaine, a true friend alwayes respects the good of another, more (which is the
 ground of his loue) then any particular purpose or designe for his owne aduantage; on the contrary, the ends of a Flatterer bee Antipodes to the desires of a Friend, who will no lesse bee willing to participate of his calamity, then prosperity; whereas the other doth obserue and follow him onely in his prospering euill. By which you see, it cannot possibly stand together, for one man to bee both a Friend, and a Flatterer, which is as much as if I should say, a Friend, and no Friend: or rather an enemie then a Friend.
FINIS.




A DISCOVRSE OF LAVVES.




A DISCOVRSE OF LAVVES.
THe nature of all sorts of Lawes, whether they concerne God, and Religion, and so haue reference to diuine Lawes, or whether they concerne societie, and conuersation, and so be meerely Humane, is properly this, to be the straight and perfect rule, by application wherevnto, right and wrong are discerned, and distingnished one from another:
 and the knowledge, and practice of them, bring a double benefit, either Publike, which is the generall good, and gouernment of the State; or Priuate, which consists in the quiet, and peaceable life of euery one in particular. So the true end of all Lawes is to ordaine, and settle an order, and gouernment amongst vs, the Iurisdiction whereof we are rather bound to obey, then dispute; Lawes being, as it were, the Princes we ought to serue, the Captaines we are to follow, the very rules, by which all the actions of our life be squared and disposed. They are the peoples bulwarks, and defences, to keep them in safety, and peace, that no vniust thing bee done against them; that by the Lawes men may be made good, and happy; and that the punishme^t of offenders should
 appeare to proceed from a necessitie forced, rather then a will voluntarie, and that by the example of punishing some, others might bee made the better; that by the feare, and terrour of them, mens audacities might be repressed, and their innocencie, and peace, secured from force and oppression.
If men were not limited within certaine rules, such confusion would follow in gouernment, that the differences of Right and wrong, Iust and vnlawfull, could neuer be distinguished; and that would cause such distraction in the people, and giue so great an ouerthrow to conuersation, and commerce amongst men, that all right would be peruerted by power, and all honestie swayed by greatnesse: so that the equall administration of
 Iustice, is the true knot that binds vs to vnity and peace amongst our selues, and disperseth all such violent and vnlawfull courses, as otherwise libertie would insinuate, preseruing euery man in his right, and preuenting others, who if they thought their actions might passe with impunitie, would not measure their courses, by the rule of Aequum and Iustum, but by the square of their owne benefit, and affections: and so not being circumscribed within reasonable bounds, their reason becomes inuisible; whereas when they finde that Iustice hath a Predominant power, they are deterred from proceeding in those acts, that otherwise their owne wils, and inclination would giue them leaue to effect.
Plato affirmes the necessitie of
 Lawes to be so great and absolute, that men otherwise could not bee distinguished from vnreasonable creatures: for no man naturally is of so great capacitie, as completely to know all the necessities, and accidents, which bee required for a common good: and then if a man could suppose in any so perfect a knowledge, yet is that ma^ not to be found, that either absolutely could, or would doe all that good which he knowes: so that in an Vtopia of such men as be not, yet the necessity of lawes are absolute. But where mens affections and manners are depraued, and giuen ouer to vnruly and vnreasonable desires, there Lawes be so necessarie; that Heraclitus said, A Citie needed rather to defend their Lawes, then Forts: for without Lawes no people can subsist;
 without defences, it is possible that they may: agreeing with Demosthenes obseruation, who supposed Lawes to bee as the soule of a Commonwealth; for as a bodie without a soule, remaines not; so a People without due administration of Lawes, doe wholly decline: but take people, as they are commonly mixt of the good, and worser sort, nay rather, more of the bad, then better composition, yet it wil euidently appeare, that Lawes are so absolutely necessary, to restraine from ill, to confirme in good, to make a happy concord, and vnion in our ciuill conuersation, to make such a distinction betwixt lawfull, and exorbitant desires, as vnlawfull affections may not be coloured with good apparances; that it can not be denyed,
 that Lawes bee the onely sinewes of contracting people together, and not meerely vsefull, but necessarie.
But in the exercise, and execution of Lawes, such moderation is euer to be held, that it may appeare rather to to be vsed, as a preuenting Physicke, by way of example to warne others, that they fall not into the like danger, then out of a desire to afflict, or make miserable any priuate person: and therefore the conclusion of Tacitus is very obseruable, Pauca admodum vi tractata, quo caeteris quies esset; In some few matters seueritie was vsed, by that meanes to cause quietnesse in the rest. So that it is necessary in euery Commonwealth to cut off offenders, as well for present safety, as preuention of further mischiefe,
 which wil be plain, if we wil but obserue the benefits that follow, and inconueniences that arise, if this exemplary Iustice bee not executed.
First, when any fact is vnlawfully committed, there is no other satisfaction left to the world, or the partie offended, then the punishment of the offender; vvhich if it bee not executed, Iniustice vvere as vvell offered to the Publike State; as to the priuate person of him who hath suffred the iniury.
Next, as it incourageth honest men in their iust and lawfull actions; so it abates the insolency of others, who bee onely bridled with the feare of punishment; for otherwise the vvorst men by wickedest courses, were most likely to make great fortunes,
 and to carry the greatest sway; wch vvould so discourage men honestly disposed, that they would neither haue will, nor power, nor confidence, to labour for the publike.
Thirdly, it banisheth all presumption from such as thinke, that their reputation and wealth, Riches, or Offices, can presse down Iustice, or make it encline to their purposes: for if these respects should preuaile, iudgement were meerely inuerted, and would not looke vpon the cause, but the Bribe; the right, but the power; the truth, but the greatnesse of the greater Aduersary.
Again, it addes confidence to the poorer sort, whe^ they see that equity, and not fauour, procures the sentence, and so by this means are conserued fro^ oppressio^. And if it were not for this, in what a miserable
 case were these lower degrees of me^ subiect to be trod vnder feet by their imperious Aduersary, and then to haue no means left for redresse.
Fiftly; it is the greatest honor, and reputation, a Kingdom, or co^monwealth can be ambitious of, and enioy, to haue Iustice iustly distributed, and people obedient to Lawes; Iustice guarding the people, by correcting and cutting off such as giue ill example to the rest. And in what Commonwealth soeuer this is neglected, it breeds co^fusion amongst the^selues, giues aduantage to their enemies, and causeth their disreputation to spread through the world.
Next to the honor of a Kingdome, it is the safety of the King, who being reputed to be as the fountain of justice, so Iustice keeps the fountaine free from corruption, infection, or
 danger, prescribing rules for feare it corrupt, ascribing Antidotes for feare of infection, and preseruing his person, and reputation both fro^ sensible, and insensitiue danger: wheras if Lawes bee neglected, his person is more subiect to the attempts of Traitors, his life to the tongues of malice and detraction, and his reputation to perpetuall infamy.
And lastly, this is it, that enriches and secures the subiect in all Kingdomes, giues him his right, protects him from wrong, increaseth commerce, and proclaimes traffique throughout all the world: whereas if Iustice were not duely administred, there would follow a diminution of our substances, a generall disconsolatio^ in our life, and a certain separation fro^ all trade with strangers. And mark but narrowly, and
 you shall seldom find that God euer blessed that Cou^try, where Iustice was either neglected, or abused.
Those therfore (if any such insensible creatures be) that dislike therestraint, and striue, and declaime against obedience to Lawes (which may be truely termed the wals of gouernment, and nations) they make themselues so co^temptible, as no obiection of theirs can be worthy the answering: for a generall dissolution of Lawes in a ciuill body, is the same with the conuulsion of the sinnewes in a naturall; decayes, and dissolution, being the immediate, and vnauoidable succeeders. And yet a man had better choose to liue where no thing, then where all things be lawfull: which is the reason why all men haue thought it more dangerous, to liue in an Anarchy,
 then vnder a Tyrants gouernment: for the violent desires of one, must necessarily bee tyed to particulars, in a multitude they are indefinite.
The first degree of goodnes is obedience to Lawes, wch be nothing else but vertue, and good order of life, reduced vnto certain rules: and as reason hath the predominant power in our naturall bodies, so the body Politick ca^not subsist wth out soule to inanimate, to gouerne, to guide it, and that is Law, proceeding from the reason, counsels, and iudgeme^t of wise men. For where Lawes be wanting, there neither Religion, nor life, nor societie can be maintained. There be three branches that mens Lawes do spread themselues into, euery one stricter then other. The Law of Nature, wch we enioy in
 common with al other liuing creatures. The Law of Nations, which is common to all men in generall: and the Municipall Law of euery Nation, which is peculiar and proper to this or that Country, and ours to vs as Englishmen.
That of Nature, which is the ground or foundation of the rest, produceth such actions amo^gst vs, as are co^mon to euery liuing creature, and not only incident to men: as for example, the commixture of seuerall sexes, which we call Marriage, generation, education, and the like; these actions belong to all liuing creatures, as well as to vs. The Lawes of Nations bee those rules which reason hath prescribed to all men in generall, and such as all Nations one with another doe allow and obserue for iust. And lastly, the
 Peculiar Lawes of euery Country, wch mixe with the generall Lawes of all places, some particular ones of their own: and this is that which the Romanes called amongst the^selues, the Ciuill Law of their City, and is indeed in euery Nation: the Municipall Lawes of that Country, as it were Lawes onely created for those Climates, for those estates.
Take away the power of Lawes, and who is it that can say, This is my House, or my Land, or my money, or my goods, or call any thing that is his, his owne. Therfore euery mans state and fortune is more strengthened and confirmed by Lawes, then by any will or power in those from whom wee receiue them; for whatsoeuer is left vnto vs by the Testament of another, it is impossible we should euer keepe it
 as our own, if Law restrained not others claimes, and confirmed the^ not vnto vs. In which respect, Lawes be the strongest sinewes of humane societie, helps for such as may be ouerborne, and bridles to them that would oppresse. So that we receiue much more benefit from Lawes in this kinde, then from Nature; for whereas men be naturally affected and possessed with a violent heate of desires, and passions, and fancies, Lawes restrain and draw them from those actions, and thoughts, that would precipitate to all manner of hazzards and ill, which naturall inclination is prone enough vnto; and do gouern, direct, alter, dispose, and as it were bend them to all manner of vertuous and good actions.
Wherfore Lawes be the true Physicions and preseruers of our peaceable
 life, and ciuill conuersation, preuenting those il accidents that may happen, purging and taking away such as haue broken forth, and sowing peace, plenty, wealth, strength, and all manner of prosperity amongst men. And for those things that be ill, but yet introduced by custome, seuere and iust Lawes will readily correct; for the force and power of Law doth easily dissolue an ill custome, though it haue been of long continuance: the excellency and praise of which Lawes can neuer be better illustrated, then in that saying of Salomon: Mandatum lucerna est; lex, lux, and via vitae, increpatio disciplinae. The commandement is a lampe; and the law is light; and reproofes of instruction, are the way of life.
The dispensers and interpreters
 of the Law, be the Magistrates and Iudges, and all sorts and degrees of men whatsoeuer, be tyed and bound to the obseruance of the same. To this purpose, Solon being dema^ded, What City was best gouerned? answered, That, wherein the City obeyed the Magistrate, and the Magistrate the Lawes: and certainly that gouernment is better, which vseth set and firme Lawes, though not all of the best sort, then that where the Lawes bee most perfect and exact, and yet not obserued. Lawes therefore ought to be the rulers of men, and not men the masters of Lawes.
There is no doubt but that Lawes were at the first inuented, as well to giue rules to the good, that they might know how to liue peaceably and regularly one with another, as to represse the audacity of those
 vnbridled spirits, who, in despight of discipline and reason, doe thrust themselues into all kinds of outrage and disorder; from which bad cause notwithstanding, according to the old rule, a good effect is produced: Ex malis moribus, bonae leges oriuntur. But the particular introducements of Lawes, arise either from a pressing necessity, or a foreseeing and prouisionall carefulnes of those that make them; these proceed from prouidence, the other from some sence of euill. The impulsiue causes in the making of prouisionall Lawes, are either loue of their Cou^try, or desire of glory, or affectation of popularity, or somtimes particular interest, and priuat respect; for it often happens, that a priuate good may haue connexion with the publike. And the
 sence of ill, decaying either by the encrease of it, or a seeming to bee destitute of remedy, is the cause, that where Lawes are once forced, out of the sense of mischiefe, and inconuenience, they be for the most part grieuous and immoderate; as on the other side, such as reason and prouidence do produce, are many times more specious then vsefull. In the first, take away the spur and sense of ill, and it makes men in the constitution of Lawes, to bee carelesse and vnwary; and in the other, if there bee not continued a strong and constant affection, they commonly faint in the execution of them.
But in the meane time there is no doubt, that there are certaine fountaines of naturall Iustice and equity, out of which hath beene taken
 and deriued that infinite variety of Lawes, which seuerall people haue apted to themselues: and as seuerall veines and currents of water, haue seuerall qualities and tasts, in respect of the nature of that ground and soyle, thorow which they flow and run: so these Lawes and the vertue of them, which bee fetched fro^ an originall fountaine, receiue a new kinde of application, and tincture, in respect of the scituation of the Country, the genius and nature of the people, the fashion and forme of publike actions, diuers accidents of the time, and sundry other occurrences, I will not stand to repeat. And in the making of Lawes, wise men haue alwayes had these things in consideration. First, the Common-good, and benefit, for wch they intend them,
 and that requires that they should be both iust and profitable: now no law can bee profitable, nor yet iust; wch is made for priuat and particular respects, and not for the publik good.
2. The persons to whom they be to be applyed; that for the executio^, and application of them, they be such as may be possible to be obserued, and apt for the customs, places, and time, where, and when they be to be vsed.
3. The present course of the State; what Lawes there haue beene vsually receiued, by what speciall ones it hath beene conserued, and by what new ones it may be assured: for one kinde of care is not fit for all places, and Countreys.
But Lawes, when they are once made, ought very rarely to be cha^ged: to wch purpose the ancient position of wise men is not vnworthy
 the obseruing, that nothing is to bee changed in the Lawes of a Commonwealth, which hath a long time by these Lawes preserued it self in good state and gouerment: and as Isiodor' wel noteth, after a Law is once made, we ought not to iudge of it, but according to it. And yet in these two cases the alteration of Lawes may turne to the better. 1. When by the changing of it the Law is made more perfect, more cleere, more positiue, more profitable. 2. When the condition of subiects and gouernment is changed, there of necessity the Law must vary, according to the difference and diuersity of the times and persons: for change and variatio^ of Lawes, are either by occasion of entertaining forraigne customes, or some internall deficiences, or excesses, according to the alteration of time. One
 of these is so far from innouation, that it is altogether necessary: but that is not introducing of Lawes by way of imitation of other people; it argues a desire of change, rather then any cause that is materiall. But on the other side, old and ancient customes, in respect of their very antiquity, doe induce a kinde of harshnesse, and breed saciety; for the wilfull retaining of a custome against the present reason of the time, is altogether vnequall.
This is to be vnderstood of temporary Lawes, made and applyed to new and seuerall accidents. For the fundamentall lawes, vpon which the fabricke of a common-wealth and people be grounded and built, they in no case will admit innouation; neither are the other sort to bee lightly altered, but where the
 present custome of the time finde them impertinent, and the State thinks them vnvseful. To illustrate, in the same times, sometimes we see Lawes mutable, and fit to be so: such as are made in time of warre, peace doth extinguish, and so on the contrary; agreeing with Liuie speaking to this purpose: Quae in pace latae sunt, plerunque bellum abrogat; quae in bello, pax; vt in nauis administratione, alia in secunda, alia in aduersa, tempestate vsui sunt. And although change of Lawes be sometimes necessary, it ought notwithstanding to bee done with a great deale of caution: but yet it must be confessed, that time, of all things is the greatest innouator, and therefore wilfully to prescribe the continuance of an old Law, in respect of antiquity, the face of the world
 and affaires being changed, is indeed an introduceme^t of nouelty; for the pressure of the vse of it, vrging and setting it only forth with the grace of antiquity, if notwithstanding it bee opposite or incongruous to the present times and gouernment, makes that old Law, if practised, to fall, and bee conuerted into a new and vnreasonable custome.
Now for my iudgement concerning the vse of Lawes, I thinke this, that as the vse of much Physicke and diuers Physicions, argue the aboundance of humours, and diseases; so the multiplicity and number of Lawes, be manifest signes of a diseased and distempered Commonwealth. And therefore to follow the similitude, as in diseases new experiments be dangerous, where those
 that be ancient and approued may serue; so new Lawes bee needlesse, when the maladies of the Republique may be cured by the old: for it is a thing both vnequall and vniust to insnare the people with multitude of Lawes.
Law and Reason are twinnes, the absence of one, is the deformity of the other; being in a kinde conuertibilia, and inseparable. That common reason we haue ingrafted inour natures, is a Law, directing what we are to doe, forbidding the contrary, according to Cicero: Eadem ratio cum est in hominis mente confirmata, and confecta, lex est. For Law is nothing but reason dilated and applyed vpon seuerall occasions and accidents, the comprehension of reason and Law, as of publike enormities, and necessities, for
 which they be seuerally, at seuerall times made, being infinite. The disease commonly in our knowledge, hauing the prioritie of the remedy. And thus the reuerence, and duty wee owe to Lawes, is nothing else but obedience to reason, which is the begetter, correcter, and preseruer, of the very Lawes themselues: those therefore who will not obey them, do come more neere the nature of Brutes and Saluages, then men indued with reason: but I goe on.
If a reason be demanded why all Countreys doe differ, and vary so much in their customes, and Lawes, I answere, that it proceeds from the custome of the first inhabitants. As we may see where there are seueral plantations by one people, they seuerally giue different orders, and customes,
 according to the intent and purpose of the first Planters, and according to the necessitie, and end of the present Plantation, as may bee obserued in the different Constitutions, and Lawes, in our two late Plantations, of Virginia, and the Bermuda's. And though, I confesse, that these originall customes, may in time bee altered, vpon seuerall occasions, diuers changes of gouernment, as in the Roman State, or vpon conquest, as with vs; yet I doubt not, but that some reliques of the old customes would remain to perpetuitie, if a people be not wholly extirpate. I should now punctually search the seuerall Authors, and Inuenters of Lawes, amongst different Nations, together with their diuers oppositions, and emulations, one with another,
 but that would bee too long, and vncertaine: I will therefore onely in a word touch the originall, and growth of Law amongst the Romanes, as being more certainely knowne, and of larger extent.
You must vnderstand that at the first they had no other set Law, then the will, and co^mandements of their Princes. That gouernment being changed, and so their constitutions extinct, the people were the^ gouerned by precedent, and custome, without any direct, and written Law; but that continued not many yeeres. Then the law of the 12. Tables succeeded, wch the Romans, in respect of their own defects, had borrowed from the Grecians: and these, as in Lawes it commonly happens, being subiect to dispute, were forced to be reconciled, and decided, by the
 authority, and arguments of the most great, graue, and learned men, which afterwards being collected, and gathered together, became a kind of volume, and body of Law, and so afterwards, before the Commonwealth was subuerted, receiued by diuers men, in sundry ages, seuerall additions: but after the gouernme^t was Monarchical, the present Emperors did adde to the old, or confirm or abolish them, according to their own will, and power. And all together is that which is commonly knowne by the name of the ciuill Law; and because it continues to be the most practical, and generally receiued Law of the world, and that though all Countreys haue Municipall Lawes of their owne, yet this Law in euery place carries some sway, and authority, in some places
 more, and in some lesse, and that an aspersion is cast vpo^ the ground, and foundation of our Lawes, in being different and contrary to the original beginning of the ciuill Law, I will briefely parralel them together; wherin if any do not find so punctuall an agreement as hee expects, let him remember that the nature of a co^parison, implyes but a similitude, and affinity of one thing to another, and not a totall and absolute agreement.
The Law which the Romans vsed, and so we, is either written, or not written. Those that were written, saith Iustinian, were of these kinds. 1. Lex, and that is such a Law as was made by the people, but first propounded by the Senat. Such are those Lawes with vs, as are confirmed by the lower House of Parliament,
 and propounded by the higher. 2. Plebiscitum, and such were the Lawes made by the whole people (the order of Patritians excepted) and offered to their co^sideration by the Tribune; like those Lawes that be approued by the Co^mons in our Parliament, and propounded by the Speaker. 3. Senatus consultu, and those were such Lawes as were ordained by the power and authoritie of the Senat, to wch we may resemble the consultations and directions of the Kings Councell, and the Decrees of the Star-chamber. 4. Principum Placita, which were Constitutions appointed by the Soueraign power of the Prince; some of them being personall, and not exemplary; others more publike; of which kinde with vs be al the Kings Edicts, and Proclamations, of what kind soeuer. 5. Magistratuum
 Edicta, as the co^mandements of the Generals in the Field, Gouernors of Prouinces, and the prime Magistrates in great Cities: like as with vs is that power which is deputed to the Deputy of Ireland, the Presidents of York, and Wales, the Lieutenants of euery Shire, and the Iurisdiction of Magistrates, according to their particular customes, priuiledges, and immunities, in the great Cities, and Corporations of this Kingdom. And lastly, Responsa Prudentu^, which were the Iudgements and opinions of such as were appointed to be Iudges, and expounders of the Law: and iust of that kinde bee the resolutions of our Iudges, which in writing bee deliuered vnto vs, by the name of Reports, and Cases.
Lawes vnwritten (amongst the Romans,
 were such as custome had introduced, and yet neuer suffred contradiction by a Positiue Law. Such Traditions as they had receiued touching the ancient manner, and forme of gouernment of their Ancestors, in precedent times; and of this nature with vs is our common Lavv, grounded much vpo^ custom.
And the reason why these ancient customes may bee collected to be of so great force, is, because alwayes before their approbation it is to be conceiued, that they had passed al censures for necessary, and to be without offence: and so hauing receiued this facile approbation, are allowed, and most religiously kept; for Lawes of the greatest weight, and consequence, which occasioned Cicero to write ante suam memoriam, and morem ipsum patrium,
 praestantes viros adhibuisse, and veteru^ morem, ac maiorum instituta, excellentes viros retinuisse. And beleeuing Dionysius testimonie, Romulus in the first foundation of the Republique, did thinke to strengthen, and confirme it more, with Lawes vnwritten, then written; peraduenture beeing of the same opinion Demosthenes notes of Licurgus, who would not write his Lawes, but to haue them more publike, and better knowne, would leaue them onely ingrauen in the memory of his Citizens.
But more precisely to distinguish betwixt Law and Custome, that the tearmes, as well as matter, may be vnderstood, you must vnderstand, that where any forme, or Law, hath had any long continuance in practice, without any
 knowne Author, it then receiues the name of an ancient custome, or mos Maiorum: which though in name, and Title it differ from a Law, yet in power, and authoritie, it is the same: which Vlpian confirmed when hee said, Diuturnam consuetudinem, pro Iure, ac Lege, in jis quae non ex scripto descendunt, obseruari solere. And there is great reason for it, because Lawes are in esteeme, and authoritie with vs, for no other reason, but in respect they haue had the reputation to bee allowed, and made by the Iudgement of the people. Then full as meritoriously doe those Lawes deserue esteeme, which all men haue approoued for necessarie, without any prescript, or rule; and this is the reason which makes our common Law originally
 grounded vpon ancient customes, of equall power and authoritie with our Statutes.
FINIS.


