irelande jubilee or joy io Paean 1. chron. chap. 29. Vers. 20.21.22 20 and David say to all the congregation now bless the lord your God and all the congregation bless the lord God of their father and bow down their head and worship the lord and the King 21 and they sacrifice sacrifice unto the lord and offer burn offering unto the lord on the morrow after that day even a thousand bullock a thousand ram and a thousand lamb with their drink offering and sacrifice in abundance for all Israel 22 and d^d eat and drink before the lord on that day with great gladness and they make Solomon the son of David king the second time and anoint he unto the lord to be the chief governor and Zadok to be Priest i. the preface or Prologomena to the whole as we have hear by true certain and infallible report the news of the prince his arrival which we most delight most desire to hear of all other in which before time we be wondrous divide and distract betwixt hope and fear as a ship drive too and fro with contrary wind and wave by reason of the uncertainty of rumour and fly lie a fame every man speak as he will have it rather than as the truth be as they be well affect or infect demonstrate themselves as the damsel tell Peter their very tongue betray they b b Mark 14.17 as Shibboleth and Shibboleth distinguish betwixt ephramite and gileadite c c judge c. 12.5.6 as the proverb be as the man be think so be the bell still ring as now I say it be certain write and fix on the column of truth that the prince be prosperous and safe in the outward and inward man arrive out of Spain to the english court of which we have so many testimony from such a cloud of eye and ear d d and witness as the apostle and disciple have to the exhilarate of their former sad e e math. 27. v. 7.8.9 Mark 16. v. 1.2.6.7 luk. 24.36.41 heart of the resurrection of their saviour he now be more incredulous than that Didymus f f John 20 v. 25. which will not believe his ear in that which be without the sight of his own eye so as we already have solemnize his arrival with our hearty gratulation we be here again assemble to resolemnize it and to renew our commemoration by the addition of another succeed exceed mercy the merciful marvelous and miraculous protection and preservation of our sovereign king our now illustrious prince our noble peer the reverend prelate the gentry the clergy the commonalty the whole body of the kingdom our life our wife our child together with the gospel and religion who all at one blow have perish g g we have lose Regimen in the powder treason have that fatal blow be give that be intend which blow the lord protector of great Britain the watchman sentinel and shepherd of * * psal 35. v. 1. our english Israel prevent by put a manacle on the bloody traitor hand by a special and peculiar providence even in a instant as once a hook in the nostril of Sannacharib h h 2. king 19.28 in the like exigent a halter about the neck of Haman i i Esth. 7. v. 9 a gag and a boult on the tongue of Balaam k k Numb. 23. ve. 7.8 a moussell on the mouth of Tobiah and Shanballat l l neh. 6.14 and a dart from heaven into the bowel of the apostate julian h h in his war with sapor the persian king wound with a arrow from heaven he throw his blood into the air cry thou have overcome o galilean when they in their damnable resolution intend mischief to the church and people of God to teach all the proud pestilent and perverse spirit of the world what it be to kick against the prick n n act 9 v. 5. swim against the stream for flesh and blood to contend against God o o 1 cor. 10.22 who sit in the heaven know in a trice how to confound they and their device to crush their cockatrice egg to sweep down their spider web to break they as a potter vessel p p psal 29. as easy as a brazen head break in fitter a head of glass q q all their counsel plot project and conspiracy perish as a embryo wither as the grass on the house top dissolve as the wax before the fire r r ps 58 6.7.8 as the snow before the sun and scatter as the dust and chaff before the wind s s psal 1.4 there be neither power nor strength against the almighty who can turn even the wisdom of a friar and jesuited Achitophel t t 2. sam. 15.31 into folly and the curse of the great Balaam of Rome against his christian Zion v v numb 23.20 into blessing he that rule in heaven w w psal 2.4 laugh all the enemy of himself and his church to scorn the holy one of Israel as appear in the experience of this day have they in derision it be as probable as possible for that antichristian man of Rome according to his project and the thrasonical brag of his canonist and gnatonicall clawback to depose king dispose kingdom 10 10 the pope sycophant make he believe that he may as jehoida do Achaliae and as when he proud depose king papin of France with Petro Petrus Rodulpho with such prank as these unless the lord first depose they as he do Saul y y 1. sam. 15.26 Balthasar z z dan 5 26. and Nabuchadnezar a a dan 4.34 use he as he do Tamburlaine and ashur b b Esai 10. v. 5. and now the Turk as the rod of his wrath as the judge and the sheriff may use a hangman to execute follon as God himself have use the devil to torment the first king of Israel c c 1 sam. 16.14 I say unless God let loose his chain mastiff whether Turk or pope to the punish the sin of the king or of a kingdom all their attempt against the lord anoint be but to fight against God as the centaur and the old giant in the fable be say to wage war against jupiter d they may aswell endeavour to turn the sea to dry land to turn jordan backward e e elisha 2. king 2. v. 14. to pluck the sun out of the firmament yea God himself out of heaven as to pull any christian king God lieutenant and vicegerent of god set and plant out of his throne unless they have as the devil sometime have but the pope never have a special commission or permission from God as a trial of a righteous prince or the punishment of the reprobate oh well may traitor like they undo themselves by their do as do Absalon f f 2. sam. 18.14 Adoniah g g 1. king 2.25 A^halia h h 2. King 11. v. 1.14.15 sheba i i 2. sam. 20. v. 22. the roman Catiline k k Sallust Sejanus l the french m m see both their tragedy polish in our english tongue b^ron Lopus Ravillack the belgic B^rnwell our english squire Parry babington the romish garnet campian and these unfortunate english gentleman as their own call they Digby Catesby winter Faux bring as do joab the blood upon their own head which they think to shed from other fall into that pit which they dig for other n scorch themselves like the fond flea Pyrausta o o Pirausta Pyrogono plin. libr. 11. nat. hist. c. 36. Aelian lib. 2. cap. 2. at those flame they think to quench shoot like he that shoot up at the sun arrow to fall on their own pate the wildfire ball of their treason as cast against a iron wall rebound back again upon themselves to their break or burn as he that gripe thorn or the prickle urchin or the edge of a sharpen steel prick his own finger and blood himself but hurt no man else themselves come to their immature and unglorious end like as be usual see with that blood and slaughter upon their own nocent head which they intend against the innocent and innocuous like the inventor of Perillus his bull first hanzel and act in that tyranny which their treachery intend and invent against other so let thy enemy perish o lord p p judg. 5. v. 31. so let they perish that rise up against thou and against thy anoint that draw the sword of war as do joab against Abner q q 2. sa. 3.27.28 and Amasa r r 2. sa. 2.20.10 in the time of peace let they perish with the sword that strike unlawful with the sword s s math. 26.52 if any rebel against God and Cesar let he be anathema Maranatha execrable and accurse let he die unglorious t t jer. 22. v. 24.28 like jechonia let none say alas my brother as the old prophet do for the young v v 1. King 13.30 let his name here stink as a fox or a poulcat or a carrion after and rot with his carcase bury in the Leth of oblivion let he like w w 1. King 21.20 ahab 10 10 1. King 16.26 y y gen. 4.14.15 Cain Balaam z z John 17. v. 12. judas and our english Banister a a servant to the duke of Buckingham treacherous betray his distress lord to Richard the 3. speed and Hollinshed in never be remember but with some brand and mark of obloquy some addition of infamy let his wife be a widow as David sing of his and Christ enemy prophetical his child vagabond b b psalm 22. his seed fatherless c c judg. 8.7 and his house desolate yea let they perish like smoke and the untimely fruit of a woman let they be like zeba and Zalmunna and they of Penuell who flesh gideon tear with the brier of the wilderness or as the ungrateful ammonite d d 2. sam. 10.19 who David bring under with iron saw as Pharaoh and his egyptian that be drown in the red sea e e Exo. 14.25.26 as jabin and the host of Sisera f f judg. 5.21 who the river sweep away yea that ancient river the river but let they that love and fear thou say always as we this day the lord be praise praise be the lord out of Zion which dwell at jerusalem and sure the concurrence of these two extraordinary mercy the reflect on the one as by past his majesty preservation the present fruition of the other the general welcome reduction of our illustrious prince keep safe by that or good angel who go along with he as once with jacob a a gen. 28. v. 16 and 48.26 with Abraham steward b b gen. 24.7 and that apocryphal Tobiah and those eastern c c matth. 2.9 bosquier in his echo concionun dispute that the star be some good angel but conclude that it be in all incident peril by sea and by land in the spanish expedition these two mercy I say meet in one centre as crystalline brook in one torrent run to that ocean and sea of mercy from whence they flow shall so water as Nilus d d Nilo Aelianus hist. lib. 10 cap. 44. Seneca nature libr. 4. c. 2. plin. lib. 5. c. 9 do Egypt all the Israel of God that they shall cause even the most barren heart to be abundant in blessing and fruitful in thanksgiving 2 the division or logical analysis with the theological explanation of the Text. but not to make in these preparatory prologue the door too great for the house nor the gate for the city for some cynic e to scoff at and deride from these preface generality I come to the strict particular enclosure of my text which be the expression of those eucharistical gratulation of David and the elder and people of Israel for a double mercy receive from the lord as we have already intimate that I may according to my talent as God shall give the door of utterance speak by it and from it unto your brain and understand part by explanation and in which the chief soul and genius of preach f consist unto your heart and affection by useful application fit it as I may as the shoe for the right foot and the glove for the right hand to the solemnisation of this day because method be the mother of memory g to lay down some basis and foundation to build upon observe with i the fountain of this scripture run into these five stream or tree-like bud and spread into these five main branch with some sprig of division or subdivision first the subject of these eucharistical gratulation and those be 1. and primary David as appear both here and vers 10.11.12.13 where both the matter manner method and part of his thankfulness be lay down 2. secondary the whole congregation move after his motion consist 1. of the head 2. the captain of thousand and of hundred 3. the ruler of the king work vers. 6. 4. the whole body of the congregation bless the lord vers. 20. second the expression of this their gratitude and thankfulness and that four way 1. by blessing the lord 2. worship 1. the lord as internal in their heart so external by bow down their head God as create preserve save redeem so require both body and soul in his worship 2. worship the king not by any religious or superstitious adoration such as the listrians will have give to Paul h h all. 14. v. 12 13. Cornelius unto i i act. 10.25 Peter k k Revel. 19.10 John to the angel which as the devil exact of Christ l l math. 4.9 so the pope that Saul or Paul of Rome that pretend Peter Satan lieutenant exact expect and accept of the king and ruler of of the earth as Alexander once of Frederick in saint mark church it be no such idolatrous worship as our popish proselyte give to their dead saint antichristian man of sin dumb image paint shrine erect cross carve crucifix feign relic and breaden God all which they will salve with their worne-eaten threadbare distinction of Latria and Dulia which by often cashier be shave more bare and bald than any of their friar crown but that I may scour the passage and explain and pave the way as I go by worship the king be mean that civil reverence and veneration which the ancient persian turk those of Morrocho China and of the country of Prester John and the great mogul give to their emperor and king to this day such as we also give to our prince and ruler that be christian even such veneration and reverend respect as Abraham give to the Hethites m m gen. 23 7. as jacob to Pharaoh n n gen. 47.7 and to his brother Esau o o gen. 33.3 as Abigail p p 1. sam. 25.23 the woman of tekoah q q 2. sam. 14.4 Bethshebah and Nathan r r 1. King 1.23 give to David 3. they testify their gratitude by sacrifice and oblation describe 1. for their nature burn offering and drink offering 2. their matter bullock lamb ram 3. their number and measure 1. general in abondance 2. particular a thousand ram a thousand lamb a thousand bullock they do not as we now scant God part they think nothing as we the least thing too dear for God 3. they have faith to believe that though they offer thus much yet God can and will still increase their store as indeed it be unto they as they believe for it come home with the holy happy interest multiply as the widow oil s s 2. King 4.5 ^ that be give or lend to the Lord 4. the end of their sacrifice be express and that be for all Israel 4. the four expression of their gratitude be by feast and festivity they do eat and drink which be not mean of the ordinary use of the creature but more full and free as in their solemn feast three the object of all this blessing worship sacrifice feast be lay down and that be before the lord for so the text run 1. they bless the lord with his add attribute the god of their father 2. they worship the Lord 3. they sacrifice to the Lord 1. there be not a pagan among they that worship any strange God as do jonas his mariner t t jonas 1.5 neither jupiter juno Mercury etc. the host of heaven or any create nature in the heathenish devilish diversify idolatry 2. neither any idolatrous jew to worship Baal Asteroth or any of the god of the nation 3. neither be there any Papist hatch in these day popery be a cockcatrice egg of a after cleck it be as u u Nilus plin. libr. 5. c. 9 Seneca nature lib. 6. c. 8. Petrus nili lib. hist. 18. Nilus his head unknown unshown as that or the philosopher stone unfound out there be not so much talk of it as we of old brasil or guianahs gold but no sight nor apparition of it in David day nor in the day of Adam and Abraham patriarch or prophet how ever they gull the credulous world-deluded ignorant with their old religion old religion old law etc. as the gibeonite deceive with their old shoe and old bottle w w 9.12.13 there be not a Cananite a egyptian in all this goodly-god company that offer to any god save jehovah there be not a Papist in the whole congregation that offer any sacrifice to any angel or archangel except to Jacob angel 10 10 Genes. 48.16 the great angel of the covenant y y jud. 9 Michael that overcome the dragon Christ the head of angel there be not a prayer make to any depart real or imaginary saint there be not a dirge sing nor a mass to fetch any soul out of purgatory these know that sacrifice either for the dead or to the dead be vain that Abraham be ignorant of they and that z z Esai Israel have forget they 4. they eat and drink before the lord which heluob and glutton do not for they eat and drink as do a a luk. 17.28 Sodom and the old worldling b b vers. 27. as though beside their belly c c philip. 3.19 there be no god to eye they spy they and to revenge their abuse of themselves of the creature yea even of the creator himself four the qualification of these subject thus blessing worship sacrifice feast and that be joyfulness and gladness of heart the text give a emphasis to their joy even great gladness for the godly have their sunshine as well as cloud their calm as storm they be not always nay never but physical for their soul good diet with the bread of affliction beside they have their affection their passion they be not d d see the book of human passion translate out of french pag. 63.64 to pag. 76. prove learned against the stoic that passion be to the mind as the sinew to the body stoic or stock but sensible of the cause of joy and of sorrow how ever their affection be sanctify that they be not infectious their passion seldom turn such perturbation to the eclypse of reason and religion the forget of God and themselves of duty moral and theological as it be in the wicked but of all other affection the godly have most cause of gladness e e Psa. 32.11 on which see master tailor comment the saint most occasion to sing to triumph and to rejoice f f see a sermon of m. Rogers on philip. 4. v. 4 as here God people five and last the occasion of all this jubilee and gratulation be a double blessing to which janaus-like it look as both way 1. to the cordial free-heartednesse of the whole congregation head and foot prince and plebeian so liberal large love contribute to the build of the temple ten thousand eighteen thousand talent according to their state of gold silver brass iron together with abundance of pearl and precious stone vers. 7.8.9 2. to the renew and second more solemn invest and inauguration of Solomon to be prince and governor over Israel as Zadok to be priest to which worthy and wise prince as we this day to we their love be so link and heart unite and of who grace and excellency in himself and good to they by his government their hope and persuasion in which we also sympathize be so strong ground and fix these be the logical part with some gloss and paraphrastical clear of the text as we have go which I have do the rather thus laconical and succinct because perhaps like some father that have many child and be not able to give portion and dowry to all or not will to give all alike but as do g g gen. 25.5.6 Abraham and h h gen. 48.7.22 jacob to some more some less as reason or affection lead he so I in likelihood have many point to prosecute like legacy or promise pension to pay may give some of they little more portion of pain then set they thus on a clear ground how ever dissipate thus brief some cloud of doubt remove some stumble block of error in every part and passage we may proceed without peril scruple or disturbance now as to show a large country in a little map all these may brief be epitomise in these three part which we will orderly prosecute 1. David devotion 2. Israel gratulation 3. our english-irish application the first part chap. i. SECT. i. David devotion and first to begin with the elder and best the chief and choice subject of this gratulation king David the consideration and serious animadversion of his practice in many both substantial and circumstantial point speak to our understanding and affection in many please profitable and useful observation for our instruction edification imitation resolution and redargution in who still for method sake and memory sake ere we come to see how the peer and people insist in his step let we view David not to scoff his zeal as Micholl i i 2. sam. 6.20 but to imitate he as christian act his gratulatory part in these six peace or particular 1 pious 2 personal 3 public 4 primary 5 perswasory or prescribe 6 powerful or political first I say pious he praise God and religious for in the link and connex of grace a thankful heart be always the inseparable companion of a holy humble and sanctify heart jacob k k gen. 32.10 Moses l l josuah 1.2 joshua m m Iosh. 22.6 the son of nun the servant of the lord Samuel the faithful prophet o o 1 sam. 3.20 of the lord Simeon p p luk. 1.28 29 Zachary q q luk. 1 68 yea Elizabeth r r Luke 1.44 45 the virgin Mary and all that look for the redemption and consolation of Israel Peter Paul jude John the holy apostle and disciple of Christ jesus the two Anna the mother of Samuel and the prophetess yea Augustine Ambrose s s vers. 46.47 1. pet. 13. 1. cor. 15.57 rom. 7.25 1. tim. 1.17 2. tim. 1.3 jude vers. 25. 1. sam. 2. luk. 2.38 psal 148.11 12 13. John 12.13 and these famous light in the primitive church as we shall see more at large hereafter in particularise what we now epitomise with all the faithful that ever have be from the begin of the world man and woman old and young yea even child and babe out of who mouth God have ordain strength so soon as they be able in the power of reason and religion to pronounce hosanna glory to the high have be find thankful there be never heart full of grace but full also of gratitude as inseparable the one from the other as heat be from the fire or * light from the sun that David pen his psalm practical and experimental unite oft in one line the service of God and the praise of God in several psalm as psal 104. v. 1 psal. 134. v. 1.5 psal. 135. v. 1. with many more he call upon the servant of God to bless and praise the name of the lord he call upon the Israel of God the Zion of God psal. 149. v. 2.3 the saint of God ver. 5. those that dwell in the sanctuary of God psal. 150. v. 1. to be joyful in God to praise their king with timbrel and harp with sound of trumpet and psaltery as if they only and none but they that be the servant of the lord saint by calling will can do this task as he make it plain psal. 145. v. 10. thy saint say he shall bless thou they shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom and talk of thy power they only indeed can do it they will do it as unpossible for a heart possess a spirit replenish with grace not to bless God as for a man to have a live soul and not to breathe a sound heart and yet never to move nor work there be unless 1. in some sickish fit of weakness 2. 2. sam. 12.9 2. sam. 24.1 1. chron. 21.1 1. King 19.4 2. chron. 32.24 25. in some dead swoon of temptation as once in our David 3. some distemper of impatiency as once in Elias 4. some surge oppress overflow humour or tumour of spiritual pride some tympany of inflation as once in Ezechiah 5. some lethargy of security and forgetfulness psal. 106. v. 13 21. as in Israel prosperity 6. some brawniness or fatness as in * * deut. 32.15 jesurun I say unless in such case there be as swift as nimble as enargetical and operative a motion in a sanctify heart to move spiritual to the praise of God as for a natural and fleshy heart to move in any natural motion yea as the less grace the more ingratitude it be impossible that a Esau shall be true thankful for his birthright 25.33.3.4 math. 26.23.47 luk. 12.18.19 1. sam. 25.10.11 15. which he sell for broth a judas for such a master as he sell for silver a churl for his full barn and bag a Nabal and a Laban which be Nabal backward for any blessing of sheep and good they receive from God or for any kindness from a David gen. 31.7 or a jacob or any man the instrument of their god so long as they carry about they these their poison canker serpentine heart unpurged unpurify from the venom of original and actual sin as for a dead man to walk a dead trunk to talk or a leaden organ-pipe to make any music without blow they want the best bellows and breath of the spirit of God so on the contrary the more grace there be in any man the more his heart and tongue abound redound with the praise of God even as the great the fire the great heat and the full the fountain the free flow the stream this hold both in the saint in earth and heaven and in the angel who as they be most holy so they be most heavenly in sound and sing their continue hallaluiahs rev. 5.8 9 10 11 12. to the glory of the lamb upon the throne SECT. 2 Further prosecute david gratulation yea as it hold in the nature humane and angelical man and angel Mark 14.32 35 so it hold in Christ himself the head of the angel who in the day of his flesh as he have the spirit without measure so as spark from his heavenly fire ascend upward as he do pray continual he do rejoice evermore and in all thing give thanks 1. thess 5.16 17 18. Luke 10.17 18 19 21. as for the propagation of the gospel the subjugation of Satan the faith of his elect one yea as a shame to unthankful christian who as hog and swine trample the best blessing under their foot John 17.24 25. John 6.13 luke 9.16 Luke 22.17 2. cor. 11.24 1. king 19.14 iohn 2.17 2. sam. 17.10 and 16.10 job 1. ult. 5.11 num. 12.3 2. sam. 14.7 2. sam. 11. never elevate tongue nor eye nor heart to the donor and giver of their food and life he never use the creature either bread common or sacramental but first he bless they but to pretermit all other instance and to keep i close to this excellent precedent in my text of a gracious and grateful heart we shall see this holy prophet David for zeal another Elias for courage a cure lion for patience another job for meekness another Moses for wisdom as a angel of God for sincerity a man after god own heart not so main vain culpable in any thing except in the matter of Urias we shall see this David never want to his god in gratitude as God be never want unto he in pour out his benefit and blessing for as a pattern of a pious prince to all prince of a holy and heavenly heart look in the first and second book of Samuel in the book of king and of the chronicle of the king of Israel and you shall see a dignity require a duty that God never have a mercy in store for David of adornation or preservation temporal or spiritual general to the church and commonwealth of Israel or special to himself but he have a holy hymme a eucharistical song a spiritual psalm again as a gratulatory retaliation to the glory of the donor like these euchonnastick verse usual in our college chapel in the praise of the founder above all other place 2. sam. 7. ponder and peruse the second of Samuel and seven chapter where David resolve with himself to build a temple for the ark of God dwell within curtain ver. 1.2 and reveal this resolution to the prophet Nathan and receive a and a approbation again from Nathan vers. 3. but they both reckon without their host God contradict the execution of this resolution in the subject because David have be a man of war but yet not in the matter appoint that to be perform by Solomon his peaceable son which be project by his martial father yet the lord accept in David as in all his child the * will for the work the affection * * gen. 22.15 16. Luke 21.3 2. cor. 8.12 for the action as he do in Abraham sacrifice of Isaac the poor widow mite the alm of the poor corinthian as well as the rich achians the goat hair and badger skin of the mean as well as the gold and purple of the mighty to the build of the material as spiritual temple he send David a comfortable message by Nathan in such a gracious acceptance what mercy both temporal and spiritual the lord will accumulate both upon David and Solomon vers. 12 13 14 15 16. that David surprise in a ecstasy of joy and gladness and ravish in spirit not able longer nor further to conceal his hide flame he resolve set himself before the lord and offer there with his heart soul and spirit and tongue and all as he profess in some * * psal 111. v. 1. 136 ver. 1. 148. vers. 1. psal. 103. v. 1. gen. 8. v. 21. John 12 v. 3. psalm such a eucharistical and gratulatory sacrifice as like Noah offering smell as a sweet perfume or savour of rest or as that box of alabaster break by grateful Mary Magdalen on Christ head in the nostril of the almighty for as you may see vers. 18.19.20 to the end of the chapter as one say of the epistle of cyprian * every word be emphatical and show a wondrous ardent and inflame affection but especial peruse all the psalm of David so denominate of he because he pen the great and better part of * they though some be pen by Moses n n prafat Lorini asaph and other and you shall see beside those that be doctrinal precatory deprecatory prophetical penitential as they be distinguish by the learned * * Musculum and Bellarm. Comment. in David more than half of they be eucharistical or psalm of gratulation now for this mercy positive in good receive or privative in evil prevent or remove yea throughout the whole book of psalm the whole syntagma or body of it almost in every psalm in the beginning middle or end of it David thankful heart run all along as the blood within the vein the marrow within the bone and the water within the cranny of the earth ponder and peruse with David heart and spirit for thy own edification and consolation in the serious soliloquy of thy soul psalm 9.18.23.31.33.34.40.57.66.81.89.95.96.103.104.105.106.107.108 113.116.118.135.144.145 146.147.148.149 150 together with many more which I purposely pretermitt and thou shall find by comfortable experience the verity of that which I have observe 3 still urge David thankfulness yea indeed the whole life of David be nothing else but a practical comment of that which be prescribe by o o James 5.13 saint james and which shall be practise of every christian namely be any one afflict let he pray be any man merry let he sing psalm for be David afflict in his outward man by p p 1. sam. 24. v. 11.14 Saul pursue as the hawk the partridge by q q 2. sam. 15.30 Absalon rebel r r vers. 31. Achitophel complot or move or grieve in his spirit by s s 2 sam. 6.20 Michols mock t t 2. sam. 16.7.8 Semeis rail v v 1. king 2.5 Joab murder w w 2 sam. 3.33 abners death 10 10 2. sam. 1.23 jonathans untimely fall his y y 2. sam. 13.21 daughter deflower z z vers. 14. Ammon work and wage incest and a a vers. 29.30 death or by the like cross be he in spirit perplex b b ps 38.5.6.7.8 roar as a lion by his anxiety first for his filthy pollution c c psal 51.3 second bloody murder d d vers. 14. three presumptuous pride in number his people e e 2. Sam 24 10. fourthly his rash vow against f f 1. sam. 25.22 Nabal five his partiality and injustice towards Miphishbosheth g g 2. sam. 16.4 side with sycophantize ziba h h 2. sam. 19 29. six dissemble madness in a heathenish Court i i 1 sam. 21.13 seventhly and for like transgression slip frailty and infirmity to which Satan temptation his own corruption and sin condition subject he in these exigent upon these cause and in these affliction in the outward and inward man he pour out his soul to the lord as appear in his penitential k k 6. psal. 38. psal 51.1 in psalm Poenitentiales psalm in humble hearty faithful fervent penitent prayer he supplicate entreat plead for pardon as a guilty self-accusing felon before his strict judge he take that course which l l exod. 14.15 exod. 17.11 Numb. 16.22 Moses Aaron jacob n n 1 sa. 1.13.14 Anna o o 2. Chro. 1^ 11 asa p p 2. King 19.15.16 Ezekiah q q da. 6.10 and chap. 2.16 17. Daniel r r Esth 4 16. Esther s s Nehem 2.4 Nehemiah t t 2. cor. 12.8.9 Paul yea u u Luk 22.41 42 Christ himself take with all his w w vers. 46. saint namely to call upon God in the time and day of his trouble in the depth of his misery he have recourse to the throne of grace and of 10 10 ps 5.1 ps 7.2 and 17.1 22.2 28.1 31.7 mercy as he y y psal. 32.5 profess and prescribe to z z vers. 6. other on the contrary as a excellent pattern of right imitation virtuous emulation to all great man to all good man do the lord loose his bond a a ps 116. v. 16. free he from his trouble take he out of the net free he from the snare of these fowler the gin and trap of these bloody hunter which pursue his soul envious bloodthirsty b b 1. sam. 24. 1. same 26. v. 21. 1. sam. 23.27 Saul matchavillian c c 2. sam. 17.14 Achitophel dogged d d 1 sa 22.9.10 Doegg the faction of the son of e e 2 sam. 16.10 and 19.22 Zerviah the treachery of the f f 1. sam. 26. five 1 ziphite and c do the lord rid he of his enemy domestic and foreign bring under the g g 2 sam. 5. v. 20 and 25. philistine cast out the h h ibid. v. 6.7.8 jebusite subdue the nation bring he back to jerusalem after he i i 1. sam. 19.13.14.15 be exile by his own unnatural bowel that fair foul viperous Absalon yea do the lord every way hedge and environ he in with his mercy advance he from the dust bring he from the sheephook to the k k 2. sam. 12.8 sceptre set a crown of pure gold upon his head let he see his desire upon l l psal. 54.7 his enemy sweep away their plot as spider m m ps. 58.6.7.8 web confound they that come about he like bee and hornet do he make his sword ever victorious against the philistine ammonite * * 2. sam. 8. and cap. 10 amalekite and c do he recover Ziglah with his wife and o o 1. sam. 30.17 18. child do he bless he with the rare of jewel so faithful a friend as p p 1. same 20.42 jonathan but especial do he ponder the mercy of God of adornation or preservation to his church his Zion his people Israel over who he be prince do the ark return safe from the q q 2. sam. 6. philistine be there a stone direct to the forehead of blaspemous r r 1. sam. 17.49 Goliab the terror of s s v. 24. Israel as Tamburlaine once to the Turk and Tawbut to the french do he see the temple likely to go forward by the large contribution of the peer and t t 1. 29.8.9 people do he see the willingness of his subject to go up to the house of the lord do he see with his own eye and as in my text his son Solomon on who be all the eye and hope of all Israel six the second time u u he be invest once before 1. king 38.39 more solemn and public by the unite heart vote and desire of all invest into his own legal regal royal throne oh in the experience of these and all other his mercy general and special how be he vocal cordial real thankful with his heart tongue mind soul spirit affection blessing laud praise magnify extol glorify the great and glorious name of jehovah his god acknowledge he his w w psal. 18 1. rock his refuge his Asylum his sanctuary his king his god his guide his leader his 10 10 psal 23.1 and shepeheard his sure salvation lead he to the pure pasture spread his table crown he with mercy protect he in all peril cause his lot to fall in a fair ground give he a goodly heritage he attribute nothing like the proud presumptuous foolish profane man of our age who sacrifice to their own net either to his own sword and spear or to the valour of his own man the thousand of his Israel the prowess of his y y the eznite Eleazar the Ahobite Shammah the Hararite Abishat Benaiah Asahell and other of David worthy 2. same 23 equalize Hector Achilles Hercules Theseus Caesar Pompey etc or any among the heathen worthy the policy of his counsellor much less to that heathenish idol z fortune the chimaera of ignorance and the addle egg of a a so crush in fitter by s. August in his book by vives his commentator and Lactantius in his institution folly nor to chance and good luck those serpent breed in the brain of unthankful man whereby God glory be sting and wound but as tutor we as the river which come from the sea return to the sea from whence they flow and as the beam which come from the sun reflect back again from the earth up towards the sun as the cloud which be extract in their vapour from the earth be dissolve fall again upon the earth so all the mercy which David receive he do thankful reflect they back again to the honour and glory of the giver the lord himself the Maecenas of the church the great b b ezek. 36.25.26 jer. 31.33 zach 12.10 patron of all the adwouson of his gift of grace unto the son of grace oh vade and whosover thou be high or low that have receive thy talent c c math. 25. from thy master from thy maker go and do thou the like that David do bless that God who bless thou thou so shall be bless by the happy usury as David be bless God I say as you shall do not as too many graceless godless man do blaspheme he as you shall not chap. 2 David praise God personal second as discharge my next bill David bless God as pious so personal in his own person though a king he be not ashamed to do his homage and fealty and service to the king of king even as some other petty king as once in d d see stow chronicle epitomise pa. 44. England and in Persia to e e Esth ch. 1. v. 1 Assuerus in Babylon f f dan. 4.22 to Nabuchadnezzar in Greece to Alexander have yield their tributary subjection to great king as at this day to the great Turk and the great mogul so David as once that saint g g make by a man as one of their own note Christopher in the legendary fable will serve the great he will here in the earth as the angel and saint in heaven h h revel 4.10 throw down his crown and his sceptre before the lamb he will fall down and worship before the lord footstool i i psal. 95 6. though he have a heart like k k 2. sam. 17.10 a lion yet he will bow like a reed melt like wax weep like a whip child bleat and cry out like a forsake lamb when for some sin to be correct or physical prevent he be under god diet with the bread of affliction though he be as a lion rampant when he be in the midst of he and God enemy yet he be couchant when he be before the Lord so again though he be a wondrous wise man a oracle as his son Solomon a miracle of wisdom as a angel of God to discern case and cause as the woman of l l 2. sam. 14 17 tekoah tell he yet at the return of the ark of God from the philistine he be so overjoy that forget himself or rapt beyond himself in zealous gratitude to God wrap in a linen ephod as a child before a pipe or as a morris dancer as Micholl think he dance before it withal his might but it be not in a vain profane promiscuous dance as among we such as the worst of the m m jul. libr. 4. Onomast c. 13. c. 14. Atheneun lib. 1. c. 8. li. 14. c. 12 and libr. 4. c. 24. Syntaxeon li. 12. c. 19 p. 207 heathen use from whence we borrow it and the best have n n Chrys. hom. ult. in col. ho. 2. in Gen. hom. 49. in Math Herod amb. l. 3. virgin aug. petil. c. 6. and in psal. 32 inter nostrate Petrus martyr in viret Instit. in praecep 7. Taffin of amendment of life li. 2. c. 18. cicer murena 25. Seneca Plat. Plutarch reprove but it be before the lord as he tell that ill egg of a worse o o mali maumm ovun and crow that mock daughter of a persecute father who have elect he and reject Saul and all his house thus punctual thus personal be David in his service his sacrifice David be neither so proud nor so profane as all the moral man of our time that can will not serve God themselves but if at all by a deputy who even at their full table sometime at their rich and riotous naball-like feast as I have see and observe both in England and Ireland either gracelesse pretermit grace or say rather than pray of grace as they say use abuse the creature without ever sanctify they more by p p tit. 1.15 prayer then the ox do his hay the horse his provender or the swine his draff or ackorn sit down and rise up as q q gen. 25.34 Esau do when he eat his deere-bought broth for which his sell birthright be the shot without ever blessing God like a carnal careless wretch as he be or if this duty for form and fashion sake be perform it be put to a schoolboy a young son a little girl as the mouth of the table to speak to God for they to intercede as their deputy though the parent can be content sometime to the rob of levy and r r mal. 3.8 God in Levie to play the parson part and to take tithe yet their child forsooth must play the vicar to say grace and give thanks not that I absolute condemn it as unlawful for child to be by degree train to this task when by catechise in the ground of religion they come to exceed parrot by understand what they say or that I deny but that at their own repast and meal they be to be teach to give thanks even as to pray when they rise and lie down as Abel from s s 4.4 Adam sem and japhet from t t gen. 8.20 Noah Isaac from u u 22.7.8 Abraham be teach how to sacrifice Timothy teach from his mother and w w 2 tim. 1.5 and 3. verse 15. grandmother as be Constantine 10 10 Constantini of his mother Helen or I deny not but that they at the same time the same table may give thanks when their parent or tutor precede and begin first then I they may well follow as the little cockboat swimes in the same stream after the great ship and the little tantling bell that ring sometime after the great bow-bel in some church or cathedral but for the father to take all the burden from his own shoulder and to lay it on the child as to take the saddle from a strong stallion and set it on a young colt to make his child his attorney for he in God service as though he be ashamed to do what David our saviour y y Luke 9.16 Christ the z z ch. 1 sect 1. apostle do in their own person be not only a breach of the a a deut. 8. v. 10. commandment that the great shall bless the b b hebr. 7. v. 7. lesser as Melchisedech do c c gen. 14.19 Abraham and jacob his d d gen. 49. son but show a dead or a profane heart and a main a vain contempt of God so for another duty family-prayer sing of psalm praise of God practise by the e e 2 sam. 6.20 saint enjoin as the observation of some penal statute by the denuntion of a great and grievous f f jer. 10. v. 25. curse a anathema as terrible as the thunder or thunderbolt which hang over that house and family where God be not invocate even as the naked sword of Dyonisius do hang over the head of that flatter Damocles yea as the cloud of fire and brimstone over Sodom and Gomorrah as sure to fall one time or other unless prevent by practical repentance as that fly book of g g 5. v. 1.2.3 vengeance shall fall and have fall as history and experience relate upon the h h he that read the theatre of God judgment in 40. m perk. of the government of the tongue in fine m. Knewstubs his abuse of engl. m. fox in diverse passage and his abridgement of the end of blaspemous persecutor Minerius joh. Eccius Laton Bomel card. cres fol. 380. 382. 383 lonicer in his example in 3. praecep the history of our time in 4. p. 319 320. 321. 322. 323. shall see god heavy hand on blasphemer person and place where God be blaspheme even as sure as the chamber call jerusalem fall on the head of that nicromanticall Sylvester and as dagons house have now twice fall on the head of idolatrous philistine I say even this duty how many either whole unho pretermit it or post it off to their servant apprentice journeyman deputy attorney they must pray for they the inferior must be the mouth of the superior the man must be the tongue of his master by read or pray or as they call it say a few prayer morning and evening direct against that apostolical canon Hebr. 7. vers. 7. thus make a historon of all religion other again be so proud or so profane that want the spirit of i i zach. 12.10 rom. 8. v. 26. prayer the heart or art to pray they only desire other to pray for they some good man or preacher as Pharaoh entreat Moses and k k exod. 8.8 etc. 8 2d Aaron Simon Magus request l l act. 8.24 Peter to pray for they but for themselves they have joint unlike the m m elephant rege^ cerona porrigun test plin. l. 8. c. 1 Arist. lib. 9 c. 46. albert. l. 8. tract. 5. c. 2. Aelian hist. l. 13. c. 22. auten psal 14. v. 4. a ovidean or virgilean fiction or Pythagorean dream as master Perkins draw purgatory pedigree in his problem elephant that can bow heart like gaddes of steel that can bend tongue and speak not as idol the mute or dumb devil be in they as in some unpreach minister they pray not for themselves they will not they can other again more foolish and preposterous trust all to the prayer dirge and suffrage of other when they be depart to sing and bring they out of their european purgatory indeed real hell as though they hope a physician physic shall revive they after death these be as preposterous in their prayer as those that think to satisfy for all their usury and extortion by alm and elymosinarie work after their death by their executor I will not be mistake I know its lawful to desire the prayer of other as Paul do of all the n n col. 4.3 1. thes 5.25 and 2. thess 3.1 church as Ezeckiah do from o o 2. king 19.2 Esaiah as Esther desire the prayer of p p Est. 4.10 Mardocheus and the jew Daniel of his three q q dan. 2.17.18 companion and so Luther calvin Grineus the martyr Ridley Latimer Bradley entreat the mutual prayer of their friend in their zealous letter I know also its lawful laudable for noble man to have their chaplain for preach pray in their family their nathan their levite may be employ yet so as high and low great and small every that will be save must with David personal worship God as the scripture injone duty particular and r r act. 2.22 heb. 3.12 and 4. 1. Esa. 55.1 psal 2.10 11. and 148.10 11 12. personal chap. 3 David praise God public three let it not pass our animadversion that David do not only praise his god religious pious personal but also public before all the congregation of Israel he be not ashamed to serve that god before all Israel that in the sight of Israel and of the sun have so serve his turn and need save and preserve he in his exigent and danger by so many and several mean improve his power his justice his peculiar and special providence so oft for David deliverance and his enemy destruction or at least distraction see god so marvellous so miraculous fight for David as oft before in the day of Moses and Deborah he fight for Israel against a a exod. 17.11 Amaleck moab and b b judg. 5.20 jabin for Constantine Theodosius athanasius and Chrysostome against the pagan and c c magd. and Osiand epitome arrian for England in the year d 88 for Rochel as once for jerusalem in the day of Ezekiah when strict besiege for Grineus against the plot of Faber e Stapulensis for Luther against that roar Leo that bark f Eccius and all the malignant fry of the romish synagogue now as David preservation be public so proportionable be his praise and benediction as God honour David so mutual and reciprocal in the sight and eye of all Israel David honour God again so do Moses the servant of the g g deut. 32. deut. 33. lord joshuah the son of nun advance to be leader of h h Iosh. 24.1 Israel Samuel i i 1. sam. 3.20 call to be the lord chief k k 1. sam. 12. prophet joseph l l gen 41.41.42 honour in the court of Egypt Mordocheus in the m m ester 6.11 persian Daniel in the babylonian n n dan. 2.47 48. court Nehemiah prefer to be the o o Nehem. 13. prince ezra to be the chief scribe p p ezra 11. and 12. in Israel jacob advance from a poor shepherd to be a mighty man q q gen. 32.9 in mean othniel judah jephte and other religious judge in Israel asa josiah jehosaphat Ezekiah and other religious king in Israel to omit Constantine so praise by r r in Constantini Eusebius Theodosius by s s in theodosij Ambrose Alphonsus of Arragon by Panormitan t the canonist with all other religious king kesars tetrarch monarch prince peer legifer ruler governor record and renown by the unerring pen of the holy ghost in scripture by civil or ecclesiastical historian in former or latter time as they have receive their crown dignity diadem rodd of magistracy rule and superiority from u u rom. 13.1 tit. 3.1 God by who king w w prov. 8.5 reign and the poor be fetch from the dust to sit with 10 10 psal 113.7 8 prince so by their speech tongue action wholesome law establish and execute their plant of religion their supplant of idolatry and idolater their discountenance of sin and sinner their grace of the son of grace the upright in the land as outward demonstration of their inward inflame thankful affection they have be ever studious to improve what honour dignity glory authority they have receive from God even before the whole world to honour glorify dignify and extol that great and glorious God with it again this have be their mark aim desire and endeavour to magnify the grace to propagate the glory of that god from who free mercy without their demerit they have receive their life their honour their talent their place their grace a glass wherein all ruler may see their own face in which as the best may have occasion to rejoice if they find their action and affection to answer these recite as face answer face so many athisticall persecute popish profane carnal careless sleepy secure magistrate of the former and in these present evil time may in the consciousness of their guilt see their spot hang down their head be ashamed as the huge y y elephantis plin lib. 8. ca. 1. Arist. lib. 2 ca. 1. and lib. 3. cap. 9 elephant that be sad when he reflect upon the hideous vastness of his own bulk in the clear water chief such as even public fight against z z act 5 39 act 7.51 God as once the nimrodian a a gen. 11.3 giant oppose and persecute the gospel and all gospeler as they call they by their law and edict suppress religion and the religious deface mangle mingle poison with their own dregs and drug of superstitious traditionary vanity toy blasphemy if not quit abolish the pure and sincere service and worship of God so wound God in his glory his saint his servant his minister member even with his own weapon these sword and rodd of authority * * Livium and Fanestellam which he have put into their hand in the number and rank of these be ahab and jesabel that persecute b b 1 King 19.2 Elias imprison c c 1. kin. 22.26 Michay feed and maintain as too many popish prince their whip baalite and fat abby-lubber since at their own table the prophet of d d 1. kin. 18.19 Baal as also the son of that cause Israel to e e 1. King 14.9 sin Solomon that by permission if not approbation so long as he be in his adulterous and idolatrous slumber as too uxorious in please his wife build temple and altar for the god of the f f 1. King 11.5 6 7 8. sidonian ammonite and moabite with other idolatrous king of judah and jerusalem and such as these omit Nero Commodus Decius Severus traian etc. and other bloody butcher of million of g g see the act and monument of the church epitomise fol. 3 4 5 6 7. martyr as pagan that know not God be Valens constans constantinus and other arrian h h hist. tripart. and euseb and Socr. emperor oppose by their sword the deity as arrius Aerius Eumonius Nestorius Paulus and other blasphemous k k August and Epiphan. heretic some the divinity some the humanity some the will some the two nature some the person some the office of our lord and saviour jesus Christ and not to wade further than our own time and time of our forefather that french Henry the second slay by tilt in midst of jollity with that apostate of Navarre who from a seem religious Protestant turn as another julian by the persuasion of the duke of Guise and the cardinal of Lorraine his brother a profess l l see the french chronicle of hen. 2. also the act of the church abridge fol. 385. Papist that duke Maine and the guizian faction that bind themselves by a sacramental oath to ruinate and root out the protestant who disgraceful they style lutheran and Hugenotes that duke who by cruelty and treachery so rage as a evening Wolf in the low country by his bloody massacre and Farnestius that vow to make his horse swim up to the belly in the blood of the m lutheran that John miner n n precedent of the council of aygue that so hearty and desire execute that o o act of the church abridge fol. 203. decree write like dracoes law with blood which go out from the french king by the procurement of the bishop of Aix and other blood suck horseleech against those of Cabriers and Merindoll as the decree of Asuerus against the jew in Persia by the mean of Haman that curse p p Est. 3.9 Amalekite whereupon the poor merindolian their wife and child be as poor sheep slaughter pell mell hunt into the wood as wild beast tear and devour by mastiff fire out of some cave into which they creep like the fire out of fox with such barbarous butchery as have not be hear of among turk and pagan as also their succeeder exceeder in bloodthirstiness Gardner bloody Bonner Weston story Hopton Morgan Tonstall steward who use abuse not only Peter key of strict discipline but as once * * this julius throw Peter sword into Tiber and take Peter sword for the war julius a pope of they and * * this julian cause the young polonian king to break his faith with the Turk by which he perish Knoll^ hist. of turk julian a cardinal even Peter pretetend usurp sword to smite unlawful not for Christ but against Christ kick against the * * act. 9.6 prick persecute and prosecute he with fire and faggot in his member malicious as once the pharisee not ignorant as once q q 1 tim. 1.13 Paul for five year together in that bloody reign of queen Mary effuse in that short space more protestant blood as be plain by computation then there have be for religion effuse unless for treason popish blood these threescore year in our Albion I say these and all such as these which may infinite be enumerate as bird of that black base and bloody feather eagle crow vulture harpy flock from Rome to be drink and drink again with the blood of the r r rev. 17.6 saint as drink before with the cup of the whore s s rev. 14.8 fornication I say do such as these give any demonstration that they be ever possess with David heart David spirit affection resolution to advance public before man the glory of that god who have advance they by the best retaliation to stir up God glory who have set up they to honour God by their grace who have honour they by their great and eminent place nay very if persecute of Christ in the church his body be the praise and laud of Christ their head if as do once persecute t t act 22.3 and gal. 1 13.14 and act 26.11 Paul their predecessor in blind bloody zeal the cause of the saint to u u act 26.11 blaspheme as much as they can by their exquisite tragical torture if this be in the sight of the sun and of all Israel with David to bless God than I shall unweave what I have weave recant and recall these apostulatorie taxation and if these thing be not plain and undeniable they may hold they as we hold their popish bull excommunication and execration even * * see the book in octoavo call Brut. bruta as mere squib and paper bullet yea they may account these imputation as I hold their mass trental dirge purgatory limboes but chief their satanical accusation of our doctrine and doctor 10 10 see their rail in G^ffords calvin Turcism in kellisons survey in upon jude their hellish slander in Coccius Bolsterus write the life of Luther chief their calumny lay down in our wallet tetra and answer in d. white his way to the true church in fine and by his apologize brother since his lament death al. o in fine libr. Luther melancton martyr and other our famous english and belgic light mere toy trick chimaera fiction and fable SECT. 2 David profession animate and direct professor and profession but that which I further urge be this that David public and purposely praise God I say profess that I may from David practice and precedent honour this word and term of profession which be almost wear out of request banish like zeal and conscience to who it profess friendship and affinity well nigh out of the country as be once Themistocles and some well-deserving roman patriot as it be by ostracism or at least entertain and welcome of most as water into a ship or rain in harvest I be sure strange and stern entertain examine like some outlandish disguise man whether it be the king friend or no. other hoot at it as at a owl or a arabian monster other fly from it as some rove orator from their theme and text as though the very plague be in it or on it stand aloof from it as job friend from a a job 2.13 job as though it be so distress and persecute they may get much prejudice by their acquaintance with it well what strange conceit and imagination soever we have of this profession the term of a professor be to every moralist and profaner among we distasteful as be the term of a galilean to apostate julian of a christian or Cruciferian to the pagan of a orthodox to the arrian of a Protestant hold a Lutheran a hugenote a heretic to a profess Papist of a disciplinarean brownist or Anabaptist to a conformitant of a calvinist to a ridge b b such as be Hunnius Huberus Eccardus in and other such hot spur who more rail upon and revile the calvinist as they term they than they do the very papist or the turk psal 1.9 Lutheran yet nevertheless David be a professor herein my text he profess and proclaim by his tongue and act his word and practice the service and worship of the true God he herald and trumpet out the praise of jehovah in the eye and ear of all Israel the like profession he make elsewhere chief in the 116. psal v. 16. oh lord say he true I be thy servant I be thy servant with a ingemination and resolution not to flinch from that he have say but to stand to it to the very death with a grateful acknowledgement of some honourable favour he have receive from the best master thou have loose my bond free i as a bird from the snare of these bloody hunter which by their plot and stratagem think and seek to entrap i yea what be all the psalm pen and publish to be sing by asaph and the chief musician before the thousand of Israel in the great congregation but loud proclamation to the church to the whole world to present and after time of that near and dear necessitude union and relation betwixt his god and he he receive the influence of mercy from God he return tribute of praise again unto God chief in the 119. psalm which of all the rest for matter manner method quantity quality be as the eagle or phoenix among c c the commentator exceed extol that psal both for the matter David love to the word and manner there be in it as many part as letter in the Hebrew alphabet every part be a octonary consist of eight verse begin with a Hebrew letter bird as the sun among star or lily among flower in every line verse staff in a wondrous elegancy and emphatical expression of himself he profess and protest his love to the word to the law to the precept the judgement the statute the testimony the commandment of his Lord which as in his judgement he prize and in his affection he love above thousand of gold and d d ps 119.127 and 72. silver they be to he as they ought to be to we sweet then the honey and the honey e e vers. 103. comb so he resolve to stick and stand to they as the martyr do in the primitive and our modern time notwithstanding all the might and malignity of his persecute f f vers. 95.85.16.23 enemy yea and he will not only meditate of they g g vers. 12 15. private for his own edification and consolation in the soliloquy of his own h h vers. 14.24.47.54 soul as the chief balm and oil to all his i i vers 143.162.165 affection but even before king and prince and the great potentate of the earth he will what we will not listen not or dare not do before the mean vulgar and plebeians speak of they and not be k k vers. 46. ashamed oh David as bullet of one mettle cast in the same mould be possess with the same spirit as the type that be in Christ his antitype who witness a good profession before l l 1. tim. 6.13 Pontius Pilate David beam come from that sun his spark from that fire his stream from that fountain which be in his saviour he be as bold as a lion to testify his love fealty and obedience to the lion of the tribe of q q Revel. 5.5 juda with r r rom. 1.1 and phil. 1.1 Paul s s 2. pet. 1.1 Peter t t jude vers. 1. jude u u Luke 2.29 see my sermon extant on this text call simeons die song Simeon he profess his master he show as it be his livery coat and cognizance and pin the very badge of his profession upon his sleeve to be view of God man and angel he care not who view and review he in cute and in cord in the inward and outward man turn his very inside outward which no hypocrite nor formalist can endure and herein David regular practice blame and shame our irregularity there need no other mean to make a foul woman blush that be conceit of her beauty but to set a fair woman indeed beside she nor to make a self-conceited fool keep silence as Roscius do in Cato company but to bring a solid wise man into the presence I need not redargue our time David profession confute and confound our claudication in which we be so heteroclite and deficient for matter and manner in what David both profess and practise as first David here be not indifferent what religion he be of whether he serve the god of the ammonite moabite and philistine or the true jehovab whether Baal Astaroth Dagon or the true God whether he praise the god of gold and of silver as the pagan do even shrine crucifix and image as our papist do or the live God but he resolve with w w Iosh. 24.15 see m. Bernard on this text call joshuahs resolution prefix before his catechism joshua that he and his house he and his heart will serve the Lord he know there be but one 10 way one truth one life one God as but one sun one soul in man and one phoenix in the world second David keep not his religion to himself in hugger mugger as a miser keep his gold from the sight and light of the sun as the great indian y y melan. li 3. c. 4. Solinus ^ isidor li. 12. c. 2. Vicent lib. 20. c. 134. albert. lib. 26. at li. 3. c. 4. ant and griffin be say to keep some mine that none can discover they as many key-cold carnalist or lukewarm neutral Laediceans and Machiavillian politician among we that lurk so close as serpent under the green grass that none can discover they whether they be ephramite or gileadite israelite or canaanite hot or cold protestant papist or neuter hang as feather in the air as poise in equal scale fit to be cast with the least sway of the time up or down to be fish or flesh to cast their old slough and bill with the z z aug. ser. 4. and Chrys. hom. 34. in math. tom. 2. serpent and the a a mistice August in ps. 66 and in psal. 102. eagle to peerenize and pinibletonize turn their old coat and note their tone and tune with the time mere hermophradite change ready their unresolved religion as the b b Aelian lib. 13. c. 12. hare or hyena change their sex mere vertumnian weathercocke three David here be not ashamed to praise God public he hang not down his head nor blush at the business as many shamefaced shame grace man of our generation that be not any whit ashamed of the service of sin and Satan their oath be hear as loud as thunder they breath or bellow out curse and execration in their anger as dragon spit fire in their drunkenness they be not ashamed to be see toy as ape or mad as tiger spew as dog or as crow that have eat reel in the street as horse that have the stagger calf that have the sturdy yea perhaps wallow as swine in the channel etc. yet these man be ashamed to serve God ashamed to be hear or overhear in which predicament too be all our civil moral honest man till grace come with power to their heart sing a psalm or read a chapter in their family but above all to weep at a sermon which the penitent jew do so plentiful so public in the day of the c c judge 2.4.5.6.7 judge of d d ezra 10. v. 1. ezra and of e e 1. sam. 7. v. 4.5.6.7 Samuel but fourthly David though he be once mock before by his sawlite f f 2. sam. 6.20 wife Michael for his profession yet he desist not here for that he be neither daunt nor discourage though then distaste nay he be and be more more zealous according to the nature of true grace to rise like the palmtree the more g g arist. 7. problem and Plutarch in and Aulus Gellius noct. lib. 3. c. 6. suppress to burn and break out like the fire the more press h down to spread like the camomile the more spurn and tread as it be with the apostle and disciple the more Pharisaical beat and threat they be restrain the more by the spirit they be constrain to preach i i act. 5. v. 17.18.19.20.21 28.29 Christ as in the primitive time the more that suffer by the pagan and arrian the more like spiritual soldier stand in their rank and double their file as their fellow k fall and though they be mock and brand with the nicke-name of cruciferians in derision of Christ for hell and irreligion have not then hatch the name of puritan and precisian yet though they meet not in the night as one well l l Lorinus Comment. in cap. 2. note to avoid scandal and construction they desist not either for bloody or unbloudie persecution by tongue or sword to meet in their m m Tertull in euseb libr. 3 cap. 26 orosius libr. 7. cap. 12. Nicephorus lib. 3. cap. 17. cyprian dom. cyrillus 6. libr. 10. epist 97. temple early in the morning even in Tertullian time and before oh where be this zeal courage profession in the milksop and mole-harted christian of our time who have by the ministry and the spirit sometime some good spark kindle in they the least disgraceful word from a father a mother a brother a husband a Naball a neighbour a quench all again as snail they pluck in their head again in the least storm of opposition they look back again with Lot o o Luke 17.32 wife and return again to the fleshpot of p p exod. 16.3 Egypt to open profess profaneness in the least let and disturbance they have to the heavenly Canaan oh that we can be heat with David fire to profess and practice every man in his place as David do oh even this outward profession if in sincerity else its Pharisaical and double q iniquity what glory will it bring to r r math. 5.16 God what a adamant to draw on the weak what a real confutation of the s s 1. pet. 3.16 wicked what a gag and muzzle to the mouth of t t 1. pet. 2.15 blasphemer what a argument of the fire of u u psal 116.10 and ro. 10. v. 10. faith and inward grace if it will show itself thus in outward heat and smoke whereas the want of this heat outward show our heart but dead coal yea join profession and practice together leave and fruit word and work else our estate be no better than cain saul Herod judas w w see doctor wakemans sermon call the true professor or demas his we shall inward rejoice in life here with 10 10 rom. 8. Paul have more peace in death with y y 2. King 20.3.4 Ezekiah and z z Nehem. 13. Nehemiah and in judgement a a mark 8.38 Christ will not be ashamed of we no more than we here of he chap. 4 SECT. i. David praise God primary fourthly David do not only thus pious personal public bless God but primary he begin himself to lead this heavenly dance and by example and his authority to unite these two in one provokingly and procuratory he excite and stir up other even the whole congregation to do the like to move after his religious motion he as a pattern still to all zealous magistrate faithful and fruitful minister like unto the a a Gallus Rensner Alciatum in emblem canicularib col. 6. pag. 210. cock by the clap of his own wing first awaken and stir up b b gallo vid. plin. l. 10. c. 22. and albert. libr. 23. g. himself from sleep say awake lute and c c psal 108. v. 2 harp awake my heart awake my tongue my glory I myself will awake right early etc. and then by his crow his Heraulding trumpet and proclaim the mercy of God he awaken d d psal 32.5.6 other as here and in several psalm come you child say he harken you unto e e psal 66.16 i and I will tell you what God have do for my soul as Moses tell jethro his father in-law what God have do for f f exod. 18.8 Israel in their eduction out of Egypt and preservation in the red Sea thus ought we that be public person to have heat in ourselves and to inflame other to have salt in our g g math. 5.13 self and to season other to have light in our h h vers. 14. ibid. self and to lighten other to be as candle on the table as beacon on a hill to illuminate the country where we preach chief the place parish house in which we live to shine to k k vers. 15. other as star in a dark night as lot in l l gen. 19.7 2. pet. 2. v. 17 Sodom as m m dan 4.8.9 daniel among babylonian as job among the n n job. 1.8 Vzzites as Abraham among the o o gen 23.6 hevite as isaac among the p p gen. 26.28 philistine we must be as the northern pole to the seaman as the card and compass to the mariner yea as the steare-man in ship as sentinel among a army to give aim to the rest and to have a eye over all and every one of those that depend on our charge as a father over every child old and young a captain over every soldier train and untrayn a schoolmaster over every scholar apt or unapt as a good q q Agamemnine Suetonius Tiberio part. 2. pag. 711. 721 732. in shepherd over every sheep weak and strong ram and lamb not willing that any shall perish by the craft of the fox or their own default in eat rot-grasse yea we shall be as the love r r in math. 23. v. 37. arist. and Berchorium libr. 7 pag. 202. hen who have a natural storge to every chick both fight for it against the hawk and Kyte and clock it with the whole brood after she thus David stir up all and every man of the congregation from the head and the elder to the young and mean to bless God as he oft s s psal 134.135.147.149.150 chief 148. excite in the psalm he will have high and low youngman and maid old-man and babe all and every one to perform this task yea the creature animate inanimate sensitive vegetative celestial terrestrial to join together with all the servant of the lord to praise the name of the Lord and sure as the roman scipio the carthaginian Hannibal the greek Meltiades and of latter time the turkish pasha and other valiant general by their oration and exquisite speech of encouragement oft view and ride through their army themselves as do that resolute french Henry the t t see the book of his war in 4. extant in english 4. of famous memory Charles the u u Paulus jovius and Thuanus de Carolo 5. Henry the 7. of w w see his exact history in folio pen by our english Tully sir Frances Bacon England with other vigilant and valiant worthy put vigour and courage in their army vivacity and spirit in the feeble soldier and according to the policy of war by sound of trumpet and shawm beat of drum and other martial instrument seek to enkindle spark of valour even in those that be as natural coward as that Clineas or Dametas in the Arcadia so a good and godly superior by his expostulation as once 10 10 Nehem. 13. five 17.18.25.26 Nehemiah y y ezra 8.17 Nehem. 8.4.5 ezra and that z z judge 2. ver. 3.4.5 angel that be send from Gilgall to the jew 2. by his exhortation as a a Iosh. 24. joshua and b b 2. Chro. 20. v. 15. jehosaphat to the israelite 3. by his provocation and excite as David here and oft elsewhere aught to stir up all and every one of their depend inferior to fight the lord battle not to yield cowardly to sin and Sathan to march valiant like c c 2. King 9.20 jehu to use dexterous all the part of that spiritual complete furniture prescribe by the d d eph. 6.13 apostle to go forth against that triple Cerberus the allure flesh deceive world deceitful devil daily arm as David against e e 1. sam. 17. v. 45. Goliath Abraham against the five f f gen. 14. v. 14.19 king joshuah against g g exod. 17. v. 9.10.11 amalek with the power of the might of God almighty and when we have get the least victory to be unfeigned thankful as be the israelite in the day of h h ibid. v. 15.16 and exod. 15. Moses i i judg. c. 5. Deborah k k 1. sam. 11.15 Isralitis Saul l l 2. sam. 6.5 David m judeth to the lord of host the god of battle testify this thankfulness in our word work life and love as David congregation testify they in my text by blessing God and by offer sacrifice and oblation 2 application of the premise to magistrate minister and master of family in which duty as we prescribe and persuade they so we must precede in practice king in their court magistrate in city and corporation bishop in their diocese minister in their church cure and charge master mistress and dame in their house and family must go before as the great male n n in Cyprun and in plin. li 8. nat. hist. c. 32 solix 21. and Aelian li. 5. c 56 deer before the herd as the bell-wether before the flock as the courageous captain before the soldier give the first onset the superior in every place in every case which concern God glory the spiritual corporeal public politic or private good of any must say to the govern as Abimelecke in another o o judge 9 vers. 49. sense as you see i do so do you and that apostle of the gentile be you follower of i as I of Christ we in the church you in the commonwealth and family in every duty moral and theological must set a good pattern write a good copy draw a fair sample to those that be under we even in our own particular for their writing imitate and follow yea we must also lend they pen pluck like the quill of turkey and porcupin even out of our own wing we must by our right line rule their book and by our right life lead their hand yea their heart we must lend they also work silk extract like the silkworm p p verse indigo Albertus libr. animal 26. and Vicent lib. 20. cap. 138. pracipue Vincent c. 67. hom. 8. Ambrose pie and theologice Laemeron l. 5. cap. 23. clew out of the bowel of our practice we must excite exhort they by our word but chief allure or they by our work draw they though iron-hearted by the q q 6 and us^ plin. lib. 6. hist. c. 22. Vicent li 8. cap. 2 and August li. 21. c. 4 etc. adamant of our practice to every duty command in the word commend by the practice of the saint as David here by speak as a orator plead but by his example as a prevail with the whole congregation to bless the Lord we in the ministry as we be call light as Christ call his r r math. 5.14 disciple and as the jew call John the s s Arden etc. bosquier in marcum c. 6. five 20. in his echo johannis baptist and the primitive t time athanasius so we must by our life and learning like those light that be hang up in some tradesman shop which enlighten those without door aswell as the journeyman and apprentice within both have light within ourselves and shine to other we must be like those light or lantern hang out in some havens in a dark night to give the mariner aim every passenger over the u u Christiani viateres Pontan tom 3 Bibl. gord. in postil dom. 4. post Epiph. Hugo de Sancto vict. in part. 1. p. 297. and 359. sea of this world how to steer from the rock of sin and to come safe to the port of grace you in the magistracy and you master petty king to rule priest to pray and to sacrifice praise prophet to instruct in your w w Rev 1.6 vid. August lib. 20 cap. 10. family as divinity right term 10 10 id. August Serm. 152. and in quest. vet. test q. 112. Bachmad in qu. Theol. Centur. 1. quast. 57 pag. 136.137 Christian you you I say must be like the first move wheel in a clock right order after who motion the rest of the depend wheel move right or wrong true or false regular or irregular which particular to press a little further since we have bring the point to this perfection already aim at a perfect period I offer to our consideration only these special 1 what honour or dishonour we may do unto God 2 what good or what evil to the soul of the people 3 what credit or discredit we reap with man 4 what peace or terror we bring to our own soul 5 what blessing or what judgement from God upon ourselves or seed as we be right tune with the hand of grace or untune by corruption right affect with David heart and spirit to do as David do or infect or leaven so with the world and her way that David duty be post off and slight or pretermit as though they nothing concern we in these secure and sinful time to give you these as several pill or as simple compound together perhaps as physical I will have this serious ponder first that the common people move after our motion that be the head insist in our step and write after our copy whether right or wrong in which it stand we in hand to look to ourselves and to our station which way we draw or incline because as general we lead million after we either to victory as David lead his man in the recovery of * * 1. sam. 30.17 18 19 20. Ziglah and Abraham his house-trayned-servant-souldier in the rescue of y y gen. 14.16 lot or else as * * 2. sam. 20.1 sheba z z 2. Sam 18.7 absolom our once northern a a earl of Westmoreland and Northumberland rebel 12. elizah earl b b 1 Maria jan. 25. Wyatt Drury c c conspiracy in Norfolk 12. eliz. hall Hollinshed speed in chron. and in Jack straw Tyler and other traitor we lead the common people as delude follower even to their slaughter as beast to be butcher we be like great d d exempl and pillar or great stone in great column if we fall we bring down and ruinate a great number of pebble stone common stone cobble stone with all the filling of lime and mortar we be as great cedar of Libanon or the great oak of e e Zach. 11.2 bashan if we be blow down oh how many low shrub what a piteous deal of rubbish and under wood do we shiver and crush and spoil all to fitter we be as guide to a army through desert and thicket if we go wrong how many disperse and scatter how many fall by thirst and famine or the jaw of wild beast if Cato compare the common people of Rome to f sheep who if once one break out and leap wrong all the rest follow as in the kentish rebellion after Jack straw and Tyler in the southern once after h h who call himself the poor man protector slay in bow church in London vid. in chron. William longbeard in the scythian after Tamburlaine i i see the book extant in 4 to of the life of Tamburlaine in the sarazen after Mahomet when they once turn thief and pirate as in the bloody rustic belgic war k k see the book call but chief of the issue and effect of these rustic read the second volume of Simon Maiolus dieb canicular Tom 3. coll. 3. pag. 467 etc. also read the history of John of leiden in the modern history extant in fol translate out of Du verdier Sansovino and other after these phantastic John of Leyden and Knapperdolim I say if one common man have power sometime over a multitude to draw together such riotous rout as we have read one scythian shepherd to many shepherd one l l of the original and imposture of Mahomet beside Bodin Voleteran and Arab n^b in Aleor read chief the preface before the Alcoran in the italian edition with our painful purchas in his pilgrimage lib. 3. c. 3. pag. 199 120. impostor by the help of one monk so many million one Simon Magus to poison with his doctrine act. 8.9 one Demetrius to disturb by his faction even great and populous city act. 9.24 what power then be there in public person to lead virtuous to heaven or vicious to hell so many soul as some pope have do beside when I consider how much good have be do sometime by one private man or woman as one Philip joh. 1.45 46. by one exhortation win Nathanael to Christ acquaintance one Andrew call his brother Peter to Christ joh. 1.40 41. one samaritan woman bring the whole city to hear and see Christ and so to believe in Christ joh 4.28 29. one little silly damosel 2. kin. 5.3 persuade her master naaman to seek elisha the prophet of Israel whereby he be heal both of his corporeal and spiritual leprosy one ethiopian eunuch if history be m m act. Apost. c. 8. pag. 390. in folio true preach and plant the gospel in Ethiopia one Paul the apostle of the n n gal. 2.7 gentile plant the gospel among the roman the corinthian the thessalonian the ephesian the philippian the macedonian achaian galathian the collossian and diverse other o o 2. cor. 10.16 region even from jerusalem to illyricum one John sound most of those asian church of Smyrna Pergamus Thiatyra etc which be now by their heresy in doctrine corruption in life pride ambition and emulation of their p p hun Osiand in epitome Magdeb. teacher give up to the bodily and spiritual power of Mahumetisme one Peter convert and build up so many thousand jew disperse in Asia Pontus Bithynia q q 1. pet. 1.1 2. ^ Cappadocia etc. one Thomas plant the gospel in India one Matthew in Egypt and in Ethiopia one mark in Mentz and Trevers one joseph of Arimathea or as r r Niceph. hist. lib. 2. cap. 4. Nicephorus think one Simon Zelotes in this our great Britain even before the time of Lucius or Elutherius as other s s of the life death grace and several place where the apostle evangelist and disciple disperse the gospel read various author recite by tit. cruse Evangelio etc. chief in Lorinus in his comment on the act ca. 1. pag. 40. 42 43 44. 45 46 47. elsewhere one man the mean of the conversion of whole household as Peter convert the household of Cornelius act. 10.44 Paul the household of the philippick jailor act. 16.31 32 33 etc. of t t 1. cor. 1.14 16. crispus Stephanas and the rest yea one man by one sermon the mean of the conversion of some thousand act 2.37 38 etc. yea when I consider how much good one man endeavour have do in the church in suppress and supplant idolatry and idolater heresy and heretic either by the authority of the sword as do Constantine Theodosius and other christian emperor in their time or by the power of the word as athanasius do the arrian Augustine the u u call the hammer of heretic manichee and pelagian epiphanius the nestorian eutichian and the rest of that hellish rabble as james the apostle be say to confute philetus and * 10 10 dorithee ^itati^ Tyaneus beside what Peter by his apostolical authority do against Simon Magus and Paul against Elymas the sorcerer record by ecclesiastical y y Simon as a second learu^ attempt to fly at the prayer of s Peter fall and break his neck as be testify by irenaeus lib. 1. cap. by Tertull. in c. 13 Cyrill Cateches. 6. by euseb hist. lib. 12. cap. 13. yea by sueton. in Nerome cap. 12. by Lucian in philopseud by Dio and other heathen writer yea when I ponder how one man even a private man as that waldo or z z Waldensib Aeneas sylu. hist. bok Toletan a dom. 355. Waldus of lion by read the scripture come to the knowledge of the truth catechise and instruct not only his own family but even his neighbour as Chrysostome counsel according to the best use of his talent by this mean propagate the gospel through the whole realm of France oh when I serious think that one man may be the organ and instrument of another though even a lay man as s. james tell we oh think I again what good may be plant what sin root out and supplant how much might God be glorify the church increase Satan synagogue ruinate be many lay man but chief many ecclesiastical man learned man great man public man sanctify with this spread grace and season with the salt of the sanctuary 3 the blessing or bane of inferior the piety or profaneness of the superior moreover when I consider how much mischief sometime one man have bring to the church one a a and fox Nestorius be the firebrand of the world one arrius so spread his damnable Arrianisme that in s. Jerome time the whole world groan that she be a b arrian one Nicholas so far spread his impure c c Clement alexand. 3. c. 15. euseb lib. 3. c. 23. theodor. fab. and a Neceph l. 3. c. 15. Nicolaitae and Iren. lib 1. cap. 27. Epiph har 15. Tertull. prescrip. cap. 46. Hilar. can. 25. in Matth Hieron epist 1. 48. Nicholaitinisme Eutiches his eutichisme Manes his manichisme Mahomet his Mahumetisme as in latter time that smooth and strict arminius his * * condemn by the late synod at Dort by our aim and the learned french moulins confute arminianism etc. when I consider how one Boniface by take to himself that proud title of universal bishop as they say the voice from heaven d affirm bring such poison to the whole world one Dominicke one Francis superstitious friar so multiply their disorderly order that from their spawn be proceed so many croak e e Revel. 16.13 frog so many swarm of grasshopper and locust as eat up all the green leaf the fat and best thing in every land whereon they come how from one Ignatius Layola be issue so many ignify fiery Jesuit jebulites f f see the face and form of these Jesuit in the Jesuit catechism and in watson quodlibet make by the faction of the oppose priest judasite world-disturbing g daviss as they brag of their number and h power their name like the devil in the possess be call legion I say ponder these thing I have just think that as some good and gracious man such as former I have specify be eminent in gift and grace have be the organ and instrument of the glory of God of the true information of man judgement the reformation of their mind and manner by their pain endeavour authority preach roll doctrine discipline chief their life and example draw the plebeian and common people to virtuous and holy live withdraw they from vice so on the contrary as it be in jerusalem of which the lord so oft complain from the ruler and the i i Esai 5.13 10.3 jer. 5. v. 5. 17 20.21 etc and 26.10.11 Ezech. 33. etc. prophet the corrupt magistracy the carnal careless and unprofitable ministry in most place in Christendom as arm Greek out of the trojan k k virg. aneid horse as do disease out of l l lucianus in Pandora box have proceed all those vice and enormity which as gan-grines and leprosy spread and as plague sore infect the whole body of the common people the vice or vanity of the ruler tend as the folly of that m m Ou^d Metamorph Phaeton to the combustion and confusion of the whole universe vice like malignant planet move in the sphere of superiority have ever a pestilent and poison influence upon these inferior of the observe apish imitate laiety the commonalty as the body after the head the shadow after the body ever move after their ruler the body n political as in other thing so in this sympathize with the body natural of which that we may still give further demonstration let we observe and peruse all history reflect upon time past and present historical experimental and we shall see that in these three state of the church commonwealth Oeconomie the govern have be ever and still be cypher or figure in God arithmetic seal or blank in God account well affect to peace and religion infect with faction division or idolatrous superstition according to the temper qualification and disposition of their governor civil or ecclesiastical they receive as soft wax usual their impression from these of good or of evil season sweet or sour ever as o cask from their liquor yea it be betwixt the head of the church and the commonwealth and family and those body of people that have depend on they as betwixt the head of a great fish and the body of the * * exempl lib. 4. nat. and and Petrus berch Moralis lib. 9 c. 1 fish for if the fish-head smell well and sweet the bulk and body of the fish smell well too be it never so great if the head stink and be corrupt the body do so too the application be obvious to every one with half a eye demonstration seal it for first look upon the state of judea in the day of p p 1. King 18. v. 21.30 ahab q q 1. king 14. five 9.16 the son of r r 2. Chro. 33.6 7 8.9 Manasses s s 2. King 1.16 Ahaziah t t 2. King 3.1 jehoram u u 2. King 13 five 1 2 jehoahaz w w 2 king 15 vers. 8.9 10 11 12 zachariah and other idolatrous prince and you shall see God altar break down the true prophet banish or butcher altar to false god erect the worship of the true God deface why so in their ruler be idolater baalite the fish head stink again look upon the state of the church in the day of 10 10 2. king 14 vers: 3 joash y y 2 Chro: 30.31 32 chapter Ezekiah z z 2 king 22 1 2 josias a a 1 king 22 five 43 jehosaphat b b 1. king 15 vers: 3 asa and this our David you shall see the grove of Baal burn his altar demolish his worship and worshipper abolish his priest sacrifice religion plant God altar repair the temple purge the people conform priest and levite for preach and teach institute the Passeover solemn keep and observe why so the magistrate be religious the scripture give this testimony of they how ever with many mixture of infirmity in which the good God be merciful to all his child they do that which be right in the sight of the Lord c c 2 Chron: 30. vers: 18 19 such force you see have example that d the whole world follow the example of king which hold even among the very heathen for in the time of Alexander and of julius Cesar as the macedonian so the roman be warrior in the time of peaceable Augustus as in the day of Solomon man be studious of e peace janus his gate be set open in the time of Commodus Heliogabalus Nero and other such luxurious goat Rome be as f a stew in the day of Marcus Aurelius the philosopher all be studious of philosophy as in the ecclesiastical history in the day of religious Constantine the court yea the camp be as a church a centre of zealous divine in the day of julian that accurse careless apostate his court be full of apostolical turn-coate so be the common people blow as g g and mobile weathercocke even as the wind come from their governor east west north south change as that h Proteus i i Arist. li. 9 c. 37. Solin c. 32. Olaus lib. 21. c. 21. Polipus or k k Camelione plin. hist. li. 28. c. 8. and Aelian li. 2. hist. c. 14. chameleon even as the l l hyena Aelian li. 1. c. 26 hyena be say to change sex according to their ruler colour be ever as our common people proverb be and as their practice have be and ever will be on that religion which the king be of as we say of dog ever take the better side if David bless God as in my text the people bless God too if m m call Christ in derision a galilean the carpenter son with the like vituperation Theodoretum julian the apostate Rabshakah n n 2. King 19 five 10.11 and Senacharib blaspheme God and prefer the god of the gentile before he so will the people blaspheme he too if Pharaoh o o exod. 8. v. 15 harden his heart and distaste Moses and Aaron his courtier and the egyptian will harden their heart too as the nether millstone pursue after Israel till they sink like a stone in the midst of the Sea if the popish prince persecute those of the reform religion the prelate be more malignant as the p p luk. 22. v. 2. luk. 23.13.18 c. 24. v. 20. pharisee be more spiteful against Christ than q q luk. 23 v. 20 22. Pilate himself and if prince and prelate prove dragon to devour the poor saint the plebeian will be at least serpent to sting the bishop of Aix with the precedent Cassane the archbishop of Arles with other have no soon apprehend a book-binder for sell of bible which they vilify and undervalue below some lascivious picture which themselves have buy but present the common r r act and monument of the church abridge by m. Mason folio 203. people cry like the howl of so many wolf like the bark of so many dog a hugenote a hugenote a Lutheran a heretic to the fire with he to the fire with he let he fry a faggot a invincible achillean argument conclude in which Christ himself and his apostle can never have answer have these man have they in their power such impression the ring-leading example of the superior work in the common people even more monstruous and hideous than those that be wrought by the force of imagination of which we have so many wonder relate by s s lodou. vives in his 3. book of the soul speak of fear from imagination Lodovicus vives t t libr. 6. des. Richerthes de la France cap. 8. pasquier u u in Comment. c. 17 Winrich the french w w in his first book of his essay in folio chapter 21. in lib. 3. Montaigne and 10 10 vives in Comment. in c. 25. lib. 12. Ambros part. in praedict. Comment. Winrichi cap. 17. other both physician and historian come from the generality to particular look into our country town and village in that reference and relation betwixt landlord and tenant and you shall easy see they draw both in one yoke to good or evil religion or superstition piety or profaneness we need no other witness of this but our eye and ear in this our Ireland in which we that be protestant be plant as some handful among such swarm of papist as israelite among egyptian as Jacob seed in the lightsome y y gen. 47.27 goshen of the gospel it be popish z z exod. 10. v. 23. darkness round about we horrid and fearful more than egyptian or a a in Bosphoro plin. lib. 6. c. 6. c. 11. c. 13. velinter Baias and Cumas in and academ 8. Solinum c. 21. ibid. sex Oiaus li. 1. c. 1. Mela Plinio and Lactantio lib. 4. at cimmerian see we not ourselves in respect of they like the army of Israel in the time of ahab as some little flock of kid here and there scatter they be as those syrian that fill the b b 1. King 20.27 country have there not be mean use both by word and sword to purge their popish leaven to bring they as once the gentile out of the power of c c act. 26.18 darkness to anoint they with d d rev. 3.18 eyesalve to pluck they as brand out of the e e jud v. 23. fire to bring they to the knowledge of the f f 2. tim. 2.25 truth but all in vain have we not lose our oil and labour be they not settle worse than moab in their popish dregs be they not like Babel g g see m. crashawe zealous and learned sermon on that text and subject incurable do they not yet as if they be possess with deaf devil stop their ear with the deaf h h in psal adder and will not hear the voice of the charmer charm he never so wise do they not fly our church and congregation worse than the serpent fly the ash or as Moses flee from his i i exod. 4.3 rod as though there be some serpentine venom in our doctrine or discipline can they be bring into our spiritual k k luk. 14. v. 23. feast by any reasonable compulsion be not their heart like clay in summer grow hard and hard even as l l exod. 10.20 Phraohs as their eye more m m Matth 13.13 14. Esa. 9 blind their will more perverse their mind more n n rom. 11.8 malignant now from whence grow all this obstinacy obduracy refractory perverseness beside the common plea which as a pair of shipman hose or as a nose of wax fit they at all assay that they must do and will do for wickedness be ever o o jer. 18.12 psalm 12.4 wilful as their predecessor father and forefather have do popery like frenzy madness and some lethargical sickness run in a blood and be like their intaled land hereditary as though some northern blew-cap borderer shall argue my father be a take man and never die in straw but go up hemp-street and down gallow gate and therefore i will go that way too or as though some young dalilah shall argue my mother be a good catholical universal woman and do good service in the stew both to the secular and clergy of Rome and therefore i will do so too beside I say this pestilent and peevish plea the chief p p and velas Aelian li. 1. cap. 27. Plin li. 32. c. 1. albert. lib. 24. Arist. hist. lib. 2. cap. 14. and Basil in Exemero hom. 7 plin. in praioria remora that hold they from obedience to God and Caesar the chief block in their way to religion the chief film and scum which be over the eye of the multitude even that the promiscuous common people be the practice of their superior the example of their landlord for so they vent and reveal themselves in plain term and so we see indeed in their practice that if their landlord go to the church the tenant will go too even as Baruch say to Deborah if thou will go to the battle I will go too if thou will stay I will stay q q judge 4.8 too as ruth say to r r ruth 1.16 naomi as Ittai s s 2. sam. 5.21 say to David sure whithersoever they go these will go too they cleave like burr to their landlord so that bring they to church that be head and the commonalty follow as the shadow the body the practice of the great one as the needle draw on the thread as the all or bristle draw on the shoemaker tach draw on the mean one yea for aught that I see our common irish depend on their landlord for their body and estate as on their priest for their soul for religion or superstition heaven or hell more than on the word on Moses the prophet the apostle more than on Caesar or on God himself either of t t the seminary priest and their landlord whole sway the body of our irish papist these be as u u Magus Apollonius tyanaeus justin q. 24. and Philastrat in quay and philon. lib. Proclum lib magia Cardanus Solomon Alverius Magn. Magus Demoniacus Elymas act 138. jannes and jambre Exod 7.11 Faustus Cornelius Agrippa and diverse friar Simon Magus to the samaritan as Diana to the ephesian act 19.28 as the Penates or household-god to the gentile even all in all their delphic * * Delphico Creso Cambysi Agamemnoni Amilcari Epimanondae Eschilo Philippo Dionysio Valerium lib. 1. cap. 8. pauson in Arcadicis lib 3. diodorum lib. 20. lib. 15. in Alexandro part. 2. coll. 2. pag 96 97. 98 99 etc. oracle speak tripod their Pythagoras their 10 their on who sleeve they pin their soul to carry they whither they please either to heaven as the angel do y y Luke 16.12 Lazarus or to hell as Mephistopheles do their doctor Faustus or to purgatory as they think the paganish traian z z help out by the prayer and suffrage of Gregory the great go so that get the landlord to the church as he that pull but one link of a chain draw all the rest we shall draw our otherwise obstinate irish to our church as if chain and link by the ear but without removal of their priest which poison they and by mulct or what else move their landlord to conformity all our pain preach persuasion imposition upon the commonalty be but with the dolphin and salmon to swim against the stream to wash a a a jerem. 13.23 ethiopian to white a Blackmore to take out a leopard spot and by water to clean a piece of clay as Gardner say in his policy in another b b he mean La: Elizabeth shall rather have be cut off as he and bonnet labour the mean people martyr fox mart. case to strike off the branch and to leave the root according to the allusion of Anacharsis to seek to catch the little fly in the web of our law and to suffer the great one to break through SECT. 4 more special application to master of family leave they look into private family and we shall see like master usual like man like father like son like crow like egg yea of as in ahab and c c 1. King 19.1 and 21.8 jezabel ananias and d d act 5.1 2 3 4. Saphira like husband like wife either combine in evil as Simeon and levi e e gen. 49.5 in blood or as Zachary and Elizabeth f f luk. 1. v. 6. Aquila and g g act. 18. v. 2. Priscilla unite in good yea general such a governor such a family if Abraham believe his whole household at God commandment be h h gen. 17. v. 23 circumcise if he sacrifice Isaac of a child be acquaint with i i gen. 22.7 sacrifice and be able to discourse of it if Adam sacrifice Abel offer up too the best of his k k gen. 4.4 lamb if the jew spread the high way with bough in the honour of l l joh. 12.13 Christ the child will cry hosanna to the high if the father bless and praise God and sing psalm in the family as preceptor begin the choir the rest yea the least follow in their holy anthem even as the congregation here follow David their first mover who set the rest on work as the m m Philomena and mean etc. plin. lib. 10. cap. 29. and cap. 42. li. 7. c. 30. fol. 199. nightingale by her prick in her breast first awaken herself and then by her carrol set a work the marl the finch the linnet the lark and all the chorist of the wood and field where on the contrary where the governor or master usual make no bone of oath no not of the wound and blood of Christ which in their madness sometime they tear as dog do kydd or lamb you shall hear the servant yea the child as the croak of so many toad the hiss of so many snake cast out of their mouth squib and firebrand against the almighty the young cock learning as the old crow as the young nithingale be say to repeat and crowd such tune alone as they learn from their male so that you shall as easy discern by the tongue of child abroad how their parent be affect at home to religion to the word to the preacher the ministry yea whether protestant or papist as you shall discern fire in the house by the smoke of the chimney for why do those forty child deserve devour by two bear blaspheme the prophet n n 2. King 2.23.24 elisha with come up thou bald pate as some profane imp abase and abuse the minister of these day but that their irreligious parent have give they a preceptory practical lecture of imitation so for servant Abraham have a servant as faithful unto he as his own o o gen. 24. soul why so Abraham himself be faithful to God and train he and the rest in p p gen. 18. v. 18 religious as well as military discipline q q gen. 14. v. 14 the centurion have his soldier obedient unto r r math. 8.8.9 he it be no marvel for he himself be obedient to Christ even in the obedience of s s vers. 10. faith Cornelius have his soldier fear t t act 10.7 God who he send to joppa for Peter but the encomium of himself be first that he be a u u vers. 1.2 devoute and religious man so on the contrary be Pharaoh churlish against Moses and * * exod. 10.28 Aaron his courtier thrust they out of his presence be Absalon bloody heart against 10 10 2. Sam 13.22 Ammon his servant upon the least y y vers. 28.29 motion be bloody hand be that rich churl cruel against Lazarus give more to his hound and spannel then to the poor we shall see his servant so too there be more mercy in the medicinable tongue of the z z Luke 16.21 dog then in either master or man yea last do joshua serve the lord then all his household will serve the a a Iosh. 24.15 Lord do zacheus believe then salvation because justification and sanctification come to his whole b b luk. 19.9 house the convert jailor baptize then be his whole house c c act 16.31 32 33. baptize there be a church say to be in the house of Chrispus Stephanas d d philem v. 2. Philemon in respect of religious duty why so their master be religious whereas in some house there be no more show of religion then in the house of a Turk a pagan or a savage barbarian unless idle and vain jangle rybauldrie talk hellish contention theban e e invent at the siege of Thebes and condemn in their either superstitious abuse as lot or covetous abuse in get and gain both by cyprian and our Daneus in tractate write express against they as also by the civil and common law as appear in the digest lib. 11. tit. 5. lib. 1. and Cod. lib. 3. tit 43. and c epist 35. c 42.43 card and dice racket and bandy of blasphemous oath be religion why so there be no life in the head no heat in the heart no zeal no grace in the governor therefore the govern be either lukewarm f f rev. 3.15 16. laodicean or key-cold even altogether godless and graceless not that I deny but that a Abraham may have to his son a g g gen. 21.9 10. Ishmael a Isaac a h h gen. 26.34 Esau a jacob a incestuous i i gen 35.22 and 49.3 Reuben a bloody k k gen. 34.25 Simeon a No^ha l l gen. 9.22 cham nor that I be ignorant that a m m 2. King 5.26 elisha may have servant a lie Gehezai a n n philem v. 11 Philemon a runagate onesimus the best master the worst servant even Christ himself a o o John 6.71 judas or that the worst master may not sometime be p p gen. 29.20 bless in and by a q q gen. 30 27. good servant as Laban in jacob or that a Nabal may have such about he as be honest affect to r r 1. sam. 25.14 15. David and to such as fear God which instance prove thus much only that God be a free spirit and give his grace free to who he will as he s s rom 9.15.16 will neither tie to t t read my origin repentance extant in fine blood affinity consanguinity nature and that the work of grace can no more be hinder than the shine of the sun the motion of the heaven or the flow of the u sea in those that be his servant though they may perhaps by the hand and tongue-persecution of carnal master as too many religious servant and apprentice in our city town and corporation experimental and bleed feel be too too much oppugn oppose discourage cloud and eclipse it hold true in the general and in most particular for all this notwithstanding that in every state and condition some few rare except the governor and those under their charge either in good duty as David here and his subject or in mischief and wickedness as do Absalon and * * 2. sam. 15.12 Achitophel against David the elder and young 10 10 gen. 19.4 sodomite against just lot the priest and the y y jer. 18.8 and 20.1.2 and 28.1 and 37.15 38.4 people against jeremy the scribe pharisee and Synedrini of the jew against z z matth. 27.1.39.41 mark 15 11 13 Christ Abimelech and the man of a a judge 9.4 5 6 16 17.18 Sychem against the seed of gideon jezabel b b 1. King 18.20 and her idolatrous prophet against Elias c c 1. reg. 22.8 Abab and d d vers. 24. Zedekiah against Michay Ephraim and Manasses against judah the seminary and the Jesuit against the strict and great and sincere of the protestant Gardner Bonner with their officer official and bloody bailiff summoner sheriff and sergeant such as sheriff woodrooffe e e of the tragical end of both these as also of Geffrey Clarke dale Cox beard Browne Baulding bradway Foxford Pavy Long Honer Elerker capon sardine with many more persecuter see at large in Martyrol and in brief in the act epitomise fol. 378 379. and the bailiff of Crowland against the slaughter martyr in the time of queen Mary v. how the godly or ungodly minister lead many to heaven or to hell by his life and doctrine but of all the rest as we have show in the magistracy and private family this hold most authentic in the ministry that according to the prophet phrase like priest like a a jer. 2.8.26 people like pastor like parishioner seldom shall we see a flock thrive under a careless pastor who feed and clothes b b Ezech. 34.2 3 himself with their milk and wool leave they to the lion and Wolf however I know that God can work as by weak mean so in and by wicked mean feed Elias even by a c c 1. King 17.6 crow as not tie to any instrument worthy or unworthy bring water even out of d d exod. 17.6 rock good out of evil and cause a prophesy e e num. 23.18 19 and 24.1.2.3 Balaam even whether he will or no to bless a people yet nevertheless in all probability he that be ignorant blind and can see a dumb dog that can will not open his mouth as be full fat and crambd with steeple and quot a cloud without f f jude v. 12. rain seldom drop a dry nurse without milk a mute fish a tongueless ambassador a blind leader of the g g matth. 15.14 blind a dark lantern in a dark night add to ignorance or idleness a dissolute life sit in Moses chair but neither preach nor practise the doctrine of Moses or of the Messiah aim at the bag i i John 12.6 with judas seek silver not soul the fleece not the flock the place not the grace of a minister his own k k Ima Greg preeminence not the people profit a lazy life a large command which Luther tax in the popish prelate and more than he l Erasmus it be as probable I may say possible that such a guide as this shall work grace in a depend people thus graceless himself as to bring water out of a flint oil out of a stone light out of darkness to excite to praise God when our own heart be as hard as adamant as congeal as you without any spiritual life or motion to exhort other as David here this people to bless God and yet we in every alehouse and tavern to belch out most horrible blasphemy against God as some do I speak it to their m m phil. 3.18.19 shame to thunder out woe and anathema against the drunkenness of other n n Esa. 5.11 12. and 20.5 see m. Downan against drunkenness in be four treatise by which God be dishonour the creature profane god image * deface and yet ourselves to make the alehouse or tavern or tobaccho-shop our study the card our book the indian weed our ink the pipe our pen extract our sermon from the fume of the grape the froth of the tap the smoke of the quiffe this make we worse and more monster than ever Africa breed than o o in his cosmography Munster p p Mandevill in his travel Mandevill or q q Textor in finish by Zwinger and enlarge Textor ever write of to be even all voice like r r Heptaphon echo plin. lib. 36. cap. 15. echo all tongue stentor-like to cry and command no hand no heart to execute aught and sure when we say to our people as the s s matth. 8.9 centurion to his servant do this but do nothing ourselves when like church-bell or innkeeper sign we direct and call other in to feast with Christ as do his disciple at the marriage feast * * joh. 2.2 and yet hang out ourselves as mark and cross by the high way when we direct other how to journey towards Zion and yet stand still as the jew at the corpse of t t 2. sam. 20.12 Amasa and never march foot forward ourselves when we set true note to other yet sing jar note ourselves seem to steer from the rock of sin yet make daily shipwreck ourselves give caveat and caution against these sinn-poyson which we gulp down ourselves the people which look at the life which we lead more than at the doctrine which we teach our life be to they * ocular and real sermon our word but verbal think we speak but for our pension as lawyer for their fee but practice according to our heart persuasion see we to have Esau hand though they hear we to have Jacob u u gen. 27.12 voice as though we ourselves know another way to heaven then what we teach they like some vintner that keep a better cup of wine for his own tooth then that he draw out to his customer they be so far from be move with our doctrine which they see cross and contradict by our do that in their heart ever sometime with their tongue they bid we physician * * Luke 4.13 cure ourselves and then they will follow our prescript otherwise they will neither be phlebotomize by such quacksalver nor be diet by such empiric and indeed to look more curious into the point be it likely that we shall draw other good when ourselves be so bad be he probable to be a good steward to another that never know how to thrive himself can he bear other on his back as aeneas his father 10 10 virg. AEneid Anchises out of the trojan flame that like mephiboshe^h y y 2. sam. 9.3 or asa be lame or z z 1. King 15. gouty himself can he guide other among cole-pitt or lime-pitt that be blind himself can he in who affection there be death to any good and in who life dissolution kindle in other devotion can a dead coal kindle green wood can any light his candle at a stink candle snuff that have only like hell fire heat without a a see master greenwood torment tophet but chief b bilson of Christ descension into hell in folio allege the father and schoolman concern hell fire light stink to offend no light to delight can one drink please at a puddle can one bring that which be clean from that which be unclean can the poor people gather the b b math. 7.15 fig of nourish edification or the press grape of right application from the thorn and thistle of a unholy and vain conversation or not rather the grape of Sodom the gall of c c deut. 32.32 Gomorrah such unsavoury rot d d jer. 24.2 fig as will surfeit the soul and such sour grape as will set the tooth on edge therefore to conclude this point these premise consider let all we who God have fix in high orb move regular that we may have a sweet and gracious influence upon these inferior that our persuasion join with our practice may fall as the first and latter e e deut. 32.2 rain upon the tender herb yea as the dew of Hermon upon the fruitful valley oh we know that master work go best forward which say not only to his servant do you for so his trust and credulity way be abuse but do we such and such a business that set his own hand to the work the wall of jerusalem be like to be re-edify and their decay house rebuild by the remainder of the captivity when there be such a superintendent as f f Nehem. 7. vers. 1.2.3.4.5 Nehemiah and when the prince and peer and elder contribute so large and * * vers. 70 71. liberal as here in this chapter in David time the work be likely to go forward so when the great architect the main master builder in the church commonwealth and family set to their hand and heart to the build of God spiritual temple to the set forward of God plough to the plant of religion supplant of profaneness and superstition then be we likely to have many spiritual temple erect Dagon and Baal deject then may we hope to see as in the day of David and Solomon a flourish church and weal-public then may we hope for jovial and saturnal time a golden age not a age for gold halcyon day expect a happy harvest of peace mix with grace when we have such seeds-man when there be such light in the eye the whole body be like to be g g math. 6 2d enlighten yea this triple body economical political ecclesiastical enlighten inliv'n chief we in the ministry when our light shine before man this tend to the glory of the father h h math. 5.16 of light this show other the way out of the darkness of popery and profaneness oh our light of holy life and learning like the pillar of fire in the i i exod. 40.38 wilderness lead many out of the desert of Zin of sin to their celestial Canaan as a adjunct to the light of grace take light from the word of k light or that word l l John 1. v. 1. Christ who be the m m vers. 4. light as the moon from the n n a sole Melichius in lib. 2. ca. 9 arist. libr. 4. c. 10. sun as the star do the eastern o o Math 2 10 11. we lead many to Christ oh when such a man as Moses and Aaron go p p exod 13 18 19 before what Israelite will not follow after and come cheerful out of the egyptian bondage of sin and the power of the spiritual Pharaoh the devil to the constant resolve service of the true God in the wilderness of the world when the general be a lion it will put valour into the soldier though but heart and hare the name of a Scipio or Cesar do romanize and masculine the most effeminate spirit oh when such a angel or q q revel 2.1 and 3.1 Scarre be fix in a settle ministry of who the heart of God people can give such testimony as saint Luke do of r r act 11 24 barnabas Paul of s s tit. 1 4. Titus and t t 2. Tim 1 5 Timothy Augustine and Chrysostome of u u pauli hom Paul of w Augustine Basill of 10 Nazianzen Beza of y y in Calvini calvin melancthon of Luther the church of Geneva of Beza Virell Faius and farrel zunch of of Gualther and many church and commonwealth of that zealous Zanchy learned Peter martyr solid bullinger acute Bucer with other laureate z z as that deep whitaker learned raynolds zealous Perkins eloquent Humphrey quick fulke melifluous playfere holy greenham deere dent painful willet etc. english German and belgic light shine in illumination of knowledge and sanctification of life such a man such a phoenix such a messenger one of a a job. 33.23 a thousand shall declare unto man his righteousness bind up the break b b esay 61 five 1. heart speak a word in due season to he that be weary turn the heart of the father to the child as be say of John c c Luke 1 v 17. Baptist where such a one be his very fame as a ointment pour d d cant ch 1 2. out give a sweet perfume draw hearer to he as the adamant iron as the caecian wind the e e plin. lib. 2. ca. 43. and Aulus Gellius Arist. noct Attic. lib. 2. cap. 22. cloud yea as Orpheus his harp draw f f syntax mirab li 11. c. 18 pag. 206. tree and arious the g g plin. li. 9 c. 8. dolphin yea as the send and odour and beauty of the specious h h Aelian libr. 8. cap. 40. panther draw the admire beast to admiration imitation the majesty of virtue be such that even the vicious that can attain she yet admire she * * Cicero and Plato as the Greek do Helen and gaze on those virtuous one her favourite which be in eminent place as the owl and beetle upon the sun there need no other cummin-seed to bring the lord dove to the coat and window of God house yea to build in the sanctuary than God voice utter by a sanctify organ yea whereas a wicked life as the smoke and rat and mouse and stink drive bee from their hive drive man from our assembly and make they withdraw to their own i i heb. 10.39 perdition on the contrary there shall need no other law nor compulsion nor ecclesiastical discipline to bring to the mean whether popish or prodestant athisticall or papistical refusant or recusant if there be in all our ministry which in many place there be not mortification and sanctification oh if such a one as John the baptist which be a burn light preach even in the desert in the obscure corner of a country he shall not want hearer even the proud scribe the justitiary pharisees the sinful publican k k luk. 3.7.8.9 math. 3.5 and the very soldier though very seldom too zealous flock to he as the ant to the barn and the bee to flower and sure at last to conclude he that in the eminency of his place can with David heart and spirit exhort other to bless the lord and himself begin this spiritual song shall have the heart of a religious people to answer again as a echo as the congregation here do David they bless the Lord chap. v. David praise God as a prince political and other last as the discharge of my last bill David as we have hear do not only praise God personal public primary perswasory but to express myself in the most significant phrase I can excogitate political or princely for as he be God lieutenant and vicegerent here on earth as he have receive his crown his sceptre his diadem from * * as he acknowledge psal. 21 God so he know it do belong to his regal office and function to establish ratify confirm and propagate what do belong to the service and worship of God he know what we know and acknowledge as christian and as true protestant profess and protest with all the reform see the harmony of confession in 8 to church in France Bohemia Germany Saxony Scotland Geneva and the whole christian world that the king majesty be within his realm and dominion in all cause aswell ecclesiastical as civil and over all person aswell ecclesiasticke as laic next and immediate under Christ jesus supreme head and governor there be no contradiction of this point in David time except m m 2. sam. 20.21 and 2. King 12.16 sheba n n 2 sam. 15.13 Absalon and some such like traitor as will have make David devoyde of all rule and regency either in thing spiritual or temporal nor be there any question make of it in our time except by o sanders p p in his principle and in Stapleton q q in his libel and letter to diverse discontent spirit cardinal Allen libel r r in his Dolman parson the late Eudemon or cacodaemon becan and other modern s s chief the opposer of the oath of allegiance Jesuit and friar who more then in the former schoolman time beat their brain in hatch this addle-egge which produce have prove the most dangerous cokcatrice or kill t t Isid. li. 12. cap. 3. Aelian li. 2. c. 5. basilisk to the deprive of king of their crown and life namely that the power and authority of christian prince be subordinate to the pope in spiritual thing absolute as to Christ vicar his his substitute on earth the head yea the husband and bridegroom of the * * see all their blasphemous title they give their pope with their several author quote by Pelargus in his tit. pon. our d. sutcliffe pon. rom. m. Powel antich church and in temporal thing too u u Dist. bell. Pontif. rom. as they have relation towards God as their great Goliath distinguish and that king emperor and monarch be to receive their crown and diadem from the pope as the moon her light from the sun as innocent the three very innocent or rather nocent collect from a corrupt * * gen. 1.16 con^^r^^g the pope to the sun the emperor to the moon text which as his friar do with other text he wring as a man do blood from his nose or rather play with as a child with a rattle as though they make god sacred bible but a babble so that the manage of these crown the use and exercise of these sword be limit to the church and by the church as the sea that be keep within her bound dispose to the son of their antichristian synagogue which false they call their church as the harlot in salomon time plead for the 10 10 1. King 3.21.22 child that be none of she who must have their direction in the improvement of their authority yea and their correction too as have the french y y see Sledan in his chronicle as also chronicle finish by melancthon Henry the German a a his neck be tread upon in s. mark church in Venice by Alexander the six Frederick our english king b b he resign his crown to Randolph the pope legate dom. 12 13 see stow and speed chronicle John with hundred more from his holiness their spiritual father with who eye they must see with who hand they must act from who mouth as their oracle they must speak by who if they be not as schoolboy prompt yea as hop and vine in their whole regency prop and support their crown yea their head as the Turk with his pasha must be lop short by the neck and they waste and transport by Charon ferrie-boate to hell or purgatory or some such odd place God know whether to answer their disobedience before Aeacus Minos Radamanthus or some such odd fellow thus these papal princely cypher be mere some thing or nothing as they be join or disjoin to or fro their deify pope the true figure and form of Antichrist as he be * * by d. Downan b. of london-detry m. Powel the German Sonnius in their learned treatise prove they must do little in temporal thing in spiritual thing nothing without their light and aim from Peter pretend usurp successor to who they be in submission and subjection as a wife to her husband as a child to his father as a pupil to his tutor as a schoolboy foole-boy yea I say further as a servant or apprentice to his master or which be yet more servile as a ward to his guardian or a captive to his conqueror without who they must either sit still or rise and fall such a yoke of romish bondage by their own gross superstition with which they be both blind and bewitch have christian prince lay upon their own neck more intolerable than ever those egyptian moabitish midianitish cananitish caldean and babylonian yoke which for their sin or trial the lord successive lay on the neck of that untamed c c deut. 32.15 heyffer jesurun rebellious Israel David be wise than thus he be not as seduce Israel as a dove without a heart he send not to Rome for either leave or light though leave be light to manage what belong either to his civil or ecclesiastical jurisdiction as the council of Trent that can not proceed in any of their superstitious blasphemous conclusion without post and repo to fetch the holy ghost from d d see the book in folio call the council of Trent set out by the well deserve pain and peril too of m. Breut Rome as a bee in a box as the jest be who come at last and fright in the form of a black dog one of their chief e agent out of his wit or if David have inquire for a pope in his day unless he have find out the pagan * * annius Sacerdos virgil. or some high priest among the jew he may as well have seek for a man in the moon with a bush of thorn on his back or for a needle which have be needless in a bottle of hay for we can say as polycarpus say of Martion that the pope be the first beget son of the * devil nay as they speak of some toad or serpent that breed in the brain and f f plin. li. 10 hist. c. 66. isidor c. 4. Aelian li. 2. c. 53. marrow of dead man he be hatch since by the warmth of that cockatrice the devil in the poison and corrupt brain of man live or rather as it be say of gnat and infect that breed of blood dung and g g cardinal crescence write letter to the pope march 25 be affright by the devil in form of a black dog Sle^da^ 23. he die at Verona see G^uiar^ french history translate pag. 197. g g Aelian li. 9 ca. 16. and aug. morib manic c. 17. and retract 2. cap. 7. putrefaction blood be his first breed as since feed for from the blood of mauritius the emperor unjust effuse by that treacherous phocas some gnat of a sting conscience gnaw and vex the traitor as once h h gen. 4.13 Cain and most murderer he have in this perplexity reference to Boniface the bishop of Rome as i i math. 17.1.2 judas have to the pharisee after he betray Christ as to his spiritual physician and be superficial baulmde and his wound skin over by this quak-salv he in requital give he what the devil tempt Christ with and what he most gape after worldly k k math. 4.8.9 honour and glory even this glorious title of universal bishop of the whole world his diocese extend as far as the devil thus creep he first out of his shell in which he have be long enclose the mystery of iniquity be long a work by degree l l Morneun commence and sit in the chair of pestilence but in David time and in the time of the patriarch prophet apostle yea and the first six hundred year after call the primitive time as we m m bishop jewel his challenge in his apology for the church of England offer the trial a man may as soon have see a millstone fly in the air as either pope or point of popery as now it stand for all their vociferation and false lapwing cry of their old religion old law mother church and I know not what nay David here ask not leave either of gad or Nathan or Abiathar or Zadok though he be now God high priest for the institution of this solemnity and for the congregate of Israel to perform these gratulatory sacrifice and oblation in my Text. David know he be free of himself and stand on his own leg and that in all thing that he lawful command in God and for God which limit indeed both the power of prince and the obedience of subject n n August serm. 6. dom. and epist 666. and in psal 124. Basil 7. brev and 114. and 202. and 204. and in 11.9 ch. 92.93.94.95 Daniel and puers dan. 3.19 Ambrose Theodosio and christianus juliano theodor. l 3. cap. 22. active though not passive as the learned discuss and determine Nathan and Zadok be to be obedient and subordinate to he not he to they which have be a gross confusion and a historen theological rhetoric indeed David consult o o sam. 7.2.3 with Nathan about build the temple as Saul and p p 1 sam. 14.8 Samuel about sacrifice and indeed it be a excellent harmony and the most lydian consort to see a Moses and a q q exod. 4.14 and 5.1 aron a jehoash and a r r 2. King 12.2 jehoiada a David and a s s 1. King 2.32 Nathan a baruck and a t t judg. 4.8 and 5 1. Deborah a josias and a u u 2. reg 22.14 Huldah a Solomon * * 1. chron. 29 22 and a Zadok a Ezekiah and a 10 10 Esa. 7.21 esay a Nehemiah and a y y Nehem. 8 9 ezra a Ambrose and a Theodosius the word and the sword magistracy and ministry the prince and the prophet consult together as his majesty at this day as in the high court of parliament and occasion since with his lord spiritual aswell as temporal about even matter ecclesiastical as political about building or repair or purge or perfect god spiritual temple establish ratify rectify his true and sincere worship and if this liberty be not give to christian prince to consult with their clergy that be make of their privy council they shall be straight tie than the very heathenish romanist that usual advise with their augurist and flamen and the persian and chaldean that advise with their * and other pagan with their wise man and philosopher both in war and peace upon all occasion but David know his own strength how to stand on his own bottom in this business though Nathan have be which he be not of such a popish proud usurp jesuited spirit to have contradict this gratulatory festival as Zedekiah z z 1. King 22.24 in the day of Michay Hananni Pashur a a jer. 20.2 and other false prophet in the day of jeremy cross these best project and proceed which be for the welfare of Israel David know that a lawful king as he be call * * psal 82. God be only less than God and that every soul be to be subject to the high b b rom. 13.1 power and so consequent pope cardinal and all prelate if they have soul and that every christian magistrate as he be a keeper of both the table of the law so he must look that god plough go forward in duty religious towards God as Caesar in duty righteous betwixt man and man and therefore as Ezekiah will ordain and institute a c c 2. chr. 30.1 2 3. Passeover to the lord send and encourage the priest and levite to teach the thousand of d d vers. 22. Israel as e e 2. chr. 23.1 2. josiah and Nehemiah and f f neh. 8.4 5. ezra will cause the book of the law to be read expound and interpret in the ear of all Israel and so other religious king of judah and jerusalem sit at the helm of the church as well as of the commonwealth steer both aright so David here beside the manage of many worthy and memorable moral act for the good of God flock and heritage over who he be superintendent he also out of his discretion or rather devotion institute this solemnity in my text in which he exhort and excite the people to holy and religious gratulation for mercy temporal and spiritual oh as the practice be lawful and laudable against all antichristian contradiction as our english g g such as have write against becan Eudemon and the oppugner of the k. book and of the oath of allegiance worthy have convince it from scripture and all history in christian king that have settle religion root out heresy and heretic place and displace bishop and minister put zadok in the place of abiathar call ratify and approve general h h see d. sutcliffe Bedar and provincial counsel so I desire it may have what it deserve as the approbation prayer and praise of all christian subject so the zealous imitation of all christian prince that so with David heart do David work they may receive David wage double blessing from God from man in earth and in heaven second part Israel gratulation chap. i. from David spirit thus we have see David act his part pious public primary personal perswasory political and independant as a prince on which I reflect for memory sake now let we see brief and succinct how the congregation here act their part and that be obsequious ready universal for as they obey David motion for the matter blessing God so for the form and manner they obey willing speedy without demur contradict procrastinate even at first motion and for the extent universal all the congregation bless God as may be hope too cordial and without hypocrisy their practice in all and every of the point as tutor and teach we what to do in the like case so redargue and reprove what we do not first then eye and apply the first act as David set they a good copy they write after it they wade where he break the ice they dance after his pipe he be as the motor the first mover in these visible heaven they as depend planetary body move after his motion they receive spiritual spark from his fire they be enlighten heat by his example this be well when the people be true religious true zealous for the qualification and form of grace as be their prince or their pastor though they shall come short as the people do here in respect of David of their measure of grace for it be something to be in the second and three place in a run race k k as in the olympic game though one can attain the l l there be difference in the valour of jashobeam Eleazar Abishai Baniah and other of David worthy yet all valiant 1. chr. 11.10 12 15 22 etc. first it be something for the widow to offer her mite Luke 21.2 though she have no more for a proselyte jew to bring goat hair or camel hair m m exod. 25.9 or badger skin to the build of the temple though as want gold and silver and purple he can bring no better it be something to shoot near the mark and to aim the white though it be not hit it be accept though poor joseph poor Mary offer up but a pair of young o o Luke 2.24 pigeon or turtle-dove when their poverty will not afford kydd and lamb all be not strong man in Christ family some be p p heb. 5.12 babe all be not great graduate in Christ college some be tyroe and but new admit all have not grace in the like measure there be one glory of the q q 1. cor. 15.41 sun another of the moon and another glory of the star for one star differ from another in glory as one man from another in grace there be diversity of gift but the same r r 1. cor. 12.4 spirit all have not one faith alike there be a weak faith in the oft doubt s s matth. 8.26 Luke 24 38. oft discuss disciple in the father t t mark 9.24 of the possess child there be a strong faith in Peter walk on the water in the cananitish u u math. 15.27 woman the * * matth. 8.10 centurion the woman with the sanguinolent 10 10 Luke 8.49 issue all son and daughter of believe y y gal. 3 9 Abraham there be a wondrous gift and measure of the spirit in z z dan. 6.10 Daniel pray three time a day this our a a psal 17.1 and 51.1 and 55.17 David with that perplex Anna b b 1. sam. 1.15 upon every occasion effuse and pour out his soul in prayer c c Psal. 4.1 and 5.1 and 6.1 and 28.1 and 38.1 abundant also in the praise of d d in psalm God his heart ever meditate of good matter his tongue the pen of a ready e e psal 45.1 writer his inward f fire break out in outward flame not content nor contain himself but even at midnight he must rise what to do not to light and smoke a tobacco-pipe as some that be besot and bewitch with the weed but to praise the name of the g g psal 119.62 lord yea early in the morning he will rise h h ps 5.3 and 8^ 13 ose 5 15. and Christiani test plin. jun. epist prevent the morning watch what be the business not to follow drunkenness * * Esa. 5.11 till he be inflame but as spiritual drink with the wine of i devotion as be say of Anna to call upon God to praise he for his mercy to offer sacrifice as k k job 1.5 job do for he and he all come not thus far all have not David measure yet it be well if we come thus far as this people here he that have a heart to pray a heart to bless God let he bless God even for give he such a heart it be a mercy above all mercy to have such a heart a blessing above gold and pearl the earth and all her treasure pleasure do not equalise it as it be the great plague and spiritual judgement to have a l l exod 8.15 pharaoh heart a m m 1. sam. 25.37 nabal heart a harden a sluggish a sensual a sottish n n Esa. 6.10 matth. 13.14 heart chief a grudge a murmur a blasphemous heart as the carnal israelite have if thou have rather heart than art how to express thy praise be not altogether discourage a spark of fire be fire and a spark of grace be o o see m. Perkins his grain of mustard seed his dialogue m. greenham his consolatory letter m. Howard his strong help chap. 19 20 21. m. Downam his christian warfare and bachman cent. 1. q. 55 56. pag. 131 132 133. grace but fuellize this spark grow in this and other grace in the use of the mean for as a dead coal that burn not be no fire as a dead trunk that sprout nor grow not have in it no lively sap so grace that grow not that move not more than a dead child in the womb be no grace more than a paint fire be true fire it be mere imaginay eutopean and conceit the very idea of the brain ungrounded in the heart therefore strive for perfection get thy heart soul and spirit in tune to praise thy God oh there be no great argument of the sincerity of any grace then that it be of a grow nature as the child that grow in the womb from a embryo to perfection as the corn that grow from the seed to a blade from the blade to the ear from ear to a ripen harvest it must not stand still like ioshua p p Iosh. 10.12.13 sun nor go back as in ahaz q q 2. King 19.11 dial but forward as in the firmament every christian motto must be that which be Charles the fifth still forward and for this cause imitate as sempster the best pattern write after the perfect copy he that will have a please object for his eye have better view the sun than any star he that will poetize will rather imitate Virgil or Ovid than bavius or * menius he that will be a good rhetorician will imitate Tully r r vid. quintil. Demosthenes or Osorius rather than a obsolete and barbarous * * such as or such who Latin be as barbarous as their matter oft fabulous friar oh as we imitate the best in nature in art let we be as wise for grace now except Christ himself I know not a better pattern of imitation of mere man than David therefore as Theseus be say to be restless in spirit in his emulation of r Hercules Achilles in imitation of Theseus Alexander in imitation of Achilles Caesar in imitation of Alexander and as Themistocles be say to take no rest after that he have hear of the trophy of Miltiades so I wish that we in consideration of that excellent spirit of zealous devotion gratulation sanctify affection in David may be stir up to pray as s s 2. King 2.9 elisha once for the spirit of Elias that it may be double or at least single upon we that with this congregation David precede we we may in some good measure some sanctify manner bless God as David do since not one of we in a multitude but for one mercy or other we have occasion in particular beside general as David have oh that we will not suffer our eye to sleep nor our eye-lidd to t t psal 132.3.4.5.6 slumber neither the temple of our head to take any rest till we find our heart the temple-house and habitation of that spirit which will cause we to do as David do expostulation but alas my doubt and jealousy be that we have freeze and congeal heart turn as hard as crystal by a u u Christalli plin. li. 36. cap. 22. lib. 5. ca. 80. Arist. li. meteor and continual freeze that as nebuchadnezzar image though we have many excellent head of * * dan. 2.32.33 gold both in the magistracy and ministry abound in this and other grace yet the foot of our commonalty be of mere clay harden rather for break then dissolve as wax melt as do once david mollify heart by the sun of * * 2 sam. 12.7.8.13 verse mercy 2 Israel obedience in duty moral theological again see the obedience of this people how flexible how docible David no soon exhorte they to praise and bless God but all the congregation bless God David prevail with one word with one motion this people a pattern of all good subject in obedience to the magistracy of all good auditor in their obedience to the ministry be to he as the centurion servant in the gospel he bid they do this and they do 10 10 math. 8.9 it yea I may say without exception I hope or construction they be to he as the creature unto God in their first production y y gen. 1. v. 11. such quarter David people keep with his prescript that his will nay his word be their work there be you see as it be a identity of will betwixt this best prince and these good people as in perfect friendship z z as among the disciple ^ct 2. v. 45.46 ^nd primative christian in ^hat measure ^nd manner 142. 1^3 etc. one heart one mind or as shall be in all christian unity and amity they do walk by the same rule mind the same thing as saint Paul prescribe his philippian philip. 3. vers. 16. no soon be the counsel out of David mouth but consent in a instant even in a trice be in the people heart their mind concur with his motion even as naptha it sudden take fire at sight of fire oh the love the loyalty the obsequious obedience of this people worthy of live admiration loyal imitation of all good subject much be write of that subjection which the turkish begler-begges pasha and a a of all these turkish officer with their subjection see the turkish history and purchas his pilgrimage lib. 3. cap. 9 pag. 244 248. in Timorites yea even his mute and Asaphi or plebeian yield to their ottoman tyrant as that at his command they will leap into water as some of Zerxes noble be say to * * Brusonium tit do when the fisher boat in which he flee be over balance to save their king life they will kill themselves as a acceptable sacrifice to Mahomet fill up pool and ditch at the siege of some city for his better scale the wall which hest as it be pride in he to enjoin so it be superstitious folly in they to obey against the light of grace and nature any man to be a self murderer so as wondrous strict rule of subjection be prescribe by that Frances and Dominicke and b Benedict to their novelist and young friar of their order to be perform to their superior so he that read cassianus his c collation and other of their recollection shall see these junior perform such subjection to their senior in some strict task enjoin as for my part d I have sometime laugh at sometime pity these delude ignorant but who ever require such thing either in the active command friar or in the passive observant fool except blind and bewitch superstition but in true and religious and rectify obedience who do we read more forward and prompt then this people e e exod. 32.3 aaron indeed as after f f judge 8.24 gideon call for the people jewel and earring and they as ready part with they as the egyptian do depart with g g exod. 11.2.3 they but to what end and purpose to make a calf to erect a idol to worship as what will not a idolatrous people part with as be see at this day among our common h h of the force of superstition even above true religion in jew turk pagan papist see hundred example in Gorlicius his theological axiom medium lib. in 4 to papist for such a purpose not their gold nor their silver be dear to they it fly as free as from michahes mother though it be eleven hundred i i judg. 17.3.4.5 shekel to the make of a grave image a shrine a cross a crucifix the priest need but ask and have if it be the blood out of their vein much more their silver out of their purse which to the impoverish of themselves to the wrong of their tatered k k we see to our grief all this verify in our gentry and superstitious irish laiety back I be sure the wring of their belly the wrangle of their hunger bite babe they part withal as willing to the maintenance of idolatry and superstition as these jew here in my text as also in the day of Moses and l l ezra 7.14 Nehemiah contribute free to the service of the true God in true religion so we have read and see beside the damage and endanger of their soul and blood the everlasting blot and brand of their house and name how prodigal how profuse even to a marvel some traitor have be of their good their land their money their mean as might be particularise in winter peercy Digby and our late dig powder pioner beside all other for the effect of their sanguinolent and bloody plot when the same party perhaps be tenacious enough and as hard to be draw and hew as rock to any good duty but David peer and people here be as propense and ready upon David first motion to part with thousand and ten thousand of their talent of gold and silver lead and brass to the best employment the edification of a * * 1. Chro. 29. v. 7.8.9 temple more famous for work than the arthemesiahs * * libr. 6. cap. 18. mansolum the sun colosse the egyptian o o Mela lib. 1. cap. 5. plin. lib. 36. c. 12. lib. 16. Strabo lib. 11. isidor lib. 14 cap. 6. pyramid Babylon p p mira Grosius lib. 2. c. 6. q. curt. lib. 5. eus Evang. lib. 9 cap. 4. wall Diana * * Diana prater Strab. lib. 14. plin. libr. 36. c. 14. aug. lib. 21. cap. 4. temple or the best building that ever m m of the excellency of salomon temple Ruffin euseb lib. 11. cap. 23. Chrys. hom. 86. Bibl. lib. 6. part 1. coli 24 pag. 736. Mogdonetum in Caluaria cap. 4. pag. 2. be but more famous for the end as it be to be a habitation for the mighty God of jacob yea they part not only with their gold but with their good with a thousand ram a thousand lamb a thousand bullock yea they be obsequious in a great nature then ail this for alas the power and life of religion consist not in the abdication of those outward thing in profession of voluntary poverty no nor in abstinence and fast from the creature nor in afflict and whip the body as the papist make it for than we shall have form the very pith and life of religion in Diogenes Thales Milesius Cleanthes Fabritius the indian Bragmans and cymnosophist who in austerity and strictness of life in abdication of these external to omit the whip * * 1. King 18.28 baalite do live as strict as any Papist of they all as any monosterian yea perhaps as any hermit who history n n of the strictness and austerity of s. Anthony Paulus simplex Pambe Macarius and other hermit read in Zozum lib. 4 c. 23. in Socrates lib. 4. hist. c. 23. in cassian l. 2. Gastrim c. 26 and ca. 40. chief Hospinian dignify for their wondrous abstinency and continency but the power be in the inward life of faith of the life of grace the life of the spirit move stir animate the very inward of the soul to bless and magnify the lord in the inward man rejoice in the lord and express these hide flame by heart break out in sudden rapture eucharistical thanksgiving hymn song psalm as David in the psalm as he and his people here and as Augustine Bernard Anselme in their meditation and soule-soliloquy this be that pith that marrow that lustre that life of religion that power of godliness * * see this particular large and sound discuss and convict by m. Bolton his discourse of true happiness on psalm 1. and m. dike of the deceitfulness of man heart and m. negus his Posthumus book of man active obedience which a natural man a civil a moral honest man a hypocrite a Pharisee a mere outside Christian a ceremonious observant Papist never attain to by many degree never know it never feel never find it in his own soul it be a riddle hard than Sampson a mystery a which they know not because they plough not with the best heyffer the spirit it be a mark they never hit a note above Ela this which never any sing but the lord true nathaniel and this sacrifice of true praise David prince and people offer up to the lord joint and mutual with David which argue they be possess with the same spirit which work the very same effect in several subject god several servant how ever diversify and difference in respect of age sex state or condition of life yea how ever separate in respect of time or place as the same sun have the same power heat light influence how ever differ in degree in several climate on the scorch negro the tawny Muscovite the remote indian the russian persian Turk Christian barbarian and who ever it reflex upon 3 obedience to God and Cesar in God and for God enjoin every christian that which concern ourselves as grape press for our physical drink by application be this that we shall sympathize with David people as we that be the head and eye must be studious by govern and teach to go in and out before you wise and worthy carry ourselves as David o o 1. sam. 18.30 do as be on a public stage God man and angel be our spectator our eclipse and slip be too soon discern and too fatal presage evil to ourselves and other like the eclipse of the material sun as * we I say for many reason premise must do famous and worthy in p p ruth 4.11 Ephratah where we be plant and our candlestick place so you that be the commonalty the laity and body of the people must be obsequious to whatever you be legal and warrantable prescribe and persuade by we first you must like this people be flexible and tractable to what you be move in religious duty of piety to God such as 1. hear the word 2. receive the sacrament 3. sanctification of the * * see d bind of the sabbath m. dod on the four commandment sabboth you and you 4. frequent and fervent prayer in your own heart in your own house such as q q Iosh. 24.15 joshuah r r 2. sam. 6.20 David and other religious family use 5. humiliation for sin such as be prescribe by s s joel 2.12.17 joel t t Zach. 12.12 Zachary u u Johan cap. 3.7 8. jonas * * 1. pet. 5.6 Peter and be practise by 10 10 psal 6.6 2. sam. 16.12 David y y neh. 1.4 Nehemiah the z z joh. 3.20 ninevite a a Esth. 4.16 ester Mordocheus b b 2. chr. 32.25 Ezekiah 6. catechise your child as David and Bethshebab do c c prov. 4.5 Solomon eunice and d d 2. tim. 1.5 and 3.16 Timothy Abraham his e e gen. 18.19 c^ 22.7 Isaac Helena her f f euseb in Constantini Constantine 7. praise of God in the observation of solemn feast and thankful commemoration of mercy receive and judgement prevent as for the coronation of our sovereign lord the king the safe reduction of our prince his majesty preservation from the Gowry conspiracy from the powder treason as the jew solemnize their Purim upon the like g g Esth. 9.26 occasion 8. or it be the observation of public or private fast as the king of Ninevie enjoin his ninevite jon. 3. second you must be morigetous and obsequious to duty of charity enjoin you to your brethren such as give to the needy as do h h job 29.12 13 job i i act 9 36. Dorcas k k Luke 19.8 zacheus forgive your enemy as do Stephen the l l act 7.60 protomartyr and Christ himself their m m Luke 23.34 persecuter David revile n n 2. sam. 16.11 Shemei three be hospitable to poor stranger such as here in abundance come over fat and full like o o ruth 1.20 naomi but go back again marah poor and bitter lank and lean as purse-purged oh relieve such as p p gen. 18.1 2. Abraham and q q gen. 19.1.2 3 lot the pilgrim angel in the form of man as the good old man of gabes-gilead r r judg. 19.20 21. lodge the distress Levite as gaius the host s s epist johan. v. 5. of the persecute saint oh you that be as Joseph here well plant do not forget your english brethren t t amos 6. gen. 43. who necessity drive hither to seek for corn and coin think here be golden grape but deceive as Christ by the promise leaf of the barren u u Mat 21.19 figtree four feed the hungry let the back and belly of the poor bless * * job 29.12 13. you let Lazaras have the 10 10 Luke 16 21. crumb in your feast still remember the affliction of * * amos 6.6 joseph five be engage for those that be approve honest though poor that have willing heart to pay all creditor though weak hand support they as aron and Hur do weary b b exod. 17.18 Moses Solomon condemn not all * * Prov 6.2 see the sermon extant on this text call a caveat for surety suretyship but only give caveat that a man ensnare not himself for carnal and careless companion charity both beginning at home and stand with providence and discretion otherwise circumstance sway it be a act of charity and christianity to undertake for some as Paul do for y y philem v. 18. onesimus as Reuben for his brother z z gen. 42.37 Benjamin as the good samaritan for the wound a a Luke 10.35 pilgrim sixthly comfort the sad heart as Beaz do b b ruth 2.13 ruth as the jew do mournful Martha c c John 11.31 and Mary as Christ himself comfort the weep widow of nain the disconsolate daughter of jerusalem e e Luke 23.28 and his own deject f f joh. 16.20 21. disciple chief if their mourn be for sin pour oil into their wound bind up the break g g esay 61.1 heart speak a word to the weary in due season declare unto they their h h job 33.23 righteousness revive they out of their dead swoon by application of that true the water of life the promise of grace make to the i i esay 55.1 matth. 5.6 thirsty it be more mercy as the object be more excellent to comfort a sick soul as Christ do sorrow k k joh. 21 15 16 Peter weep l l Luke 7.50 Mary Magdalen Paul the penitent m m 2. cor. 2.6 7. corinthian ananiaes humble n n act 9.17 Paul Peter the heart-pricked o o act. 2.37 38. jew Paul and silas the affright and afflict p p act. 16.30 31 jailor then to help and heal a sick body seven pray for all man 1. chief for king and q q 1. tim. 2.2 ruler as the jew do for the prince of Chaldea in their captivity jer. 20. the primitive christian for the emperor 2. for minister and preacher as the church of Colossia thessalonica Rome Corinth and r r rom 15. ^0 Coloss. 4.3 1. thess 5.25 2. thess 3.1 other do for Paul 3. for thy wife and child as Zachary for his s s Luke 1.13 Elizabeth Isaac for his t t gen. 25.21 Rebeccha Abraham for his u u gen. 17.18 and 18.23 Ishmael David for his sick * * 2. sam. 12.16 child 4. for thy household and servant as the centurion for he Matth 8.5 and Abraham for his 10 10 gen. 24. steward for thy enemy and persecutor as Stephen for those that stone a a act 7.60 he Christ for those that crucify b b Luke 23.3 he Samuel for those that reject c c 1. sam. 12.19 he Moses for d d exod. 8. so for rebel Israel Numb. 16 22. for Miriam Numb. 12.13 Pharaoh that oppose and hate he last for all man even jew turk and pagan except for those that sin unto e e 1. John 5.16 death as do judas f f see d. devisons sermon of the sin against the holy ghost julian and the wilful malicious * * mark 3.28 pharisee yea for our enemy as be a a matth. 5.44 Luke 6.28 rom. 12.14 1. pet. 3.9 command and have be g g gen. 20.17 num. 16.22 and 21.8 1. reg. 13.6 psal 109.4 jer. 11.13 19 1. cor. 4.12 Davidi^ jeremiae pauli etc. practise last you must submit yourselves even to perform these duty moral and political that be prescribe you master to servant servant to master husband to wife wife to husband parent to child child to parent magistrate to subject subject to magistrate pay scott and lot tax and subsidy homage and honour tribute to who tribute belong all which because they be very many and numerous in their particular I refer you to such as have general entreat of they only in all these special and specifical duty I enjoin your submissive obedience this day as David people yield themselves to one so do you to one and every one of they to day if you will hear the lord voice harden not your heart as in the h h heb. 3.15 provocation be not clay lest you be crush asunder but melt wax take the seal and impression of grace draw like silver thread in the furnace bow your neck to God take on you the yoke of i i matth. 11.29 Christ that be easy and his burden which be light which we as his mouth and messenger impose upon you if you consent and obey you that be here plant shall eat the good thing of the k k esay 1.19 land but if you refuse and rebel you shall be devour by the sword or famine or other plague for the mouth of the lord have speak it you shall be spew out and disgorge as the * * judg. 1. and 2. etc. canaanite and wipe as a man wipe a dish turn it topsi-turvie upside down I set life and death before you this day choose life l l deut. 30.19 choose whether you will be oak stubborn resist God and his ordinance in the magistracy and ministry as do the m m jer. 3.15 and 18.12 1. sam. 8.19 jew or reed bow bend flexible docible obedient to whatever the lord in and by we shall enjoin you as this people be here unto David know that the despise and resist of we be the despise yea despite of God n n Luke 10.16 1. thess 4.8 himself as the contempt of ezekiahs o o 2. chr. 30.10 post and of David ambassador be p p 2. sam. 10.6 revenge as the contempt of these two king SECT. 4 obedience civil ecclesiastical theological the life and soul of religion oh let we know that as disobedience be as the sin of witchcraft yea plain treason and rebellion against the q q 1. sam. 15.25 lord so obedience be the very life and genius and soul of religion 1. if a weep eye do speak a man religious then r r heb. 12.16 Esau Israel at her worst have tear at s s deut. 1.43 44. command like the t t vincentius Physiologo nat. hist. 2 17. c. 606. crocodile or u u Astuia hyena lachrymantu Arist. lib. 8. c. 5. Vincent lib. 19 c. 61. Aelian l. 6. c. 13. hyena even when bloodshed and fratricide be hatch in the heart of the one and flat rebellion purpose in the heart practise by the hand of the other 2. if a hear ear do speak and proclaim a religious man we have Herod hear * * Mark 6.20.28 John yet behead John hear he as a saint live still in his lust as a beast butcher the baptist as a devil we have the scribe and the pharisees john auditor yet a generation of 10 10 matth. 3.9 viper 3. if a confess tongue do always demonstrate a religious heart we have Cain bellow out his y y gen. 3.13 murder judas roar out his own treason z z matt. 27.3 in the languish anguish of their soul Saul himself with much ado bleat out I have a a 1. sam. 15.23.24 sin yet the first brand for a b b 1 joh. 3.12 reprobate c c gen. 4 12. runagate the second for the son of d d joh. 17 12. and 6.70 perdition the three for a man eject reject of e e 1. sam. 15.26 28. God vex by f f 1. sam. 16.14 Satan in all probability as certain damn as Solomon be g g salute praef. in cantic and Lorinus in eccl. c. 1. save though some scepticque question both the one and the h h Bellarm. confut. a Zanchio and Will^tt in fine other as if they will find a knot in a * * 2. sam. 7.13 bulrush 4. if pray do always prognosticate piety we have the Pharisee i i Luke 18.10 prayer prey upon the poor under pretext of fast and prayer devour widow house we have the worst of the jew like evening wolf in their extremity howl upon their bed yea the proud Pharisee that ever show to the lord all the pedlar pack of the trumpery of his own justitiary work we have he in the temple as busy as a bee pray or prate at the least yea that Papist that will eat his breaden god upon a bargain of k k the speech of Northampton extent in print against the powder traitor blood even when he go by a plot as deep as hell to blow up the parliament house as high as heaven will pray over and over his rove roll out a hundred ave and noster solicit every he and she saint friend that he have in the court of heaven to prosper his bloody project yea this meritorious act must be commit and commend too to the prayer of their church so a profane man who mouth run over as the scum of a seethe pot with the froth of all lewd and vicious speech band and dart more damnable oath and blasphemy in the very face of God in one hour then there be pore in his spongy tongue or tooth in his jaw or joint in his hand this blatrant beast for God hold he no * * wicked man in the scripture be oft compare to beast psal 57.4 and 58.4 Esa. 1.4 matth. 7.6 Luke 13.32 tit. 2.12 better will have sometime such a fit and good mood come on he that he will dribble or rather l l matth. 6.7 babble out a prayer or two nay you shall have the swinish drunkard in midst of as much profanation as * * dan. 5.1 2 3. Baltazar ordinary jest out such a prayer God forgive i my sin etc. as usual be this in his mouth but when it be countercross with a oath as the cough or the phlegm in the mouth of some consume old man 5. yea general if the outward profession of religion to knit up all in one word do speak and prophesy a man to be true religious we shall have more way to heaven then to any town or city in Christendom for the belgic dany gorgean Anabaptist brownist Familist arminian as in former age the arrian Aerian Monotholite nestorian lutichians with all the rest of the heretical rabble profess themselves as our papist now the only true catholic they have many as blind zealous in their kind as Paul for his m m act. 22.3 pharaisisme nay to keep within the bound mount the limit of the scripture have we not the worst of sinner profess like saint Cain n n gen. 4 3. sacrifice Balaam o o Numb. 23.7 prophese the harlot p p prov. 7.14 vow judas q q luk. 9.1.2 preach simon Magus r r act. 8.13 baptize demas a companion to s s 2. tim. 4 10. Paul himself yea ananias and t t act 5.1.2.3 Saphira as forward in outward formality as any of the rest yea we have the carnal Israelite load god altar with sacrifice weary he with his sheep and calf and bullock his u u Esai 1.11 psal 50.8.9 sabbath and his new moon all which with the rest of the formal sacrifice of the w w jer. 6.20.21 wicked God protest his soul hate loathe and abhor as he do the offering up of swine blood or the cut off a dog 10 10 Esai 66.3 neck the howl and bellow of profane spirit be to he no more than the hiss of so many snake the croak of so many frog all their sacrifice with their person be execrable and abominable to the lord yea stink as carrion in his nostril why so because they want the true salt of the sanctuary the life and soul of all which shall vivificate and animate these their observance and oblation and that be in one word obedience as God himself reveal y y 1. Sam 15.22 psalm 50.23 Esai 58.3.4.5.6 himself therefore I say to thou to conclude this point as the israelite here in my text even before they offer their burn offering and drink offering their oil and their wine their ram and their lamb they first offer as the best usher and prologue of acceptance their obeisance external yea better their obedience internal to God and the king so do thou otherwise as Peter say to Simon z z act. 8.20 Magus though baptize thou and thy money perish together I say to thou though a professor if a profaner in sin commit in such duty omit as former prescribe thou and thy pray thy blessing thy hear thy sacramental receive deceive and all thy profess confess profane disjoin from the obedience of the law legal from the obedience of faith Evangelicall perish together a protestant be once in popish cruelty unjust burn with a bible about his a a see m. mason abridgement of the act and monument pag. 203. gen. 42.20 neck but thou may in God justice just burn in hell with bible in thy mouth and profaneness in thy heart and life therefore as joseph say of bring * Benjamin I of sincere obedience bring it or else never stand before the lord any more in his holy temple unholy unhappy man that thou be I can pretermit another observance without bring by application some of their honey into our own hive these people be not only obedient to the jussion and summons of their prince but as the grace of this grace as a pearl in gold their obedience be speedy as quick as thought as lightning David word be the watchword they be in a readiness his command give fire they discharge present a whole volley of blessing which promptness of just blame and shame the refractory obstinacy of many christian in all degree and profession for many inferior wife to their husband child to their parent servant to their master subject to their governor as they give their superior a absolute negative by their word or practice that they will not do such and such duty enjoin moral matrimonial natural theological but rather cross and contradict as Ziphorah do the circumcision of her b b exod. 4.25 son so when at last though long first they be persuade it be with such a hale and pull and draw as the bear to the stake the bull to the ring the ass to his burden what they do be hale and extort from they as alm from a usurer and * precarie they be either as hawk lure to it by fair word and promise as the * * (@) Atlia etc li. 4 cap. 23. Basilius exem hom. 9 Albertus lib. 22. elephant to draw great burden by the praise or flattery of their keeper like windmill grind nothing nor once wheel about without the wind of applause or win by gift as child to their book by nut and apple or whip and beat to it as trewant boy to their school or lazy apprentice to their work how ever what they do in any prescribe duty go against the hair Minerva as the proverb be against god forbid hence it be that we see many wife as stuborn against their husband as oak in stead of draw in the same yoke as when a Israelite and a Cananite chief match together like two sparrow I have see tie at the two end of a packthread the one draw one way to the church the other to a mass the one to a sermon the other to a play their will mix together as oil and water or if Lot wife after much parley and plead the case be at last hale out of Sodom to a save c c Genes. 19.20 zoar yet it be neither with heart nor good will she look back again with a aspect to what she do respect d d gen. 19.24 her heart have no heart to travel with her body she have a month mind to her mass again e e 2. Peter 2.19 so for child how many do we see perverse and stubborn against their parent not to be bow more than cold iron or steel as hard wax unyielding to any good impression uncapable of counsel either from father or friend swim without f a cork dispose of themselves how when and where they please be their parent willing or nill walk and jet up and down as jacke-gentleman or as masterless hound mere vagum without any call wander g g jud. 13. planet spend and mispend their money and h mean as the gospel prodigal without any ho * here or there have so many home as a hedgehog have nest or a fox start hole that they have no true home no honey hive yea which be worst of all some of they so wed to their i will that they will wed where they will be their parent please or displease like that profane k k gen. 26.32.35 Esau that will marry with daughter of Heth. though to the grief of old Isaac the heartbreak of Rebecca so for servant how many be there which stir like post at their master bid nay at their master beat how many hasten about their business as the ox to his yoke as swift as snail with as good will as captive to their turkish galley or felon to the gallows like Miphibosheth his servant more lame in his love and obedience than his master be on his leg stay so long in fetch his master mule till the tide be past the opportunity lose of meeting David to his no small prejudice by the scycophantize of l l 2. sam. 19.26.29 ziba most servant be so careless negligent sluggish and secure now a day that what they do in their master occasion be common undo be by their negligence oft unseasonable as rain in harvest or a pardon after a execution their obedience at last show itself like exquisite music in the right manage of occasion yet be too long in tune which disgrace all so for subject in the common-welath how many million in many christian kingdom to pass by jew turk and pagan be as unlike this people here specify in my text as crow to eagle as tiger to lamb who be command by their governor and enjoin these thing that immediate concern the worship of God as to break down altar pull down image consecrate their hand to the lord as Moses command the levite in his m m exod. 32.29 time execute idolater as n n 1. King 18.40 Elias and o o 2. King 10 24 jehu command the suppress of the priest of Baal and p p 2. King 11.15 jehoida the slaughter of that usurp or enjoin as our irish at this day to come to our church to join with we in conformity uniformity of worship as sheep of one fold with the like particular they prevail as much with their injunction mulct imposition yea in some measure in former time compulsion as lot prevail with his son in-law to leave q q gen. 19.14 Sodom or jeremy with the jew to submit themselves to the king of r r jer. 37. and cha. 38.2.3.4 Babel nay what ever the magistrate prescribe or we persuade in public or private with they about the work what ere we can say or do it move they as colour affect a blind man or music a deaf man yea as the s s act. 17.32.33 athenian do with Paul when we persuade they to leave these unknowen god which they worship saint angel shrine image relic cross t t these seven kind of idolatry be impute to they by m. Powel li. 2. by d. crucifix and to worship the true God in spirit and truth they now worship like the u u John 4.22 samaritan they know not what exhort they as Ezekiah by his post and messenger exhort his people at last to awaken out of their idolatrous w w 2. Chro. 30.6 7.8 9 slumber and to keep a spiritual Passeover to the true God we reap the same harvest from this seed which Paul and these poast-man reap scorn contempt scoff and derision so again law be establish against this bite usury against profane of the Sabaoth excessive pride in apparel engross of corn against theft robbery rape and other breach of civil and religious peace in sin against God and man all which be so many edict statute proclamation reveal the will and mind of christian king alas how be they observe notwithstanding all the annex mulct and penalty against the infringer beside the sin and threaten 10 10 psal 11. ^ psalm 50.18.20 21. job. 20.12.13 1. cor. 6.9 plague in respect of the soul if I shall anatomize our time and rip into particular I can more than mathematical demonstrate that our commonalty grow worse by like the fire that more break out the more it be suppress as some run brook that more swell roar and rage the more it be stop as cammonmile which they say more spread the more it be tread down or as some stern colt and unruly unbroken stallion which more frisk and fling and plunge the more he be curb and keep in and yet the of the law be not the cause of the increase irregularity no more than fire be cause of cold or then the scripture be cause of heresy or the chief good of the chief evil but only perverse rebellion and native hereditary corruption break out by opposition I may here also expostulate how far differ from this people be these which be not only refractory in thing spiritual to christian prince have in very truth no king nay hardly any god but their pope who they make a other god on w w juda such like blasphemous title their canonist and sycophant give to the man of sin earth with other blasphemy as the jew say when Christ shall have be receive their Messiah we have no 10 10 joh. 19.12.15 king but Cesar but be stern and stubborn also if not rebellious in deny subjection in thing temporal as namely tax subsidy ten or the like which even the whole world in a manner give to Augustus about the exacting and collection of which by some factious ring-leading firebrand it be wondrous to observe in history what mutter murmur mutiny rebellion factious insurrection have be in many christian kingdom to the effusion of sea of blood the breach of the public peace the weaken and waste of many state beside private man estate and the loss of so many collector life as happen to Adoram the gatherer of roboams tribute who all Israel stone with stone 1. king 12. vers. 18. v. expostulation with our refractory and rebellious time disobedient to God to man to ministry to magistracy but leave these and to expostulate with the multitude of our common people how far hetroclite and defective be they in respect of this people in respect of their christian obedience to the ministry as well as to the magistracy David as a prince as a prophet prescribe persuade here the people to bless God they bless he to sacrifice they sacrifice ram and lamb to rejoice before the lord to eat and to drink with gladness of heart to contribute to the temple they bring talent of gold silver lead and iron in abundance he no soon speak but they perform he prescribe they practise they work what he will oh this harmonical music betwixt a zealous tongue a circumcise ear a yield will a consent heart a active hand where shall this consort be hear or see among our plebeian oh what occasion have we that be pastor and preacher to complain declaim yea exclaim against the refractory perverseness of our people that we speak as Orpheus sing to stock and block that we cry as Diogenes beg to mere image of y y see staffords Diogenes as also one of Guevaras extant epistle of Diogenes man without spiritual motion that we do sing to deaf man put meat in the mouth of dead man wash 10 10 jer. 13.23 blacka-moo^es spend our breath in vain sow among stone and y y math. 13.6.7 thorn beat the air plough as z z Homer that Ulysses the sand cast our seed into bog and quag-mire yea disperse our lose labour into the wind and reap the a whirlwind our word echo-like perish with the wind return as some ambassador from great prince in some land or sea expedition without any performance our people to who we call and cry for the practical performance of many duty seem to be like the baalite Baal either a sleep or b b 1. King 18.27 weary or their wit go a wool gather that they neither hear we heed we nor understand we convince their conscience we may as Christ oft convince the scribe and pharisee Paul the false apostle Augustine the manichee and pelagian Beza some learned papist in his dispute before the cardinal of * * who wish one day that Beza have no tongue or his auditor no care Lorraine but till God give the grace we can convert they we may by motion persuade they to c c Mark 1.15 repenance from dead work as do our saviour himself John his d d math. 3.1.10 predecessor the scribe pharisee publican sinner soldier of their time to humiliation for sin to family duty to which the e e Zach. 12.11.12 command yea the comination of f f Jer 10.25 God and practice of the g g gen. 18.18 2. sam. 6.20 joshuah 24.15 saint enjoin they to sanctification of the Sabaoth they and their h h exod 20.8 Esai 58.13 hushold in public in private to elimosynarie work of mercy to leave their brutish and beastly drink their German quaff their drunken i i a quoss lucen be such client to Bacchus that they be behold to esculap^ut unhealthful health their good bad fellowship their goatish swinish lust their lionly oppression their foxlike fraud their grind extortion bite usury shift sharking colloguing cozen cony-catchings mony-catchings chief their vain profane devilish damnable swear forswearing which they may aswell spare as the dirt or pare from their k k psal 25.3 nail the smoke from their chimney as inexcusable afford what other lust promise l l gen. 29.25 laban-like without performance neither profit nor pleasure with mortification of all other sin as prejudicial to their soul as Ratsbaine in their meat poison to their stomach a dagger or a dart transfix to their heart set the best edge we can upon their affection by all the preach rule of ecclesiastical rhetoric prescribe by the * * Hunnius Kickerman in Rhetorica learned in our exhortation to moral or theological virtue or dehortation from vice yet like he in the comedian though they be persuade they will not be m persuade be as it be mad with n reason shut their eye against the sun kick against the o o act 9.5 prick worse still for the physic as in a consumption of grace languish more and more even when they seem to have good stomach to their meat this spiritual manna dwine away as some child that have inward disease even whilst they seem hunger and affect to suck the milk of the p p 1. pet. 2.1 word from the dug of the two testament perish spiritual for want of digest practice even whilst this meat this milk this manna be in their mouth as the carnal q q numb 11.34 israelit with their lust quail even in eat fill the grave of lust insomuch that when I read what author have write of r r Mela Solinus Gellius Plinius orosius Lycosth monster some with their great huge s s Sciopedes Indos Maiolus col. 2. pag. 81 and Hippopodes mela. lib. 3. c. 63. plin. lib. 4. c. 13. foot great head great t t (@) plin. li. 5. c. 8 li. 7. c. 2 aug. li. 16. c. 8 and agriophagoi Solin c. 19 c 32 c. 53. and Cyclops li. 11. cap. 3. eye great u u mela. li. 3. c. 3 ear great tooth great lip great w w mela. lib. 3. c. 4. Solin cap. 32. plin li. 6. cap. 30 tongue i think our common people the great monster some of they be upon our Sabaoth and lecture day all ear to suck and sponge up our sermon yet as other monster or serpent creep on all four in their practice as drunken man disgorge again present in the churchyard what they seem to gulf down in the church or as lead and iron instant cool as soon as they come out of the fire of the ministry and feel the cold air of the world blow upon they though seem wash when they be in the water of the sanctuary stir by the preach 10 10 John 5.4 angel yet soil again as soon as ever the infect dust cleave to their foot we whip they by legal terror as parent their young child with rod when we get they in God house for soil spoil dabble their garment their flesh their nature their soul with filthy sin yet as soon as ever they be out of our sight in every alehouse and taphouse they be swatle and dabble again in the quag and mire of pollution as little gooseling and duckling in their boggy pond we in the church give they antidote Mithridates preservative and curative against sin and the world with her circean cup poison they still a fresh again we with the bellow of our breath for the time kindle in they some spark of good desire and motion as Paul do in y y act. 26.28 Agrippa Christ in the carnal z z John 6.28.34 ch. 7.46 jew Peter in a a act. 8.24 Simon Magus b b luk. 3.12 John in the publican and c c math. 3.6.7 pharisee but the d d Revel. 12.4 dragon the devil with the help of his agent the flesh and world present quench they again they be short live than e e mela. l. 3. c. 4. Solin c. 15 53 plin. l. 4. cap. 11. li. 5. c. 29. aug. 104 l. 16. c. ^ pigmeye yea then f f Ephemeron un^ die and and albert. li. ^4 and Vincent hist. li. 17. c. 47. Maiolu^ col. 9 pag. 36^ Ephemerons thus what we weave the spiritual enemy chief our corruption penelope-like unweave again thus we run with they as in a circle in amaze in a meandrian labyrinth never the near like he that follow a seather or butterfly than when we begin we roll as the phrayse be Sisyphus his stone and turn Ixion wheel they give we the hear as this people do David but only the hear without the heed in which this people do more than they oh my brethren what mould be our heart of of what mettle be we make how be we hew out of Caucasus what flinty heart have we what pumice g eye when I compare the docibilitie the tractableness of this and other people with our lion-like steamnesse our adamantine obduracy i think I compare again not worthy with worthy as in David h h 1. Chro. ch. 11 v. 11.12.13.18.20 22. time as * * in plutarkes life now english by doctor Holland Plutarch the Greek with the roman but worthy with wretch with wicked one I seem to poise and parallel again Venus with Vulcan Achilles with Clineas Ulysses with Thirsites yea saint with sinner devoute proselyte with incarnate devil SECT. 5 Israel zeal and readiness approve our remissness in good duty just redargue and reprove when I consider how forward some have be even like angel to do the will of God immediate from God as h h gen. 12 4. gen. 22.3 Abraham i i gen. 6.22 Noah k k exod. 4.18 exod. 5.1 c 14.27 Moses l l Iosh. 4. vers. 4. cap. 5.3 joshua m m judg. 6.27 chap 7.6 gideon this our David etc. and mediate from man in God and for God as here this people withal how froward and backward we blockish in not know like the horse and n n psal 32.9 mule more beastly in not acknowledge with the ox and o o esay 1.4 ass our own master our maker when I read and ponder Abraham sacrifice his own his one his only child love belove Isaac the son of blessing the bless seed typical Christ even with once * * see Parreus calvin and Marlorate in their comment on genesis exemplify all the circumstance of Abraham faith and obcienc in this intend act bid and we not to sacrifice one lust the least sin a tongue-oath etc. with many bid how Noah prepare the ark with one word we prepare no ark no spiritual temple no tabernacle fit no upper room for Christ p p Mark 14.14 Passeover no chamber of presence for the great king no inner closet of the heart for God spirit to inhabit after many word many woo pulsation solicitation pollicitation and promise unto we upon his q q revel 3.20 entrance how ready Samuel answer the call of God once r r 1. sam. 3.10 perceive how careless we neglect it though discern a hundred time how speedy s s Luk 5.8.9.10 11. joh 1.39 42. Peter Andrew and John leave their ship and net the world with her snare t t math. 9 9 Matthew his receipt deceit of custom follow Christ as his docible disciple even at first call as do also u u luk. 19.6 Philip Bartholomew * * luk. 19.6 zacheus with some other embrace the first motion of his mercy call of his word and spirit we neglect reject so many call freeze in our dregs as unwilling to leave our ship our net profit pleasure and ensnare lust to exchange they for Christ for his grace his gospel his spirit his glory as 10 10 gen. 19.6 lot or his y y luk. 17.32 wife to leave Sodom Israel his egyptian z z exod. 16.3 onion yea as the mole to forsake the earth the fish the water the child his dug the fool his babble though upon promise of far better thing how soon Philip win a a John 1.45.46 47. Nathanael to know Christ the true Messiah how that samaritan woman upon once conference with Christ perceive he and receive he her b b John 4.20.29 saviour how upon one testimony from that one single odd woman the whole city upon the first mention first motion entertain and receive he as their desire c c ver. 40.41.42 salvation how upon one text open and explain by Philip the aethiopian eunuch believe in Christ be d d act. 8.35.36 in tom. 6. Bibl. baptize yea as a true new proselyte preach Christ and plant the gospel among his nigroe as be e e Iren. li. 3. c 12. and l. 4. 40. euseb li. 2. c. 1. Niceph. 1. c. 1. Hierom. c 3 Esai and 103 and record how in one sermon of Paul Lidia heart be f f act 16.14 open one admonition from Paul and silas the jailor with his whole household be g g vers 30 31 32 convert one sermon from Peter Cornelius be confirm the holy ghost by his friend and household h h act 10 44 receive by another sermon three thousand even christ-crucifying jew touch in heart wound in i i act 2 37 38 soul and conscience yea still to keep to my ground though I run descant never so oft never so far how all this people as heavenly querister in my text be ring and sing the praise of God upon the first begin strain of David their precentor compare all these with our secure and sensual and sinful time that be not wrought upon by any mean not reclaim more than the * * pli. l. 28 c. 8. and lib 8 c. 17. Aelian lib. 6 c. 2 panther can be tame by any mercy not to be turn from our vain course discourse more than the sea out of their channel by many by any motive our heart so crusty so brawny not to be pierce and penetrate more than the scale of a dragon by any edge of the word the sword of the spirit our disease so desperate so dangerous not to be balm salve with any balm of * * jer. ^ 22 gilead our heart so foul like that augean k k one of Hercules his work to cleanse it moralize by Maiolus col. 1 part 1. pag. 13. and by in his mythiology stable not to be rense cleanse with all the water of the sanctuary yea more when I serious ponder what some historian pen how docible how pliable how teachable how tractable even some brute creature have be to l l as a hart to Sertorius Maiolus Colloq. 7. pag 276 a panther to the father of Philin plin. libr. 8. cap. 17. man as m m B^tephalus alex. Solin c 46 isidor lib. 12. c. 16 diod. libr. 12. Ael^an libr. 16. cap. 23. horse n n docilitate plin. lib. 8. cap. 40 Aelian 8 c. 30 and lib 6 c. 61. li. 5 c. 26. and li. 7. 10. 18 and zonaras in Tiberio dog ape p p mira docilitate elephantis aelian lib 4. cap. 9 and 7.39 arist. lib. 9 cap. 46. and Albert lib. 8. tract 5 cap. 2 Camelo plin. lib. 8 cap. 18. and Leonius p 8. elephant crow yea if we believe some writer how officious even wolf and * * leone noct. Attic. lib. 5. cap. 14. Aelian lib. 7. cap. 43. and lupis and surium come 6. and in spir. cap. 107. pag 3 cap. 7 lion have be to man their acknowledge lord and yet that man himself shall be so hardly tutor and train without strain and constrain by the iron rodd and whipcord of many cross and affliction inward and outward as god last and best physic to yield homage fealty honour and service submission and subjection and all the tributary duty of invocation humiliation gratulation etc. to his maker lord protector preserver and redeemer yea last and to conclude all when I ponder how easy we be persuade by any indifferent friend to aught that concern our moral good as Moses by his father in-law jethro to admit of a help in his q q exod 18 24. magistracy r r 2. king 5 13 14. naaman to wash in jordane or dissuade from what be prejudicial to we as the s s act 16 29 30 jailor from kill himself David from kill t t 1 Sam 25 32 33 ^^ Naball chief how inclinable to our lawyer or counsellor lay our case or action thus or thus move in this court or remove to that as may be to our best advantage but especial to our physician that by his prescript we take drug and pill and potion though never so bitter as aloe rhubarb and the like be content to be diet to abstain from what we love as from wine in the gout milk in a fever eel pork goose etc. such stir meat in case of a green wound for fear of * * see gales chirurgery and the general practice of physic in these case impostumation yea and for the preservation of health prevention of sickness to part with the blood of our vein I say ponder these and lay all these prepare parallel in one balance with the present condition of many million that careless of their soul as Esther once of her life if they perish they u u Esth. 4.16 perish be so hard to be draw by God or man by the word or sword by preach or beseech threaten or entreat either from the leave or loathe of commit sin or constant and conscionable performance of omit duty I say in the serious meditation and consideration of these premise I can but lament the sinner folly man native and natural stupidity * * jerem. 8.6 inconsideration and misery our english irish sensuality security impiety impenitency that though we have more mean more mercy more call to grace than ever judea or these former recite yet we make less use of they then they either in the theory or practise of such gracious such gratulatory duty as the peer and people after the prescript and pattern of their prince here perform 7 the universality of Israel gratitude with our universal ungracious ingratitude parallel and compare moreover to examine our ground a little further this first spring of my text abound you see with spiritual water to refresh the Israel of God there be no word letter syllable or Hebrew prick superfluous or unsignificant in the language of Canaan as in Tully Demosthenes Eschins Hortensius and other follow orator humane as the learned in the original tongue have w observe and from thence argue the infallible verity and excellency of the scripture above all humane author as and distillatorie water above conduit water it be very remarkable here the generality of their gratulation the conformity unity uniformity of their worship their sacrifice it be say all the congregation though great and populous bless God all worship all sacrifice all feast before the Lord there be not a man of they of a contrary mind heart spirit judgement will in the best of work they all draw as in one yoke walk as by one rule or line sing one note keep one tune there be not one cross refractory spirit that be take notice of in the whole multitude but they join together their heart and voice to the blessing of God oh here be a bless object to David ear and eye I wish our David can see the like according to his travail and desire that all those difference division contention betwixt prelacy and Presbetery in our english Israel about black and white and square and round and sit and kneel with such ceremony so hot controvert by the tongue and pen of so many zealist on both side in our church pulpit house and private as sometime public table that all this may meet as right draw line in one centre of 10 10 read the extant treatise of our moderate Cassander as d. sparkes m. Sprint m. As^aew his brotherly reconcilement peace that as we agree in doctrine with all reform church notwithstanding all papistical cavil and calumny to the contrary so we may agree also in discipline in the circumstance as well as in the substance of religion not dissent in the colour form or fashion shape lace of the garment when we consent in the choice goodness of the cloth oh that as we profess confess one God the father of all one Christ the redeemer of all one * * eph. 4 4.5 spirit the sanctifier of all the elect yea one faith one baptism one hope one life one way to this life as one sun but one soul in man one y y Phoenicia Mela li. 3. cap. 4 Herod li. 2. c. 5. Solin c. 35. symbol Isodor li. 12. c. 7. aug. ser. 18 in Concil. Aquisg c. 112 113 phoenix in the world etc. so that we will as one in one mind by one z z psalm 3.16 rule worship this god in a a John 4.24 spirit in truth in unity in uniformity of judgement and affection and sure this harmony I desire to see to hear as earnest as Augustine desire in his time a Timothy or Paul again in the b b augustin desire to see and pulpit to effect with best mental music oh that those string what ever they be which be put out of tune will come up to these that be in tune yea if I may speak it without offence to God or man as Paul in some case wish himself cut c c rom 9.3 off and Moses his name blot out of the book of d d exod. 32.32 life for the zeal of Israel I wish even my mummiamized earth and dead ash may quench at last these unnatural flame and fire in our english church about these these indifferent * * adiaphorist thing as they be call that like Aetna and that Vetruvius the frog and smoke of scandal and offence may no more break out to the choke and smother of the unsettle ignorant and unstable but as be the meditation once of * * d. hall our english Seneca in his meditation another I fear as the e e pulloi Aelian lib. 15. Vincent libr. 16. cap. 127. applicant aug. in psal 101. Gregor. in psalm 6. pelican in love to her young about who nest the indian shepherd make fire think to quench the flame do but scorch she own wing by which she be take so in too much intermeddle by the scorch tongue of censure I prejudice myself without profit the public cause therefore steer from these rock I desire to reflect upon this meditation that all be here well affect to God and the king all thankful for mercy all worshipper all sacrificer there be not one notify specify cham in the ark not one judas among these docible if not disciple not one at this feast without the wedding * * math. 22.11 garment not a Tobiah and Sanballat that counterfeit their help to the temple * * Neh 4.1.2.3 building not a sheba not a Achitophel not a popish kern not a rebellious spirit among they all not a Corab or g g Numb. 16.12.13 a Dathan in this goodly we may hope godly congregation despise h h jude vers. 8. government resist authority not a tongue wag as in former time we have no part in the son of i i 2. Sam 20.1 Isai shall this man reign over k k 1. sam. 10.27 we to thy tent oh Israel not one that prefer a foreign Bramble l l judge 9.15 before their own cedar not a man of they jesuited but if the oath of allegiance have be put to they will have subscribe with heart and hand not one recusant among all these that refuse in the same religious manner to worship God as his king worship not a infect sheep among all this flock not a string out of tune in all this musical * * multitude be either a instrument musical or that multitude not a contradict superstitious Cananite a idolatrous egyptian among all these israelite but all of they for as much as man can judge with one heart voice and spirit as the rush of so many water as the sound of so many trumpet as the noise of so many cornet so many cymbal and loud cymbal with unite spirit as organ and instrument of God glory right tune resonate and resound the praise of the almighty oh that I may be a auditor a spectator of such mental music in these day many musical man have write m m lib. 5. Musices c. 1. li. 1. Dodechacordon c. 1. Athan. libr. 14. Dipnos cap. 5. and cap. 14. julius Pollux libr. 4. Onomast cap. 8. and 9.10.11 etc. Rhodig Antiq. lect. lib 5. cap 23 25.26 ottom Luscivius libr. 1. Musurgia Plato lib. 3. Rep species instrumentoru^ very curious and exact of the variety excellency and excellent effect of n n 6 Musices cons^^^e arist. job. 8. polit. 5. and Plato dial. 6. li. 3. cap. 5 M^pocrate Amatum lib. 2. in Dis. or ^ 50 Gellium noct. Attie lib. 1. cap. 10. li. 14. c. 11. and lib. 1 c. 7. in Ter^^dro and Amphion and in Cythar Agamemnon music and have distinguish it into vocal instrumental lydian doric natural artificial elementary celestial regular Choreall gregorean figural mensurall dispute about the pre-eminence of one of these before another most prefer vocal which they call solemnisation before instrumental but for my part as much as I prefer the soul before the body I prefer the music of soul and spirit with one unanimous concord and consent right tune in the best key by the finger of the spirit with holy heart rather than musical harp sing as once the angel and the Bethelem o o Luk 2 14 shepherd Moses and p p exod. 14 Miriam Augustine and q q they be say to be the author of that holy hymn which call Ambrose David here and his people their holy hymn gratulatory praise io paean as our plantation this day to the glory of the god of glory the giver of all grace and sure if ever I see heaven upon earth it be when a religious pastor and a zealous people be assemble together in God house upon the lord sabbath or a religious family as a private or petty church hear and preach the word as in Paul time continue the whole r r act 20 7 day expound scripture as in Ezras s s Neh 8.5.6 7 8 time in public prayer early in the morning as in Tertullian day and the primitive t t Pliny the junior testify so much of they in epistle to traian apologize for christian time in some place and church in our time sing of psalm as our saviour with his disciple at his last supper oh sure here be a image indeed of heaven here be in some part of God worship the life of the saint in earth and in heaven here be bethel God own w w gen. 35 7 house the place be holy 10 10 exod 3 5 ground God himself here be present u u mark 14 26 walk in the midst of the y y Revel. 2.1 golden candlestick as he be with Sydrach Mysaach and z z dan. 3.24.25 Abelenago sing in the babylonian flame and with these joyful saint Saunders a a Foxum in mart. ^ilogi^ Gl^ver and other who rejoice and triumph in the midst of that romish babylonian flame in which the martyr be torture in queen mary day here Christ himself be present and precedent too as he be with his disciple after his b b Luke 24. resurrection and ascension in the day of c c act. 2.1.2.3 Pentecost according to his promise whether there be natural music in nerve artery and sinew the simularie or dissimularie part of the body of d d Medici Albere^ Durer^ and Tyurdei l 2. Musices syntax Mirabil^ l. 12 c. 8 pag 189 man or whether elementary music in the element as e e in Tymeo and in Marsil Plato f f in scip. and Macrob. in lib 2. c. 1 Tully Matrobius think or whether celestial and heavenly music in the sphere as Py^hagoras first g g athen. lib. 14. cap 14. imagine and to which many learned man since in all age have in some h h Plat. li. 10. reip. pa. 670. Macrob. lib. 2. somn scip. c. 3. p. 90. Plutarch tom. 2 pa. 707. Aristoph in act. 1. scan 3. pa 169. virgil. Aeneid pag 167 Manilius l. 1. pa. 25. Theologes Anselm magine ca. 24. tom. 3. pag. 300. beda tom. 1. p. 417. T^ius serm. 21. p. 256. and ser. 23. pag. 280. sense subscribe though by other contradict other dispute other doubt these musical controversy to i be not much material here be that music which as David say of goliahs sword 1) 1) 1. sam. 21.9 there be none like unto it here be the music of music as salomon canticle be call the song of song to which the quire of heaven join with the chorus of saint in earth at this the angel rejoice 2) 2) Luke 15 vers. 10. as at that conversion of sinner with this god himself be delight his spirit ravish refresh more than ever Alexander or any other be wrought upon by modulation of any earthly man where on the contrary to make application to our own time if ever I see the very image and picture of hell it be when a careless empiric of soul a doltish sir john-lack latin a blind Pholypheme a profane Esau one of Jeroboam priest 3) 3) 1. King 12. vers. 31. be place over a people of Sodom 4) 4) Isay 1. v. 10. as a wolf over goat whereupon god own saboths which shall be consecrate as glorious day to the lord 5) 5) jer. 17.27 be pervert and profane rather to the service of Bacchus Priapus and Venus as once the heathenish and etc. that the devil shall so rule and reign in the popish or profane parish keep such a rackett as the chief steward both with pastor and people that neither barrel be better hear in stead of preach there shall be pipe or idle prate play as the israelitish wantoness once with the moabitish woman Numb. 25. in stead of devotion dance in stead of sing of psalm discharge of oath like volley of shot and roar of canon with full fool foul mouth even in the very face of the almighty oh the difference betwixt David day and we those jovial saturnal golden day in which he live and our iron ireful time David people have they act such public part of God praise in our day worship God so serious so solemn so sincere now they have be count and call puritan precisian every mother son of they many a i i gen. 21.9 Ismalite will have scoff they many a k k 2. sam. 20.6 Micholl mock they yea have but part of this congregation assemble in the night as the persecute christian be sometime occasion for their security and the disciple after Christ l l act 12. v. 12 ascension have there be any religious m m chief a damsel rhoda as act. 12.13 she will be count and call too a woman among they though mary magdalen salomee or Susanas they shall all have be tax and traduce to have be of the family of love or lust Adamite or anabaptist they have be censure every one their devotion have be turn on the tipp of malignant tongue into promiscuous dance they have escape no better than the primitive christian or then the sincere in those day at least they have be count more precife than wise more hypocritical than holy thus public to praise and worship God which they may have do well enough in private without this Heraulding and trumpet God praise and in he their own perhaps they have not escape the imputation which Festus give unto m m act 26.24 Paul and n n 2. King 9.11 jehues consort captain to the anoint prophet even of mad man SECT. 8 David time and we further balance in respect of multitude then religious now irreligious thus David and his people be as in a pleurisy or burn fever of zeal carry up as o o 2. King 2.11 Elias as in a fiery chariot we be now in a cold palsy freeze as Esop snake yea as p p Discorides lib. 2. c. 5. galenus temper lib. 3. cap. 4. aug. lib. 21. cap. 4. salamander not to be heat extinguish all spark and fire that be put in we by good motion from God or put to we by good motive from man oh the difference betwixt their blessing shibboleths and our smoky stink blaspheme q q judge 12.6 sibboleths reflect on my text and at first blush you see all this numerous and populous congregation blessing and worship God to be bless and praise for ever reflect on our time and it will make any true Nathaniel that have but a glimpse or dram of grace his face to blush his heart to bleed his ear to tingle to hear in thousand parish and congregation in England and Ireland except some few which fear a oath the most part chief in alehouse tavern inn and tipple house when the devil and strong drink be in and the wit be out not only with tongue poison as asp blaspheme the best of man as the drunkard that make song of David but even set their mouth against heaven bark against the sovereign majesty of the almighty as the egyptian dog against the moon tear as the lion a kid or the flesh Wolf a sheep the heart wound blood yea nail foot gut yea all the part of Christ humanity as though like cannibal they will eat his very flesh again not as our mass priest and papist in a blind devotion but even in despite as though with the jew they will crucify again the lord glorify body and wound his wound a fresh oh the blasphemy of the multitude in stead of blessing for which the land mourn can a man come to any public assembly unless in assize session and such court where silence be enjoin and as I have purposely observe at horse-race dogge-race men-race in market fair marriage occasion feast and all public meeting from noble to page from knight to ploughman there be not a man among ten to speak which swearer do not within compass that make conscience of a oath chief of their faith and troth which pawn they upon every trivial occasion more than a ape as they say to crack nut and as it hold in other place so chief as I see too experimental in these our plantation in my observance great man knight gentleman yeoman husbandman servant servingman prentice page yea woman and child matron and maid and old wife too who tongue want the garrison of tooth hang as loose as the rest have no often the use but the abuse of their tongue in this needless unpleasing unprofitable sin chief when heat with wrath and word or in the bicker of contestation how do not only great but even base spirit revenge themselves upon God himself wreak their teen by oath upon the creator when they be any way provoke by the creature as if a spirit mastiff be whip by another shall fly in the face of his master as king Henry fool that be strike by any be say to strike again ever his next fellow whether he hurt he or no but come now to our rascality or riffe-riffe of the rout of the base of the common r r and people and you shall hear they in their ordinary talk conference commerce work or walk together beside what they act upon the tribunal of their alebench in which these serpent turn then dragon rap dart yea laugh out more oath in a hour then ever they do good deed all their day croak like so many frog bark as so many dog as so many adder spit their very venom and poison so in the very face of God as a man will think he be among so many devil and hellhound I pretermit the curse execration imprecation of our people blaspheming dally jest with s scripture and sermon as with edge t tool mutter murmur against God as once rebel u u exod. 16. numb 11. Numb. 16. Israel gruntle as swine if but touch with the least cross hiss like snake and serpent in the least fire of affliction oh this be to speak the language of ashodd as accurse canaanite whereas we shall speak the language of Canaan as these blessing israelit if I shall press the practice of this prince and people further and lay we to it in a equal balance compare what they do with what we do not as black compare to white seem more w black as the heathen Vulcan compare to their fair Venus seem more foul so our congregation and commonalty seem as more sinful compare with these saint in David day they be all duteous devout obsequious thankful religious at least in the outward man for God only know the heart and search the 10 10 jer. 17.9.10 reins and know whether there be among this congregation as among we any guild y y Luke 11.39 40.41.42 post paint sepulcher sodoms z z Solinus cap. 36 Tacitus Aegisippus lib. 4 ca. 18. mira Tertul. apol. cap. 39 O^osius lib. 1. cap. 6. August lib. 6. cap. 30. and 21. cap. 5. apple rot at the core hollow heart hypocrite but hope the best when we can only suspect not detect the worst even the generality of our plebeians our vulgar people come short of these in that they have hardly so much as show they come not so near heaven as do sacrifice (1) (1) gen. 4.4.5 Cain weep (2) (2) hebr. 12.16 Esau the vow (3) (3) proverb 7 harlot the carnal (4) (4) even Doeg himself 1. Sam 22. will offer a sacrifice Israelite prophese (5) (5) numb 23.8.9 Balaam preach (6) (6) act 1.23.24 judas the pray (7) (7) Luke 18.13 Pharisee the foolish (8) (8) matth. 25. virgin the fast (9) (9) esay 58. jew the humble (10) (10) 1. King 21 ahab the herodian hearer the devoute jewish woman the temporize hypocrite and other reckless reprobate for these have at least show of religion as have a a coll. 4.14 2. tim. 4.10 demas b b 1. sam. 11.15 and chap. 14. v. 33 Saul himself and many more a name at least to live like the church of c c Revel. 3.1 Sardis how ever like those wanton widow in d d 1. tim. 5.6 Timothy dead whilst live in sin and e e ephes 2.1 trespass yea bury and stink in God nostril as f f John 11.39 Lazarus in man but our common christian for the most part their course be so lewd that please God as a common woman do her husband they have not so much as a show to live they have not so much as figg-leaves of outward profession much less the fruit of practice they want both stock and that which as they say show any substance of grace they do not so much as seem religious they have not even shadow their whole profession be profanation I know God have his elect once in every place and people chief where the mean be plant as where also they be unplanted or corrupt I know God have his lot in g g Genes. 19.2 Pet 2. Sodom his Noah among the h h Luke 17.26 Genes 6.8 worldling his Elias and seven thousand more unseen among the i i 1. King 19 18. baalite his Sydrach Mesach and Daniel in k k dan. 3.13 Babylon his Ezekiell among l l ezek. 2.6 scorpion his Abraham in m m act. 7.2 Mesopotamia his david in the very tent of kedar and n n in Mesek his joseph in the court of o o Genes. 41.45 Pharaoh his Israel in p p exod. 3.7 Egypt yea such as hate the babylonian whore and by their pen and tongue discover her filthiness even in the dark time of q q see they express and nominate by that learned work of the b. of out of all record and author ancient and modern popery I know as the lord have a r r John 1.44 Philip in Bethaida a Nathaniel in s s John 21.2 Cana a Lazarus a Martha a Mary even in that little t t John 11.5.18 bethania a Simeon a joseph a Zachary a joseph of Arimathea that look for the redemption and consolation Israel even in the midst of a bloody and sinful jerusalem a Cornelius a devoute u u act. 10.1 centurion even among the band of roman soldier yea a thunder christian legion in the camp of a heathenish w w of this legion who obtain rain to the save of the emperor army and how from the power of prayer they be call we read in text Scapul and in apol. ca. 5. in eus l. 5. c. 5. in justin apol. 2. auto. in Alsted Theol. ^^t sect. 3. pag. 731. emperor even a church in the house of Nero himself so in the profane place time city town parish yea sometime family there be some that fear God that keep themselves free from the contagion of the time hate the garment 10 10 jude 23. pollute by the flesh save themselves in the midst of a sinful generation stand in the gap as Moses and Aaron by y y numb 16.22 prayer to prevent deserve plague yea I say even in the profane household there be sometime some holy one sometime a z z gen. 39.1.2 joseph in the house of Putiphar a jacob in the house of a a gen. 29. Laban a religious young maid in the house of naaman the b b 2 King 5.1.2 syrian I say there be even still some come among chaff but alas these godly one be thin swoon here one and there one as unious here one of a tribe and two of a c c jer. 3.14 city as pearl among pebble compare with the multitude of blasphemous swearer goatish adulterer swinish drunkard bite usurer thief profane sabboth-breaker and other give over like ahab and jezabel to commit all wickedness with greediness alas the true nathaniel compare with these nabal these sensual sinful * * ps 14.1 prov. 7.7 proverb 8.5 luk. 12.20 fool as God call and account they which swarm as the locust and grasshopper in every place as egyptian frog in court country city they be so few that thus shine as star in this our dark night of popery and profaneness so many be carry away to all sinful course with the very stream and torrent of the time that we may say as we see that all be not so much as seem religious as here in David court and camp but as David complain in the d d psal 14.1.2 rom. 3.10.11.12 psalm we may say our congregation comment that all be go out of the way all for the generality be corrupt and become abominable their throat be a open sepulchre their foot ready and swift to shed blood so little do our multitude parallel these people so praise in my text for praise God and other religious duty the three part chap. i. application of all to our english-irish Israel hitherto we have see David act his part in his gratulatory praise on the public stage pious personal public primary the people they innitiatory Propensly obsequious universal after their prince his pattern and jussion the several point and passage have be make we by application but as the marrow and quintessence of all that may be extract which concern our meeting and the solemnisation of these day take this for the conclusion of all as my aim and end in all that be speak without which there be but a confusion of all that where God bless he must be bless again a dignity require a e duty a benefit from God a blessing of God all that have be say as the hand in the dial to the hour point to this point every part open already and apply be commix as several drug that in joint operation they may purge our ingratitude which because it be as a humour viscous and glutinous like f pride the mother of it and like the devil the father of it have once get deep possession in the heart of our nation be hear to be dispossess plead many year prescription since also as a rebel and traitor against God be unconfront and not encounter it daily wax strong and strong and get head more and more to the ruin of kingdom and realm and supplant of all where it get dominion as the usurp Turk with his f f he that reign put the rest to death as Amurath dispach his five brethren and maho^^et have murder ze^^s have he not f^ed of which and many more he that will be satisfy let he read the history of Scanderbag the turkish history Pl^^thi^f^ his pilgrimage lib. 3. cap. 8. and 1555. brethren as with the king seed put to death every grace keep out especial as a tyrant in a usurp throne the true king this regal and royal grace of gratitude therefore for the suppress of this hellbred tyrant and for the inthronoze this tetrarch this heaven-bred monarch into his true seat his legal throne the heart of man chief to help it to regain his monarchy in the spirit of our britanicall nation and of we their offspring here hybernify I will not be want according to my talent to cast this Cananite out of our border to crush the head of this serpent this viperous ingratitude and to bring back again joyful as the jew their exile David from Hebron to g g 2. sam. 5.2.3 jerusalem this true grace of gratitude as the athenian at last reduce their worthy Themistocles and the roman their Tully from their ostrocisme etc. which that I may effect as my heart desirous affect I will use motive as my chief spiritual weapon second prescribe mean as the order of my rank three remove * * I have not full prescribe the mean nor remove the let or remorae as I intend because the book contrary to my first project swell so great already but I promise they God willing if ever these be think worthy reprint otherwise impediment as the discovery of ambushment and these will we do as God and your patience shall permit first for the motive as aim still method take they either general or more especial 1. general as they concern all christian to be thankful of what sort sex quality condition soever they be for all mercy of what nature soever reiterate or renew to their soul or body and above all thing to steer from this rock of ingratitude either to God the principal author and agent or to man the mediate organ and instrument of any good to they or they 2. special as they concern the solemnisation of these late mercy in which we promise and purpose to commemorate and congratulate as David and his subject here in their time the mercy of adornation or preservation to our english Israel in which even we now english-irish have deep share 1. for the first if any soul here present or to who soever these present shall come find himself infect with this leprous disense of ingratitude which as a felon or gangreen have spread over the whole body almost of our nation and as poison corrupt the blood of so many let he take these physical purgative for the cleanse and purify of his infect spirit the kill of the humour and tumour of pride the original of it together with some julupps and cordial to corroborate his heart against it and to breed and increase in he this good spirit this good vital blood of true gratitude the fair daughter of a fruitful mother true grace chap. 2 motive to thankfulness first let he know that this thankfulness have his special mandate and injunction from God in several g g psalm 50.15 psalm 107. 1. thess 15.16.17 scripture it have his warrant and sign in the great court of heaven it come from the great monarch of the world to every microcosm and little world it be enact in the high parliament as God statute law and upon penalty to the contrary to be execute by every one it be that tax and subsidy and spiritual tribute impose and exact upon every subject not deny cross or contradict by any unless by some that like stubborn fort and castle stand in opposition or as Kearnes come out in rebellion against the supreme and sovereign majesty of God himself the king of king yea this must be pay in our own person of high low rich poor learned and unlearned prince peer potentate duke marquis earl baron knight gentleman yeoman husbandman labourer Plebeian common-beggar we can do this duty by a deputy or attorney none can make affidavit one for another as in our civil court even David a king be not exempt from this homage neither other king much less the vulgar if not senator magistrate and patritian second the easiness of this task if neglect and unperformed admit no apology no plea nor excuse great subsidy and custom impose as appear in our chronicle and all history have occasion mutter murmur mutiny rebellion in the subject as perplex Israel against perverse h h 1. King 12.18 robeam and so in i i see stow and hellinshed chronicle England about pay of poll-money and Peter penny but this imposition of gratitude to God if God give grace be as easy perform as enjoin what great inconvenience be it for naaman the syrian to wash in k k 2. king 5. jordan for the halt to wash in the pool of l l John 5 4.5 Bethsaida for the leper to go show himself to the m m Luke 17.14 priest for the poor widow to throw n n Luke 21.2 a mite into the treasury for a man to open his mouth and the door of his lip or rather of the heart to God as the marry-gold open to the sun and shewforth his praise if the prophet have command thou some great thing say the servant to that syrian thou ought to have do o o 2. King 5 ^^ it so if the lord shall command we in requital of all his mercy to give to the poor not only half with p p Luke 19.8 zacheus but as he try that young justitiary in the q q math. 19.11 gospel even all our good we ought to give all to he for he that have give all to we if he enjoin we to sacrifice our son as once r r gen. 22.1.2.3 Abraham to give our body to be burn as once the martyr in the paganish Arrian and popish persecution we shall not grudge the lord our good our blood our son yea our very soul as be once the case of s s exod. 32.32 see d wiles his Comment. in his Comment. in his Moses and of t t rom. 9 Paul himself to vindicate and redeem the glory of God to which every creature in heaven and earth must be subordinate but now he enjoin we a more facile and ready way which we may honour and glorify he and that be by our thankfulness our cordial and hearty acknowledgement of his mercy a yoke that be not heavy but easy a burden not laborious but u u math. 11.29 psalm 33.1 light a thing not unseemly but seemly a thing not incongruous any way or undecent but exceed good psal 92.1 yea pleasant and comely psal 147.1 now how can we be want to this eucharistical spiritual duty that have in it all the requisite of the pagan moral * * Cicero in offic. E^ dulci. good be honest pleasant profitable unless we will be a want to God glory and our own good 1. have God command we only to sacrifice our eye blind Bartimeus and such as have be bear blind as he in the 9 of John can not have offer this sacrifice 2. or only our ear and tongue the deaf and the dumb have be exclude his service 3. or our wealth and full bag the poor have be to seek for his sacrifice as that poor persian for his * * Alexandro gift when sudden he meet with his king but now since the lord require neither thousand ram out of the flock nor the goat from the hill nor the bullock from the stall nor such hecatomb psalm 50. nor the ear nor the eye nor tongue for these the hypocrite and temporizer give he but only a cordial and a grateful y y deut. 5.24 Prover. 23.26 heart active passive constant conscionable universal obedient to God the very life and soul of all gratitude since Christ the princely z z Aelian 6. hist. cap. 28. Ambr. in math. 24. ho. 49. August johan. tract. 36. in and Jsidor lib. 12. ca. 7. applicant and add eagle ascend as it be write of natural eagle chief delight to pray upon the heart he that give not this give nothing as God will nothing as he shall three there be many gracious promise make to the thankful as goad of the sanctuary and prick to excite and stir up to this duty as golden cord to draw and allure we to it as also many threat and menace as so many thunderbolt against the unthankful beside other scripture the whole 28. chapter of Deuteronomie and 26. of Leviticus be spend in this argument chap. 3 further motive to thankfulness from the blessing it bring and continue fourthly let we consider the blessing and good thing which gratitude bring or continue with the inconvenience and subsequent of ingratitude as argument which not only divinity but even heathenish oratory have use both persuasive and dissuasive from a reward and b punishment first to begin even with the least the mighty and merciful God take this gratitude exceed kind at our hand give many encomium and commendation on the grateful as he do on Solomon 1. king 3. five 6.7 8. even as a man that have but a glimpse and spark of that justice and mercy which be attribut essential in c c Zanchius God wondrous approve and applaud a thankful person where ever he meet with such as a black swan or white d crow in any condition whereas again God sharp and severe tax and redargu not only the ingratitude of the e e jerem. 5.7 jewess of f f Revel. 2.22 jezabel of g g rev. 3.15.16 17. Laodicea as to be such indeed which his soul loathe and abhor and his stomach can digest more than luke warm water prefer even the very brute beast the ox and the ass before h h Esai 1.4 they but even lay open detect and detest the ingratitude of the very gentile themselves that have no guidance but the dim spark of i i rom 2.22.23.24 nature now if a courtier will be in disgrace with his king as k k Esther 7.9 Haman once with Assuerus a child with his father as l l Genes. 9.25 cham and Canaan with Noah a servant with his master as m m joh. 6 70.71 judas with our saviour Christ and sycophantize treacherous ziba with n n 2. sam. 19.26 27 Mephib^seth a friend with his great friend as David treacherous companion be deserve in disgrace with * * psalm 41.9 David if we will live in Rome as the proverb be and contest and contend with the pope if that impostor may be name in that line where God be name then let we continue still as we do in our obstinate rebellion and viperous ingratitude second let we consider and lay to heart that gratitude and thankfulness be the very mean to perpetuate and continue mercy of what nature soever in any measure receive yea entail they as it be sure than our land and revenue to we and to our heir for ever if they walk worthy of they God be the god not only of Abraham but of his seed Isaac and o o math. 22.32 jacob oft in mercy remember distress Israel the offspring of that patriarchal root even for his covenant sake with Abraham for his servant David * * 1. King 11.34 sake as indeed to speak my thought and opinion free if not judgement if without touch or pry into the p p 1. sam. 6.19 ark enter into God secret intrude to be of his privy counsel from which rock I steer we may make any scrutiny or search into the reason of God progress and proceed with a nation the lord be holy in all his way and righteous in all his work his judgement though secret yet never q unjust consider great Britain many and manifold marvelous and miraculous deliverance pluck oft as in the year 88 especial and the powder treason and plot prevent as abrand out of the fire as lot out of r r gen. 19.16 dan. 6. Sodom as Daniel out of the mouth of lion yea and of dig fox too who though they dig nigh we yet they dig by we preserve as David and his company from Saulites nymrodian bloudy-hunter together with other positive mercy as the reshining once again according to that zealous latimers our english Luther s s he use in his prayer and ejaculatory mental desire to reiterate this once again once again send the gospel to this unthankful land prayer of the gospel break as the sun out of that dark popish cloud of conglomerate english t t in that Quinquenium blood the continuance of it still the go forward of our spiritual temple notwithstanding the disturbance scoff and plot of so many libel lie popish tobiah'ss and u u neh. 4.1.2.3 sanballats the reduction of our illustrious prince among we better belove of we then w w who death be so lament that in any disaster which befall the Turk it be proverbial Mustapha among his ottoman with as much joy rewelcomed as Israel return from 10 10 ezra 1.5 and 3 Chaldea as isaack birth be to laugh y y 2. Ezr. 10.12 Sarah and rejoice Abraham together with that which I can pretermit lest if we hold our tongue and be silent the very stone shall speak that visible and remarkable judgement to speak in verity and charity both at once if fame Battus like do not babble which late befall upon the adversary of our judah the lord own immediate hand for as trial have experiment it can be father as the powder plot shall have be upon any puritan as they impure call they no Samson no protestant Nazarite their pestilent policy may perhaps give out have either hand in or heart to this tragedy but I say god own hand which shoot from heaven against w w throw his blood into the air with thou have overcome o galilean thou have overcome theodoret. julian fight from heaven against Amaleck and 10 10 judge 5.20 jabin cast a thunderbolt from heaven against that arrian y y see in the end of zegedin table in folio God judgement against several heretic anastasius throw the chamber call jerusalem upon the head of that z z Manserium and nicromancer Silvester the second drown Pharaoh in the a a exod. 14.16 sea smite proud Herod with b b act. 12.23 worm devour Hatto of Mentz with c c Sifridus prasbiter lib. 1. epitome dom. 923. Maiolus col. 7. pag. 254. Ann^ deut. 914. Damonibu^ rat that hand which oft as a sheriff apprehend and as a general by martial-law execute wrath on the wicked in the very act of sin as on the blind d d gen. 19.11 sodomite presumptuous e e dan. 4.30 Nabuchadnezzer the gospel f f Luke 12.20 carnalist that hand pull down dagons house upon the head of these philistine these Dagonites in the very midst of their idolatrous sacrifice by a visible sermon and as by a audible voice from heaven I say speak to we how much he honour that ark of his truth fix among we and to they how much he detest their abomination pay home at last their provocation by this fall also prolong the fall of their bell their Babel tutor they also in their bloody project as once Saul what it be to kick against the prick to contest with the lord protector of Israel I say in all probability leave god secret justice or mercy we be in a great part to attribute the continuation and succession of these mercy to our english Israel as partly even to the piety constancy patience zealous prayer and tear of our queen mary * * in that as it be call martyr so more special and particular to the gracious humiliation fast and tear of the faithful of the land in our distress and danger and fear in the absence of our prince as also to their cordial and hearty gratulation for his joyful and triumphal reduction both the positive blessing we enjoy and the privitive evil that have be keep from we both the one and the other be to be ascribe more to the prayer and thanksgiving of the upright in the land then to all the power and policy of man or the arm of flesh for as God bless even private family for the cause of some one as the house of Laban for Jacob d d Genes. 30.27 cause the house of e e gen. 39.5 Putiphar the jailer f f ibid. vers. 23. prison yea the court of Pharaoh for Joseph g g gen. 47. v. 25 cause preserve by rain h h Antonius his army be ^ day without water on the mountain of Germany by the prayer of a legion of christian soldier be relieve by rain from heaven whereupon as we have already allege from justin martyr Tertul. Eusebio it be call the thunder legion send in a wondrous drought the whole army of a heathenish emperor for the cause of one christian legion save all that be in the ship with Paul act 27.24 for Paul cause how much more do the lord pour both precious mercy and reprieve a land from deserve plague depend judgement for the cause of many Noah david and daniel that be upright in the land who upon all occasion be both humble for judgement and thankful for mercy herein God imitate man who be willing ever to do most good where he find the recipient party most thankful cast like the husbandman ever his seed most willing in that ground which have recompense his former labour and pain in former year with the most grateful interest thankfulness for one mercy ever draw on another as one circle in the water make another that a three and that a four as one link in a chain draw on another link after link as indeed why do jehovah accumulate so many mercy upon David one after another as one beam of the sun reflect after another make his cup to overflow his lot to fall in a fair ground give he a goodly heritage crown he with long life spread his table lead he still into the green * * psalm 23. and pasture but because he be ever so thankful to his shepherd as for further instance David be preserve from a rage bear a ramp i i 1. sam. 17.34.35.36 lion he be thankful for this deliverance after he be rescue from k k 1. sam. 23. ch. 24. chap. 26. Saul more rage roar ramp then they * both after from the jebusite after from Achitophel from Absalon after from sheba he be thankful whilst he reign in Hebron as a petty king therefore God enlarge his territory and plant he in l l 2. sam. 5.1.2.3 jerusalem as god high Stewart now among we be find faithful in govern the young Scotland espouse he at last to the elder sister England as jacob after his faithful service prudence and patience at last enjoy joy in his fair m m gen. 29.28 Rachel as that good servant in the gospel that be faithful in a few talent be make ruler over many n n matth. 25. v. 20.21.22.23 city thus joseph also deliver out of a pit by o o Genes. 37.28 Reuben no doubt be thankful for that God deliver he out of a deep p p prov. 23. v. 27 ditch a more dangerous pit the train of a whorish mistress the prison of a ungrateful master so Moses be thankful for his deliverance from q q exod. 15. Pharaoh and the pursue egyptian host God after take his part against r r exod. 17.11 amalek against moab and vindicate his cause against his sister s s numb 12.6.7 Miriam aeiwlate aron be ever ready at all essay as a friend at need to bestead he in all his exigent three thanksgiving sanctify unto we every blessing yea every creature every action every call yea what ever we set our hand too our meat our drink our exercise recreation study marriage journey rest primacy company yea what not as it be a speey and part of * * scult precatione pag. 2.3 prayer without which every thing we intermeddle with be like ourselves impure and t t 1. tim. 4.1.2.3 unclean we handle they as collier or smith sometime eat their meat with unwashen hand yea we use abuse every blessing as usurper incrocher yea purloiner where we have no right nor title more than a thief to a true man purse leave be light but without thankfulness we take leave we ask none we be not only unmannerly but without question more bold with God then welcome chap. 4 ingratitude a sin against grace and nature condemn by the very heathen fourthly a thankless heart be a evident signal and demonstration of a graceless heart where there be no gratitude it be certain there be no grace for as thankfulness be conjoin with other grace as with prayer and spiritual u u 1. thes 5.16.17.18 rejoice as the inseparable companion and adjunct so as Hypocrates twin they live and die together as relative they depend one upon another as it be oft with some woman and her conceive child the death or life of the one be oft the death or the life of both and indeed as this be a true rule in the aggravation of any sin that the more unnatural that any sin be the more odious horrible and unmeasurable sinful it be as fratricide and brother butcher such as cain against Abel Absalon against w w 2. sam. 13 3^ Ammon Alphonsus his 10 10 a proctor in Rome that come very far to perform a meritorious act the murder of his brother in bed with a hatcher because he be a protestant brother be worse than homicide or man-killing as incest such as y y gen. 35.22 rubens with his mother in law ammon with his sister * * 2. sam. 13.4 ^ Thamar and that of the incestuous z z 2. cor. 2.5.6 corinthian be worse than adultery or simple fornication because more unnatural so it be with ingratitude the hag be more ugly and deform in that she be a monster-bred against the very light course and kind of nature much more against the sunshine of grace five to illustrate this a little further as another motive to set a edge upon our affection towards this beauteous Helena this excellent grace of true gratitude and to hate that foul Thirsites that Ate or hellish hag ingratitude to make that positive which we have make comparative let it not pass our animadversion and consideration that to the shame and obloquy of ungrateful ungracious christian even pagan and heathen have be find thankful yea by the erect of trophy image statue a a and and juvenalem Corona nau. li Civica etc. plin. lib. 10. c. 22 Guevat in monte Caivariae and Cassaneum in Caetalogo part. 1. pag. 8. in 3. and 4. antiq. and Cel^^ rhod. lect. antiq. lib. 13 cap. 6. picture they have express their gratitude to their eupaters patriot and benefactor of their country as the roman to their sciptoe decian horatian curtian the athenian to their Codrus the egyptian to their ptolomee for free their country of enemy themselves of fear preserve their peace their good wife child and such blessing receive by their mean yea they have thankful honour the memorial of those that by their prowess and valour have rid they of poisonous and noisome serpent lion dragon fierce and ugly destroy monster thus they grateful honour their Hercules for subdue Cacus the robber Sph^nx Cerberus and Geryon Perseus for kill the snaky Medusa Bellerophon for conquerin that chimaera Regulus for destroy that great and terrible 10 10 plin. nat. hist. lib. 4. cap. 14 serpent at the flood Bragada Capadox for quell the african snake Corebus for overthrow that grecian monster Alcon for shoot the dragon of Crete Meleager and Acastius for kill the calidonian boar Cadmus and diverse other for subdue other serpent dragon minotaure record in history as much honour by they as our s. George Bevis of South-hampton Guy of Warwick and other among we who fabulous story in such exploit as these be receive as gospel truth by the credulous popish I doubt too much too of the Protestant laiety so these pagan have honour such live by erect their picture to live last glory deify they die among their god place they above the star by who art and science for their experiment good have be invent or perfect as Ceres Triptolemus Saturn the invention of corn by tillage Bacchus for plant vine other for other invention particularise by Polidor * Virgil no less prodigal and profuse have they be grateful distribute large honour to those by who letter be first find and invent or good law have be act and establish thus to this day Lycurgus among the lacedaemonian Zele^chus among the ^ocrensians Minos among the cretan philo among the corinthian Zalmosis among the scythian as once Romulus among the roman with other legifer and lawgiver or interpreter of their law in other nation as the druid among the gaul Mahumet to this day among his saracen the brachman and gymnosophist among the indian the among the persian have their name praise and perpetuate even to these time in which honour also Menno the first founder of letter among the egyptian Rhadamanthus among the assyrian Nicostrata among the roman phenice among the grecian have deep and deserve share yea these heathen have be in their kind not only thankful to their best deserve man which they have count their heroes yea as semedian or half god but they have be more thankful to the multitude stultitude of their imaginary god who in their blind superstition they have acknowledge as author of their good preserver of their safety preventer of their evil or as appear by their own author their a a Virgil lib. 1. Georg li. 5.6 aneid ovid. lib. 4. fast and li. 6. h^mer lib. 22 in fine Tibul. eleg 1 5. li. 4. eleg 9 and Juvenal Satyr. 2. poet b b Cicero and Vat. li. 4. orator c c Livius lib. 2.3 4. and 22. Herod li. 7. Festus Pompeios li. 14. li. 4. Cato rust li 41. plin. li 35 cap 15 cyprian li 5 historian d d Proclus Plutarc in brut. and mac. li. Saturn 1. and 3 philosopher e e gal. l. 1 tuend c. 7. Avicen l. 1. fen 3. and Alsar l. 2. pract. tit. 26. cap. 2. physician as they have diverse and different lustration and purge sacrifice for their city camp field court house ship family function after different way and ceremony so have they eucharistical and gratulatory sacrifice wherein to honour their god the more they cause their priest to sing solemn hymn and sonnet to their praise as jon pa^n to Apollo amorous song to Venus martial hymn to Mars other to f Ceres g g hipingo^ Diana h h Dionys Tythir Maiol canic part. 2. pag. ^6 Dionysius etc. and as they place and assign they as our popeling this day their deify adore saint their several function as tutor and guardian over several thing as Ceres over fruit i i par. 2. col. 1. pag. 23. Triptolemus over corn Bacchus over vine Ch^orus over flower Vertumnus over apple aristaeus over honey their and over their household etc. as also over several place assign their power as jupiter in the heaven juno in the air Neptune in the sea Pluto in the infernal hell the fawn and satyr over the wood the dryad over tree and mountain their Naides over fountain as also in which still our k k see a conceit book call the beehive of the romish church one m. Emerod his picture of a Papist chief d. sutcliffe his turcopap^smus against giffords Calvino papist sympathize over several profession and function liberal illiberal military physical mechanical as Minerva over the learned Phoebus over the muse Aesculapius over physic and physician Vulcan over smith Venus and Cupid over love and lover Mercury over cheater and cuni-catcher Mars and Bellona over war and warrior Lucina over woman in childbed and so of the rest so when they perceive or but conceit that any thing prosper better or any fear or feel evil be prevent by the tuition and protection of their titulary god so in imitation of the jew in their sacrifice to the true jehovah they have show their thankfulness by their eucharistical oblation and l l and Livium and and aegyptiorun canicular part. 2. col. 1. pag. 55. sacrifice yea by the present of gift unto they as our papist still load the altar before image and shrine and by significant emblem and symbol represent their power inclination and operation as appear by the assign unto Vulcan a hammer to pan a pipe to Sibyl a bell to Bacchus a tiger to Venus a swan to Saturn a serpent to Aesculapius a snake to Minerva a owl to Mars a wolf to Mercury a caducean wand to Diana a hart and dog to Phoebus a crow to Bacchus a panther to Pallas a spear to jupiter a eagle to Cupid bow and arrow to juno a peacock to Hercules a club etc. and so the rest now shall superstition be more thankful to her false god then true religion to the true God shall the devil delude these pagan as at this day our papist by his sleight and operation work as by once speak in Eden serpent dodons oak Apollo oracle and oft in image by and in these imaginary deity his own end shall he which as God ape and emulator he above all thing desire obtain more honour of these idolater than the true God of we his profess servant shall pagan be more thankful than christian as purposely by more pain I have express sure as the ninivite the queen of m m matth. 12.41 42. sheba and the sodomite themselves against the ungrateful ungracious jew so these pagan shall testify against we at the great tribunal in our omission of these gratulatory duty to the true jehovah which they blind give to their imaginary n n Trismegistum in Pimandro cap. 1. Gale and Alsted in natural god their well deserve deify man chap. v. Chrstian and heathenish ingratitude exemplify sixth as these heathen have be themselves grateful and thankful to their god and to their best merit man so they have from the light and spark of nature wondrous distaste detest and declaim against the ingratitude of other hold a ungrateful man the very viper the ugly monster in the o world the most unprofitable bulk and burden of the earth the centre of all injustice the compendium and abstract of all that can be call ill in p a man yea as the best moralist chief q q in Plutarch r r l. 4. c. 21. and 27. and libr. 5. Seneca s s libr. 1. Stobaeum tit Tully have give many rule and motive to gratitude tell we that for the benefit we receive either from God or man we must in imitation of the fertile ground render more than we have receive no more grudge to repay thanks back again for good turn do then to redeliver back again the pledge and pawn we have have in our custody not forget the good that from any we have receive but the good we have do with many such particular counsel caution and caveat so these with other grave and learned historian have severe censure and brand with a perpetual blot of obloquy and infamy such person yea such province nation and kingdom as have be unthankful to well deserve man much more to their god make ingratitude the canker in the rose the cantharides in the ointment the soil and stain of many other excellent gift and part of such as otherways excel in arm or in art thus they satirical and sharp tax the ingratitude of that Paris or Alexander Phrygius in steal away the wife of Menelaus and treacherous kill the king of Sydon of both who he be courteous entertain against the law of nature of nation and hospitality thus also t t Appian lib. 2. Appian and all roman historiographer since lay load upon the vile ingratitude of Cassius and Brutus Caesar son in u u brute cry Caesar when he be stab in the senate house law Domitius Trebonius Tullius cymber the two Casca Hala with other confederate in bewitch stab julius Caesar with bodkin in the senate house as dispitful as Gerson be stab by his ungrateful scholar by the instigation of emulating-fryer or as Fulvia tyrannize over Tully tongue with her needle notwithstanding this worthy Caesar have pardon some of they with many other of the pompeyan faction out of that clemency which w w Roscio Detotaro and Tully every where so commend so who can with patience read in Livy and Plutarch the ingratitude of the roman towards the two scipio the african and the emilian the first whereof though he be their fortress in so many fight perish in Leviterium the second for all his conquest over the carthagenian and numantine find in Rome a murderer but not 10 a revenger the ingratitude of the athenian towards their Theseus and Solon and Themistocles who they banish towards Miltiades who in remuneration of free they from the persian in the expedition against Darius they imprison and famish as also towards their ten praetor who in stead of deserve and expect honour after their victory over the lacedaemonian they condemn to death the ingratitude of the carthagenian towards their eloquent hamilcar who in guerdon of his well perform embassage with Alexander the great they butcher at his y y his and Bruson exempl libr. 3. pag. 8. in return so he that read how that fair famous Tully be sting with ungrateful viper as banish by Aulus Gabinius be consul who he have so fair clear from many great and grievous imputation second emulate and oppose in all his aim dignity by p. vatinius who he defend and bring of with credit in two public judgement which else have pass against he three but chief detruncate and behead by that Popilius for who life he have so plead and prevail in a capital and criminal cause he can but be drive to commiseration and admiration so I confess when I consider the ingratitude of diverse other both christian and pagan as that bloody Caligula the sentencer of the death of Macro and Eunia by who he be chief help in the 10 10 Valerium Maxim^^ tit. and empire of Maxaninus the thracian the murderer of Alexander Severus from who he be advance to so many honour favourite who attempt though be reveal execute not so much as the other hi^ heart as bloody as the y y read Guevarah that eloquent chronologer of the life of Severus c. 16 pag. 319. other of Macrinus the butcherer of his lord and good master Bassianus who have prefer and entrust he as general of his z z Bassiani pa. 369. cap. 16. army of that pestilent and the praetorian soldier in kill that excellent Pertinax so pertinacious by who they be so well a a cap. 10. pag 245. regard guard and reward of sextilius that be the only betrayer of c. Caesar the orator by who he have before be so stout protect against the accusation and faction of the scyllaneans of callias Antisthenes that in requital shameful kill a barbarian that show he a great mine of gold so for ever cure the jealousy which he have of his blab and vent unto b b brusonius lib. 3. exemp. pa. 189 in other of Zerxes who in stead of deserve and expect preferment cut of the hope of that boatman upon the shore short by the head who care and providence prevent the otherways inevitable shipwreck in that unhappy expedition which he make into c Asia of that treacherous Ptolomey who send the head of his poor perplex friend Pompey to Caesar as a present fly to he for shelter as the sheep into the jaw of the wolf or the hunt hare into the fang of the shepherd d dog but chief when I reflex upon christian read and revolve how beastly Michael Thranlius deprive his good master Leo the emperor both of life and honour how that bloody phocas that great papal e friend and founder deal with the lord and emperor mauritius from who he have receive some undeserved favour how justinian the emperor deal with that heroic the very Hercules and Atlas of Italy and Lombary who have free they as the sorke some city of frog and the dog some country of wolf from the invasion of the goth and vandal over who he be so oft victorious by the emulation of a woman chief actor that sex in the tragedy of the great spirit deprive he in a trice of all his office and honour put out his eye expose he to the misery or mercy of the merciless world constrain he for pure need to beg a half penny to buy bread to his f f Bellisario libr. 2. and Kramzins belly as that tigress empress will have serve the valiant eunuch narses with the same sauce but that the curse cow have short horn he do countermine her mischief beside in our own chronicle ponder how that viperous Banister betray his lord the duke of Buckingham for which he be as deserve brand as infamous as ever be Z^pirus for betray Babylon Sinon for betray Troy judas for betray Christ when I reflect upon these and other example among christian and heathen of such ungrateful person as have be as the ivy to the oak kill those by who they have be prop and g prosper as h h Viperino Plinius libr. 10. cap. 62. Aelianus libr. 1. cap. 25. isidor li. 12. cap. 3. Arist. libr. 5. cap. 34. divus Basillus exemp. hom. 9 and chrysostom in 3. cap. math. homil. 12. applicant viper gnaw out the very bowel of those that have breed they I can but lament that this monstrous and hideous hag ingratitude have get a regiment over so many and have enlarge her territorye further than the turkish ottoman Prestber-Iohn the cham of cathay or the great mogul but chief when I consider how like the centaur in the fable and like these gygantean nimrodian hunter in the i i Genes. 11.2.3 scripture she have maintain fight so fierce and furious against the majesty and mercy of the great God of heaven to her own destruction and the ruin of these subject in which she be resident it be lamentable and deplorable oh the massacre and tragedy she continual make more rueful and piteous than these of the roman Sejanus the french Byron our english king Leir the arrian Valens the italian julio the jewish king Saul the machabean Antiochus or what ever else most command a passion always as fatal to her possessor as that Sejanus his horse to his k k C^e^ Seio Antonio Casiio Dolabella Sciano Aulus Gellius libr. 3. cap. 9 Simon col. 7. pag. 287. master chap. 5 ingratitude blame and shame even from the thankfulness of brute and beast to their benefactor but to leave the beastly of man ungrafefull person detect you see as detest contemn and condemn of the very pagan as schoolmaster and tutor to degenerate man we may be teach gratitude and thankfulness to our god for all his blessing and benefit past and present even from the very brute beast who as they have be find very thankful unto man their l l psal 1.6.7.8 lord and superior of who they have have their dependence and from who they have receive their food and relief so they teach and tutor man to be thankful to that superior essence on who he depend in who he live move and have his m m act. 17.28 be and from who he receive food and raiment health life liberty peace plenty protection and what ever be needful for his be or well n be thus to enlarge my notion and motion historical when I consider how the very brute beast have be faithful and love to their master in their brutish kind more than one man to another as those three famous horse Alexander o o plin. lib. 8 ca. 42. Solin cap. 46 Bucephalus Caesar horse and the horse of Antiochus king of Syria who as emblem of faithful wife will suffer none to intermeddle with they but their own master yea the very dog to the very shame of all temporize sycophant treacherous zibaes trencher parasite false heart Joab viperous judass hollow-hearted friend that have the of honey in their mouth but the gall of cave in their p p Mel in over Felin cord Sphinx heart that be unthankful to their profess friend as many million and myself among q q jonathan and judas ere long to be print many can give a I say the very dog that have be faithful to the very death to those master who they have love and follow as the dog of Ulysses that be to he in his kind as firm as his Penelope know and acknowledge he when he return home from the trojan war the dozen dog of masinissa the numidian king as safe guard he as the french or scottish guard their king the athenian dog Caparus that keep the treasury in Aesculapius his r r Aelian hist. li. 7. cap. 13. temple better than the gaggle sentinel the roman Capitol the dog of Lysimachus call druid that die with his master s s plin. lib. 8. c. 40 Lysimachus as the dog of Hiero that like a indian best belove t t the belove wife of the indian burn themselves quick in their husband funeral and acosta in histor. jud. wife leap into the same flame which burn his master the dog of Titus Sabinius who never forsake his master no not in prison nay that bring meat to his master mouth when he be dead and fetch the dead body of his master out of Tiber into which it be u u plin. libr. 8. ca. 40. and zonaras in Tiberio cast the dog of Darius who in his fight and flight from Alexander be murder by his treacherous servant stay with the dead corpse of his slaughter w w Aelian lib. 6. cap. 24. lord with other dog which as we know by history and experience have either die with their master as Aelianus instance in the dog of polus the tragedian and of Theodorus the musician who leap into the funeral flame of their 10 10 Aelian libr. 7. cap. 33. and 35. master like love cur as they be or else for their master famish themselves upon their master grave as do the dog of y y eupolide Aelian lib. 9 cap. 42. enpolde and some in our z z see some instance also in this kind in m. Topsell our english Gesner quadrup in ^^l also the book call the pilgrimage of prince in pag. 103. time these and all these faithful grateful brute to their breeder to their feeder cry shame upon ungrateful man that for all mercy he have receive to his body to his soul be not so love so loyal so thankful to his maker his heavenly master his creator preserver redeemer as horse and dog for grass hay oat bone and crust have be to mortal man again when I consider how submissive and obedient not only domestic and house creature but even these that have be more sylvane and wild have be unto man once win and train and lure by meat or music or by teach make docible and tractable as namely when I read how a nightingale will ever sing at the command of a a Zwin^er^^ in Thea^o ^lin Anl. Gell. ^lexand A^^xandro Celium ^hodigin camer (@) maiolum etc. Stenchorus only to pleasure he of marthes his crow if we credit Celius that will carry letter which way soever the king direct * * l. 16. c. 54. plin. l. 10. c. 37. etc. 24. in annalib vand. l c. 7 she of the dragon that attend Hera^lides the philosopher of a serpent that wait upon Aiax in Locresia a thrush on Agrippina the empress a wild bull on Pythagoras at Tarentum of another bull as also a train dove that will come at a call to that impostor Mabomet of a lion that as a page follow that manumit Androdius his whilom physician up and down the street of Rome of a seal fish that will come at a call from the sea to the shore and take meat of a man dwell at the shield as I credible hear when I live where my b b as queen Mary be say to say of Calais that if she be dead it will be find write in her heart etc. heart still live at Newcastle on Tyne i think man be more brutish as esay himself or God in c c Esai 1.4 esay complain on he then the most savage and sylvane of brute that be disobedient to his god that be more refractory than the wild d d job 39.6 ass that snuff up the wind than the wild e e Aelian li. 6. hist. c. 2 heyffer that will not admit the yoke than the wild panther that will not be tame even as when I consider the mercy of some beast to man more than of one man to another as of that she f f Bergomensis histor. libr. 4. Coepella Imper. Milit. elig 12. Cassaneu^ pag. 45. wolf which foster Romulus the first king of the roman that she bitch which feed Cyrus when he be expose by his cruel grandsire g g in paedag Astyages that she bear which sustain prince Alexander when destine to death by his father Priamus those bee which feed Plato with honey those ant which be say to feed Midas with grain when they be in their cradle those raven which feed Elias the persecute h h 1. King 17.6 this bite with the i i mirach lose praeservatis lib. 2. Ri^fridum cap. 10. surium 10.2 like compare these with the cruelty of a Nero a Domitian a Dionysius a Caligula and other such which canniball-like feed upon man as bird and beast and fish of prey the great upon the less the strong upon the weak I have think that one man be a wolf to k another yea a devil to l another and that there be more mercy in beast then in beastly man so I say compare the subjection submission subordination of even the worst of brute and beast to man their superior every creature by a natural instinct fear the very face of m m Magiri in sui^ Comment. man as their deputy king and superintendent under God with the rebellious and indomable heart of man himself to the sovereign majesty of his maker who image he bear I find more obedience in beast to man then in man to God but to come still more punctual to my propose point when I consider how not only love faithful and merciful but even grateful bird beast and fish have be to their breeder and feeder their friend and benefactor and how ungrateful man be to his god in walk unworthy of his mercy in turn his grace into wantonness in sin presumptuous and proud that grace may n n rom. 6.1 abound abuse the patience and long suffer of God that lead to o o rom. 2.5.6.7 repentance heap sin upon sin as once the feign centaur Pelion upon p Ossa and so consequent wrath upon wrath God give he as he do to q q Revel. 2.19 jezabel r r jonas 1. ninive and s s matth. 23.27 jerusalem a space of repentance in this day of grace and of the gospel yet he not know the day of his t t Luke 19.42 visitation neglect god call harden his heart as the neither millstone make his brow of brass and his spirit of u u jerem. 5.3 flint I say compare and parallel the gratitude of beast to man who pride and lust yet subject they to w w rom. 8.20 vanity the horse by his travel the ox by his toil the cow by her milk the sheep by her mike wool flesh and dung the bee by her 10 honey recompense and grateful remunerate the petty cost and pain of man towards they with a full and a fertile usury such as the field yield the husbandman for his plough his pain and his seed with the ingratitude of man to God who God have make little low than the y y psalm 8.5.6 angel crown he with glory and worship make he ruler over the work of his hand that he shall yet be by sinful rebellion as unthankful as the very devil and damn spirit this thought confound my thought plunge and perplex my soul make i even z planet-struck oh its man misery by a unwise a unworthy walk thus to abase thus to abuse God mercy oh when a a psalm 8.4 David consider the privilege and prerogative of man he break out emphatical lord what be man that thou be so mindful of he etc. but when I consider man dignity of which some have write whole b b see the french academy in fol. in the french author in see pag. 1.2.3.4.5 (@) 51. 52. tract parallel this microcosm with that c c Alsted image in theolog natural p. 2. pag. 643. 644 megacosm man perfection with the whole world with man neglect duty of gratitude I say by a inversion from man perversion oh ^an what be God that thou be so unmindful of he or the son of God that thou so little regard he so vain so main forget he and all his benefit and bounty his work and wonder as once d d psal 106.21 Israel as the ostrich forget her e e job. 39 14. plin. lib. 10. c. 1. egg and as some have forget their own f f Messala corvinus orator li. 7. hist. cap 24. and Solinum cap. 6. name thou forget the great and glorious name of the lord thy God oh do I believe my eye and ear that lion eagle panther yea dragon elephant asp dog wolf ape have be thankful to their eupaters and benefactor and shall man their petty sovereign be claudicant and heteroclite be he make of a worse mettle his mind cast in a worse mould than the rest than the best yea than the worst of beast to add according to my renew read and meditation something to my former instance shall there as g g in exem ho 9 Basil and h h Maiol col. 7. p. 1. pag. 228 Ambrose themselves have observe be for some few crust or crumb such gratitude in dog to their master to a marvel if not a miracle such fidelity that they have keep their house their i i Aelian libr. 7. cap. 13. and lib. 9 cap. 42. treasury yea their very wife as if they have be turkish eunuch have they find the lose treasure of their master have they defend it from the incursion of thief have they lay by their master lose purse or ware till they have famish as once the dog of a Colliphonian k k Aelian lib. 1. cap. 30. merchant have the reveal the wrong do to their master by their adulteress mistress as the little cur of a sicilian by whrine and scrape at a secret door be say to discover a hide l l Aelian libr. 7. cap. 21. adulterer a arm intend murderer have they reveal murder have they know and fly upon their master murderer where they have after find they even in public market till they have cause their apprehension and execution as instance be in m m lib 7. c. 13. plin. libr. 8. ca. 40 author and some in experience in our time so for lion those heroic creature it be certain that a roman slave n n Gellinoct Attic. lib. 5. cap. 14. Aelian li 7. cap. 43. Androdus fly from a cruel master into the wood meet with a lion who foot he leached and pay out the thorn after both he and the lion be take and he according to that bloody sport of the roman when his turn come as his deserve punishment be expose to fight with even that lion find his enemy so favourable and friendly that know he that be his former surgeon in requital of his surgery he lick his hand fawn on he a spaniel of rampant to other be of a sudden couchant to he to the astonishment of the emperor and all the plebeian spectator do another lion show the same gratitude to Elpis the samian mariner that he every day hunt for he and bring he a pray to the shore for the good turn he receive from he in pull a bone out of his o o plin. lib. c. 16. throat so for panther do a panther show herself so thankful to the father of philo the philosopher for pull one of her young one out of a pit that she will not leave he till she have safe convey he out of the wood from the danger of other p p Bruson lib. 1. exemp. pag. 54. in 4to beast be a dragon so thankful to Thoas a boy who have bring he up at home and and feed he that afterward this feeder fall into the hand of thief in a desert the dragon know his voice with wing speed rescue and deliver he be a eagle so love to a virgin at Sestos that at her burial she throw herself with she into the funeral q flame as a robin-redbreast as we call he will needs fl into the grave of one hopkinson the clerk of Hutherfield in the west of Yorkshire as there be yet live witness who in his life have use he to his hand and feed he in the church with r r it be credible relate to i by my worthy and worshipful friend Sr. J.R. at my last sojourn at longly bread be even a asp so thankful for the good entertainment she have be feed at the table of a certain egyptian that one of her young one ungrateful sting to death a child of her host she be so just and respectful that kill that young murderer she lay it dead before they at the table and be never after she nor she see more to haunt the s house be t t and his soli. c. 43. and plin. libr. 10. c. 23. and Basil ho. 8 stork so thankful that to the shame and confusion of unnatural child they feed their age parent when they be unfeathered and unplumed which thing the crow likewise be say to do yea cover they brook they and keep they warm with their own feather in the storm and cold and as tradition be as good emblem both of grateful guest and just tyther do they in requital of their houseroom throw one young one out of their nest as their host part to the German bower in who house they u u Aelia lib. 8. cap. 21. build yea have even wolf whether natural or supernatural I dispute not be find so respective and indulgent to humane nature that if w w Tom 2. mouse Aprili Surius be not unsure and 10 10 Guagnin libr. 10. and Gregor. Turon histor. Fran^ lib. 2. c. ^4 guagin deserve no gag for fable even young child as they instance in some have be suckle with their milk feed with flesh and restore again to their own mother in their wolvish courtesy nay from beast and bird to come to fish that I may speak nothing traditionary or legendary of that thankful ape who when he can nothing else skip up into tree and knappe down bough to the speedy load of a poor old man who live by sell of wood in requital of his pull one of her cockered young out of the pit even dolphin have be so enamour on boy that have feed they with bread that at the call of sinion in which name Pliny say they delight they have come to the shore and in grateful sport as sea horse as once that y y Arionis lib. 20. cap. 12. cap. 24. dolphin do musical Arion they have swim with they into the sea bring they back again to land one of they above the rest drown his over burden burden in a sudden storm in revenge of himself lay and die on the shore and will never more return to the sea again as a a animal libr. 9 cap. 48. Aristotle Albertus b b animal cap. 24. in Magnus c c colloq. 9 pag. 325 Theophrastus d d libr. 9 histor. cap. 8. Simon Maiolus e Pliny the elder and Pliny the young instance in many particular at Hyppo Puteolum Tarentum and other place where such pageant be play oh? have beast be thus grateful to man even the irrational creature by a instinct of dame nature and shall man endue with reason and understanding above the brute the very sun irradiate his microcosm and little world be so destitute both of grace and good nature as we say as to be unthankful to well deserve man but chief to the all merit mercy of God yea I say more as beast have be grateful respective to man so have man show a kind of gratitude to beast as Alexander though heathenish bestow burial on his dead f f plin. libr. 8. cap. 8. Bucephalus as a mass priest do once on his dog as be g g the french Stephens in his apology for Herodotus call as translate the world of wonder relate yea lament his death as Crassus do the death of his h h M^crob lib. 3 cap. 15. murena as I have see some and hear of more that have feed their old horse and elder dog even mastiff greyhound spaniel set dog hound brach beagle when they have be spend and do as old almanac past date yea of some that have bequeath not only their rational but irrational old servitor legacy pension and portion to keep they even after their old master death for the good service which they have do some be of a better mould then to cast of their old friend and favourite as bawd pander and whore do prodigal when they have spungd and suck they dry as a man cast of his cloak after rain and the spaniel shake of the water on the shore when they have no more use of they and have serve their need turn and end by they and with they like a man that care not for the best dish of meat when as a helluoh he have glut himself with it no some man respect be as the i i ^yome plin. libr. 13. cap. 25. laurel green even in winter shrink not like some ill wrought western cloth in wet but be more to they that have once well deserve more at the last then at the first now shall there be such mutual gratitude from beast to man from man to beast as we have hear and shall not man be thankful to man for benefit receive and all and every one thankful to God from who as all blessing flow so all kind of reciprocal blessing back again be as due and deserve as exact and enjoin oh shall man be like the horse and mule without u u psalm 32.9 understanding nay worse so dull so dead heart so stupid so blockish that he have no show no demonstration no expression of thankfulness to God either vocal real or cordial as be see in too many miriade and million of man which unless swinish drunkenness so domitish uncleanness Esau profaneness jewish usury cannibal-like cruelty execrable and horrible blasphemy against emulatition against all that have any show of religion with other transgression perpetrate and resolve commit against God and man be thankfulness all which indeed with the like show and speak a unthankful tongue heart and life as the ivy bush show the tavern the blue spot the plague and carbuncle and plouke in the body and face the inward infection of the liver and the smoke and sulphur the inward brimstonely matter that be in Aetna and in Pliny choke w Vesuvius and the like etc. I say unless this may stand for thankfulness as if counterfeit coin shall stand for pay there be no further glimpse and spark of further thankfulness in our promiscuous multitude though we see here the inflame zealous fire of David and his congregation chap. 7 gratitude to God for all his grace press from the practice of all the saint in the church militant thus as Solomon send the sluggard to the aunt or a a Proverb. 16. v. 6. pismire to learn b b mira plin. libr. 2. cap. 41. and lib. 11. cap. 30. and Arist libr. 9 cap. 38. and homil. 9 providence and diligence to the connye the locust and the spider to learn wisdom and c c prov. 10. vers. 25.26.27.28 prudence to the lion the greyhound and the goat for constancy and d d ch. 30. v. 31. courage as jeremy send the jew to the almanac of the stork the turtle and the swallow to learn the circumspect observation of time and e e jerem. 8. v. 7. season as Christ himself our saviour send his disciple and in they we to the f f math. 10. v. 16 dove to learn simplicity to the serpent to learn not matchavillian but religious g g and in (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Plevius Plinium libr 8. cap. 27. lib. 8. cap. 17. August libr. 8. cap. 15. theologice applicant augustin serm. 4. in and chrysost hom. 34. in matth. tom. 2. policy so I have according to my talent send this ungrateful age according to my ministerial mission and commission from God as to the pagan so even to bird beast fish and fowl to learn that gratitude to God for all his grace which as I have prescribe David and his people here in my text pious public much more private practise now the effect of this grace be that which purposely premeditate project I do affect that I may roll every h stone touch every string attempt every mean use every motive to bring our english-irish Israel parallel with David Israel change my form of speech modulate now in another tune and tone I desire that every man that desire to have a Israel heart to be a true israelit i i John 1.47 Nathaniel indeed to consider that if the practice of the worst of man the pagan the worst of beast too yea the worst of animate creature except the very devil and infernal spirit shame not his ingratitude yet that he will be lure and allure by the imitation virtuous emulation of the best that be or ever be of create nature either in earth or in heaven to the performance of this tributary task which God impose upon every soul that have the organ and instrument of reason right k k for God require no praise of fool natural madman young infant such as have yet no use of reason nor may be admit to the eucharistical supper fit even to praise his great and glorious name as David and these davidican do here as they will answer the contrary to their peril at the great day of audit and great court of parliament before the king of king and herein first to begin on earth and then by a theological climax or gradation to ascend up as high as heaven let we look to the saint militant here on earth and we shall see a cloud of witness like the cloud and the pillar of fire go before Israel to l l exod 40.38 Canaan as the new create star or the angel move in the star or in form of a star go before the eastern as their conduct and convoy unto m m disp^ at Bosquerus in echo in math. 2 1.2.3 Christ precede and go before in this never to much press till practise duty invite incite we to insist in their step to begin as they say from the beginning we have n n Genes. 4. v. 4. Abel in true gratitude to God surpass ungrateful Cain as the sun exceed the pitchy cloud sacrifice the best of his lamb the first fruit the chief and choice of his o o sacrun pingue dab^ macrun Sphinx flock as a freewill offer for a blessing upon the rest though I know too it have a special p p see Moses unveil in extant reference to the oblation of Christ the true Paschall q q John 1. v. 29. lamb so Genes. 24. vers. 17. we have Abraham servant blessing the lord for his mercy to his master Abraham and for make his journey prosperous vers. 26.27 so Genes 32. vers. 10. we have jacob acknowledge himself unworthy of the least of the lord mercy which he specifical and special enumerate so in token of gratitude for renew mercy as a everlasting testimony to they and their seed for ever in all succeed generation how much they poise and prize as courtier from their king the least mercy and favour from God and to oblige they and they in a eternal indissoluble bond of obedience Abraham Isaac jacob and the rest the best of the patriarch where ever they come build altar set up stone and pillar to the honour of the name of the r r sir Abraham gen. 11.8 gen. 22.14 Isaac ge. 26. v. 25. gen. 28 17. jacob gen. 31.13 and v. 53. gen. 35.1 v. 7. lord as the egyptian king in their s s Mela his li. 1. c. 5. Strabo lib. 16. pli. l. 36. c. 12. and etiosa^ pyramid Nabuchadnezzar in his t t dan. 4. v. 30. Babel the nymrodians in their u u gen. 11.1.2 tower Absalon in his w w 2. sam. 18.18 pillar Cyrus in his sumptuous 10 10 pli. plin. histor. Maiol 23. tit pag. 703. house and other proud and ambitious spirit erect monument and memorial to the glory of their own name so in the fifteen of we have Moses aron Miriam and all the elder and people of Israel triunph and gratulatory rejoice before the lord as we this day for the preservation and reservation of our king and prince for their safe eduction out of Egypt reduction from tyrannize Phraoh production and protection through the red sea which be to they a walk garden to their enemy a devour grave in the 33. of genesis we have the same Moses when he have receive the gracious summons of his bless dissolution as a second Simeon sing his Cygnean and swan-like y y Cantater Cygnus song bless the lord and the thousand of Israel in their several tribe the people of the Lord to proceed in the first of Samuel chap. 2. we have that devout annaes gratulatory song for her Samuel as bathshebaes z z prove 31. v. 2. Lamuell the son of her desire yea in his corporeal birth as Augustine be to his mother monica in his spiritual the son of her a a Ambr. monica aug. Manicheo etc. prayer and of her b b 1. sam. 1.13 and vers 26.27 tear so in the five of judge we have Deborah and Baruch and all Israel tripudiate and triumph before the lord of host the god of battle for the overthrow of the troop of jabin and Sisera who the river kishon sweep away yea that ancient river the river c c judg. 5.20.21 kishon the star also fight from heaven as once the sea for our english Eliza and for a Britain Drake that give a overturn to a swell dragon as once also for theodose the like as the sun too for joshuah so in the first of king chap. 3. vers. 6.7 when God appear unto Solomon in Gibeon as he sacrifice before the lord as a prologue to his fervent prayer for a wise and understand heart he first thankful acknowledge the unspeakable mercy of God to his father David as also by a corollary and consequence unto himself and not to enumerate all particular which be infinite for this our David beside the book of the psalm which be in their golden chain link continuate praise as one call the very life of just man like the alm of d d act. 10.1.2 Cornelius if season with grace and not soil with sin perpetual e prayer so in the second of Samuel chap. 7. vers. 18.19.20.21 etc. omit all other place to fix on this when God send to David by Nathan the acceptance as in Abraham sacrifice of f f gen. 22.16 17 Isaac and in the desire of all his saint and servant of his will for the g g 2. cor. 8.12 work his h affection for the action in building of the temple reiterate and renew many large and love promise concern Solomon his son in what privacy and nearness he shall be to God even as a son be to a father David upon this embassage as a second Niobe melt and dissolve his heart whole liquefy as wax and ice before the sun of these mercy in the most zealous and fervent expression of his soul as fire break out long smother in the soliloquy of his soul such as we read proceed from Augustine Bernard Basill and other zealous spirit in imitation of David he thus bespeak his god who be I lord and what be my house that thou have bring i hitherto and this be yet a small thing o lord God but thou have speak also of thy servant house for a great while to come and be this the manner of man o lord God and so go forward to the end every word have a emphasis every phrase as be say of the epistle of i cyprian show a heart brimful of grace of gratitude so come to the new testament indict by the same spirit what ere the blaspemous manichee to the k contrary the saint partake of the same grace have express the same in their gratulation to begin with Simeon he have no soon Christ that expect incarnate shiloh in his arm as his spirit in his heart but he breathe out his gratulatory blessing bless l l Luke 2 28.29 so Zachary be long strike m m Luke 1.20 dumb as the fruit of his incredulity have no soon his imprison tongue unjale but he improve the first fruit of his speech to God n n Luke 1.63.64 65. praise dart out as a pellet out of a gun in the sudden flash of the spirit the inward conception of his soul by the outward modulation of his mouth I may instance in that o o Luke ^ 36 Anna in the two best mother of the two best son that ever be bear of woman the virgin mother Mary and her cousin Elizabeth who visit one another in the most warrantable journey not gad to a trotter feast as our common gossups and for the best end not to tattle and talk and prattle and prate like parrot and jangle like jay and chat like Dawes and pie on this subject and that abject not to calumniate and vilipend the absent but to comfort and corroborate one another in the mercy of God at first encounter as two instrument right tune in the best key by the finger of the spirit in a holy and heavenly harmonious melody resonate and resound the praise of p p Luke 1.42.45 46.47 God as do also all the rest which look for and expect the now exhibit patriarke-promised prefigure Messiah the consolation of Israel which pretermit without further enlarge view the apostle Paul the inspire doctor of the gentile and we shall see that as he have as holy and as sanctify a heart except his crucify master as ever be enclose and include in a body of flesh he have as so many epistle yea in some place as so many leaf and line so many breathe yea break out and eructation in the praise of God yea in every q q rom. 1.8 rom. 16.27 1. cor. 1.4 2. cor. 1.3 ephes 1. v. 3 phil. 3. v. 20. col. 1.3 1. thes 1.2 2. thes 1 3. 2. tim. 1.3 epistle it be observable that the Alpha and Omega the beginning and end of it be prayer and praise ofttimes both in the antecedent and conclude consequent the subject or matter of which petition and thanksgiving be the happy success of the word the propagation of the gospel the faith and patience of the saint their growth in grace their forwardness in zeal their readiness to distribute their constancy in profession their perseverance in the truth together with God merciefull proceed with himself in turn he in his name and nature from a Saul to a Paul from a wolf to a sheep a persecuter to a professor a preacher a cannibal to a christian a blasphemer to a blesser of r r 1. tim. 1. verse 12 13.14.15.16 17. Christ yea from a caterpillar to be like james John and Cephas a pillar from a confounder a founder from a supplanter a planter of the church of Christ these mercy together with that talent of preach of tongue of knowledge above his fellow of part of s s 2. cor. 9 2 cor. 10. Paulus pain of patience in do suffering more than the rest that door of utterance open to he so abundant be as they shall be to all in Paul place of Paul spirit the ground not of thrasonical ostentation luciferian pride and presumption as in t t jerem. 20.1.2 Pashur Hanany u u 1. King 22. v. 24. Zedekiah the romish Jesuit and baalite as former in s s the intolerable of arrius samosaetenus and other heretic gent. magd. where Caesar as Pelargus our Jesuit praefat. arrius Nestorius Paulus samosetenus and all other pseudoprophet pseudopostle pseudomartyre pseudochristian heretic and schismatic but of holy and humble thankfulness I may enlarge my meditation in this point if I will wade into ancient and modern history from the practice of all other saint and holy man of God that ever be chief million of martyr confessor record by Eusebius the tripartite and the rest of ecclesiastical historian fox in his martyrology nominate by name and describe by their state and calling who faith like the t t arist. libr. 5. cap. 19 Discorides libr. 2 cap. 50. and galenus lib. 3 cap. 4. Plinius libr. 10 cap. (...) plin. (...) lib^ 21. cap. 4. salamander and that Pyralis or Ce^astia live even in the fire and hot persecution even in the midst of flame as Paul and silas in the low prison have send out the spark of holy praise in hymn and psalm and spiritual song etc. but above all which be in stead of all as the best precedent to we christian we have the un-erring as precept so practise of Christ every action of his humanity be our u instruction as he pray continual rejoice evermore in all thing give w w 1. thes 5.16.17.18 thanks chief for the propagation of the gospel the subjugation of spirit to his disciple the fall down of Satan like lightning yea in the very benediction of the creature abound with praise to his heavenly 10 10 matth. 11.25 matth. 26.30 father so shall we if we be christian in truth and sincerity as in name and profession imitate our Christ as member of his body branch of his vine and docible disciple to that best of master otherways as Augustine once note that it be incongruous under a thorney head to look for soft and delicate and effeminate y member it be as incongruous under a bless blessing head to have as many christian have execrable execrate curse accurse blasphemon member chap. 8 gratitude further prove and press from the saint and angel in the church triumphant with thunderbolt against this blaspheme in stead of blessing age. but if the example of the saint on earth move we not I wish that we will lift up our heart and eye a little high unto the saint and angel in heaven look to the soul and spirit of the just in the nature angelical and humane we have a fair copy to write after a more resplendent white to shoot at in the church triumphant than we can have in the church militant where the white swan have his black foot the pure gold his dross the fair face of grace his mole the most eminent light his cloud or eclipse as may be instance beside a a gen 19 v. 36. lot b b gen. 9.21 Noah c c John 10. v. 25. Thomas d d math. 26.70.72 Peter etc. patriarch apostle even in two of the best for great man good man the world ever have in David and hezekiah the one commit such e e 2. sam. 11. 2. sam. 24.1.2.3 2. sa. 16.1.2.3.4 sin the other omit such f f 2. chron. 3^ 24.25.26 a duty as both soil their grace and put they to wash away those tincture and stain with penitential g g psal 6. v. 6. 2. king 20.3.4 tear by the heat of renew love draw out of the best distillatorie limbecke of break heart and compunct spirit so that it be dangerous to imitate the best man that ever be except the sanctifier and saviour of man in every point of their practice least like the motion of that h h 6 Simon Maiolus cavi^ p. 1. c^ll 1. pag. 9 or transient fire call in my country maude with wisp they lead we wrong in the dark night of some error into the devious by path of irregularity but to imitate the angel and soul and spirit of the just in heaven their example be the right cynosure the straight line of our action and affection the right card and compass of our conversation the very pole according to which to steer our practice in our manifold fluctuation and dangerous aberration in the sea of this world because they be inseparable unite unto God to be like unto they be to be like unto God even partaker of the divine i i 2. pet. 1.4 nature they be fix in their port and haven their heaven not subject now like we in our surge to any shipwreck of faith or k k 1. tim. 1.19 conscience therefore it be good for we to cast anchor as near they as we can to build our tent and l l math. 17.4 tabernacle as near they as we may to ascend up the mount to they by meditation contemplation imitation as in other thing so especial in this duty in sing and ring forth here below as they above the praise of their god and our god in join our choir to they in this holy anthem holy holy holy lord God of Sabaoth heaven and earth be full of the majesty of thy m glory if we look into that mysterious revelation we shall see what the very life of the angel be in what the spirit of the glorify saint be eternal incessant employ namely in stand about the throne of the lamb n n Revel. 5. v. 15 12.13.14 e^ch 7. v. 9.10.11.12 Christ clothe with white robe and palm in their hand as emblem of victory over that triple C^rberus the flesh the world the devil and cry with a loud voice salvation to our god which sit upon the throne and unto the lamb blessing and glory and wisdom and thanksgiving and honour and power and may be unto our god for ever and ever amen this be the continuate voice of the saint of the elder that serve God day and night in his temple thus they sing Haleluiah in heaven for the judgement upon the great romish o o Revel. 19 v. 1.2.4 whore which hang over her head for avengment of the blood of so many of God servant innocent martyr which causelesse she have effuse thus they rejoice too at the marriage of the lamb and for the grace already give to the bride the church chief the jewel of the gospel by which she be daily fit herself for the solemnisation of her espousal in p p heaven this indeed be the heavenly life their life in heaven who be ever stand before the lamb yea according to the distinction of q q zanch. sex and Zanchie and r r Casmannus in Casman this be the life too of these that be minister from God for as the devil where ever they be whether limit or confine to the earth or disperse in the air or in the fire or in the water or in the mine or cranneye under the earth or in the centre of the earth or below the centre as some think there be local hell as most probable because most remote from heaven or confine to some climate some province some town some circuit of ground some mountain some fountain some court some palace some chamber some nunnery or monastery where they have play reak and s s Cardan in lib. 4. parie^ c. 176. Langius li. 1. epist an. 1539 wier l. 4 ca. 9.10.11 prank yea or to the body of some man as once in the t t call ventriloquisis by text marrion c. 25. by Chrys. in 1. cor. 12. by oecuman in act. 16. v. 16. because the devil speak within their belly as once in the serpent pythonist and ordinary in the day of Christ and extraordinary now where ever according as the learned discuss and determine these u u as Delrius magicar lib. Tyareus w^er Perer. de magia laur. ananias de nature intricate he be permanent or transient he carry still his hell about with he as murderer traitor adulterer and blasphemer his darling son carry their petty hell in the gnaw of their conscience so on the contrary the good angel where ever they be whether in bethlens field with the shepherd or in daniel w w dan. 6. five 22 den with Daniel or in the fiery furnace with Sydrach Misaach and 10 10 dan. 3. v. 25. abednego or in Sodom with y y gen. 19 v. 15. lot or in the door of the tent with z z gen. 18.2.3 Abraham or whether with Manoah and his a a judg. 13.9 wife in the field or with the virgin Mary in her b b luk. 1.26.27 closet or where ever else they ever carry their heaven about with they they be still in heaven or heaven in they in respect of God c c Luke 1. v. 19 presence which fill they as the moon be fill with the light of the sun and in this fullness of joy which they have in and from God they can but resonate and resound back again their praise to God for even when these heavenly soldier be on earth with bethlems d d Luk 2.13.14 shepherd as if they have be in these high imperial heaven into which Paul be e e 2 cor. 12.2 rapt they sing glory to God on high on earth peace and among man good will now to act our part as we pray in that best of f f the lord prayer prefer by cyprian by Daneus dominica and by Alstedius in Theolog. Catech. prayer in respect of the author matter manner and method thy will be do in earth of we mortal man ready prompt g g math. 6.10 see Brimsley and late m. Bernard in their plain paraphrase upon the lord prayer sincere etc. as it be in heaven of the immortal angel so unless we mean to prate and prattle rather than pray as do the h h Math 6.7 heathen and our vulgar i i ^n their tantology battilogy latin prayer papist unless we will take God name in k k abuse of prayer by m. Perkins in his golden chain by Alsted Theol. catech be make a main breach of the three command vain and abuse this primary and principal part of God l l gen. 4.26 pag. 4 5. etc. worship unless we will dare dally with deceive and delude the almighty we must strain and study desire and endeavour to practice as we pray we must bless God on earth as the angel do in heaven we must not blaspheme on earth the god of heaven which the angel do not dare not can do we must praise God not pinch God as the angry cur may the stout lion we must magnify God as the angel do not martyr God murder God tear and crucify over and over again as Augustine allude the glorify humanity of Christ worse than the jew on the cross as hellish and profane spirit do not spare his wound his blood his heart his head nay not his foot his nail and his gut as our roarer our rakehell our rascality and ragamiuffin's do such as in their practice have turn just renegado julianist oecebolians apostaite worse than turk and mahometans forsake Christ nay oppose Christ more fearful than witch and conjurer oh this be indeed to be like unto the angel like unto the god as the devil jesuitical m m the devil first teach the doctrine of equivocation the jesuite in it be not a scholar to jesus equivocate with Adam and n Eve but what god what angel even angel of darkness not angel of light for sure to curse tear blaspheme God be the very life course practise of damn spirit the torture ghost of devil and man reprobate angel and reprobate man Cain judas Esau Saul Pharaoh Nero Caligula Heliogabalus Holofernes apostate julian whorish pope joane nicromanticall Sylvester Alexander the six athisticall Caesar Borgia treacherous Absalon serpentine Achitophel soul poison Mahumet blasphemous arrius Michael o o burn in Geneva Servetus with million more will you know what they be now do their body be jayl and imprison in the grave till God general assize but what of their soul thus in the midst of their exquisite torture in hell unless God give speedy grace to some to die better than they live even with their father the devil who they sympathize as in sin so in p p math. 25 41 suffering they rave they rage they fret they fume they revile they blaspheme they execrate they curse the majesty of the almighty they wreak their teen and wrath on God as that mad Bajazet copee up in a iron cage do upon q q see beside kneel his turkish history the history of tamb. extant in Tamburlaine even by rage and revile like mad dog tie up in iron chain they bark and foam at the mouth and belch out blasphemy as the condemn miscreant that curse the judge the jury and the bench when their malignant malice and mischief can proceed no further and indeed as wicked man be by the spirit of God call the son of r r 1. sam. 1.16 and 1 Sam 9.27 Beliall the child of the very s s John 8. v. 44. and 1 joh. 3. five 10 devil so do they not patrizare be they not as like their father as if they be spit out of his mouth do they not look as like he as egg to t egg snow to snow or rather pitch to pitch do they not resemble he as face answer face in a glass he blaspheme God in hell they blaspheme God here on earth he be the old u u 12.9 dragon they be as yet but w w rev. 16. v. 9 serpent yet grow to be dragon and as full of venom for their measure as he be who name they bear who nature they have shall such die in this state and condition blaspheme the name of God as so many thousand do in the world especial if they be never so little cross or touch by the hand of God or tongue or hand of man then let their oath-pellet fly from their hell-heated mouth as do michae 10 10 judg. 17.1.2 mother the contest Israelite in the day of y y lev. 24.10.11 Moses and these accurse carnalist prophesy of in the z z Apoc. 16.9 apocalypse I pray you to let such reflect a little on their case and condition d d Math 5 35.36 and August cap. 15. and Chromat in james 5.12 psal 25. v. 3. Zachar. 5.3 deut. 28.58 and in apocryph Eccles. 23. v. 11. if God will please to open their hoodwink eye beside the scripture that be infallible true firm above heaven and a a matth. 5.18 earth irrevocable above the decree of the mede and b b dan. 6.8 persian to be verify in every letter title and syllable according to qualification of object in work of justice as of mercy I say beside the verdict of the word which must in due time be verify else God be no c c Numb. 23.19 god and the word but a fable like these of esopes or Lucian which be blasphemy to imagine I say yet again and again beside the thunderbolt from god own mouth that strike the swearer as low as e e psalm 9.17 hell the centre of profaneness nothing keep he out of it but a small twine thread of life every day and night as a black worm and a white gnaw this thread and at last a blatrant f f m. Perkins allusive simile in one of his legal motive in his treatise of repentance beast call death perhaps sudden lop and crop this thread and send the customary swearer into the low pit without ever bail or mainprize remission or redemption if there be no word or if the word be as carnal life heart g g psalm 14.1 athist account it of no more certainty than mother hubbardes tale Bebelius h jest or melander i yea then the lie legend of the k papist their limbo and pick purse purgatory yet even in reason let i expostulate with a impious and profane spirit and whisper but some few word into the ear of a blasphemous swearer how fit he be for hell and how unfit for heaven if he shall die sudden as some of his predecessor have do and be sweep away as dust and l l psalm 1.4 chaff in a instant as be reveiling Corah Dathan and m m Numb. 16.32.33 so anastasius the blasphemous arrian emperor be strike with a thunderbolt from heaven as also olympius the arrian like joab with three dart blaspheme the trinity see in the end of Zegedine his common place in folio Abiram for alas what shall he do in heaven be condition and qualify as he be what work be there for he that he can do that he will do in heaven there be perpetual sempiternal blessing of God as we have prove which task he be as fit for as yet as a ass for n n Sus Erasmi chiliad a harp a sow for a sack-bot he that can sequestrate one minute of a hour one hour in a day one moment of time to praise God he that have as much heart to this or any other spiritual duty as a bear to the stake the bull to the ring the coward to the battle or the ass to the race he that be weary in the church or in a religious family to bear one part or burden in a psalm which be indeed his burden or chain but to a sermon or a sacrament for a hour have his ear take up as by commission sore against his will his heart be o o as ezechiels auditor EZche 33. vers. 31.32 wool-gather roge and straggle like dinah perhaps in the p p gen. 34. v. 1. field in the town in the tavern in the theatre the taphouse the tobacco shop the brothell-house perhaps in his bag in his barn in his coin his count house his corne-heape or among his sheep and brute be it probable or possible judgement find a man just as death leave he the tree lie as it q q Ecclesiastes fall that this man shall die in this tune and temper be fit to join his untuned spirit with the heavenly choir of angel to bless and laud the lord for ever and ever oh less fit be this man for this spiritual motion than Saul to be among the r r estne Saul inter Propheta^ 1. sam. 19.24 prophet then drunken Philoxenus to be in the school of Soler Socrates than judas to be at the lord s s John 13.26.27 supper or cham in the t t Genes. 7. v. 7 ark yea less fit than for a jayz to sing among nightingale for a fool to sit on the bench with judge for a quacksalv to consult in the college of physician or the rural fiddler to join his Pan pipe or oaten reed with the choir of the muse the chorus of the musician or to add one more as though * bavin or Mevins or a ballad poetaster shall intrude among the heavenly * inspire spirit of a Virgil a Ovid a Homer a Hesiod a Chaucer a Spencer a ben-mont and such letter laureate etc. alas what delight have a plowboy a cow-boy to handle a pen that know not a b. from a bull foot as the phrase be what delight shall I take to be among the dutch or welsh or wild irish w w 1. cor. 14.11 who language I understand not to who I be as a barbarian and they to i and so what a good year shall a swearer do in heaven where there be nothing but blessing God with everlasting hosannah and halelluiahs with which he be altogether as unacquainted as a poor apprentice with the mystery of of his trade the first day of his admittance or a child with greek and Hebrew the first day that ever he handle book how to speak the language of ashdod the language of hell curse swear swagger riot reveal etc a profane spirit know well or rather ill enough it be natural to he as for the fire to burn the sea to foam etc. he swim without 10 a cork he take these as some do the the art of coney catch at his own hand he need no tutor no prompter but the devil and corruption but for the language of Canaan the language of heaven the tongue of y y 1. cor. 13.1 angel how to bless God how to express with the inspire apostle a a act. 2. v. 11. the wondrous work of God how to set forth the glory of God as do Augustine and Ambrose when in heavenly responsory be say one answer another as cherubin cherubin they alternat in b b etc. course compile that holy hymn call or we praise thou o God etc. I say though a profane person shall have more tongue than c c king of Pontus that be say to have speak 22. language Mithridates Scaliger or d d who dictionary consist of eleven language Calepine yet till God scrape or wash his tongue from oath and blasphemy give his mouth a physical or rather a metaphysical purge heat his tongue as the disciple with celestial e e act. 2. v. 3. fire as f f esay 6 five 6.7 esay with a coal from the altar he never can speak to any purpose except in hypocrisy as do g g John 12 4.5.6.7 judas h h 2. King 9.32 jezabel and i i 2 sam. 14 five 3 joab like a horse that go a force pace any thing theological good tend to God glory and the good of other and if he be as a fresh man untrayn for any part of God service as he be or shall be a soldier militant here on earth be it probable that he be fit for a high office and place to serve the lord joint with saint and angel in heaven SECT. i. the blasphemer fit for Hell beside the profane blasphemer be not so unfit for heaven but he be on the contrary as fit for hell as a cut purse be for the pillory or a traitor for Tyburn yea as a good grammar scholar be fit for a high school even the university for Satan by the help of native and hereditary corruption as a wily nurse have herein earth train up the blasphemer in the language of ashdod and other abomination as sin never go bird alone like some father that teach his son his own trade and make he more expert and exquisite than himself his purpose be to prefer he to a high or rather to a low place even to be a free denizen in the low country the nethermost hell his own dukedom and demesne where whensoever the earth by a commission from the god of heaven be weary of k k horat. he and cast he out as once she do the l l judg. 1. and ge. 15. vers. 16. canaanite as the sea cast out her froth there he may as free as any in great belzebubb territory in a trice set up or set open his mouth shop and have free vent for all his blasphemy be they ten time more and more abominable yea and he shall have too such pension and pay as they deserve abundance of fire and brimstone storm and tempest shall be his portion to m m psalm 11.6 drink and sure as he that know the language and the fashion of a country make less bone at it to travail thither and have more hope of entertainment in France Italy Germany Polland Hungary Slavonia if he can speak well and perfect the french italian German polonian hungarian slavonian tongue so he that speak in his horrid oath imprecation and execration the language of hell as I persuade myself be the devil himself as he assume shape true and real metamorphize into the heart the habit and speech of some man he can not act worse pageant than some do slander more malicious blaspheme more boisterous etc. such a man when ever God by his sergeant death send he a passport may travel in a trice into the devil dominion and have work at will and abundant wage even more than he desire but large as much as he deserve yea i think as by a man speech it be easy discern what countryman a man be english irish scottish a German or the like so a man a minister chief may even here this day give a great guess at thousand as infallible as the two damosel do of n n math. 26.72 and rhoda act. 12. vers. 13.14 Peter what country you as yet belong to and whither you set your face to Zion or to Satan even your tongue bewray you whether you speak Sibboleth or o o judge 12. vers. 5.6 Shibboleth as ephramite or as gileadit as angel or devil oh as I begin this press point I end it if ever you desire to be like the angel in glory sympathize with they though you can equalise they in grace chief consecrate as they their whole power you your least member to the glory of God else that part unreformed all your p p james 1. five 1^ read all these excellent mean and motive against swear forswear m. Down^^^ four treatise pag. 26.27.28.29 ^^ 49. etc. religion be in vain and know further what I have heretofore more enlarge that a man begin either his heaven or hell in this q life here he be in the suburb of one of the two of saint Augustine r r aug. (@) vit. city either jerusalem which be s s gal. 4.26 above or Sodom which be here below here by grace a man have charter and interest after livery seizure and possession of glory here it be easy see which way he walk even by what he t t ^t t^ Socrates talk a man need not wish with Momus a window into a man heart let he look into his mouth there he have the best of his mind as the un^erring truth itself have u u math. 12. ver. 32.33.34.35.36 determine fig never grow from thistle nor grape of * * jam. 3.12 thorn nor sweet stream ever come from a poison corrupt w w jam. 3.11 fountain let we make the inside clean then all be clean so shall we be able in earth as the angel in heaven in sincerity without hypocrisy in filial love not in servile fear incident to the 10 10 jam. 2.19 devil and reprobate with purge and in good measure purify spirit even here on earth inchoative and after in heaven perfect to make one quire with the angelical spirit to the ever blessing and praise the god of spirit SECT. 2 I do not deny indeed but a wicked and a graceless man may sometime speak good word not only savour of moral wisdom of experience and deep observance as the sentence say and apothegm of Socrates Solon Bia^ Thales etc. and the greek and the roman y y record by Valerius Maximus Diogenes Laertius Brusonius Lycosthenes and other sage yea the expostulation of z z 2. King 9.31 jezabel with jehu the dissuasive of a a 2 sam. 24 3. joab to David the speech of some even of the unbelieved b b John 7.40.46 jew the censure of Gamahel concern c c act. 5.35.36 Paul the counsel of pilate wife concern d d math. 27.19 Christ which many such specialty do demonstrate but he may speak word even in outward show and appearance savour and relish of grace as appear in Balaam e e num. 23.10 wish agrippaes f f act. 26.28 flash the first to die the second to be a true christian beside the pharisee g g luk. 18.11 prayer the foolish virgin cry h h matth. 25.11 lord lord the carnal jew desire the i i I^hn 6.34 bread the adulterous Samaritane desire the water of k k John 4.15 life with many more it can be deny also but the best man may sometime speak word at first blush savour of a carnal spirit such as have hardly the print and impression of grace as appear in Abraham l l Genes. 12.13 simulation or dissimulation joseph his swear by the life of m m gen 42.15 Pharaoh eve tempt of n n Genes. 3 6. Adam judah solicit of his incestuous o o Genes. 38.16 Thamar David murderous vow against p p 1. Sam 25.22 Naball his folly in command his people to be q q 2. sam. 24.1.2 number his bloody jussion in the slaughter of r r 2. sam. 11.15 Vria^ his unjust verdict against s s 2. sam. 16.4 Mephibosheth in Peter t t math. 26. luk. 23. denial his dissuasion of Christ u u math. 16.22 passion the culpable request of james and w w Mark 10.35 John the incredulity of saint 10 10 John 20.25 Thomas with many more verify that of saint y y James 3.2 james that he be a perfect man indeed which offend not with his tongue yet nevertheless that be true in divinity which the eternal truth have reveal that word justify or z z math. 12.37 condemn that the mouth speak the man either good or bad as it either bless or blaspheme God or a a James 3 9 man for first this be to be presuppose that usual the just and pure have pure b b proverb word their heart their conscience and their spirit be c c titus 1. v. 15. pure Abraham pray for d d Genes. 18.25 Sodom for Ishmael e e Genes. 17.18 Isaac for f f gen. 25 2^^ Rebeca Moses bless the child of g g deut. 33.1 Israel jacob bless his h h Genes. 49. and 48.15 son and the son of i i gen. 48.20 joseph Samuel and joshuah exhort to the service of the true k k 1. sam. 12.13 joshuah 24. God lot exhort the l l Genes. 19 7. sodomite boaz comfort m m ruth 2.11.12 ruth Eli reprove his n n 1 sam. 2.23 son gideon plead against o o judge 6 31.32 Baal the prophet pray and prophecy the disciple preach all that look for the consolation of Israel bless with Zachary the god of Israel for the incarnation and exhibition of Jacob shiloh the promise Messiah as David call his tongue his p p in psalmi^ glory so all the godly have make do make except in some temptation or the break out of hereditary sinful corruption their tongue organ and instrument of the glory of God as again the wicked when they speak usual unless when they fain and strain to the contrary pronounce parrat-like such word of which they have no feel against the heart and against the hair cold come from they as from sick man or be over rule by a special hand as q q Numb. 23.5 Balaam and r r John 18.14 caiphas in his prophecy Pharaoh neco in that which he tell s s 2. Chro. 35.21 josias or out of common gift as judas in his preach Saul in his t t 1. sam. 10.6 prophesy the wise man among the heathen from moral philosophy or the very ethic of nature I say usual except in these specify case when the wicked speak their word speak they wicked even as what bitter stream the fountain send forth these stream speak the fountain no better then bitter since none can give what he have not or show better stuff than he have within he the mouth of a good man be as the open of heaven which never open but there be always some remarkable good thing happen as either Christ u u act. 1.11 ascend or the spirit w w John 2.32 descend or the like the mouth of a wicked man be as the open of hell out of which never proceed as into which never enter ever ought that good be or it be as the open of the tryoan horse in which be arm Greek fatal to Ilium or as the open of Pandora box out of which fly all leprosy and disease or as the open of Curtius his gulf of the sicilian 10 10 plin. lib. 2. cap 106. August lib. 3. cap. 31. Aetna or that Pliny choke y y orosius lib. 7. cap. 9 Procopius lib. 2. bel. got. Nicepher libr 3. cap. 12. Vesuvius out of which proceed nothing but filthy fog and sulphurous stink stream as appear in ismaels r r Genes. 21.9 scoff or as the apostle call it tongue s s gal. 4.25 persecute Michols t t 2. sam. 6.20 mock Rabsakees u u 2. King 18.28 29.30 rail Simeibs w w 2. sam. 16.5 6.7 revile the son of belial disdaining and dispising of 10 10 2. sam. 20 1. David and of Saul y y 1. sam. 10.27 saul profane execration and a a 1. sam. 14.39 swear senacharibs and goliahs b b 1. sam. 17.36 defy the curse of that carnal c c 24.11 Israelite and michae d d judg. 17 2. mother corahs e e Numb. 16.3 dispiting the ungrateful israelite rebel and f f Numb. 11.1.4 murmur against God Moses and Aaron to omit the pharisee g g mark 3 22.28.29 blaspheme against the holy ghost their vilify and vituperation of h h John 9.24 Christ ananias and Saphiras i i act. 5.3 lie gehezies k k 2. King 5.25 dissemble the old prophet hypocritical l l 1. King 13 18. halt Simon Magus his m m act. 8 9 magic and monstruous mistake in his n n ver. 19.20.21 staking elimas the sorcerer o o act. 13.8 dissuasion of Sergius Paulus from Paul preach and as be manifest by the multitude of oath and blasphemy which as thick as the the atomie or sun moth beside talk whole compose of rebauldrie folly dissimulation and treachery come from the multitude which testify that there be no grace in their heart since there be no good in their word they rule not the least member how much less the great therefore all their religion and profession be p p James 1.26 vain therefore as thou will be persuade that with the tongue of angel thou shall glorify God hereafter get a cleave tongue a fiery tongue not from hell as the q q jam. 3.6 most but from r r act. 2.3 heaven as the best to be a instrument of God glory here which if thou attain thou may infallible conclude that here thou be holy in the church militant and be tend and bend to be happy in the church triumphant else know that a swear a blaspheme a execrate and curse tongue show a unholy heart as corrupt stream show a corrupt fountain as sour fruit show such sap and such s s jam. 3.11 root as ulcer in the body and fiery plouke in the face show a unsound or inflame liver yea as the black spot show the pox and the blue spot the plague fristed hair mannish attire a roll eye gad t t Prover. 7.10.11 foot a tempt tongue paint face naked breast and uncovered dangle dugg the ivy bush that proclaim what wine within be to be have for love or money not more demonstrate a very whorish u u 2. King 9.50 jezabel than a tongue which make a daily trade of evil and curse speak show a evil and accurse w w math. 12.35 heart a sensual and unsanctified soul yea that the very devil speak in and by such man as he do once in the 10 10 Pareum and Parerium in Genes 3.1.2 serpent in Apollo y y and Herodot lib. 1. and 3. Valerium lib. 1. and 9 c. 12. maiolu^ col. 2. pag. 99 oracle in many z z Magie and in act. 16. pag. 628. 629. Hieronymo pythonist and possess person even as God spirit speak in and by the elect as once in and by his prophet or evangelist and disciple and so for thou in this state fate and condition possess or rather plunge poison and pester with such a filthy heart and foul mouth that be altogether as unfit untuned and unprepared for holy hymn and song divine anthem and heavenly praise as a ass for a harp as the adage b be for thou I say to imagine in this predicament to die and not be damn but to pass without any change or conversion in heart or life word or work from a satanical life to a angelical life in heaven be a sweet delude slumber a brave golden dream a bewitch conceit a eutopaean paradise a mere castle in the air without any warrant foundation a a 2. pet. 1.21 from the god of truth from the scripture of truth chap. 9 SECT. i. motive here to begin the life of the bless I still desire to add more fuel to this celestial fire of true gratitude which I labour as I have I hope already instrumenta kindle further to inflame in the heart of our english-irish Israel like that once material c c Maiol col. 22. vestal fire never to die or extinguish but to live and last to burn and blaze even when the spark of nature be quench and the radical moisture of all and every one of you drink up and consume oh I desire that when your earthly and elementary part be dissolve your dust turn to dust and to mummiamized earth that then your better part your soul more pure and subtle than either fire or air may with the angel and the d d Reve. 5.11 Revel. 7. ver. 11. elder clothe in pure white before the throne of the lamb yea with the e e and cherubin and Seraphin par. 5. p. 79 80. cherubin and seraphin whole fire and inflame with the love of God as inchoative and initiatory here on earth so perfect constant perpetual in the imperial heaven and praise and bless and magnify and glorify that great the mighty jehovah f f Elohim and a donay Elohim etc. in all his great and glorious title name and attribute for ever and for ever without any persecution of the world opposition of tongue scoff of ismaelite flout of Michols or any external interruption and disturbance from the son of Beliall which labour the extinguish of all the spark of spiritual zeal in any devoute proselyte of the house of David of the new g g Zach. 12.10 jerusalem yea without any internal suggestion and temptation from Satan but above all without any distraction of mind division or divulsion of thought alienation by these external or any other molestation in the outward or inward man from yourselves as have there a full and free exemption and infranchize manu-mission from all this dulness of flesh deadness of heart lumpishness of spirit corruption of nature pressure of cross and loss exigent and strait for these outward thing care and distraction of family encumbrance from your calling and what other let disturbance impediment and remorae whatsoever which do every way in this your warfare here embodage and enthral you from the performance of this or any other spiritual duty in that measure and perfect manner that you will or shall of which you daily complain with the h h rom. 7.23 apostle and all the faithful and against which you daily strive and fight in the christian conflict and bicker i i gal. 5. v. 17. duel betwixt grace and nature the flesh and the spirit oh let it be your live die yet never die comfort that you that begin cordial and christianly to bless God here after this short life be end which be as brittle as k k Esai 40 6. 1. pet. 1.24 glass as waver as the wind as frail as the ice as swift as a post or a weaver shuttle as melt as snow as fade as smoke or the field flower as vanish as a dream you shall join your spirit to the spirit of the just to sing and ring forth your everlasting hosannahe and haleluiahs to the god of spirit for which end as Paul wish and heart desire be that Israel may be l l rom. 10.1 save so my wish and heart desire be that all of you may here be so far sanctify that innitiate in this life as apprentice to this heavenly science or as journeyman or journ man even stranger and pilgrim with m m 1. chr. 39.15 David the patriarch and n n hebr. 11.13 1. pet. 2.11 prophet travel and peregrinate in this veil of misery in your few and evil o o Genes. 47.9 day ere you sleep with your p p 1. King 2.10 father you will so learn to speak the language of Canaan with the tongue and tone of angel that at the last as free denizen free citizen infranchize and privilege in all the liberty of grace and glory you may keep a perpetual jubilee a everlasting sabbath of praise and holy expression in that heavenly Canaan celestial jerusalem mount Zion which be q q gal. 4.26 above to which my hope be that you be my desire be that you may be travel breathe and aspire SECT. 2 motive further urge here to begin the l^fe of grace after of glory oh suffer the word of exhortation I beseech you as heavenly quyrister begin even here even now even this day the quire on earth it be not thank worth to be eternal thankful in heaven you must do it you can do no otherways if you once come there it be as natural if I may use that word for the bless spirit to bless and praise the lord as for the fire to burn the sun to shine the water to move the sea to ebb and flow r r Aelian hist. li. 10. c. 44. plin. li. 5. cap. 9 Nilus to overflow or any other creature celestial or sublunary animate or inanimate to move and work and produce effect according to their nature and several propriety but to praise God here joyful cordial constant to break here through all impediment as David three worthy through the Garryson of the philistine to fetch the desire water of s s 1. chr. 11. verse 18. Bethlem to strive here against all discouragement as in the olympic t game for mastery to swim against the stream of all opposition as be say of the u u Arist lib. 9 cap 48. dolphin and salmon to be resolute against all repugnance of the false and flatter flesh that bid the spirit as Peter bid Christ favour itself the tempt devil the persecute world who by the imputation of hypocrisy humorousnesse fantasticalitie singularity at least of Puritanisme and precisnesse seek to quench in every zealist all spark of devotion as soon as ever kindle yea as w w math. 2.16 Herod and 10 10 exod. 1.22 Pharaoh to drown and murder even Christ and Christianity in all the Israel of God as soon as ever new bear I say those that can thus digest all those bitter pill as physical and can be as be David y y 2. sa. 6.21.22 case with Micholl more zealous in this and all other duty the more they be oppose like the fire that burn the more the more it be z suppress this indeed be praise worthy every inferior bird can chip and crowd it in the spring and can sing in the sun shine that be a bird indeed that can sing in the storm and charoll it in the winter every fish can play in the calm the dolphin and some more can play in the tempest every man can bless God in the sunshine of his prosperity with full bag full barn full belly and clothe back but to bless God in adversity in the storm of affliction with job on the a a Job 1. v. 21. dunghill Daniel in the lion b b dan. 6.21.22 den with the three companion of c c dan. 3.23 daniel in the furnace with the martyr at the d d many have that strength and grace give they in the paganish arrian popish persecution nominate in the martyrology but chief by he who have epitomise all the book of martyr fol. 3.4.5.6 7.8.9.10 to fol. 18. etc. stake to sing song of Zion here in a strange land this be that which be most acceptable to the almighty oh then that my word may prick and fasten like the goad and nail of the sanctuary that I may plead and prevail with you even now with Noah e e Genes. 7.9 dove to enter into the ark to leave the carrion and fleshly lust of the world on which the world crow dog and vulture prey and glut themselves here to be at rest in God and on God oh let my counsel be f f dan. 4.24 acceptable here strive to enter into the bridegroom g g Math 25.10 chamber to rejoice as paranymph and friend of the h h math. 9 15. bridegroom to sing with Solomon a divine epithalamium in honour of the spiritual espousal betwixt Christ and his church oh that you can here sleep in quiet rest and tranquillity of the soul in heavenly contemplation as that Endymion be say to have sleep with the i moon in the philosophical speculation here be conversant in the mount with God as k k exod. 19.3 Moses get a glimpse of the glory of Christ in the mount with Peter james and l l math. 17.4.5 2. pet. 1.17 John for in the mount of high and heavenly thought and meditation God will be see Christ will be find in m m luk. 2.46 jerusalem which be the vision of n n peace peace oh that we can ascend up from earth to heaven with o o 2. King 2.11 Elias in the fiery chariot of zeal that we can strive even in this life to enter at least the suburb of the heavenly city that we have our p p phil. 3.20 conversation even in heaven our heaven begin here on earth that be rise with q q Collos. 3.1.2 Christ we may seek those thing that be above place and plant our affection not on thing in earth but on thing in heaven that we can send our heart as the disciple their heart and r r act. 1.11.12 eye after Christ that be ascend that s s a man in his incarnation a lamb in his passion a lion in his resurrection a eagle in his ascension eagle high mount at least that we can soar up to his cross in Golgotha in the meditation of his passion not to breed compassion towards he who now from suffering be enter into t t luk. 24.26 glory as the superstitious friar as may be see in u u in his mount Calvarie guevara Lodowicke w w in his soliloquy ground from several gospel ponte and 10 10 his meditation Granado etc. make that the chief end of their mental meditation of his suffering and of their idolatrous crucifix but to resolve to suffer with he that we may be glorify with he to feel the power of his death to die to sin the power of his y y rom. 6.8.9.10 resurrection to rise again to newness of life to bless and praise the z z Apoc. 5.9 lamb because he have redeem we from all the nation and kingdom and kindred of the earth if for this end we tract and trace our incarnate crucify saviour from jerusalem to a a matth. 27 luk. 23. mark 15. John 19 Golgotha with his sword pierce weep mother the doleful daughter of jerusalem joseph of Arimathea and the centurion and for this end look upon he who our sin have b b Zach. 12.10 pierce with the eagle eye of our faith as the antitype of the brazen serpent who Moses erect in the c c Numb. 21.9 John 3.14.15 wilderness look on he also in the glass of the gospel where we may see he as the apostle of the gentile tell the convert corinthian even crucify among we if by this sight of he we can get unto he by save d d John 1^ 3 knowledge into he by e e Epi^^ 3.16 faith we grow up with he as plant in f f jo^^ 15.4 he by the sap of the spirit we make a bless speculation of his passion oh that beside the fruit of his passion we can get here some glimpse of his transfiguration a true type of his glorification some glimmer and reflection of the heavenly Canaan as Moses a perfect view and synopsis of the g g deut. 34.1.2.3 earthly here seek some glimpse of heavenly light as the prisoner the gleam or beam of the sun through some cranny in the wall or door or keyhole through the veil of thy flesh as the spouse in the canticle that have a glimpse of her h h cant. 5.4.5.6 well-beloved look through the hole of the door and her heart be affection to he here in thy great pressure of body soul and spirit get some refection by reflection with that primitive protomartyre i i act. 7.56 Stephen and the rapt k k 2. cor. 12.4 apostle on Christ crucify and glorify and of the glory of Christ prepare purchase lay up as reveal here get some warmth and heat in your heart as the apostle and the two disciple that go to l l luk. 24.32 Emaus by oft talk and commune with Christ by the word and m prayer and by that mean receive from Christ that best newyear gift that love token promise by Christ to all his n n John 14.17.18.19 elect and exhibit as once in the o o act. 2.3 form ever in the effect of p p the spirit like fire etc. 1. illuminate with knowledge 2. heat with zeal and love 3. mollify the heart 4. cause spark of prayer 5. purge dross of sin 6. purify the heart 7. change with what it meet with in to it own nature fire oh that we can break off company and society with man chief wicked man so much as our calling and charge to be discharge will permit that in our meditation and soul soliloquy in innitiation of saint Augustine Bernard Anselme and other heavenly mind man we may be more conversant with God oh why do we not retire ourselves as q q Genes. 24.63 Isaac into the field as Augustine and Alixius into the r r relate full and apply in parson resolution orchard as joseph of Arimathea into our s s John 19 41. garden or immure ourselves according to Christ t t math. 6. vers. 6. precept and his virgin u u luk. 1.28 mother practice into our private closet or chamber for some sequestrated time there to meditate of the mercy of God of the merit of Christ of the privilege of grace of the christian dignity of the joy of a better life etc there to exhilarate ourselves according to the apostolical counsel and command and according to the precedent set we in my text by David and his noble and to rejoice before the lord and in the lord more than the carnalist and the moralist of our time in their corn and wine and oil w w psal 4.7 increase more than Laban in his 10 10 gen. 29.2 sheep Naball in his y y 1. sam. 25.36 feast Balthezar in his z z dan. 5.2 drink Herod in his a a Mark 6.17 Herodias Saul in his b b 1 sam. 16.16 23. harp Nero in his c c Suet^nius in Nerone music the carnal jew in their d d Amos. 6. v. 6. minstrelsy than the philistine in their e e judge 16.23 Dagon and mad mirth or any other licentious libertine in their luxurious and sabaritish delight oh why do we not retire and sequestrate our soul our thought our action our affection from all carnal delight and desire more full more free to converse with God set time a part even for the very nonce to praise God as do f f psal 55.17 David as Daniel do for g g Daniel 6.10 prayer arise with that man after god own heart even at midnight to give thanks unto the lord oh that my word like spur and goad like the prick under the nightingale breast that be say to awaken she in the night from sleep to sing may excite and stir you to this neglect and too much pretermit duty and for this purpose I wish we may here use this world as though we use it not as the mariner the sea and his ship as the soldier his arm as the traveller his inn as the student his recreation as the spaniel the water for our turn and time for a time for mere necessity and conveniency not give it our heart nor affection shake it of when we have do with it for h h seek only Cicero meat drink and clothes and embrace in the inward of our soul more pure spiritual contentive and satisfactory delight and desire oh be as much as thou can in the mount of spiritual speculation rather than in the valley of external action rather in the lightsome i i gen. 46.34 exod. 10. ver. 23 goshen with god Israel then in the darksome Egypt with the uncircumcised rather suffer affliction as Moses with God k k heb. 11.24.25 people then enjoy the pleasure of sin for a season rather desire with David to be a door keeper in God house then to live in the tent of kedar as lot in l l Genes. 19 2. pet. 2.7 Sodom Ezekiah among m m ezek. 2. ver. 6 scorpion rather fast with God child the mourner in Zion as Esther with her n n Esther 4.16 maid Mordocheus with the distress jew o o ezra 10. v. 1.2 ezra p p dan. 10. v. 2.3 Daniel and q q Nehem. 1. v. 4 Nehemiah than feast with the profane balthezars and drunken nabal of the world rather sing song of Zion with Moses Deborah Miriam Zachary the two Annas and the spiritual Israel of God to the laud and praise of God than song of Sodom to the lute and Tabret and harp to the dishonour of God with that carnal r r amos 6.6 esay 22. vers. 13 Israel avoid the company of the wicked fly from their society as Manes the Chalcedon bishop do from julian the apostate John from cerinthus Origen from Paulus samesetenus polycarpus from Martion athanasius Chrysostome and the s s of all these there be ample mention make by Socrates Eusebius the German century etc. as I have allege they already in my Origen repentance orthodox alexandrian and antiochian from the blaspemous arrian as from a dog a t t cane snake and a devil come no near they then to the plague who have hot mouth like armenian dragon hot as oven with fire from hell spit burn venomous spark of blasphemy in the face of heaven for to converse with such be to have our hell on earth but to praise God with the saint yea withal the creature magnify he in all his glorious attribute this be to have heaven on u earth oh happy as holy be that soul who in imitation of the lark and the sing quyrister of the air have his chief delight to be mount upward and sing above as near to God as he can get and use this grosser earth but only for food and mere necessary make no stay below till it soar up again that it be entrap as these incautelous bird in the lime-twig of lust in the begin of temptation oh happy he that not content with ordinary duty with our common protestant material and cursory perform such as their stint task of say rather than pray prayer read of chapter sing of a psalm say grace before and after meat as they use to say by themselves or child their attorney run daily in these unless by carnality or profaneness omit as in a labyrinth or circle like a milne-horse ever in one pace without ever quicken their motion what extraordinary occasion soever come either of prayer in humiliation or praise God in true gratulation those that beside these ordinary can sequestrate time to dedicate and consecrate their very soul and spirit to the very God of spirit extraordinary in manner and measure as occasion be offer either of mourn such as be in the day of w w esay 22. v. 13. Esau 10 10 Osee 6 v. 1.2 Osee y y dan. 9 v. 1.2.3.4.5 Daniel z z joel. 1. v. 5.8.11.13 and cha. 2.15.16.17 joel a a ezra 10.3.5 ezra b b 1. sam. 1.10 Anna c c job. 3.24 job d d jerem. 9 v. 1.2 jeremy or of rejoice such as in the day of David both herein my text and elsewhere when David pen his eucharistical psalm sing public in the church he and the elder of Israel as also in the day of his son Solomon Ezekiah and josiah after he exulting and triumph before the Lord oh happy he that can marry as some father beside e e Stella and friar have allude both Martha and f f Luke 10. vers. 41.42 Mary Rachel and Leah can unite and so conjoin the fruitful thoo-bleare eye life of action as less fair with the more beauteous life of contemplation that in his general call as he be a Christian can make holy and spiritual duty the unbending of his bow sauce to his meat his very recreation and best prepare to the duty of his special and particular call as he be a man such a man be indeed a phoenix among man as the hevite say of g g gen. 23. v. 6. Abraham even a prince of God among man yea he that can be a regular observant of these few rule by blessing the lord with his heart and mouth the member of his body and faculty of his soul here in grace shall inchoate and begin even in the valley of the world in the veil of his flesh the life of glory such a one shall attain to more Evangelicall perfection than ever do jew Papist or Pelagian in the mere observation of Moses his legal whether moral cerimonial or judicial yea by these rule he shall come near god shoot near heaven walk more in the light of the sun as every way more perfect yea I say further he shall inherit and enjoy sweet ecstasy of soul rapture of spirit comfort of conscience peace of heart joy in the holy ghost than ever any superstitious popeling regular friar or monasterian in this earth have notwithstanding all their thrasonical brag and boast to the contrary of their feign revelation apparition and enthusiasm by their strict observance of the rule of their saint Francis Benedict dominick etc. or these that be forge and father on Basill h Augustine or any other record by i i surium Lippomanum Marulum Abdiam and cassianus and their own writer oh can we try how good and gracious the lord be have we but a spiritual gust of the comfort of grace if we do but once eat the spiritual manna that be hide from the world can we turn the bread of life into blood and moisture can we be wean from the world to be feed as child true new k k 1. pet. 2. v. 2 bear with the milk of the word can the world with her bewitch delight prove bitter unto we that Christ and his comfort may be l sweet that we can be as content to sacrifice our false joy as Abraham his belove m m Genes. 22.6 Isaac as the repent israelite their idol can we pray n n 1. thes 5. v. 16. continual rejoice ever o o vers. 17.18 more etc. in all thing give thanks whether we eat or drink or whatsoever we do or excogitate reserve all to the honour of God oh can we attain retain this p p math. 5. v. 48 perfection commend and command can we thus keep our spiritual Passeover with q q luk. 22. v. 15 Christ we shall experimental find as much difference betwixt the comfort and content of christianity and carnality of the joy of the flesh and the spirit as betwixt the clear fountain of r r exod. 15. v. 27 elim and the bitter water of s s 2. King 2.19 jericho betwixt honey and aloe or as the ancient pagan find betwixt their former use Gland and acorn and that corn which be first sow by Ceres or t t Virgil inventione Saturn or as the prodigal son find betwixt the husk of the swine that have almost starve u u luk. 15. vers. 16.17 he and that bread in his father house which abundant feed he we will confess with that good w w in Augustine that we find God too late we will say with that other 10 10 Ignatius zealist my god and all thing we will resolve with David rather to be door keeper in the house of God or to nest there with the very sparrow then to be the monarch of the world without the word oh can we make melody to the lord in our heart if the harp of these heart of we be right string and prepare to sing and give thanks this music mental we will as much prefer it before all the vain vicious profane mad y y Eccles. 2. v. 2. mirth of the world as a exquisite Lutenist or organist prefer the organ the z z a instrument so call in which be diverse instrument in one multitude orpharian Bandora lute or Cytharin etc. before the roar of a rural bagpipe in which the countrie-swaine delight because he be apprehensive of no better oh we glut ourselves as vulture and kite with these carrion delight sensual because we know not nor try not those that be more pure and a spiritual as the stomach that feed on wind and corrupt humour when it want better meat * @ * * @ * SECT. 3 blessing God the mean to supplant blaspheme and other tongue sin oh if once our heart like golden organ-pipe be blow with the best favonian wind that bless breath of the spirit without which they make no heavenly modulation that they can resonate and resound with David the glory of God that we can say with that princely psalmograph awake my tongue a wake my glory a wake lute and harp I myself will a wake right early if we can thus cant and charroll out the praise of God if we can say with faith and feeling praise thou the lord oh my soul yea all that be within i praise his holy name this one grace will show that we have gracious heart form and frame in a holy and heavenly mould and sure as it be in the two scale in a balance or the opposite spoke in a run wheel when the one be up the other go down as be feign of Castor and Pollux that when the one rise the other set so if this grace of true gratitude do possess thy heart how soon will all graceless and profane carriage vanish and avoid out of it as the mist before the sun as the darkness and dampishnesse of a low room yield to the light of a candle and to the better smell of sweet odour and perfume which be sudden bring in all thy oath and blasphemy thy curse and execration will be purge out of thy ulcerous and unclean mouth as the gross and viscous humour out of the body by aloe or rhubarb Christ wound and heart shall no more be chew and champ in thy tooth as thou do the bone of a lark all these tongue sin against the piety of speech the justice the equity the wisdom the honesty the sincerity the verity of speech lay down by some b b in number 30. as they be lay down by Peraldus in his sum and by in his author which once more public I c c at Paul cross dom. on that Text. James 3. vers. 6. enlarge all these I say will vanish as the morning mist yea fall down as Dagon before the d d 1. sam. 5.4 ark nay I dark say not only shall this horrible sin of swear whether civil and moral oath as by faith and troth this light this e e math. 5.33.34 James 5.12 money etc. or great and grosser not only by the creature but by the creator I say it shall not only turn to blessing God thyself like jordan turn backward but thou will no more endure to hear or bear the bellow and blasphemy of the multitude the roar of the vociferation of the son of Beliall without zealous though discreet reprove of they according to circumstance of time place and f f m. Perkins in his case of conscience person at least without grieve and mourn for they in thy heart than lot can endure the abomination of the g g 2. pet. 2.7 sodomite Elias the h h 1. King 18.40 baalite or our saviour i i mark 11.15 Christ the simoniacal buy and sell in the temple or k now of temple thou will be affect to such sound as to the roar of a cannon nay thou will with as much patience hear the howl and yell of the damn spirit in hell they will be as welcome to thou as the gruntle of the swine to the l l Aelian libr. 3. cap. 8. sue Maiol 7. pag. 252. elephant which so move they that some battle have be disorder and lose by this swinish stratagem I say more be this grace true eradicate and graft in thou that tongue of thou that be fire and oil too from hell and make glib with oath as the wheel of a coach or a clock to run more nimble till it have strike all vent and foam out thy tongue sin thick and threefold as winter hail to God dishonour the church scandal thy own m m jude v. 13. shame and thy soul n n exod. 20 7. psalm 25.3 Zach. 5.3 destruction time may come that rather than thou shall blaspheme God with it as thou have do in the least particular thou will bite it off more free than the hunt beaver his o o Plinium stone thou will spit it out of thy mouth as once a primitive martyr upon a p p in epitome occasion spit his in the face of a tyrant yea thou will suffer it to have more torture here than that rich churl in q q Luke 16.24 hell to be sod in blood as Tomiris do the tongue and head of r Cyrus to be prick through and through with needle as s s Ciceroni Herodias johanni jezabel Fulvia do Tully tongue rather than it shall prick and stab and torture the humanity of thy once painful crucify now glorify saviour nay with that good Hilarion be the choice offer thou thou will rather die the death again and again then once to blaspheme that God who have be so good so gracious and so propicious unto thou what shall I say more what stone shall I further roll what string shall I touch what argument shall I further use to plant this bless grace of blessing to supplant this accurse plant of the devil own plant in the ground of thy corruption of blaspheme the god of heaven which be so usual in the mouth of all sex and sort of man woman and child from the head to the tail of our people to the shame of u u read master Downam in his four treatise against this abominable swear sect. 8 9 10. 11. 12. etc. pag. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. etc. as also m. Philip knewstubs his abuse of England and a sermon of little m. gibbins on this text the land mourn because of oath christianity the just scandal to the gentile who more respect their feign jupiter and Hercules then we our Christ and as the stumble block before the jew who by our little respect of our Christ and by popish idolatry which they daily see for which their forefather so smart be keep main from be christian oh that I may still harp on this tongue string till it be in tune enure thyself to bless God thou will by dissuetude then cease to blaspheme he learn to speak the language of Canaan thou will forget the language of ashdod even as the child that be spanish or of the native here our irish if once they live among the english and be anglify they forget for want of use their own tongue as pharaoh daughter forget her father house and w w psal 45 10. people oh as one nail drive out another one passion drive out another one burn heat out another according to some surgery so the fire of the spirit be it once in thou will eat out all that hellish fire that in thy tongue all that filthy and stink matter that foam out at thy mouth as froth from a boar as the sulphurous smell from Aetna or Vesuvius which steam and stink in the nostril of God and all good man as the stir of Aiax or the rake of a bury carrion all this I say will be wash rense and cleanse as be once the uncircumcised corinthian in their word and work from this filthy and putrify matter as sore mouth be wash by alum and sage by the water which flow from the sanctuary the heal water of the word and 10 10 1. cor. 6. verse 10.11 spirit chap. x. to bless God the only way and mean to be bless of God as Abraham say in another case to y y gen. 18. v. 32 God I say to man let i speak once more so have I do my motive to this gratitude so press and urge aim my conclusion with some diss^vasives further against ingratitude this all positive I have to say in this point that by this blessing of God as do David and his israelite in my text for matter and manner thou take the best way the most compendious course god own prescribe method to bless thyself to procure blessing to thyself and thy seed to perpetuate and entail as do z z ge. 12.2 cha. 15. vers. 18. Abraham a a gen. 17.19 Isaac and jacob even blessing to thy posterity walk in thy holy way and step even as wicked man curse spirit propagate as some do their frenzy their leprosy and hereditary disease corporeal this dangerous and damnable disease spiritual of link and chain curse even to their seed blood and family sympathize with their curse sin and accurse judgement oh the bless interest and happy usury of blessing God it bring blessing redouble and multiply by God arithmetic upon ourselves even as he that in the best employment of his preach talent in divinity or teach talent in humanity read art and author to other get and gain by God blessing more knowledge to b himself both theological and moral by cause other to c c math. 25.29 know and as he that with d d job. 29.15.16 17. job as a good steward in the right dispense of the unrighteous Mammon make the back and belly of the poor to bless he cause also god to bless he in the increase of his store as the harvest to that seed that be cast upon the e e Eccles. 11. v. 1 water as the f f 2. King 4.7 oil and the g g 1. King 17 16 meal of the two poor widow be multiply that be so respective to the two good i i elisha and Elias prophet as Abedmelech the ethyopian save his own life by save jeremies k k jer. 39.15.16.17 life as a rich man even in piety and christian policy increase his stock of money when conscionable without any usurious contract or l l it be the compact this this covenant to gain how ever the other lose a certain sum which make the usury and that which bite too see d. fentons treatise on usury compact of bite interest secure only the principal he set up or help the traffic of honest and conscionable poor tradesman participate in equity some of their gain as God give a blessing to their get thus in help they not hinder but help himself do good to himself as experience have show when he do good to other so in the fit application according to my first proposition a man by blessing of God bless also himself by a necessary consequence even as he that look upon the sun by the light see light even as be verify in all history which be the hostage of speech that they which honour God God will honour they as he tell m m 1. sam. 2. ^0 Samuel as he honour believe n n gen 12. ge. 17 gen. 18.17.18 Abraham in Chaldea and Mesopotamia Isaac among the o o ge. 26.12.28 philistine joseph in p p Genes. 41.39.40.41 42. Egypt q q Esth. 6.10.11 Mordocheus r r Esth. 2 9 Esther s s dan. 2.46 48. Daniel Sydrach Mysaach and t t dan. 3.28 abednego in Babylon u u 1. sa 18.7.16 David 10 10 1. sam. 3.19.20.21 Samuel and y y 2. Chro. 35.18 24. josiah in Israel boaz and ruth in z z ruth 4.11 Bethlem the believe a a math. 8.10 centurion the cananitish b b math. 15.28 woman the weep c c luk. 7.44 45. penitent the flux cure d d mark 5.34 patient devoute Mary e e joh. 12.7 cha. 20.16 Magdalen patient f f Job 1.8 job. 42.16.17 job meek g g Numb. 12.7.8 josuah 1.6 Moses public before the son of man herauld their praise even in the face of their malign or contest enemy yea against even Satan himself and his accuse sathanist on the contrary shame and dishonour they that dishonour he as he verify as well as threaten against Hophney and h h 1. sam. 2.33 34. phineas and the house of Israel against the sodomite burn they with stink i i gen. 19.24 sulphur as well as fire as their sin stink against the proud rebel nymrodians who tower he overthrow and confound their k k ge. 11.7.8.9 language against wicked Haman all who honour be in one hour strangle at the l l Esth 7.10 gallow in his dogge-like death against rebel m m 2. sam. 18.14.17 Absalon who name now stink as foul as his face be once n n 2 sam. 14 25 fair against proud o o act 12.23 Herod who the worm eat proud Nabuchadnezar who usurp more than a man in his imagination for seven year be worse than a beast in state and p p dan 4 30 see how this transform be in d wiles Hexapla in this place fate yea verify this against his own Israel who for their own rebellion though they be the head yet be they make the tail of other people as they be give over to the power of the q q jere. 39.9 chaldean r r judge 6.2 midianite s s judge 3 14 moabite t t judge 13.1 philistine at several time but chief in jehoiakim who as he live wicked he die wretched and dishonourable have the very burial of a u u jere. 22.18.19 ass none lament he as it be also with that blasphemous arrius and other w w of God judgement against arrius Nestorius and other heretic and apostate see in the end of zegedines table in folio heretic with julian and other accurse apostate with Cain 10 10 act. 1.24.25 judas and other bloody murderer y y 2. sam. 20.22 Shebah z z 1. King 2.31.32 joab and other traitor with jezabel Cleopatra Messalina a a 2. King 11.16 our english Rosamond and jane Shore and all other impenitent profane one who as they live without grace and holiness die in disgrace without honour a debauch life be usual accompany with a dishonourable death even so that from this circumference I may conclude the point in the right centre that soul that be active in true blessing God be also passive in receive blessing from God he be that true bless man which be describe in the b b psal 1. ps. 112. psalm 119 1. math. 5.3.4.5 psalm and in other scripture all those blessing shall accrue unto he and come upon both he and his seed which Moses both c c deut. 28.1.2.3 Levit. 26.3.4 5. conditional and d d deut. 33.6.7.8.9 absolute pronounce upon the Israel of God even as on the contrary he that love curse the curse shall come upon he even as a stone or pellet of lead that be throw up in the air may fall upon the head of the thrower and crush it as do that stone which a eagle let fall upon the head of Eschylus the poet or as a ball that be throw against a iron-walle rebound back again on the breast or face of the thrower as the curse of e e 2. king 1^ Rabsakah of f f 2. sam. 16.7.8 Semei of Balaake redound on their own head not on the head of Ezekias of David and of the israelite as the pope curse at this g g see the book call day against the orthodox protestant who he execrate under the name of calvinist lutheran Hugenotes heretic fall patt upon himself and the decline sea of the papal hierarchy who begin to ebb by the just revolt of king and christian kingdom from Babylon as fast as ever by the mysterious work of h h read that noble french morney now english in folio of the progress of popery since it be first hatch Satan it have a time to flow the causeless curse as a arrow shoot to no purpose in the air ever return in vain so that to draw this point to a further head as the lord be by a just i i Pana and retaliation in other particular to punish sin so to curse the curser as most * * see God hand upon those that use to curse and imprecate instance by Kellay lib. 8. and Guicardine lib. 17. in the death of Charles duke of Bourbon by Crantius libr. 6. chap. 45. by Wierus lib. 4. magia cap. 10. by John le gast in his tabletalk volum. 2. pag. 131. by Benso in his history of the new world lib. 2. cap. 17. by Philip hist. med. cap. 86. in the tragical end accustom curser accurse according to that of the psalmist as he love curse so let it come unto he as he delight not in blessing so let it be far from he as he clothe himself with curse as with a garment so let it come into his bowel like water and like oil into his bone let it be unto he as the garment which cover he and as a girdle wherewith he be gird k k psal 109. ver. 17. ^8 continual so why may we not argue that by a retaliate proportionable mercy see both in mercy and justice the lord keep a arithmetical or geometrical proportion in reward as revenge he bless those that bless he and that bless he for if he tell Abraham that those who bless he he will l l Genes. 12. v. 3. bless and have ever verify this promise in blessing and prosper the friend of the church the spiritual seed and son of Abraham as some of our m m Gorlicius in Melancthone Sarigelli^ and Neotoricis modern instance in the two theodosij in Constantine in gratian in Valentinian and other christian emperor who as they be nurse father and nurse mother to the church the lord go out and in with they and be present with they in all their affair in war and in peace as he be present with o o joshuah 1.5 joshuah p p judge 6.12 gideon q q gen 39.2.21 joseph r r 1. sam. 18.12 David s s dan. 4.5 chap. 5.12.14 Daniel and other his servant ever also according to his threat curse those that curse Abraham and be malignant enemy and opposite to the true t t gene. 12. v. 3. church his Israel veryfy and seal all the curse in his fly book of vengeance upon u u read the curse threaten against Egypt moab Ammon edom Tyre Sidon Medea Arabia and all wicked province and people in jeremy the 25 vers. 15.16.17.18.19 moab Ammon Amalech jeconiah ahab jezabel Haman Nero Caligula julian Antiochus Maximinus w w read the theatre of God judgement in write by d. beard on which in the title of apostate and bloody persecuter these name with many more be spectacle of vengeance maxentius and of latter time on johannes de Roma Minerius Gerson Cassaneus Weston Bonner story Gardiner and other bloody butcher 10 10 see master fox in his book of martyr but especial in a book epitomize the act of the church where you may see the end of these name with many more 377. 378. 379. 380. 382. 383. etc. see also Andrew Husdore in his theatre of example on the 3. and 4. commandment in latin in persecutor ancient and modern then sure as the argument hold much more from the lesser to the great affirmative both logical and theological the lord will bless those that bless he as he will curse those that curse he if he will bless those that bless Abraham much more will he bless those that bless the god of Abraham since indeed none can bless God cordial and sincere but such as the lord first inspire with his grace and spirit even as the instrument make no sound till it first be tune and touch with the hand of the musician as the organ-pipe be not musical but dead till it be fill with the windy bellows from the organist for none can say that jesus be the lord but by the spirit of God so that the blessing of the god of spirit with upright heart and spirit as David and his israelitish elder do here be but as a spark of the spirit fire as stream from that fountain as reflect beam from that sun it be a evident demonstration that such be true actual real bless already and as a preparative beaver to a great banquet at the supper of the y y Revel. 19.7 lamb potential to be further bless of God in the high heaven the throne of God the bosom of Abraham the prepare mansion and seat of the bless all which affirmative i think have their corroboration from this theological axiom that as the seal leave the impression in the wax be it gold or silver etc. as the sun by reflection leave his shadow on the opposite cloud so what mercy soever the lord bestow on we as a dignity he work in we the same grace demonstrate itself in some proportionable duty as for instance 1. have the lord elect i to life from eternity he give i grace to elect and choose he again to be my God 2. have he call i to the knowledge of his truth he give i his spirit to call he abba z z rom. 8.15.16 father in spirit and truth 3. have Christ die for i and my sin and rise again for my a a rom. 5.6 justification he have mutual give i power to die unto sin and to rise again to holiness and righteousness of life mortification of my fleshly b b Coloss. 3.5 lust and crucify my affection by the power of his c c gal 5.24 death and vivification and quicken of the spirit d d ephes 2 v. 1. by the power of his resurrection 4. be he ascend into heaven real for i he virtual cause i to ascend thither after he in my e e Coloss. 3. v. 1.2 heart and affection 5. be he my high priest to pray for i he as his legacy to his church bequeath unto i the spirit of grace and f f Z^ch. 12 10. rom. 8.26 prayer to pray again unto he 6. so for conclusion do he bless i with all blessing in heavenly thing he give i the heart by the same grace to bless he again as all his saint have do such print and impression the seal of his spirit leave in my heart as answerable to itself as face answer face in a glass oh then as ever thou desire to be bless bless God here be not so ignorant on idle as to dream of the kernel without break the g shell of eat the meal without grind in the milne of the h dignity without the duty of ever be bless but curse without blessing God oh think on all these motive in general every one in particular and let they be as goad and spur to excite thou to this press duty at least let all and ever of they be so many bit and bridle curb and remorae to restrain and keep we from ingratitude the bane of every grace yet the ulcer and spread leprosy and gangrene of every place yea of this province and our english here plant if I may digress by expostulation chap. 11 the application of all by compare as and our time with Israel in all time and now for special and specifical application of all that have be say unto ourselves to reap the harvest of all this seed and to drink the wine from these press grape that I may belike bring all these rapsodicall collection home to the english-irish hive of our own church and commonwealth all these general motive be but preparative to prolong and prepare the way to my intend scope or as a foundation to a subsequent building if ever nation and people under the cope of heaven have cause and occasion to act the part of David and his worthy since they leave the stage of life in blessing the lord as the very word of my text be we be the people for in the blessing and benefit we have receive from God both of adornation and preservation spiritual and temporal external and internal general and special our mother Albion and we here hybernify lay in a equal scale I will not so undervalue we to say balance with all the inhabitant of the christian pagan papal octoman world compare with the famous kingdom european asian african and american not except the cham of cathy the great mogul the sultan of Egypt Prester-Iohn the kingdom of Fez and the most flourish that be or ever be but equal poise with the best people in their prime in david and salomon time that ever be take even in their best as answer all their privilege and prerogative give they by the inspire a a 1. pet. 2.9 apostle of a royal priesthood a holy nation a choose generation etc. to who be the oracle of who come Christ according to the b b rom. 9.4 flesh we do not only weigh and parallel blessing with they lay in equal balance but all thing due ponder we as far i think exceed they as they exceed once the environ nation and this will plain and perspicuous appear if we and they Britam man and Jew be compare together as c c in his life Plutarch compare the Greek and the roman both in our best and worst our dignity receive from God our oblige yet neglect duty that we owe to God we shall be find to bear the buckler from they to begin then from the beginning etc. first we know the lord of his mere mercy and philanthropy enter into covenant with the jew give they the seal of the covenant circumcision initiate with their father d d gen. 17. v. 1.2 7 9.10.11.12 rom. 4.11 Abraham he by this e e joshuah 5. ve. 5.6 deut. 5. v. 1.2.3 covenant elect and select they from all the nation kingdom and kindred of the earth to be a peculiar people to himself of they and among they he have his church institute prescribe and establish his own worship give they law and ordinance moral ceremonial judicial as far exceed the law of Solon Numa Pompilius Mercurius Trismegistus Adraco or any other legifer among man in equity purity and perfection as the gold exceed the brass or tin by these he hedge and limit they within their bound all that he exact of they again in reciprocal requital of his mercy be only f f deut. 5.40 obedience to his law and statute his love he first set upon g g deut. 5 v. 34.35.36.37.38 they and choose they not they he not for any merit or worthiness that be in they but of his mere mercy and paternal good will adopt they unto himself repudiate and in a manner reject for a time all other people who he shut up in unbelief in respect of they as Moses oft time urge unto they so to reflect upon ourselves for this our english Israel have not the lord sequestrate and separate we from pagan and heathen yea even from turk and Jew themselves who for a time he have reject for their h h rom. 11.20 unbelief to be a church unto himself a people zealous of good work be we not once as we may see our face in the glass of the i i rom. 1.29.30.31 roman k k 1. cor. 6.9.10.11 corinthian thessalonian l l ephes 2. v. 2.3 vers. 11.12 and tit. 3. vers. 3. ephesian in their pristine estate before their conversion in the uncircumcision of the flesh serve lust and vain idol without God in Christ stranger from God and alien from the commonwealth of the true Israel in the power of m m act. 26.18 death in the power of darkness have our very understanding n n ephes 4.18 darken as ignorant of the true God and of the way and mean of life and salvation be we not once even darkness itself a obscure people even to the world divide and cast out as it be into a unknown corner and o angle though now as a candle on a table as a beacon on a hill as a city on a mountain that can be hide give light and lustre to the gaze and admire world who eye be upon our eminency * * par. 12. pag. 348. and lib. 4 but in respect of our spiritual estate we be like other gentile walk in the vanity of our mind child of disobedience in who the prince of the air rule wild p p rom. 11.24 olive ere we be ingraft but even when we be thus in our blood the lord pass by we and say we shall q q Ezech. 16. ver. 3.4.5.6 live by the light of his word whether by joseph of Arimathea or who else or in the day of r r the papist contend that this isle first receive the faith in time of Lucius dom. 180. and in time of Augustine send by Gregory 600. but as appear by some passage out of bede and Peter yea by Tertullian and Origen homil. 4. in Ezech. we receive the gospel long before the time of either by joseph of Arimathea as Gildas think lib. 4. or by Simon Zelotes as Nicephorus affirm libr. 2. cap. 4. Lucius or else when I dispute not now I say by this light by bless organ and instrument we be bring first from paganish and after from popish darkness more hideous than the egyptian or the s s in Bosphoro plin. lib. 6. cap. 6. c. 11. c. 13. Mela li. 1. c. 4. chymerian and reduce into the lightsome goshen of the glorious gospel call to be a people that before as it be be no people gather to be a church yea a glorious church as any in Europe or in Christendom beside for the continuation of the gospel the propagation and profession of the true religion the zeal and sincerity knowledge and answerable practice of preacher and professor purity of God worship free in a great measure from the leaven of popish and paganish idolatry and superstition holiness of life and illumination of judgement shine in many eminent member as pearl in gold notwithstanding the nevy and wart and spot and blemish in this of we as ever have be in the best reform church by open profane one and secret hypocrite as wooden leg to the body as rot bough to the tree in the true church like corrupt humour in the body rather than of our church I say church of t t Revel. 24. vers. 14.20 Revel. 3.15 Asia of u u 1. cor. ch. 3.3 ch. 5. v. 1.5 ch. 6. v. 1. ch. 11. v. 1^ Corinth and the best that be or ever be militant on earth till they be triumphant in heaven for the number of for the sincerity and measure of grace in our present and pristine proselyte true Nachaniels zealous professor and confessor constant and courageous martyr since the day of that belgic Elias Luther who have and upon trial I be persuade still will answer their name of protestant protest and confess for the faith till death seal the truth with their blood reflect on those I may well say according to my heart persuasion that our english-scottish Zion our church of great Britain of all other church be as the dove among the bird as the lily among the flower as the sun among the planet Christ own spouse though w w cant. 1. v. 4.5 black yet fair yea if comparison be not odious I will say as fair as any of those we call reform in France Helvetia Bohemia Saxony Denmark etc. or any other in 10 10 see the book extant in of the confession of the reform church Belgia yea I except not Geneva and we may put in for the armour of Aiax with Amsterdam itself second as in the church of the jew multitude and million of carnal israelite yea the whole generality except some few who the lord reserve as a few name in y y Revel. 3.4 Sardis a few corn in chaff as some few of Elias his z z 1. King 19.18 rom. 11.4 spirit among baalite break and infringe this covenant of God by apostatical revolt and backslide as the lord expostulate with they by his angel send from a a judg. 2. vers. 1.2.3.4 Gilgall by Samuel in b b 1. sam. 7.56 and 1. sam. 12.6.7.8.9.10 Mizpeth and by all the prophet after the death of Moses and c c judg. 2. vers. 8.9.10 joshuah and those elder of Israel who see the miracle in Egypt the wilderness and the red sea forget the d d see psal 78^ throughout lord that buy they and bring they into that good land flow with milk and honey so have not the god of Israel as just a quarrel and controversy with the commonalty and generality of our nation for break our covenant in baptism by which we be as strict oblige to his service and worship to faith and obedience as ever they by their circumcision for be ever any nation more perfidious or fedifragous one to another the carthaginian to the roman the e e titus 1.12 cretan f f Creta grecian or worst dissembler yea even the very g g see their perfidiousness in Knols his turkish history turk to christian then christian unto God how many miriade and million at this day to go no further to former time by their pledge and surety their godfather as they be call or father for God in the public congregation in the presence of God man and angel call heaven and earth to record have promise and protest to forsake the flesh the world and the devil to serve and worship the true jehovah when they be initiate and matriculate as it be into the church by baptism admit into Christ college the number and rank of christian as soldier swear to their general who yet have hardly keep their covenant so well as Regulus with the g carthaginian and other pagan even in thing moral for if I may in brief lance and cut and discover the ulcer and disease of the time how many as yet even serve the very devil as real as once that s. Christopher fictitious in the popish fable how many wicked pseudochristian by their life testify that as the scripture call such as they the h h John 8.44 1. John 3.8 son the i i rom. 6.16 1. John 3.8 servant and the k k 1. tim. 6.10 2. tim. 2.26 slave of Satan so they be at his command and obeisance as the servant of l l gen. 24.10 Abraham and m m act. 10.7 Cornelius yea of that other n n math. 8.9 centurion to their earthly master he bid they go and they go do this and they do it lie steal murder swear blaspheme they be obsequious their spirit and nature as tinder and powder take present the fire of every temptation 1. he rule they as the rider the horse he rule over they as a tyrant in a usurp kingdom they obey he as the jew that Idumean Herod yea he rule in they enthronize in their heart as once in the treacherous heart of o o John 13.27 judas the hypocritical heart of p p act. 5.3.4 ananias the envious heart of the q q math. 9.34 mark 3.22 Luke 11.15 pharisee at the least he take total possession of their whole man by his deputy and lieutenant some one or more dear darling sin rule and reign in they yea he do not only set they a work as he do judas in betray the jew in crucify Christ but he even speak in their heart athistical in their mouth blasphemous as once in the body of some r r lib. 7. and Chrys. in 1. corin. 10. origenes libr. 3. peryarch cap. 3. and Tertull. Maro c. 25. and ant. Lect. lib. 8. cap. 10 pythonist and within that serpent which he use as he use serpent fox and viper still in every country city and almost village as the organ and accurse instrument of man seduction intend destruction so the world for all our covenant and obligation to forsake it how many swarm of earthworm carnalist and covetous phylargurist have we not only ever root in the earth as moale and swine without ever a eye to look upward but as trunk and tree even root and eradicate in the earth turn all into earth even lump of earth as s s Suetonius in Caligula be call a lump of clay and blood conjeal be all for earth even for white and red t t gold and silver dust which by hook or crook right or wrong lionly force or Foxely fraud they scrape and rake together as greedy harpy or snatch eagle their desire prey all be fish that come to the net though it break the net or like the eagle coal in the u fable set all on fire though they gain by their ill-gotten good as achan by his steal w w joshuah 7.1.21.25 wedge as judas by his saviour sell 10 10 math. 27.3.4 5. silver as that Midas like our covetous alchumiste since by his bad y y what he touch turn into gold alchumy by which they and all such in all age have z z mithridate ere Plinius hist. 33. c. 3. perish as if all that be ill get be tholouse a a q. Cepio consul m. Crassus Aul. gel. noct. attic c. 9 gold carry on Sejanus his b b equus Scianus Cascio etc. Gellius ibid. horse for a sumpter horse so for the flesh and fleshly lust how many be give over to all voluptuousness lover of pleasure more than lover of c c 2. tim. 3.4 God serve diverse lust and d d tit. 3. v. 3. pleasure as if they be yet in their natural estate fleshly mind man walk after the e e rom. 8.2 flesh savour the thing of the f f rom. 8.5 flesh as the dog savour carrion very epicure and g g phil. 3.17 belly-god wallow in every obscene lust as the eel in the mud the swine in the mire and c thus as a watery glimmer sun end in rain our profession of the service of the true God the triune jehovah end in profanation in stead of the bless trinity which we shall worship we have a accurse trinity which we do worship though we promise to repudiate and cashier it the flatter flesh vain world delude devil it be h trinity adore by worldling evil in not serve one lord contrary to our first covenant we serve many i lord as a adulterous woman that forsake her first husband as God oft complain of k k jer. 3.1.2.6.8 Israel and follow after many stranger and unlawful lover three the lord use many mean to recall and reclaim these israelite and to reduce they to the performance again of the covenant which so blameful and shameful they have infringe send his prophet unto l l 2. Chro. 36.15 they speak early and late and plead about this very message and embassage yea to make the word to work more physical visit in paternal love their sin with rod and their offence with scourge and when gentle admonition and castigation will not serve use more severity whip they for their refractory rebellion with rod of whipcord yea with wire and iron send upon their cattle murrain upon their body disease leprosy and consumption into their tent fiery m m Numb. 21.6 1. cor. 10.5 serpent sweep many of they away with plague and n n num. 16.49 and chap. 25.9 judg. 2.15 pestilence yea cut they off by famine at home or the sword of the enemy abroad according to the verification of his severe and vehement comination against their sin and o o 26.26.27.28.29 etc. transgression so to parallel we also in this point have not the lord in mercy use as many and sundry mean to recure and recover our spiritual malady as ever he use towards his jewish Israel to receive we out of our dead sow to awake we out of our lethargical slumber to quicken we in our first love to bring we again to the observance of our first covenant to restore we by a new covenant of grace after we have so fearful break the first covenant of work for which end he have send we his word more powerful plentiful and continue then to any nation he have give we his p p in word great be the number of the preacher as the psalmist be verify this word he have send to our city our corporation yea to our countrie-towne and village as water to wash we as fire to purify q q jerem. 23.29 we as physic to purge we as a hammer to break and bruise we as manna to feed we as milk to nourish r r 1. pet. 2.2 we as a lantern to our step as in the dark night of sin to illuminate we as a sword to lop off our hydra-headed sin as a weed hook to weed out our corruption yea as the wiseman s s math. 2.9 star to lead we to Christ and as Israel cloud and pillar of t t exod. 40.38 fire to conduct we to our heavenly Canaan but since the word have not come to we as once to the convert * * 1. thes 1.5 gentile in power and efficacy but have be receive in vain since the preacher have spend their strength in vain among the generality and the multitude prevail no more than let with the u u Genes. 19.9 sodomite than Moses with w w exod. 7 11 v. 23 exod 8 15 Pharaoh than jeremy with 10 10 jerem. 34 2 3. etc. 17 18 and chap. 35.15 Zedekiah than y y 1 king 22 26 Michay with ahab but have be laugh at by some as ezekiahs z z 2 Chro. 30 10 post scoff at by other as Paul by the a a act. 17 32 athenian deride as the young prophet by jehues b b 2 King 9 11 comrade yea persecute as Paul by the unbelieved c c act 14 2 act 17 5 jew and abuse in many profane place as David d d 2 Sam 10 4 ambassador by the ammonite since like the e e jerem 13 23 Moor we have be no better but like the clay much worse for wash since we have be more sick and unsound for our physic since the word be sow seed fall into stony and thorny f f Math 13 for 20 21 22 Luke 8 13 14 ground have be choke with the lust of the world since our corrupt heart like a corrupt stomach have change his spiritual food into bad humour and make it the favour of death unto g g 2 Cor 2 16 death therefore to this rod of beauty God have add the rod of h h zach 11 7 band he have lay rod in steep for we more deep as our best physician he have phlebotomize we in our rank vein let we blood in the tympany of our pride and pleurisy of our sin diet we with the bread of affliction and water of tear turn our honey into gall and aloe he have come as near we as to Israel in draw the fury and brandish sword of his wrath not only hang it over we as that Dionysius once a draw sword over the naked head of a flatter * * Brusonium Damocles by a twine thread but even smite with it for sometime with the keen edge cut off many million as the lop and prune of our english vine lest we grow too rank in this our peace and plenty and that not only by ordinary but as he deal with Israel in the wilderness for their grievous provocation by extraordinary death cause the carcase of our people to fall at sundry time in great number sometime by gnaw dearth and bite famine sometime by sudden and turbulent inundation of i i of the ^ out of the sea and the damage by these overflow book be extant water in our chief shire as the river kishon that sweep away jabin and his k k judge 5 21 midianite yea that ancient river the river kishon sometime by lightning thunder and earthquake sometime by strange and uncouth l l as the sweat disease disease of which physic and surgery be oft ignorant both of the cause and cure as appear by our m m let he that will be satisfy when these several judgement be send upon our land and how far they rage and how long they continue with their effect and in the reign of what king since or before the conquest consult with stow hollinshed speed and lanquet chronicle since the margin will not bear the expression of every particular which I purpose to insert chronicle and chronologer but chief by that be some of his wrath the all devour plague and pestilence the arrow rage and destroy at noonday as he do with Israel in the day of o o 1. Chron 21 verse 14. David and of p p 1. Corinth 10 8 Moses and with other country since in Italy Austria q q Grossius in his tragical history in about the begin of his book reckon the great plague in the christian world say of Italy and Vienna that the dead be more than the live Viena and elsewhere he have lay his very axe to the root of our english tree and have cut down and lop off by many hundred in one week tall cedar lofty pine green popler strong oak of bashan white almond tree of all sort from the peer to the ploughman high and low young and old even in our chief city our metropolitan our mother city Troynovant our corporate town our country village yea even in our private house and cabin the pestilential fever as a rage torrent of water carry all along with it that stand in the way four as Israel be not reclaim for all these proceed of God with they either in mercy or justice but still grieve the lord not only for forty year in the wilderness but even in the land of Canaan when their sin like we do increase in the land of plenty like weed and brier in a fat moist ground and as flea and vermin in the hot summer sun either not repent at all harden their heart as that egyptian r r exod. 7.13 Pharaoh upon the message of his prophet and summons of his judgement or else repent superficial dissemble with a double heart shed crocodile s s and nat. hist. libr. 17. cap. 606. tear and fast for a fashion as once t t 1. King 21.29 ahab and another of their irreligious israelitish u u 2. king 6.30 king tear be in their eye and rebellion in their heart both at one w w deut. 1.44.45 instant like Esau that weep for the 10 10 hebr. 12.17 blessing yet intend the murder of his y y gen. 27.41 brother all with one breath howl and cry like wolf when god hand be upon they confess their sin as traitor on the rack when they be oppress by the moabite midianite ammonite and other z z judg. 3.9.13 chap. 4.3 canaanite but as soon as ever deliver by such temporary saviour type of the spiritual Messiah Othniell gideon jepthah Baruch Samson as he send for their rescue as he stir up Abraham to rescue a a gen. 14.15 lot they return again to their former bias idolatry extortion oppression as the dog to his b b 2. pet. 2.19 vomit the sow to her mire provoke he as much as ever by their rebellion like the ice seem to be thaw yet freeze and conjeal again in their dregs in which like moab they settle they can not be remove thus it be with we their case be we we like some impatient patient have be rather worse then better for God physic our sore by our inveterate and wellny uncurable corruption have be increase by our salve the lord will have heal we but like the Babel we will not be heal our disease be epidemical general and continual the flux of our sin like the bloody c c Mark 5.26 issue of that woman in the gospel be not to be stop it be d past cure as it seem and so past care as the land have long mourn by reason of oath and other sin so we have mourn for a time when God hand have be upon we we have proclaim general fast as once e e jam. 3. v. 6.7 ninive beside many a Esther and a Mordocheus many a Daniel and a Nathaniel that have mourn alone beside the house of f f Zach. 12. v. 12 13.14 Nathan the house of aron and the house of levi many religious family that have mourn a part the g g joel. 1.11 husbandman the vine-dresser and the tender virgin the h h vers. 13. priest and the elder yea the bride and the i i joel. 2.16 bridegroom that have fast mourn and lament before the lord as once k k 2. sam. 12.16 David do in the case of his sick child when we have either feel or fear the heavy hand of God chief when the land have be whip with his rod and for her transgression when judgement have be threaten or execute when as once Elias in another case we have see the l l 1. King 18.44 cloud or feel the storm of shower or pour down vengeance then as the m m Saturno to in Melpomene libr. 11. Ovidium in 2. fast Dionys Halycarn libr. 1. and euseb libr. 4. julianus apostate Heliogabalus Hedrenus Godfridus and Celius lampridius heathen the savage and the n n and acosta in and Purchasius syntagmate 17. indian at this day and in former time have offer sacrifice in some common plague to appease some angry Nemesis some exasperate imaginary God so have we offer sacrifice to the true God but except some few some true nathaniel hardly in truth we have abstain from meat but not from sin fast from the creature as the carnal o o esay 58.3.4 jew and dishonour the creator we have not lose the bond of the p p vers. 6.7 poor relieve the cause of the fatherless and widow make restitution of good ill get as q q luk. 19.8 zacheus and the jew in the time of r r jerem. 34.10 though after they revolt vers. 16. jeremy chief we have not as a man from a whorish wife give a bill of divorcement to those sensual sin and belluine lust which have make a separation and s s esay 59.2 jerem. 5.25 sequestration betwixt the lord and we and occasion his hand to be upon we etc. yet we have have many a Moses a aron and a phineas to stand in the gap betwixt God judgement and our sin such our land have afford thus have we sympathize with Israel in these particular in her blessing receive her sin renew and her gratitude neglect chap. 12 many mercy recite temporal and spiritual in which we far exceed the jew by many degree but to hoist up my sail a little high and to look our face in the glass or they in we both in God glass the sacred scripture gloss and comment by experience and to parallel the brittanicall and the jewish church and policy in many specialty the lord have come near unto we than ever to they and have be as a kind father both more liberal in his portion of blessing and more indulgent in spare and pity our sin and delinquence and first for the largeness of his mercy we receive as Isaac from t t gen. 25. v. 5.6 Abraham as joseph from u u gen. 48.22 jacob as Benjamin from w w gen. 43.34 joseph a double yea a treble portion as it be we seem jacob like even to carry away the 10 10 gen. 25.32 33 blessing and the y y gen. 27.30 birthright too from they and that in these specialty both of temporal and spiritual blessing in mercy of adornation and preservation as they come to hand with pretermission of innumerable more to begin with the best first to they God give the law in the hand of z z gal. 3.19 a mediator to we he give the gospel by the mediation of a a Luke 2.9.13.14 angel now in how many degree the sun exceed the moon our Messiah exceed their Moses our jesus their joshuah our high priest their * * heb. 7. heb. 8. heb. 9 10.10.11 12.13 etc. aron the bloody one and only propitiatory sacrifice of his body the annual sacrifice of their high priest the typical sacrifice of their beast and bullock our heaven their Canaan so far our gospel which be a quicken spirit exceed their law which without Christ be but a kill letter to they indeed say the apostle be the holy oracle commit they have the law and the testament Moses and the prophet but we have the gospel more plain more perspicuous than ever they have I deny not indeed but in their law there be the gospel include beside personal type in their ceremonial law Christ be shadow b b see the little book call Moses unveil prefigure and in their several oblation of all sort typify and represent as he be promise to c c Genes. 3.15 Adam the promise renew to d d gen. 12.3 Abraham and the e e gen. 28.14 patriarch and prophesy of by all the prophet from Moses to f f deut. 18. ^5 Malachy so in their several age and generation he be expect to be exhibit by all that look for the consolation of Israel long for desire that he will break the heaven and come g g esay 44.1 down as they strong believe that he shall come hence according to theology the patriarch and prophet before and under the law in the old testament be save by believe that Jacob i i gen. 49.10 shiloh the promise Messiah shall come as we now in the time of grace be save by believe that he be come there be but one k k ephes 4 5. Christ but one faith as but one sun to the world both to jew and Gentile one * * act 4.12 act. 10.43 act 13.39 rom. 10.4 gal 3.22 mean of life and grace to all that be justify sanctify and save hence Christ be say to be that Agnus in God decree and infallible promise that lamb of l l John 1.26 God slay from the begin of the world to take away the sin of the whole l l John 1.26 world of the elect as m m rom. 11.12.15 2. cor. 5.19 and John 1.2 v. 2. scripture and n n ^ and Tract. 87. in lib. 3.5 3. commons in 2. Corinth. 5. and Augustinum serm. 20 serm. 44. serm. 109. in rom. 5. libr. 1. augustin Augustinum corrupt and cap. 12. tract in johan. 2.77 r^demptione and father limit that universal hence also be the theological axiom that Christ who be the very end of the law to which it point as once John the baptist as the hand in the dial point to the sun and to which as a sharp schoolmaster it o o gal. 3 24. drive and direct that this Christ be typify in the old p testament and reveal in the New hence it be also that Abraham and so consequent all the believe patriarch the son of Abraham by faith be say to have see the day of Christ and to have rejoice but how be Christ see dark obscure as under a veil as the prisoner see the sun through a little chincke or grate as the spouse in the canticle have a glimpse of her belove through the hole of the q q cant. 5.4 door so be Christ see of they but we now see he plain perspicuous as walk amid the golden r r revel 2. vers. 1. candlestick as we see the sun in his or at noonday in the plain and powerful preach of the gospel we see he not due and deadly as the Papist in a stone or a piece of brass picture in a cross or crucifix idolatrous worship but as Paul tell the corinthian even crucify as it be among we in the plain evidence of the spirit therefore say the same apostle the grace of God have s s tit. 2.11.12 appear this gospel of grace have appear the phrase be observable even as the sun that peep and break from under and appear from the obscure cloud yea the day star from a high have visit we say t t Luke 1.78 Zachary yea light be come into the u u John 3.19 world say he that be himself the w w John 1. v. 4.5 life and the light even to enlighten those that like zebulon and 10 10 Luke 1.79 Nepthaly sit in darkness and the shadow of death here be our privilege above the jew. second beside as a corollary to this point God at sundry time and in diverse manner speak in time y y hebr. 1. v. 1. pass unto these jewish father by z z jere. 35. v. 15 the prophet yea and by a a gen. 18.1.2 Genes. 19.1.2 judge 13. v. 3. angel too by oracle by dream and b b Numb. 12 7. vision by and c c exod. 28. v. 30 but in these last day he have speak to we by his d d heb. 1. v. 1. son who he have appoint e e vers. 2. c exod. c. 3. c. 4. cap 13. heir of all thing by who also he make the world three moreover to they he stir up temporary and typical saviour and judge who deliver they out of the hand of those that spoil they judg. 3. vers. 16. e e vers. 2. c exod. c. 3. c. 4. cap 13. Moses and f f exod. 34.9 joshuah and g g judg. 1.2 judah and h h judge 3.9 Othniell i i vers. 15. Ehud k k judg. 4.4 Deborah l l judg. 4.10 Baruch m m judg. 6.12 gideon n n judg. 11.5 jepht^ah o o judg. 16.31 Samson be raise up upon their p p judg. 3.9 15. and chap. 4 3. etc. cry in their great exigent to deliver they from the egyptian the mesopotamian the ammonite the moabite the amalekite the philistine and uncircumcised canaanite but to we as to the rest of the believe gentile he have raise q q Luke 1.69 up a spiritual saviour to deliver we out of the hand of our spiritual r r vers. 71.74 enemy more deadly more dangerous as the soul be more noble and excellent than the body four again they be hold as child in their nonage under the rod and the burden and the bondage of s s gal. 4.1.2.3 Coloss. 2.20 ceremony in their jewish pedigogie as touch not taste t t vers. 21. not handle not etc. this creature be clean this be u unclean but we now as child that be come to ripe year to full and perfect age as no long under tutor and w w gal. 4.3.4.5.6 governor be now infranchize and set at liberty by say in Christ and free from the yoke and pressure of Mosaical 10 10 gal 5.1 ceremony which neither they nor we be able to bear unless with our papist and late threskite we will resolute put our neck under the yoke again of these beggarly y y gal 4 9 rudiment in a unsupportable bondage five the lord exact and require of they more cost and pain in his service and worship than he do of we for cost we know their worship be exceed costly in their daily z z of all these offering and sacrifice chap. 1 2.3.4.5.6 7. sacrifice their holocaust their whole burn offering their freewill offering as once the a a colloq. 1. pag. 55. heathen in their hecatomb their their lupercal armilustral orgy ferrcation vinilians quirinalial bacchanal saturnal vertumnalians hyacinthians novendinalians laurentaliall solitaurilialls and other feast and festival in honour of their imaginary deity which it seem they have in a apish and superstitious emulation and b b see mourney of the truth of religion imitation from the jew God altar be load with ox bull sheep goat ram and bullock in great abundance in their solemn and daily oblation as sometime in one peace offer as at the dedication of salomon c c 1. King 8.64 temple be offer twenty thousand ox and a hundred and twenty thousand sheep another time as in ezekiahs d d 2. Chron 29.32.33 Passeover be offer threescore and ten bullock a hundred ramine and two hundred lamb beside six hundred ox and three thousand sheep consecrate as in the verse after my text in the inauguration of Solomon and the preparation for the temple there be offer in burn offering in one day a thousand bullock a thousand lamb and a thousand e e 1. Chro. 29.21 ram in so much that but that god extraordinary blessing increase as the corn and oil and wine so the cattle of that little country of judea and Palestina which now be under the turkish Ottoman by a secret curse be as barren as other f f I have hear traveller honest and judicious so relate it country a man will as much wonder from whence they have a continue fresh fry and supply of cattle for sacrifice beside other office as he will wonder of their fresh seminary and supply of man so many be cut off at sundry time by civil and foreign g g in one battle of abiah k. of judah against king of Israel there be in abiah army 400000. choose man on the other party 8. hundred thousand whereof be slay five hundred thousand 2. Chro. 13. v. 3.17 yea one tribe sometime afford 40 thousand valiant man as ashur 1 chron. 36. Nephtaly 1000 captain 37. thousand warrior five 34 war as we read of in the great army of Caesar Pompey Alexander Scypio or the great martialist among the h h we read not of any such army as 12 hundred thousand as this in judah and Israel either in justine Livy Theucidides etc or among the numerous Turk since heathen and sure for my part I persuade myself shall we in England or Ireland be enjoin to offer up monthly weekly or daily but the ten sheep beeve or goat which they offer which sure will amount to more then to the levite grudge tithe throughout the land god altar will stand unfurnish of the fire of the altar and the lamp of the sanctuary will die out the one for want of fuel the other of oil for he that be now a Naball a covetous Cremes full hand for gold but empty heart for grace that have not now a shilling to spare to the maintain of a stipendiary preacher for the settle of a preach ministry to God glory the conversion and consolation of his own soul the present and future good of himself and other he and his seed after he without churlish grudge swinish gruntle mutter murmur as once Israel against Moses and Aaron or if ought be wrong from he t^is as the wring of the blood out of the nose the wrest of Hercules club out of his fist or the pare of his nail to the very quick at least go against the hair and the heart as when a man eat the meat which his stomach loathe I say he that be as willing to part with his right hand or to pluck out as Naash once persuade the gileadite his right i i 1. sam. 1. ^^ eye as part with his penny for preach in that bad exchange as he imagine when the same man will spend and misspend penny and pound as oil and fuel to his lust in card dice drink drab till he be devour by these lust as Actaeon be of his own k k Ovid dog be it probable possible that ever he will make God behold to he for a bullock or a sheep at once shall he enjoin he such a sacrifice as do the jew l l see Moses unveil in 8. so for pain aswell as cost we know that after the build of salomon temple which be typical in a great mystery the jew be enjoin four time a year at the 4. solemn feast m m at the feast of Passeover of Penthecost of tabernacle of dedication to make their personal appearance there before the lord old and young man woman and child that be fit for travel as we know even the child n n luk. 1^ 41.42 jesus go with his foster father joseph and the virgin his mother to worship at o o psal 84.67 jerusalem yea how ever far distant in place they must appear even from dan to Beershebah leave for the time all their moral affair to hazard of invasion of foreign enemy or of domestic casualty as carnal good husbandry will conceit what inconvenience in the eye of flesh and blood do this subject they unto in respect of their outward estate beside the pain and peril the trouble and toil and tediousness of the journey now there be no such task no such burden impose on our shoulder for how ever we be not strict according to the good policy in first divide and distinguish people into several church parish and congregation to tie a man perpetual to his own church as to his own wife or wife to her own husband her own house as a tradesman to his own shop or a bird that constant keep she own nest or as a beggar that still keep his own stand his own circuit as the milne horse not so jayling or imprison man to a ignorant and profane ministry as some landlord strict tie their tenant to grind at their own milnes how ever abuse in their grind or moulter by the ignorance or knavery of the milner though I say I see neither reason nor religion tie any man so constant to the ministry of his own parish priest to suck at dry dug to drink at dry brook to seek food or fruit at a barren tree but that if jacob and the house of jacob any true Israelite want food in his own Canaan he may seek for corn in p p gen. 42.2 Egypt elsewhere as the beggar that have no bread at home seek abroad else people shall be in worse case for their soul and strict lace then for their body since in free liberty if they whole want or have but the outcast and refuse of any commodity in any mart or market they may seek further for better or what drug or physical receit one apothecary shop yield not may be seek in another and from a empiric and quacksalver they may commit their health and life to a learned physician yea else god people shall be in worse case for their soul than Israel once for their iron tool who when there be no smith in q q see the sermon extant on that text there be no smith in Israel 1 sam. 13.19 Israel yet go to the philistine to make or mend their ploughshare and other iron work yea in worse case than the horse and mule who if he want water seek up and down the pasture though never so large and wide the water of life though they be not at home be better worth our search than those which ahab and Obediah seek from one end of the land to the r r 1. King 18.5.6 other or those water of the well of Bethlem which David so s s 1. Chro. 11.17 desire yet nevertheless though we may go further from home for better food in Christian liberty ere we starve or eat meat ill cook for all this we be not so punctual precise and ceremonious oblige and tie to any one special place of God worship to this church or that chapel this cathedral or that temple as the jew be tie to salomon temple though the papist who in this as in other thing run against the hair and swim cross against all god ordinance will needs in their superstitious folly lay on their own neck a jewish yoke in worship at this stone and that shrine this rood and that altar this cross and that chapel rather at Rome or Loretto in Italy in compostella in Spain at the rood of yoghell in Ireland etc. yea still in their blind bewitch superstition as if they be turn t t read a book in 4. call the picture of a Papist you shall see it prove that papism be a mere mixture of judaisme turkism paganism turk or jew even in mahumitanize jerusalem but now as our saviour tell the Samaritane woman be the time that we shall neither jew nor convert gentile worship the father in this mountain or that nor at jerusalem but in spirit and u u John 4. ve. 20 21.22.23 truth in every place lift up pure w w 1. tim. 2.8 heart and pure hand to the almighty whether in our own house with 10 10 dan 6.10 Daniel or in the field with y y gen. 24.63 Isaac or in the garden with Augustine and z z lib. 8. Alixius or in our bed with a a psal 6.7 David and b b 2. King 20.3 Ezekias or on the sea with c c jonas 1.6 jonas or on the shore with d d act. 20.36 Paul or in prison with e e act. 16.25 silas f f 2. Chronic. 33.10.11 Manasses g g jerem. 38.6 jeremy and our modern martyr or in our private closert as the bless virgin or in and with our family as h h Iosh. 24.15 joshuah and that sweet singer of i i 2. sam. 6 20. Israel or in the public congregation as once k k 1. King 8.22 Solomon it matter not for the place if we have the grace to worship God aright for matter and manner in which our papist and all moralist hypocrite and profane man be so gross defective and indeed this be a great mercy a great privilege than we conceive at the first blush for shall those that trot and trudge and drudge up from all the shire and country in England and Wales every term time to Westminster or Ludlow or from all the county and province in Ireland to Dublin to follow the plough of contention prosecute wrangle suit l about matter trivial and of no moment but only that such wasp must shoot their sting discharge their squirt gun sometime charge only with paper pellet these crecket and m m Arist. lib. 5. c. 19 Salamandra and salamander not be able to live out of the fire of contention shall these I say be enjoin as the jew to n n before the build of the temple the jew worship where ever the ark be deut. 12.13.14 exod. 25.22 1. sam. 7.5 2. sa. 6.2 chief in Silo in time of judge and Samuel after in mount Zion 2. sam. 6.12 but after the temple build thither they be confine 2. chr. 7.12 1. reg. 9.3 Luke 19.46 jerusalem by God or Caesar I will not say four time a year but annual once a year they or they all Sam to come up to Paul cross or the spital in London or to yorke-minster or to Lincolneminster or to christs-church in Dublin or any such remote place in any kingdom or province mere to worship God by hear sermon and present their prayer before the lord and offer their spiritual oblation as oft the jew in the day of Samuel ezra Solomon etc. there corporeal oh this will be think a hard task as the disciple say in another case o o John 6.60 this be a hard imposition indeed worse than the tribute that p p 1. reg. 12.16 rehoboam exact of the jew or Augustus tax from the q q Luke 2. v. 1. world they will make hardly such haste as the bear to the stake as the coward to the battle we shall find few tribe go up with joy nay shall none but such as come from far visit these temple we shall have as in some street in some long devour plague the very grass to grow in the very porch for want of trample and indeed those that be so idle or profane so perverse athisticall irreligious that on god own sabbath which they be so strict enjoin they and they to sanctify by motive from r r Esai 58.13 14 reward and s s exod. 20.8 gal. 3.10 threaten that love God his word his worship and their own soul so little that have health and limb and leg and no restraint but the t t act. 13.8.10 devil and corruption they will not go twelve score to hear a sermon though twelve mile perhaps to a wedding u u as appear in the hopping in Northumberland to which there be such resort every sabbath throughout the summer hop drink feast among good fellow or to make merry with comrade and carnal friend or further even from one shire to another a set match of bowl shoot hunt man race horse race dog race or any such vanity but for any stir more than a stock or block to any part of God worship in public or private their foot be gouty as w w 2. Chro. 16.21 asaes lame as 10 10 2. sam. 9.3 mephibosheths either they keep home as drone in their hive as hog in their sty or if they find leg it be to the tavern not to the temple to bethaven not to bethel the alehouse sometime hel-house not god house or else with straggle y y Genes. 34.1.2 dinah to walk or wander as wafe or strafe in the field will such ever travel as far as jerusalem to worship be they as near it perhaps as z z Luke 24.13 Emaus or a a John 11.18 bethania a sabbath day journey much less will they ever saddle their horse as the sunammitish b b 2. king 4.22.23 woman to ride to the prophet upon the sabbath or new moon or if they be great personage they will not use their c c bosquier in his e^cho allege author affirm that the use dromedary dromedary to travel half so far as the wife man from the east to jerusalem to worship Christ or use their coach as that noble aethiopian d d act. 8.27 eunuch to come out of one coast or country to worship in another they will not go so far as the queen of the south to hear the gospel wisdom great than e e 1. King 10. salomon nor travel so far for divine Plato and Pythagoras for humane learning chap. 13 the jew and we briton in other blessing poise and compare to parallel we again with they in blessing of a mix nature partly temporal partly spiritual first as they be bring out of the land of f f exod 20.2 Egypt with a mighty hand and stretch out-arme by the mean of Moses who God stir g g exod. 3. exod. 4. up and send as the instrument so be not we reduce and bring out of that spiritual Egypt that mystical h h Reve. 14.8.16 9 and cha. 18.10 Babylon that unclean i i Revel. 11.8 Sodom the seat and nest of k k Revel. 18.9.9 19.2 fornication spiritual and corporeal by the mean of that worthy and zealous instrument Martin Luther that l l so call oftentimes by Eccardus Huberus in his thesis Hunnius and other rig lutheran Melander that belgic Elias as some call he who eye be first open to see clear into the mystery of justification by faith which he so perspicuous clear in his comment chief upon the galatian he be convert like m m Luke 22.32 Peter convert his brethren as the sun break through the overshadow cloud he be himself enlighten enlighten other and as another n n act. 26.18 Paul be make the mean to open their eye to bring collyrium and eye salve to Saxony Germany Denmark we in England yea to Belgia and whole Christendom which be in a manner envelop and cover with the fog and mist and cloud of popish ignorance yea whole overspread with darkness more than egyptian or chymerian so gross and palpable that it may be feel only herein further be the proportion Moses a weak old man arm only with his o o exod. 4.17 rod and staff against all the repugnance and resistance of Pharaoh the juggle and magical practice of jannes and * * exod. 7.11 jambre the might and malignity power and policy of Egypt bring the thousand of Israel out of the house of bondage Luther arm only with power from above with his tongue and pen bring as many by degree though not all at once by preach write and dispute out of the tyrannise slavish subjection of that man of sin that antichristian Pharaoh that babylonian p p see the sermon call Nabuchadnezzar of Rome as once the D^i^i^^ and Rebeca with the idol of Michay and Laban judg. 18.24 and Genes. 31.34 Nabuchadnezzer the pope notwithstanding all the rage of that romish lion the juggle and colour plot and train of his fox the friar and Jesuit the prop of his hierarchy as the janissary to the turk together with the dispute of Ecchius the invective philipick and libel of monk with who belly he too much intermeddle as Erasmus once scoff yea against all the power and policy of Cesar the roman emperor with the confederate prince affect to the whore yea against not only the might of man but the malice of devil the very gate of hell and the power of darkness which do as much resist he as these bad angel the prince of q q dan. 10. vers. 13. vers. 20. Persia and prince of Grecia resist that angel which by the help of Michael the great archangel the angel of the covenant bring the child of Israel out of their chaldean and babylonian captivity second as when Moses be take away by death and gather to his father the lord stir up a r r Iosh 1. ve. 1.2 joshuah to succeed he in some manner to exceed he in bring the israelite into s s Iosh. 4.19.20 Canaan which he do not so when Luther conclude his holy life with a happy and bless death notwithstanding the calumny of all romish t t Cocleus Bolsecu^ Luthert Simeis and revile rabsakeis to the contrary God multiply his spirit as the spirit of u u 2. King 2.15 Elias upon elisha upon other successor melancthon justus jonas capito Oecolampadius calvine bullinger etc. and other worthy and renown instrument according to his own prophecy to finish and perfect that which he have begin even as he finish that in Saxony which according to another prophecy Jerome of prague and John hus have begin in Bohemia many year w w husse when he be burn tell they they only burn a goose as hus signify in the bohemian tongue but out of his ash God will raise up a swan which be verify in Luther before and seal with their blood at that unconstant unconscionable council of Constance three so to proceed further in respect of the commonwealth as when Deborah the prophetess die that nurse mother or nurse and mother in Israel there be leave yet a worthy Baruch so when the lord deprive our english Israel of a virgin queen virgin mother that phoenixe of her sex for art and virtue the world wonder the far famous Elizabeth the laureate poet 10 10 spenser Eliza or his fairy queen all be not lose and go as our friend fear our enemy gape expect our sin deserve out of the dead ash of that phoenixe the lord stir we up another such a nurse father a wise y steward to go in and out as once zealous and judicious z z 1. sam. 18.16 David before his people to lead we on from the tent of moab from the gate of Babylon against which he have march with the best pick of his a a in his majesty print book extant pen and blow a trumpet to all christian prince to come out of b b Revel. 18.4 Babylon lest they partake as of her sin so plague keep we by this mean from all apostasy and backslide chief total and final that those who have the least measure of grace with a sound judgement and discern spirit may never dream of the union of the romish Egypt any more or with Lot wife to look back with any affection towards spiritual c c gen. 19.26 Sodom and herein be the mercy the more that this faithful regal royal Stewart as faithful over little as it be with the talent be entrust with d d math. 25. v. 21.22.23 more be not only as be evident by a special providence in which there be God own finger preserve among we in one treason but purposely in God store-house reserve for we in another e e from gowries conspiracy treason as a prologue to the powder tragedy only as the queen of Shebah say of f f 1. King 10. ^ Solomon because the lord love this our english Zion four yea and yet more the mercy relish as the rose smell sweet that be get from the prick and the lily from the enclose thorn as Sampson and jonathans honey taste the sweet because hard come by where it be never expect out of the lion g g judg. 14.8 belly and the h h 1. sam. 14.27 waste desert when in our expectance the time be probable to prove most turbulent when most man heart fail they for fear when we be even at our wit end and know not which way to turn we when at the desire death of our Deborah the enemy of our judah cry up moab and to the spoil the day be we there go the game even so will we have it hope to fish in a trouble water and to build on our ruin I say when factious spirit and malcontent look for stir time yea when we ourselves be such cloud may just fear storm yea some expect no other but that i i ovid. phaeton-like all will have be in a confusion and combustion that stern Mars and bloody Bellona will have rage in our street that there will have be as much bicker about the english crown as about Aiax his armour Paris his k k virgil. and Homerum ball or the grecian Helena when thus we think the sun of all our peace and prosperity have set in the night of she bewail death who live we account as the breath of our nostril and die lament as the jew do l l 2. Chro. 35.25 josias and joshuah her name with her princely virtue yet perpetuate in the mind and mouth of m man more than in all the monument of brass or marble in these fear in these exigent division and destruction of we when we look for a a disjoint of all in the church and commonwealth so God mercy above man misery man demerit see God greatness what he can his goodness what he will do turn yea bring as at the n first creation still light out of darkness on a sudden in a trice a northern star arise in this our Albion prognosticate good as Pollux appear at the set of Castor the lord high Stewart by the lord free donation his own lineal and legal succession the peer election the popular approbation with unite heart and head vote and voice be reduce or produce as David once from o o 2. sam. 5.1 Hebron to jerusalem with the consent and to the content of all our english Israel from one part of great Britain to the other from the lesser to the great island from the north to the south to be the ruler and governor over God heritage as this dash all the hope of every jesuited Tobiah and Sanballat as a squib that bru and end in smoke yea eclipse all their joy and make they as some even now hang down their work head like bulrush with so all our fear upon the rise of this new sun of comfort vanish as a northern mist or the southern dew our sigh be turn into p song our tear into trumpet our sword into Sythes our spear into mattock our tragedy imaginary into real comedy our sorrow into jubilee as the sound of so many trumpet all the land with unite mind and mouth as one man upon the proclamation of his majesty as Israel at the invest of Solomon cry till the air echo and resound la God save the king the very field and wood quyrister in the spring ring out and rejoice for our then spring and since our more than twenty year bud peace and blossom prosperity conjoin their well tune treble to our excellent tenor to the mend of our music this be the lord do and it be wondrous in our eye five and to set a full and a free edge yet upon our affection as our peace I say begin a fresh to spring with all other concomitant blessing upon his majesty invest and marry as it be with this elder and fair sister our beauteous Albion so if our sin be not those davuss to interrupt it it be probable to continue in he and his seed those royal blossom which so abundant to the joy of all Christendom that be not romanize have proceed from his regal q q in the royal issue of lady Elizabeth princess of the palatinate stem even so long as the sun and moon shall continue since all plea and pretence of any Idumean any foreigner or usurper be by this blessing of bounteous hymn cut off notwithstanding the plot and project of that Dolman that devil man that r or any other spider web that be spin or cockatrice egg that be hatch by any such like jesuited Ignatian fiery spirit whatsoever six herein still the torrent of mercy run towards we more clear more delightful more cheerful compare with the bloody and sanguinolent stream that run in other country our neighbour region round about we for as a mercy of mercy never to be forget as it be calm in one city when it rain in another as lightsome in goshen when dark in Egypt as manna in the tent of Israel but none in moab so do not we enjoy and joy in the serenity of peace in these our halcyon day when both in former time and at this instant or within these few month there be and have be war and rumour of war according to our saviour s s math. 23.6 prophesy prognosticate the end round about we bloody Bellona environ we round as the circumference and we still at peace in our rest centre how have fair France the most fruitful ample and fertile country in t t bartholomeum Cassaneun par. 5. consider 30 and par. 16. 17 p. 297. 298. 299. 300. pag. 306 and in epithesis in Galli mant. lib. 7. jonea etc. in epitome cap. 17. in fine Christendom as a kingdom divide in itself be rend and tear in the late civil war by these viper breed within she own bowel chief by that hellish league of the guizian faction by the duke u u see the book call the history of France in as in a diary express the daily event betwixt the duke Maine and the prince of Navarre after henry the four of France Maine and his confederate catilinarians how have she long wallow like a boar that be stick in her own conglomerate blood her man bleed as fresh as her vine by the prunning knife of unnatural war how have fruitful Italy be overrun by the goth and vandal those truculent w w the goth and vandal under Attalus ton^as subdue by at last and narses foreigner by the faction of the guelph and Gibelines the ambition of the house of the Medici the Matchavillian stratagem of Caesar Borgia the Luciferian pride of some contest pope the very firebrand of Europe who like that julius the 10 10 N^nclerus and Bergomensis de julio second have more affection to Peter sword then to Peter key or Paul parchment which they have make float in Tiber have unlawful use the sword and make million perish by the sword the ambition of some few pope as chronicle testify shed more Christian then ever the ambition of Alexander Caesar or Rome pagan shed heathenish blood so for Bohemia how have she like a virgin be ravish and then slaughter and the like I may say too of the palatinate how have her young man perish with the edge of the sword her old man and wise senator be massacre her field and vine root by war that wild boar her city and fortify town like jerusalem low level with the ground and leave desolate the war there in many place leave such monument of her trophy as in this our Ireland in which as the great object of passion or compassion my eye ever behold where many goodly town if not city have stand as appear by their ruinate relic there be either corn or grass or as they say now in jerusalem some few tent for pilgrim some smoky irish cabin stand as little urchin with their bristle up betwixt great old outwalle or y relic of castle or as pigmy that sleep in the midst of the guard of great giant whilst we britanians all this while yea even we britanicall hybernians in our long continue peace hang up our target as at Hercules his pillar set open the gate of janus as in the day of Augustus nay make bee-hive as once the roman of our helmit let our gun rust our spear rot and our sword canker for want of employment hurt by no enemy as yet unless by our own lethargical sensual and supine security which if ever any thing will be our ruin as it be to * * Luke 19.42 when Titus besiege it they be so secure in the strength of their wall as once Babylon and Thebes in the like case that they say if the roman have wing they can not fly over they joseph jerusalem to the man of z z judg. 18.7 laish to the a trojan the b b in their pride and security they contemn the roman and the valour of Scipio carthaginian c c when the turk surprise a castle at the mouth of Hellespont the prologue to their tragedy they make light account of it and say it be but the loss of a hog sty as it signify in the turkish tongue kneel his turkish history Constantinople d d judg. 16.19 Samson and diverse other yea we fit as Israel under our own vine quiet and peaceable as in the day of Solomon as bee in their hive aunt in their cavern feed on the honey and oil and wheat of plenty the daughter of peace under the shelter and shadow of his majesty wing our sovereign Solomon who deserve as desire the title of the peaceable king as well as the title of the defender of the faith more just claim both than the french king the name of the most Christian the spanish the name of the most catholic king yea better than Augustus or Polycrates the name of fortunate then Adrian the name of good than Titus the name of generous then Alexander the name of great munificent and magnificent thus though we may just fear the spark to fly over sea have by our sin enkindle the fire of that wrath which may kindle the fire of our war both with God and man our own house be in danger of fire or plague when our neighbour be e burn with the flame or with the fever yet as yet we do but look on though with more pity and piety than f f Suetonius in Neronis Nero when Rome be on fire and he sing his tragic verse in representation of Troy or then g Scipio behold the universal conflagration of the perverse as well as resolute numantine as commiserate spectator rather than actor of or in their tragedy which how ever it be to they justice or trial for good end I be sure this long bear forbear we in mercy the instrument and organ of this i mercy be his majesty who by his admire prudence and providence as true effect as lawful and laudable affect the appellation and deserve cognomination of the peaceable * * see the book extant call the peace maker print dom. 1619 not only of the bless peace we have by mean of his majesty not only with Spain Scotland France and Ireland our once opposite neighbour but of the peace conclude by his majesty betwixt Denmark and Suevia Suevia and Polland Cleve and Brandemburg prince seaventh as a mercy equalize the former as much to be marvel at and I admire as magnify though our sin have exasperate the lord as much if not more than ever Israel as sin against a great light a great measure of grace a great knowledge and illumination a bright gospel than ever they receive in our sin Evangelicall as well as legal against the Messiah as much as against Moses in sin omissive by impenitency as well as by sin commissive of impiety yet nevertheless the lord have not be so strict with we as with they in give we over as the great judgement and the severe punishment of former sin as he do the unbelieved k k psalm 81.12 jew and l l rom. 1.28.29 gentile to the vanity of our own mind and to the lust of our own heart for how ever there be many rot member in our church such as with m m 1. king 21.20 ahab and n n job. 20.12.13 jezabel even sell themselves to work wickedness commit sin with greediness drink up iniquity as water make their member weapon of o o rom. 6.13 unrighteousness turn the grace of God into wantonness how ever many a atheist which say in his heart there be no p p psalm 14.1 god many a open profess many a secret conceal church Papist that with the ha^e run one way as the mariner row and look another his tongue with the time but in his belly he have a pope though there be many yea more than a good many root of gall and bitterness among we unpurged by our state physician many string untune as the discord in our church-musicke the spot in our q q jude vers. 12 feast the gangreenes and plague sore in our body political and ecclesiastical the r r judg. 1. canaanite in our border unremoved the canker in our rose the drone in our hive the unsavoury salt that offend and scandalize the little one uncast s s Math 5.13 out by the severe censure of excommunication yet for the generality and universality we be still a church as Rebecha be still a holy and a chaste spouse though she have a Esau in her t t ge. 25.24.25 womb as Noah ark be God u u the church be sometime confine to Abraham family Noah ark the chamber in which the disciple be act. 2. church notwithstanding there be w w gen. 7.13 a cham in it we have not make a total defection and apostasy as Israel from our first husband to follow after idolatrous and adulterous 10 10 jerem. 3.8 lover we serve not yet bell nor Baal nor Baalim nor ashtaroth nor y y 1. King 11.5.7 Chemosh nor Milchom nor Dagon the abomination of the sidonian moabite and canaanite for the body of our church we yet bow not down to shrine and idol cross and crucifix our kneel communicate gesture though scandalous perhaps to the weak be far from idolatry or z z bread worship see the satisfactory resolution of master hooker his ecclesiastical policy master Hutton explain our liturgy bishop Morton his learned defence of the ceremony with other artolatry adore or implore the breaden God let our amsterdammians then prove that we retain either the head or tail of the dragon that we have so far play the harlot that the lord have give we a bill of divorce to be cut off total though not final from be a church as he have do with the jew give they over till the fullness of the gentile be a a rom. 11.25 come for a time to the hardness of their own heart and blindness of their own b b verse 9.10 mind for though there be among we as many open profess profane one so many clancular and secret papist as in France Italy and Spain there be many secret protestant and will be more if it be not for the severity of law and the strictness of the inquisition yet as in the corrupt time there have be always some that have discover and detest the abomination of the scarlet whore and with Elias have not bow their knee to Baal as John Husse and Jerome of prague in Bohemia with their hussite waldo with his Waldenses and Hugenotes in France joachim abbas Bertram Jerome Savanoriola in Italy and elsewhere Wickeliffe with other learned light in Oxford Luther in Saxony as they be express and nominate by our modern c c see d Abbot that late bishop of Exeter in his preface before his defence of m. Perkins d. usher the bishop of meath m. Gabriel powel in his preface before his learned book writer so for the generality of our kingdom of great Britain at this day the mark of the beast of the most and the best be not receive and though there be blemish and infirmity and corruption in our church as in the best that ever be yea erro in judgement and life in the best member as the sun be subject to she eclipse the moon to her overshadow the best and healthful body to some anguish fit or other distemper yet the church may be say to be sound and so may her member be say to be live as a man may be say to be sound at the heart though he have some plouke in his face or and carbuncle on his body as the fruit of worm-eaten as a lawyer a physician a musician a logician a rhetorician may be say to be exquisite artist in their profession though the first miss it in some case in judge or plead the second in some cure the three in some strain the four in some disputation the last in some declamation and how ever there be some difference about some ceremony and d d see master powel little book a diaphorist as there have be difference and dispute among the best as appear in our e e as there be difference betwixt chrysost Theophilus and epiphanius betwixt Cyrill and Theodores Gregory the great and Eutichius Bernard and Peter of clunes yea among the chief bishop of Asia about the celebration of easter as appear in ecclesiastical histor. yea how ever it be excuse by Chrys. hom. 6. and by other father Paul and barnabas dissent act. 16.37 margin yet since we all hold the foundation against Papist and Pelagian and armenian and who ever else which be justification free by faith in Christ without the work of the law according to the scripture thus build on the rock though there may be among we doctrinal or personal error we be still a church we have not total and apostatical revolt as the jew eight and yet see still a further mercy to we then to these jew though god own peculiar people as indeed as when by a stone throw in the water one circle beget another and as in a golden chain one link succeed exceed another so in the cord of a man in the cord of g g Osee 11.4 love one mercy draw another though our provocation and rebellion have every way equalise they and though in paternal love by fatherly castigation and correction the lord have visit our sin with rod and our offence with scourge as he threaten h h 2. sam. 7.14 Solomon and as he have deal with i i 2. sa. 12.10.11 David k k 2. chr. 32 25 26. Ezekiah l l jonas 1.3.4 jonas and all his transgress child yet he have not be so strict and severe with we as with they for many age and generation to scourge we with any ashur or assyrian any rod of his m m esay 10.5 wrath any foreign power for how ever in our first plant in this island we have be subjugate and subdue very n n see lanquet chronicle lib. 2 and in libr. 3. ^t pag. 136. often by the picte by the dane by the roman and since the time of William the conqueror as appear in the reign of several king we have have bloody bicker with neighbour kingdom chief the norman the french and the scot now our brethren our near and dear ally they and we meeting in his royal majesty as in the royal centre of love as the tyrian and the syrian in one Aeneas and how ever in the reign of every king our Edward Richards john Henry and the rest since as before the conquest our land have be shake as with a fever rend and divide as with the tooth and fang of mad dog in civil war more or less by the faction and rebellion of turbulent malignant humorous proud ambitious and discontent spirit yet within our memory or the memory of our forefather our great grandfather which be a singular mercy both to we their successor and our predecessor we have not be bring under any foreign power no external yoke have be lay on our neck except the roman yoke on the soul of our forefather as the o o exod. 1.13 egyptian chaldean p p esay 10.6 jerem. 50.33 assyrian q q jerem. 51.34 babylonian yoke be lay upon the jew for many year together in grievous pressure we have not be subdue in our time by any foreign enemy as the israelite be keep under sometime r r judg. 3.8.14 twenty sometime thirty forty year by the midianite moabite ammonite philistine and other enemy which the lord stir up against they our land in our time as be once say of Venice be a virgin unconquered unsubdued we have obtain s s 2. sam. 24.14 David desire to fall into the hand of God by plague and famine and other affliction but not into the hand of man as Samson do to be mock of the t t judg. 16.21.25 1. sam. 31.4 uncircumcised which be saul fear as Abimelech be ashamed to die by the hand of a w w judg. 9.54 woman last which be the sum and substance and shut up of all the rest compare ourselves still with they not only in positive mercy but in privative in respect of our evil of 10 sin and evil of suffering we shall find though as have be say and prove that our provocation be as many as monstrous our demerit as great as they all circumstance consider we have walk as unworthy of God mercy as ever they that the lord have be to we in respect of they a merciful and indulgent father and to they in respect of we a just a severe and unplacable judge to we a father of mercy to they a jealous and zealous God visit the sin of their father upon the child unto the three and four y y exod. 20.5 generation when I consider not only the judgement of God upon their soul even to this day in give they over according to his z z deut. 28.28 threat to madness blindness of mind astonishment of heart to grope as at noon day their heart be make fat their ear heavy their eye a a esay 6.10 shut lest they shall see with their eye and hear with their ear and understand with their heart and convert and be heal God give they over to the spirit of slumber their eye be darken the veil b b 2. cor. 3.15 unremoved blindness in part happen to c c rom. 11.8 ve. 25. v. 9 five 32. they until the fullness of the gentile be come in their table be make a snare and a trap and a stumble block and recompense unto they God shut they up so far in unbelife that when their Messiah come among they as his own his own receive he d d John 1.12 not but crucify the lord of e e act. 2.36 glory reject he that come in his father name their promise shiloh but receive to their inevitable ruin and destruction both of body and soul impostor and deceiver for their Messiah as Herod entertain of his f f some think the herodian be so call in that they think Herod that Idumean the Messiah herodian two Bens or barcosbas the son of lie as their own writer g g Sanhedrim li. c. Helech rabb Moses ben. Maimon that place of Haggai c. 2 7.8 be apply to the one by rab Akiba tract Meghala and Jacob scar 23. unto the other Talmud jeros l. Taanith testify be receive even of their great Rabbyns and the prophetical scripture apply unto they the one immediate after the passion of Christ the other in the day of Adrian beside that egyptian Moses that devil in the shape of a h h socrat. eccle hist. libr 7. c. 37. man who drown so many of they in the sea in the isle of i i 434. Crete with other bird of that black feather as that Pseudo-Moses in k k Nicephorus Arabia with other more thus as our papist and other heretic at this day not believe the truth the lord give they over to strong delusion to believe m m 2. thes 2.9 lie persecute after the death of Christ the n n act. 5.18 chap. 7.58 apostle chief saint o o act. 9 23. cha. 14.2 Paul throughout the act that preach the true Christ unto they with such virulency that put away the gospel from they and judge themselves unworthy of eternal life act. 13.46 their golden candlestick be remove their vineyard let out to other husbandman the halt and blind and lame we sinner of the gentile be call in to that marriage feast of mercy by that gospel which they p p math. 22.8.9.10 refuse but when I consider again as consequent upon the former god judgement upon their very body and outward man upon they and their seed and posterity in all age since the death of Christ and in all place where they be as the dust disperse that curse and fearful execration his blood be upon we and our child so full q q math. 27.25 verify that he that read their tragedy by r r josep bell antiq. josephus and s s josippus heb. josippus both english in our tongue write as it seem not with ink but blood and prosecute since by Eusebius Nicephorus Dion Nicetus Caesar Baronius joseph Scalliger Peter Galatinus Damianus a go John Renclin our master fox in his martyrology and many more authentic author that in all time since have observe god heavy hand upon they and his strict proceed with they in all country where they be scatter if he have not a heart of flint or marble hew out of Caucasus he can but relent but more particular when I ponder and serious consider those infinite slaughter and massacre that be make of they by Titus Vespasian after that by divine oracle the christian be warn to fly to t t euseb hist. eccle lib. 3. cap. 5. Pella as lot out of Sodom the and joseph out of judea as first eleven hundred thousand of they perish in the sack of their city second the rest either kill themselves or be sell for u u joseph jud. reckon of slave 97000. l. 7. cap. 17. Petrus gal. l. 4. ca. 21. 200000. account all as slave under 17 year slave or after the roman custom reserve for triumph three beside the murder of their priest the ruination of their temple like the wall of w w Iosh. 6.26 jericho never to be re-edify though attempt by curse 10 10 hist Tripart and greg. Nazia 4 in Julio julian in despite of Christ prophecy for which they have a sect and order of y y joseph Scalig. Elench. trihar ser. cap. 13. mourner Heraclitus his offspring which solemn do nothing else but weep and lament it four and beside the spoil of their sacred vessel or profane as once before z z dan. 5.2 3 Balthasar employ they to the adorn of the heathenish temple of peace five beside the slaughter that at several time Adrian the emperor make of a a joseph jud. lib. 7. cap. 24. they some eight and forty year after their first overture by Vespasian for their rebellion under their impostor Benchochab or Barcosba cut off by Severus his lieutenant 580000. by the b b Dion Nicei adrianus sword beside those that perish by famine sickness and fire or as other number they kill at Alexandria in Egypt 700000. of they in such multitude that if we may believe their own c c lib. writer the blood reach to the horse mouth and run down from the place of effusion four mile to the sea it colour and make swell two d d lib. Massechith Ghittin river yea serve the heathen seven year after to fatten their ground with it as their bone stand Adrian in good stead to hedge in a vineyard of many mile compass those that revive be prohibit from ever come near jerusalem or look towards it say e e euseb Eccles. hist. libr. 4. cap. 6. Eusebius out of ariston Pelleus with many other f f Niceph. lib. 3. cap. 24. punishment and vexation together with the wondrous massacre the emperor trajan make of they adrians predecessor who for their rebellion in g Egypt and Cyrene under their captain Luke or Andrew as Dion call h he by the mean of Martius cut off many thousand of they but more by Lucius quietus that make they ever quiet who destroy they utter in Mesopotamia and more when I consider how every way miserable they be at this day in their inward and their outward man their body and their soul how they be a mock and derision to all nation as they mock and deride Christ how they have be sell for slave yea thirty of they for one piece as they buy Christ of the traitor judas for thirty piece how they be hold under as slave in every nation without without without temple or true priesthood ministry or magistracy office place or government as make the tail and not the head where ere they come their name smell as a fowmart or fox the name of a jew be as odious as the name of a i i at zante they be so hate that from Monday Thursday till Saturday noon they come not abroad lest the people stone they purchase libr. 2. cap. 10. judas every place in Europe Africa and Asia be weary of they except k k they have build they in Rome five synagogue see the relation of religion in the west part Rome that make use of their tolerate usury as of their stew and courtesan mere for gain how every country after a time have either hold their nose to the grindstone miserable afflict they as they be use here in England in the day king Richard the first edward the first and king John as our chronicle mention or extreme pill and poll they by tax l l John the second king of Portugal make they pay 8. crown for a poll Emmanuel do the like ann. dom. 1497. with many more imposition and confiscation of good as they peel and poll christian by their bite yea bloody usury fleeting they as the Turk use to do with his pasha and phlebotomize their full purse to prevent a pleurisy or else banish they and cast they out as the sea cast her froth to the shore as they be use by the three Phil^pps but chief by Ferdinand and Isabel in m m 1592. its thought they be banish 120000. family of they or 420000 person as be compute by jo^annes Re^clinus cabal lib. 1. Spain by some pope also in n n as Paul the four and Pius or impious the five though receive again as loath to forgo such good customer by Pius the four and Si^ius the five Rome by some of our king in England or else massacre they with the sword or stone they to death by the rage of the people chief as some history instance for their sanguinolent devilish and malignant disposition in use to crucify some child as upon our good Friday still in derision of our Messiah when I see how all nation be weary of they as a tender stomach of unholsom meat ready to disgorge they how as the apostle speak of they even to this day God they please not and be contrary to all man 1. thes 2 15. how as be say of o o gen. 16. v. 12. Ishmael like ismalits rather then israelit their hand be against every man and every man against they how even the turk detest they above any nation for kill their own prophet Christ the best prophet they say that ever be except Mahomet and will not admit any among they except he first turn Christian and then a turkish renegado in their reproach also use a kind of imprecation if this be not true will God I may die a p p m. purchase in his pilgrimage jew as our perverse irish use a worse when I do such or such a thing i will turn Protestant and go to church I say lay to heart and desire all and every of we to lay to heart these premise this strict and severe though just and legal proceed of God with these his own people in these specify particular together with his multiply accumulate renew mercy to we in give we so many blessing forgive or forbear we still after all our rebellion and provocation by which even we rack and stretch his patience as clothe on the hook not cut we off as he may do and have do they root and bough and branch but give we a large space of repentance as he do to q q all the time that ^o^ live among they Sodom to the old r r all the time the ark be in building world to s s Revel. 2.19 jezabel not forty day as to t t jonas 3. ninive but forty year in the pure and powerful preach of the gospel under a gracious Deborah and more than twenty year add since under so wise and worthy a king all this while manure and manage and prune we as once his israelitish u u esay 5. vers. 1.2 3.4.5 Vineyeard hedge we in and environ we with so many mercy of adornation and preservation as will stretch arithmetic to number they and geometry to measure they make we as famous over the whole world as they be infamous we as much fear as be joshuah of the canaanite Alexander of the indian Taubut of the french w w a drum be make of his skin to terrify his enemy when he be dead in vandalia libr. 11. cap. 9 Maiol colloq. 7. pag. 270 Akiat^ in emblem ziseas etc. Zoenus Zisca of the popish among the bohemian Constantine among the pagan and and narses among the goth and vandal yea as much love and admire of our friend and confederate and aweful fear of our enemy as they all be of all hate and detest with a anathema Maranatha till the veil be remove that they love and receive yea believe in the lord Christ their expect saviour yea when I consider how the lord by the word preach by the inward motion and suggestion of his spirit which sometime in some flash knock at the door of the heart of a 10 10 Numb. 23.10 Balaam a carnal y y joh. 6.34 John 7.46 jew a z z John 4.15 Samaritane a a a Pilate math. 27.23.24 John 18.38 heathen a b b act. 26.28 Agrippa by cross by affliction which wrought on c c 2. chron. 33.10.11 Manasses and the gospel d d luk. 15.16.17 prodigal yea sometime on these jew e e Hos^^ 6. v. 1.2 themselves by fatherly castigation and correction paternal admonition and expostulation legal comination and redargution Evangelicall promise and consolation yea even by mercy and judgement nay even by sign and wonder from the earth from the heaven from the air by comet blaze star vision and apparition as often to these jew before their f f see the book extant call doom forewarn to judgement where at large be recite the voice commanmand some to go to Pella the cry of one jesus woe woe to jerusalem with many vision and wonder destruction as prodigious and prognosticate as any record by g g Texter in Textor or h h Lycosthenes have write a great book only Lycosthenes how I say by all these the lord have lure we unto he labour to wean we from our sin as the child from the desire dug that iniquity be not our i i ezek. 18.30 destruction as it be to these jew etc. when I see he have roll every stone touch every string use all mean for our conversion to prevent our confusion chief draw we with the cord of love use to we the rod of beauty as our indulgent shepherd to they the rod of band make we above any nation in the world pattern and precedent of his mercy as they of his justice to present time and to all posterity make they exemplary mark of justice to we not we to they as our sin deserve I say thus compare mercy and judgement together as white with black as the heathen Venus with Vulcan our mercy this day balance and poise with their misery have such a lustre that if we see they not we be blind if with David and his people we bless not the lord for they we be as much past grace as past gratitude chap. 14 special deliverance of our prince peer and people from romish treason thus have we open the box and see the pearl the blessing of great Britain compare nation with nation our english with the jewish Zion but to come near still to my scope and aim and to instance in more specialty the privilege and prerogative that we have have even in our own memory to omit former time equal with the jew in the happy and prosperous regiment of our king and governor may notable serve as a further prick and goad to true gratitude so press and prescribe for in some particular we shall have the balance if not the cast scale I can enumerate all as he that come into a garden pluck not every flower but some choice one compare our late Deborah our mother in Israel queen Elizabeth of famous memory with their David our present liege sovereign with their Solomon not only in the propagation and continuation of true religion together with the two goodly daughter of so gracious a mother peace and k plenty in which we sympathize with they nay far exceed they for as our time have not be so turbulent so truculent so bloody and boisterous as David that be a man of war and shed much blood as he be to far occasion and provoke both by foreign war a broad with the jebusite ammonite philistine and domestic broil at home we have not hear Bellona drum except in a prudent provident martial train in our city as l l Genes. 14.14 Abraham once in his family but for these many year chief since his majesty reign see Noah m m Genes. 7.11 dove fly among we with the olive branch of peace so for that great and better blessing the sun of religion in our hemisphere have shine more comfortable more constant then in the day of Solomon neither have it be nor I hope ever shall be cloud and eclipse by idolatry as it be in his day till it do reshine again upon his certain and assure though needlesse question r r he that question salomon repentance let he read S^to Maior his preface before his comment on the canticle and Lorinus his comment on ch. 1. of Eccles. as also a book in call salomon solace in medi^ repentance but in one particular purposely to avoid fear prolixity to instance how we do agree and s meet as in one centre of blessing as their prince have be mervailous preserve in immediate and immanent peril so the preservation of we and of we in they since the body political and ecclesiastical be safe in the safety of the head have even in our memory and the memory of our father be marvellous if not miraculous for as David life as before have be full specify and now shall be but epitomise be hunt after by Saul and such as he set a work the t t 1. Sam 23.19 ziphin u u 1. sam. 22.9 Doeg and such bloody dog emulate courtier yea wolf and fox in sheep clothing his pretend friend as he complain make net and gun to intrapp he by fraud when they can not prevail by force use with it politic w w Lysimachus the fox craft when the lion courage fail so to reflect a little upon queen Elizabeth of famous memory and as I promise and purpose to parallel that Deborah with their David beside what we have in chronicle in master foxe his martyrology be there not some yet live that can relate how the life of that famous virgin queen be persecute and prosecute by the bloody romish Saulites from the first hour of her crown to the last of her death for beside the plot and project lay against her innocent life by sanguinolent wolf in the reign of her unsisterly sister queen Mary her unjust taxation about the business of sir Peter Carew in the west but chief about her confederacy with Courtney in wiatts conspiracy the second her inhuman apprehension when she be 10 10 she be take sick out of her bed at her house at ashredge by the lord Ta^ne sir John Williams and other two lord sick in her bed the three her transportation in that case from place to place the four her uncivil usage by her churlish tailor Beinfield the five her guard as a traitor by a y y the retinue of these lord be two hundred and fifty of which there be a troop of horseman after a hundred northern soldier add in white coat yet as her black guard after at Woodstock threescore soldier march everyday with in the wall and without band of soldier the six her hurry to the tower without permission either to speak or write to the queen the seven her land at the very traitor stair the eight her strict usage in the tower worse than some ordinary prisoner the nine the restraint of her man the imprison of her lady her toss from post to pillar as from Scylla to Charybdis from danger to danger when in she own apprehension and preparation as her motto be she be as a sheep to the slaughter the ten the examination of sir james Acroft and the rack of many poor man to find out the knife to cut her throat the eleven the gape of the lord of the clergy chief Steven Gardner bishop of Winchester and lord chancellor after the day in which they may wash their white rochet in her innocent blood as much as ever Saul gape after the blood of David after all which storm and tempest lightning and thunder her sun from under all these cloud glorious reshine in her triumphal crown with such celebrity prayer wish welcome cry acclamation shout verse pageant interlude as symptom of affection together with such gratulation from foreign z z as from Zuricke Geneva Basil berne Wertenbridge argentine Frankford place as the like have not be see her enemy by a a as Poole Hopton bishop of Norwich Christopher of Chester Weston^ the chief disputer against Cranmer Latimer and Ridley as also Bonner and Gardiner death together with their plot as mist be sudden disperse leave these dangerous accident and occurrent these complotment with many more to cut off that head which after as glorious as ever any of her sex wear a crown how have she sympathize with David in these her marvellous and miraculous preservation after she come to the crown from both public rebellion and private treason that be complote against she and so consequent against we and our safety both by ambitious and factious spirit as in the Norfolk and kentish b rebellion insurrection of the commons under the conduct of their turbulent leader which have not God providence and man prudence and prowess prevent may have prove as fatal as that rustic c c rusticano Canicul volum. 2. in fine colloq. 3. pag. 466. war to our neighbour Germany both to this land in general and to her royal person in particular but especial by spirit that be jesuit and leaven from Rome from whence as arm Greek out of the trojan horse and as disease out of Pandora box have issue all these treason and rebellion public and private that as cockatrice egg have by man malice be hatch and by God mercy crush among we to reflect upon some of they as a man may look upon a dangerous serpent or vast monster or his malignant enemy when he be slay as the israelite upon Goliath and the Greek upon Hector with gratulation and admiration how dangerous be that conspiracy in the north by the earl of Northumberland and d d in the conspiracy be dacred Digby Hulthorp Penyman bishop and many more great esquier and gentleman Westmoreland kindle by the bull of pope Pius or rather the five in the year 1569. and blow by doctor Nicholas Morton story felton the nortons plumtree hang just at Durham on a crosse-tree and other dangerous spirit justify by that boisterous e e in his six motive fol. 31. and in his forty motive Bristol and f f lib. 7. pag. 730. he praise the attempt of these nobleman pag. 744. he praise felton for a honourable martyr sander yea applaud and approve by many seminary priest chief by campian their chief g g as appear by his ten reason in his Oxford oration confute learned by doctor Humphrey champion who for all his cunning h h the dean of Paul and Windsor dispute with he find he very subtle sophistry be find to have a hand and a heart for treason and suppress by these wise and martial worthy which her majesty employ in that behalf as also to survey again that other conspiracy intend Norfolk but discover and crush in the shell and the the chief agent execute as also the treason of the duke of Norfolk and after of the earl of Northumberland who as he have a hand in the northern rebellion as well as his brother which by the queen mercy be remit enter into a new plot of invade the land as a agent in throgmortons treason a conspirator with Charles Paget a intend assistant to the duke of Guise to bring in a foreign catholic prince of which the pope holiness have a principal care as also not to be so unmindful of god former mercy no more than David be of his preservation from a lion and a i i 1. sam. 17.34.35 bear or Moses for the overture of Israel egyptian enemy in the red k k exod. 15. sea or Deborah of jabins drown in the river l l judg. 5. kishon as to pretermit the discomfiture of that catholic m m 15^8 fleet which the pride of popish proselyte call the invincible Armado by one only n n sir Francis Drake drake with some principal o o as Charles lord Howard high admiral lord Thomas Howard the lord Sheffield with other brave spirit beside swim among they with his wooden p p so be ship call wall with the help of the wind and wave of the sea which from the god of the sea fight against they as the sun once fight against the q q Iosh. 10.12 amorite and the star against r r judg. 5.20 Sisera and for we as once for that good s Theodosius with no less glory to our english then that valorous greek have who with his handful of a few hundred overthrow that numerous river-drinking cloude-threatning army of the persian Zerxes I say to pretermit these public danger with our deliverance manage by all the might and malice prowess and policy of the arm of flesh as also these priest and romish proselyte that be deserve cut off at Tyburn and their treacherous heart cut out as deny the queen supremacy and so consent unto if not contrive the most horrible treason among the which be johnson Ford shirt kirby filby Cotton Richardson so to leave other as unworthy name pestilent vermin or croak frog crawl out of the romish Tiber or as locust from the bottomless pit to disturb our peace or endanger our princess how odious the name as of a jew or judas how horrid the remembrance as once of he that burn Diana temple of these man monster inhuman cannibal yea generation of viper that beside stranger and foreigner attempt as by the devil and priest first tempt to gnaw the very bowel that breed they yea to lay their bloody hand on the lord anoint a princess the most free from vice the most famous for art part and virtue that these modern admire time ever look upon among the which that smooth parasitical Parry who spark of treason be kindle by the word and writing of the carnal cardinal como and inflame by a book of one doctor Collins send he out of France in which there be as many warrant for treason as word and discover partly by his own tongue to a esquire one Nevil and partly by the wisdom of some t t the earl of leycester and sir Christopher hatton counselor they be quench smother and strangle at Westminster palace where he be execute and another bird of the same feather Francis throgmorton who by the encitement of one jenny at the spa in the country of liege and sir Francis englefield in the low-countries with they confederacy of one Charles Paget alias mope alias spring be make a agent and instrument of discovery of the most fit and convenient havens for the land of such foreign force as if the great lord protector of England have not prevent and restrain have supplant we and plant themselves with all the tail and of their idolatrous worship in the three rank as rank traitor as the rest be Anthony babington the head of his confederate as u u act. 1.16 judas be of those that apprehend Christ who with thirteen ungentle young gentleman more bind themselves by oath as those forty jew that vow the death of saint w w act. 22.13.14 Paul that by murder the queen majesty they will either settle their pope again in his former estate in England or else as deserve they do reckon without their host even the god of host and swim against the stream even die the death in the same predicament be our 10 10 bear in Tonlerton near York Yorkshire Weldon Sutton hartley priest like Simeon and y y gen. 49.5.6 levy brethren in blood heart like the rest for the invasion of the land the surprise of the tower of London the fire of the city the kill of some privy z z chief the earl of Leicester be assign to the pot counsellor and other such like catholical meritorious deed all drink of that bloody cup as free as a Tomiris cause Cyrus which they have brew for we the same poisonous bloody cup be attempt to be brew mix and administer by doctor Lopez the queen physician with his confederate Stephano de gama Manuel Lewis Tivaco portugese with his pension of fifty thousand crown promise for poison the queen by count Fuentes and Ibarra as judas be promise thirty piece of silver for betray of Christ and Ecchius promise a bishopric or great b b of which miss he rave and die benefice for dispute at least rail against Luther neither be the treason of York and Williams less dangerous less monstrous less malicious who by the consultation hold at Brussels to murder the queen whereof the devil that murderer from the beginning be precedent as these holy father in the council of Trent consult how to poison soul and their forefather the pharisee how to murder Christ and their holy brethren of the inquisition how to murder his protestant profess christian these with one Owen a english rebel be think the fitte agent of which bloody purpose fail with their hope of the promise forty thousand crown they lose their treacherous blood out of their vein I may here further exemplify great Britain danger and deliverance as the mark that I shoot at by the foolish and at his death true repent attempt of Heskith a gentleman of Lancashire who at the solicit of cardinal Allen sir William Stanley and worthington our unnatural countryman persuade Ferdinand the lord c c who as a natural subject reveal the counsel of this Achitophel Strange son and heir to the earl of Derby to claim to himself the title to the crown of England that so these turbulent spirit may by this mean fish in a trouble water as also of that viper squire who by the solicit of the same venomous brood beyond sea to kill the queen do complot the poison of the pummel of her saddle that lay hand on it the poison may disperse over her whole body which plot also come to light by the eye of that vigilant sentinel the shepherd of d d psal 23.1 Israel as also of that irish kern Patrick Cullen who by the persuasion of that ever factious Stanley and one jacques his lieutenant together with Sherewood and holt to come into England about the same bloody errand that former his brethren be surprise by the high way and he and his plot supplant so let thy enemy o lord e e judg. 5.31 perish be they english irish romish hellish whosoever whatsoever and wheresoever and let we and all that love thou rejoice in thy salvation and since we have enter into this our Ireland it be worth our animadversion how the lord hand have be as just and heavy even against irish traitor as english in cut off they and their bloody hope and plot ever by one mean or another such be his mercy to we his justice to our enemy as appear if I may without offence reflect upon they in james-fitz morris one of the first traitor as I be inform in this our Ireland who be cut off short by the head by a irish young gentleman as he go to burn his father country second such a stern bloody treacherous varlet as this be one Morrogh ogue or rogue who after his effusion of abundance of english blood in the province of Munster be apprehend and execute at cork and his bone break with a smith sledge his only repentance be that he may not live to murder more english his bloody villainy will fill a volume three so for the earl of f f 1. king 2.34 Desmond that be a prince and principal agent in these rebel stir time be not his end proportionable to his life do he not come to his grave as g g 2. sam. 18.17 joab absolom and other traitor with blood and slaughter wander as a beggar be he not take by one of the irish in his cabin and his head dissever from his body so Desmond brother to this earl a notable traitor as be say of Caesar Borgia a faithless and perfidious butcher as well of his friend as enemy who any way stand in his way to hinder his end wander as a hungry wolf in the wood to seek some prey as he have behead other in a proportionable retaliate justice be take and behead himself notwithstanding all his coat-armour of the pope bull and Agnus and the ring that the pope send he from his own finger as a love token to a traitor dear belove hang about his * * of these and other irish kern and rebel see at large the discovery of Ireland by sir John Davis neck so doctor sanders the great Goliath of rebel by hand and head tongue and pen animate and encourage they as one of the best active factor that ever the pope have by his agency and one of the best proctor the romish hierarchy ever have by his work and writing this not only firebrand but trump of rebellion the pope legate the commander and treasurer for the late war wander in the mountain without succour or relief die as be credible report raving and in a frenzy so let all perish which either themselves unlawful or by animate and encourage cause other to attempt to strike treacherous with the h h math. 26.5 sword against the lord vicegerent who as deputy under God carry not the sword in vain chap. 15 more special application of our preservation and other blessing of which we be eye and ear witness thus have we compare our Deborah for to this term I still cleave with Israel David his and in he their deliverance with we he be deliver and preserve from a lion a bear Saul the zephim the jebusite Goliath the amalekite the courtier of the king of Achish absolom his own rebellious bowel Achitophel that Matchavillian politician and our deliverance have be more for number great in respect of danger by the invention and intention of our enemy domestic and foreign as have appear in the particular and therefore which be still my aim and scope our gratulation shall be answerable I can enlarge myself further in parallel the deliverance of our wise and peaceable Solomon our sovereign lord the king with their Solomon in this one point of preservation in a double deliverance for as the lord have elect Solomon not only to grace notwithstanding his fearful but not final fall but also to the place of a i i 2. sam. 7.12 prince of God so dear belove as his name k k 2. sa. 12.24.25 import that as he be his father and he his l l 2. sam. 7.14 son so he promise he the inheritance of a spiritual son as from m m vers. 15. God of a natural son as from David even the throne of his father which Nathan and his mother n n 1. reg. 1.17.2 know and David himself both o o vers. 30. promise and perform when time serve so we know the^e be some ^ubbes and blot and and block in the high way to wipe he of the kingdom for sure have the prevail faction of joab and his brother Adoniah prevail Solomon have be office perde his nose have be put of joint he may have fish for a crown yea he may have plead for his p p Rethsheba urge this ver. 21. life as the lamb before the fox in the fable he shall have have that favour show he which Abimelech show to the son of q q judg. 9.18 gideon to the king r r 2. King 11.1 seed and the reign Turk at this day to his s s all be put to the sword etc Knol^ his turkish history brethren he have be sure to have go to the pot or be restrain neither have his case be better have his second plot take and his project prevail in ask the Shunamite to wife a ground of a second vie for the kingdom as Solomon be so wife and nasuted that he smell out the danger of his t t 1. King 2.22 drift so that by God overrule providence both those treasonable plot of Adoniah be prevent the one by the care and circumspection of David the other by the wisdom and prudency of Solomon himself so if we do not voluntary shut our eye do we not sensible and at this day comfortable and feel perceive that our Solomon our sovereign have be rescue out of the jaw of a double danger the one before he be invest with the crown of Albion the other since the one in Scotland the other in England the one as under God who hand keep he ever as the apple of his eye by his prowess the other by his prudency and policy for as he be lure and train to the house of earl Gowry by the false lapwing cry of Alexander Ruthwen as he be a hunt invite he in his intention to a bloody breakfast and thereby a serpentine wile lead he from the rest of his noble as a sheep to the slaughter the butcher executioner stand ready prepare for the fatal stroke the lord cast such a punic fear into the heart of he that be set to be a murderer that that dog stand tremble and quake as a Espin leaf as he that once intend the murder of Darius as not be able to look upon our * * his majesty be say to have the impression of a lion on his breast the prophecy 2. Es^ 11.27 be by some apply lion and give withal such a strength and spirit to his majesty that grapple hand to hand even with that Alexander though naked and the other arm he hold he play the other stand by as a cipher or dumb show till by a special providence his majesty be overhard and so speedy relieve by his valiant follower who in a unequal u combat four to seven as appear in the particular passage thus epitomise with the loss of their own blood and the death of some of their enemy bring of his majesty with honour and safety but this danger be but as it be a northern prologue to a southern tragedy if it have be act and effect as it be pen and project by these unfortunate gentleman as their friend call they Piercie Catsby grant fauke key Bates Rookwood Digby and the two winter for ever sigmatize and brand as Cain with his w w gen. 4.15 mark as jeroboan with his 10 10 1. King 16.23 the son of that cause Israel to sin title with the odious name of the powder traitor which plot be so deep and infernal to blow up the parliament house with powder and in that one blast to turn heaven as it be into hell religion into superstition peace into war liberty into bondage safety and security into bloodshed to eclipse our sun our moon and our star all at once to turn the flower of Christendom the worthy king the sweet prince the most honourable nobility the most reverend judge learned clergy loyal commonalty wise patriot there assemble into mummiamized earth even in a trice as it be think to be first invent as powder and gun by a conjure friar even by a parliament of wicked spirit breathe and suggest it into the head and heart of these malcontent drink with blind and bloody zeal as the crow with so it be if comparison be not odious as be well know by all circumstance as wise and judicious find out and discover by his majesty by right expound past a humane reach the most intricate quiddity of a mystical letter as ever Solomon find out the true mother of a controvert y y 1. reg. 3.27.28 child or discover the ambitious and bloody plot of a false brother Adoniah but to draw at length together my sail and to cast anchor in this large sea of mercy the lord have not only give his judgement to the king but enlarge his mercy to the king son we be to look upon the sun rise or else already rise chief to admire the lustre of our illustrious prince after he have be so long hide from our horizon as it be shine in another climate yea in our fear only and jealousy of love cloud and veil from our eye but not from our heart and now the fog and mist of our fear be dispel and disperse break again upon we with more resplendent beauty to our eye more sweet influence of comfort to our heart than ever we now receive he as Abraham do his Isaac or jacob his joseph with a joy after we have a while leave he or rather he we in his expedition from we which our long think too long and now to set a strong edge upon our affection and to excite our heart to a high strain of thankfulness for the safe and prosperous return of our prince which we with the whole realm of England Scotland and that part of Ireland that be not romanize yea Belgia and all Christendom our friend in the same faith do entertain and welcome with joyful jubilee as those that have past the wave and quicksand and rock and shelf and pirate of the sea stand upon the shore and as joyful as safe view and recount with glad and exhilarate heart their forepast peril so let it be with we in this our sunny calm let we reflect upon the storm that may have fall upon we have not the hand of the almighty withhold they in that hazard which we run in the late absence of the prince and as general which may as fit as the right glove to the right hand be apply to our own particular let we consider but these special first how many great and famous prince together with other famous personage for arm and art have die out of their own country far absent from their friend and favourite except such as do accompany they find their own country the place of their birth another of their burial thus Alexander be bear in z z q cart. lib. 1 Macedonia but die and be bury in a a euseb libr. 1. Babylon Cyrus bear in Persia yet slay and dishonourable bury in b b justin. hist. Scythia Hannibal of Africa bury in c c Plutarch in Pompeyo Bithynia Cleomenes bear in entomb in Egypt Crassus and Pompey both bear in Rome but fall untimely the one in Assiria the other betray and butcher in Egypt so for learned man Pythagoras bear in Samos dead in Metapontus Virgil bear in Mantua bury in Brundisium Terence bear in Carthage bury in Arcadia so these worthy athenian Themistocles Theseus Solon be bear in Athens yet end their day in Syria Cyprus Persia and elsewhere I may add many more as king Igurthu bear in Numidia bury in Rome these famous worthy the scipio Curtij decci cornelij bear in Rome but dissever in their death over the superficies of the earth as Paulus emilius that die in Cynna Titus Gracchus in lucania Augustus Caesar in Nola traian the good emperor in the east part of the d world second when I consider how many renown young prince beauteous blossom of excellent lustre have be in their verdant spring as a trial or punishment to their subject cut off from the tree of life crop by that blatrant beast death their sun set on a sudden even in the first rise or in their height and go back again by degree as the sun in ahaz e e 2. King 20.11 dial 1. sometime eclipse by the immediate hand of God as that zealous young prince Edward the 5 and the staff of our hope our so lament josiah that so fair promise hero who as one call julius Scaliger and Picus Mirandula we may true call worthy and wonderful spirit now translate to the god of spirit 2. some make away by the malice of man by treasonable plot and conspiracy as Britanicus the son of Claudius slay by Nero in the 14 year of his age the nephew of Richard the 3 the duke of Clarence and his mate root out by the bloody celidonian boar in their spring bud 3. yea some expose to death in their very infancy as Romulus and Renus that Lamusius that be cast into a ditch young Cyrus by his grandsire Astyages etc. some by this mean perish though some again as these nominate marvailous preserve 4. some cut off by the sword of the enemy as josiah by Pharaoh f f 2. Chro. 35.23.24 necho that love jonathan by the sword of the g g 1. sam. 31.2 philistine Ladyslaus the young king of Bohemia slay by the Turk in a fatal battle together with Hippolytus and h h this julius persuade the young king to break his league and swear truce with the Turk by which he perish julius cardinal that hold themselves in their pride as good as prince in the 21. year of his age 5. other cut off by sickness incurable disease or other dismal accident from which the diadem of emperor the k crown of king and the mitre of pope be not exempt as Hierome Vrsmus who die of a wound which he receive in Rome Henry crush to death by a fall in the water Medici the father to the great duke of Hetruria slay by the breach of a gun as also Heraclas Constantine with more that may be name all these yield the dew to death and their debt to nature in the 28. year of their age some by one mean some by another together with Lodowicke the young king of Hungary that as he be eager pursue the turk be find dead in a quagmire in the 20 year of his age but in the three place when I serious ponder parallel history with our present time not only the peril and pike that great prince have past in their expedition by land as many prince and noble peer of Christendom cut off in their several unwarrantable voyage which in their blind zeal and devious devotion they unite undertake for the recovery of jerusalem the holy land from the Turk but when I deep ponder the peril by sea so many so dangerous as the psalmist l l psalm 65.7 reveal as experience know as holy saint even m m act 27.14 15 Paul himself and the disciple of our n n math. 28. ^4 saviour have try from which even king and prince have not be exempt the piety of that trojan o Aeneas the greatness and power of Zerxes or Artaxerxes the felicity and fortune of p p veha^ and etc. Caesar as he call they be but mean orator and unprevailing pleader to stay the rage of angry Neptune when bluster Aeolus have stir and exasperate he that he roar and foam insomuch that the wise bias hold seaman to be neither among the q live nor among the dead and it be father of Cato that he resolve among other thing never to go by sea when he may go by land to which peril if we credit r r a little book new extant of the prince his return Mendoza which now speak english even his highness be subject in two or three particular from which the divine providence merciful preserve he yea when I consider how many prince peer and great personage have perish in and by the sea in which they have be entomb in their watery grave as the egyptian Pharaoh aegeus of Athens Aiax of Greece Leander of Abaddon yea in our own realm a king and a queen that as that s s Icarus icarij^ ovid. Icarus before they from be drown in the water give denomination to the water and comment these and many more example with that proverbial adage verify daily by experience that what happen to any one may happen to every one and notwithstanding as I say before all these just fear storm which may have befall we in the leave or lose of our prince at home or abroad by sea or by land lay to heart the peril that king and t t as Humber divide Yorkshire and Lincolnshire and queen hive prince be subject unto even when they be at home among their friend and favourite as they think even in their castle their court their palace secure by their guard as Eglon slay by Ehud even in his own parlour judg. 3. vers. 22 23. Ishboseth murder by Baanah and u u 2. sam. 4. verse 5.6 Rehab even in his own bedchamber as Plautinus in the like case think to have dispatch Alexander Severus by the mean of w w the history be at large in guevara in the life of Severus as judith deal with Hollosernes in the w w judith 13.7.8 as the two son of Senacharib with their father who they slaughter as he be at his idolatrous sacrifice much more subject to more eminent immanent danger abroad where they know not their friend from their foe and yet notwithstanding all these doubt and danger these peril occasion our perplexity that good angel that go out with he as with 10 10 chap. 48 16. jacob to padam aram with Abraham servant to y y gen. 24.7 Mesopotamia and with that Tobiah in the be his Achates by land his Palinurus and best pilot by sea his if every man as every province much more every a a this question justine martyr expound q. 30. and late our master calvine lib. 1. Instit. cap. 14.7 the mayor part of all the father and the schoolman affirm it as Clemens alexandrinus lib. 6. Orig hom. 8. in gen. Basil in psal 33. Epiphan. mer. 51. Chrys. ho. 3. c. 1. Coloss. Cyril lib. 4. ground on gen. 48.16 on math. 18. vers. 10. and on act. 12.11.15 prince have his genius his protect angel both by land and sea in every coast and country where he come have reduce and bring he back again after this large circumference to the english court his own centre in health and honour prosperity and safety both in body and soul not somuch as the least infect dust cleave to his foot much less any corrupt popish air infect his royal blood such be the antydote and preservative of grace of which his highness have give more than mathematical demonstration even since his come home oh this be a mercy to his highness in particular to the land and realm all we in general interest in he past expression chief when I consider how unworthy we have walk of former mercy how like these nine cleanse leper we have be b b luk. 17.16.17 unthankful how there be at this day a controversy whether God be more merciful to we or we more sinful against he we wound the lord with his own weapon abuse our peace and plenty and all other talent as bawd and pander to uncleanness as fuel to the fire of our licentiousness as if a whorish woman shall with these jewel and love token she receive from her husband mantaine a adulterous lover or a favourite with these land and revenue he have receive from his prince assist and animate a profess rebel we employ still God favour in the service of sin and Sathan our sin like jerusalems yea like c c eze 16.49 sodoms pride idleness fullness of bread yea and fullness foulness of drink too extortion oppression increase and spring with our blessing the sin of every country the german drunkenness asian luxury cretian lie carthaginian perfidiousness italian wantonness jewish usury turkish cruelty the french complemental formality with the vice and vanity of every other nation meet in our land as in their centre entertain and retain as lawyer their client physician their patient nobleman their jeaster and fool because they bring sack to our milnes pleasure to our mind or profit to our purse etc. yea withal when I ponder too how little use we have make of the lord judgement plague pestilence dearth inundation of water sickness disease death of the honourable of the marshal of the senator and of the d d Esai 3.1.2.3 counsellor that have be take from we but chief the eclypse of that bright sun that once shine so glorious in our hemispher the death of that our illustrious and far famous prince Henry as grievous to our heart as the death of that worthy e e by the malice of Roxama cut off by his bloody father Solyman in any great thing that happen the proverb be Mustapha be dead Mustapha be once to his martial jenisary or the death of that noble Zisca to his zealous and valorous bohemian of who death in not die since to any sin as humble by this judgement we have make so little use that by our grievous provocation and as a just punishment of our former ungracious ingratitude in the absence of our prince the lord have late the ball at his foot as he have ever to goal it to our grief whereas he may have bring on we now stoop plague indeed and have pay we home once for all by many mean which I leave to all christian heart to excogitate yet when we experimental see that as in the first creation he have bring light out of darkness good out of our fear evil glory to himself praise to his majesty as before prayer for the preservation of our thrice honour prince be not all this the lord do and it be marvelous in our eye oh if David and his noble be thankful for the mercy towards their Solomon the instrumental builder of their material let we be thankful for our Solomon the builder of the spiritual temple the propagator and continuer of true religion the planter of god true worship the supplanter of idolatry if Cain be avenge seven time then Lamech seventy time say that f f Genes. 4.24 polygamist if the jew have cause of gratulation seven time for God mercy towards their church and commonwealth king and people we have occasion seventy time seven time if the undersong of David psalm much more of our spiritual hymn may well run in this torrent to the god of mercy for his mercy endure for g g psal 136. ever oh then let all of we this day this hour with our mother great Britain by all mean express our thankfulness by our rejoice in the outward and inward man blow with your trumpet as in the new moon strike your drum advance your pike I wish I can say as in England ring your bell make your bonfire sound your cornet display your banner charge and discharge your gun apply your powder make good use of match or as more certain use your fire lock march like martialist dance your measure as David do before the ark let the day of our preservation from the powder treason of the coronation of our king the reduction of the prince be to we as the jew h h ^^^h 9.26 Purim let they be write in red letter insert in our calendar but for ever these mercy with their memorial let they be as Moses command i i deut. 6.6.7.8 Israel be engrave better then in brass and marble in the tablet of our grateful heart perpetuate traditionary to our child child let our heart life love vote voice tongue soul spirit join with all the bless quire of angel in heaven and saint in earth for all his mercy to praise the father of mercy the god of spirit to who be honour and glory of we and in all church for ever and ever amen