


The family of Iesus Christ after the flesh: who is God blessed for euer.
After that Koheleth or Ecclesiastes had shewed all thinges vnder the sun to be vain, that men might look how the soule immortal might stand in judgement, and find the ioy of the Kingdome promised to Dauid, I opened Ieremies Lamentationes, how therin the Iewes hope of happines in this world was buryed with the destruction of temple, city, Kindome. And the same yere that Ieremy first wrote his Lamentationes, the noble Daniel so beloved of God was captiued, to Babylon, to rule his captiuers, as Ioseph to rule Egypt; who thence deriueth the Kingdomes that vexed the holy Iewes religio^: how Christ had all theyr actiones as opened in a book before his judgement throne, and made a riddance of them by the day that he was to com into the world. And joyneth vnto theyr vtter consumption, his coming in the cloudes of heauen: and ascention vnto the Everlasting throne promised vnto Dauid. There the Romanes begin theyr dealinges; and vvill rule over the King of heauen, till they crucified the God of glory: Wherfor they are pictured after the tenour of all Daniels fower in one; The Lion, the beare, the fourheaded Leopard, and the fourth the ten-horned, giue them armes, to make one of them fower, a beaste ten-horned, colored like a Leopard, footed, as a bear, and mouthed like a Lion Theyr tribute or taxe over the world fell out euen vvith the time that Christ the God of heauen came from the father into this vvorld. And Da^el taught vpon Babels fall vvhen God vvold by his ovvne blood open an Eternall Kingdome to them that beleued in him: and vvhen God in Christ wold enter into the vvorke of the tabernacle, euen begining 30 yeres in the flesh. So the faithfull savv vvhen the son wold dvvell in our taberna^le; of Abrahams sede; whose familie, knovven rightly of fevv, and perverted by ^evves, vvith many questiones depending heron, I open to all Christianes; and first
 shevv at the Entrance the reason of severall beginnige^ in the holy men that spell or speak vnto vs of God come in the flesh.

Of S. Mathews beginning from Abraham.
The full purpose of S. Mathew concerning the Kingdome of the Iewes, I will handle at large in due place: Now the reasons of Abraham made the beginnig may be touched only; 1. Abraham vvas the first man to whom Christ was promised in plain termes; that in his sede all the families of the earth should be blessed, So a beginning from him is fit for Iewes and heathen.
2. In that Eue had a promess that Christ should destroy the workes of Satan, who destroyed the vorld, and Kild Adam, to be dead in sin, and to leaue this world; our Lord his justice and death, and resurrection and ascension and restoring Adams soule to justice, and the new world wherein justices dwelleth, all these poinctes are closly taught; But contemned by the blinded of Satan, who delite to be vnwittj, and vvill not so much strain theyr care, as to vnderstand vvhat God speaketh. Novv to Abraham matters vvere shevved playner, that the destroyer of Satans workes; should come of him; and after death should be reuiued; and figured by Melchisedek; and as Abraham and Sara dead from strength of generation yet by faith vvere quickened: and iustified by faith; So they should be, vvho beleued in God that raiseth Christ from the dead. For these causes the beginng of the Nevv T. is fitly taken from Abraham.


Of S. Marc.
S. Marc dravveth his entrance from the last prophet vv^^^ Iohn Babtist is foreshevved: and from Esays comfort vpon spech of the fall of Babel. vvhich matter vvas plainly expounded fo^
 time, vvhen Cyrus destroyed Babel. and Marc his Gospell is of half a seauen; to shevv Christ his teaching of the covenant for many. And as God vvold haue S. Mark to fortify the Angels Chronicle for the time: So he vvould haue the other thre Euangelistes to hasten to the same. As S. Mathevv doth, vvhen he told that our Lord dvvelt in Narazet; as in the volume of the prophetes Es. xj he is called Nazer; and in the Babylon Thalmud in Chelek; Nazor is the name of the son of Dauid; Presently after Thalmadique handling of that his name, he cometh to the Angel Gabrieis half seauen; and so doth S. Luke, and S. Iohn hasten to the preaching of Malachj the sonne of Zacharj. Wherby any might marveile hovv the Ievves could misse to receaue the King of glory coming to his ovvne hovvs. And thus all the four evangelistes shevved care to fottifie that part. And God vvold haue it famous, turning it into a proverbe; for afflictiones conformable to the afflictiones of Christ; by all^sio^ to that time; That the afflictiones for Christ should be called the afflictiones of dayes 1260. or, of a time tvvo times and half a time; and monethes forty tvvo. So by allusiones our Gracious Lord teacheth vs to mark the four evangelistes, for the half seauen of our Lordes preaching; and specially S. Mark; and to go back with him to Daniel. And our Lords ovvne tongue doth call vs to marke the time: in the Parable of the fig tree fruteles, hindering the Earth. Which spech may be gathered to be six monthes, before the cursed fig tree vvithered. As Bucholkerus maketh a goodly comparison, of that Parable, and of our Lordes half seauen. So our Lord calleth vs from Elias Baptist vnto Elias the Thisbite: hovv in his time heauen vvas shut three yeres and six monethes; vvarning that synce the heauens vvere opened at his baptisme, vntil his soule should returne from the cross to heauen, yeres should be three and six monethes. Novv the gathering of Elias times in the first of the Kinges vvold require long labour; But vve may be sure it vvas vvell knovven amonge the Thalmudignes; as S. Iames
 speaking to the Thalmudique maner, sayth, that Elias pray^^ stayd raine three yeres and six monethes. Thus the time of our Lords preaching is svvetely compared vvith other Scriptures. and vve may be sure that our Lord spake the truth; and seing ou^ Lord told, in Daniel ch. 7. and 12. That Antiochus should cro^^ the lavves and offring* a time tvvo ^imes and an half; He vvold haue his time for sanctifying the temple to be as vvell Knovven; and as vvell measured; seing the allusion Ap. 12. of a time, tvvo times, and half a time, is taken from his preaching.


In what moneth S. Marke beginneth his story: and the rest, the opening of the heauens by the second Elias.
Because our Lord was baptized, even beginnig thirty, and to open the Kingdome, by teaching the covenant to many, three yeres and six moneth: Seing his soules passage from the crosse to the fathes is certen in the fiftenth of Nisan; So his birth and Baptisme should be in the seauenth moneth, Aethanim. Which vvas the first moneth, after the creation of the world.


Of the moneth Ethanim or September.
It may somwhat help to mark old story of Aethanim from 1. Kinges. ^. 2. All Israel assembled to the King Salomon, in the moneth Aethanim, in the feast, that is the seauenth moneth; And the sacrificers brought the Ark of the covenant of the Eternal, vnto his place; vnto the Dabyr; vnto the holy of holy; and the Cherubim spred theyr vvinges over the place o^ the ark. This so Solemne should haue antitypon awnswearable in high matter. And what thing els can be, but that the most holy was manifest in his temple; and the army of Angels spred^
 theyr winges; to haue him honored at his coming then into the world.


The explication and story, of the moneth Aethanim.
The most Lerned Chaldy paraphast Ionatha^ speaketh thus: of Aethanim. It is the moneth of the ancient, and they called it the first moneth, of festiuity. But now it is the seauen moneth. Thus Dauid Kimchj doth expound him. Aethanim or strength is the month wherin they gathered the fructs and encrease of the earth, to theyr houses. For that cause it is called the feast of gathering frutes. So Aethanim meaneth strength: and fructes and entrease of the earth be the life of a man. And some of our doctoures expound Aethanim, the moneth in which the fathers were borne. The stay (Aethanim) of the world; as the spech, Mich. 7. 2. Heare ye mounta^ies; and ye strong foundationes of the earth. Others call it Aetha^im from the strength of the lawes that are geuen for this moneth ^^th feastes, and lawes. So Ralbag sayth. I think it called the moneth Athanim, for the feastes: the strong, and teaching iustice: which ^re in this moneth. This for Ralbag. The first day had the trumpets; the tenth, expiation; the fiftenth the feast of tabernacles for eight dayes. And Ionathans wordes cited of me afore, be thus expounded of Camchj. Before the time that Israel came from Aegypt, Tisri or Aethanim was the first moneth. For in Tisri the world was made. And by reason that the Children of Israel came from Aegypt in Nisan, it became the head of monethes, and Tisri became the seauenth. For so the blessed God sayd vnto them. This moneth shalbe vnto you the first of monethes. To you, by reason that to the rest of the world it is not first: For Tisri is the first. And this much for the moneth. So Iohn Baptist well might begin the first day; and assemble vnto him much People fourtene dayes: And our I ord come to him the fiftenth day; when they had lerned of the stronger then the Baptist, who wold baptize
 with the holy Ghost, and with fyer. So the four Evangelist^s Celebrating the Baptisme celebrat the birth which was the same day 29. full yeres. So as the first Adam and the other to Noah came to the world that moneth, Christ should come; and that time was fittest for Caesar to bid men resort to theyr cities; and most likely that shepheardes wold yet be abroad with theyr ship; and fittest for men to go into a riuer naked to be Baptized. And by Daniels half seauen Iohn brought in Baptisme; for heathen; as Dauid and Salomon only Baptized proselytes; Maimony in Asure Bia, tract. 12 and 13. And yf his warrant had not bene sure, and plain, from Daniel, none might haue com to him for Baptisme. So our Lord begining a new yere of his age then, shewed the same time of moneth to haue geven vs his coming into the world. And the Rabbines in Middras Rabba conclude that Messias shalbe borne in Aethanim or Tisrj; full of feastes to teach of him. And God appointed no feastes for the winter; because of the vnseasonablenes of the weather. Chrysostome mistaking Iohns fathers story, thinking that he ministred not in june but in September, began to disgrace the state of the Gospell. Hence Turk and Iew scoph: that we place the byrth where the conception should be; and can yeld no reason of our Gospels narrationes which we make most vnlikely to be true. And Arias Montanus helpes Chrysostom; that Zacharie should be high sacrificer, Wheras all Iewes know that the Candelstick, Table and altar of incense were without and dayly gone to by the ordinarie sacrificers. Elias, four times made the begining of Daniels half seauen, might haue taught the Iewes a sure note, what Elias Malachj spake off. Now the end of all the Evangelistes is in the first moneth, towardes leauing the Aegypt of this world at the Pascha. And at Pentecost, after, the law vvas giuen to Moses; when the fyerj lavv of the spirit vvas by Iesus geuen. So the conception of Iohn, vvher men placed his birth; falleth to Midsomer; and birth to the spring Aequinoctial, and likevvise the conception
 of Mary fell most fitly to mydvvinter, and our Lordes coming into the vvorld, to the first moneth after the creation, and his redemption, to the first moneth for redemption from Egypt; These matters agree vvith Scripture and plain reason. But novv the altering of the date vvold to much troble the vvorld. It may pass amongest vs; as fit for considering a time vvhen vvinter feastes, and leasure to heare the lavv read hindereth none vvorkes; and according to the conception; very many Lerned men haue cleared the truth, of late; and all are to blame that will folow an old errour here, that disturbeth law and Gospell. Iewes and Turkes look on: and the iust iudge, who hath eyes pure, that they cannot behold euell, will kepe from his heauenly city all that practise lying.


Of S. Lukes begining.
S. Luke joyneth the end of the old testament to the begining of the New. A most heauenly worke. And here note the very names. Zacharj and Malachj end the spech of God in the old Testament; and Zacharj and Malachj are in the first spech of the Angel Gabriel in the New. The Angel Gabriel; who did tell of Antiochus Epiphanes, for dayes 2300. and Generally of Gods hand vpon the Graecianes: he, tels of the second Elias; or Malachj, vnto Zacharj; an holy man: and of the birth of Christ, whom he him self named Christ; Daniel 9. and here the time must be considered. Euen when the Grecianes were rooted out from vnder the cope of heauen: and had not the governement of one city in the world; but at Romanes taxe, in Daniel were vtterly consumed; as the former all, the Graecianes before they vvere parted: and the Medes with Persianes, and the Chaldeanes; when the last of all these were consumed, then the Angel Gabriel cometh twise to tell the joy of the Kingdome of heauen; for Iohn Elias: and for Christ the most holy. Thus so heuenly a ioyning of the old Testament to the New should
 be celebrated of all that will kepe the commaundement of praising God with vnderstanding. And all teachers be wicked that wilbe spending time to theyr hearers, and them selues, in matters of this world, wher the hearers be so wise as they, and not study first the truth of these matters, so gracious and full of salvation, and after, teach them vnto the world. Bishops that wold teach with dexteritie to make all in the the Kingdomes able yf they wold to teach all the world, should never be envyed for theyr 200000 lib. per annum; But they should be counted most reverend and right reverend fathers; and such Papae as Athanasuis, and the like in Grecia. But ours must alter much before all the lerned nobility vvill think them so referend and so learned, as some nobles be, and lower gentry, that never came in Pulpit.


Of S. Iohn begining the Gospel.
S. Iohn the last beginneth fro^ before the begining: from the Eternall, called the word of Thalmudiques infinitely through Moyses, as Onkelos nere S. Iohn foloweth them: sayng for, Iehova sayd, the word of Iehova sayd. S. Paul sayth they tempted Christ; vvher they tempted Iehovah. This vvas the main combat vvith the Thalmudiques: and Cerinthianes, and other heretiques. And matter required that myndes longe occupied in easier matter, should at the last be called to consyder the Eternity, of the heyre of all, vvhich made the vvorld. And S. Luke sone after mention of Elias Iohn baptist, handleth the humanitie of Iesus Corist, vp to Adam: vvhom Satan overraught to bring darkenes vpon him self, before the sun euer left him in darkenes; and then ioyneth a nevv combat to the old serpent; thence vvill I shevv the familie of our Lord: and cmment vpon it; and S. Mathevv shall folovv, touching succession to the Kingdom, and other dependantes, all for instruction of Ievves, and such as vvold not lay a trap to Ievves, and theyr ovvne destruction.




THVS THE TEXT SPEAKETH Luke. 3. from. v. 23

ANd Iesus himself euen began to be of
The noblest story of all that are: for yeres 3927 The piller of all the Bible: to which Heathen be servantes.
thirty yeres: being, Sonne, of Ioseph, (as me^ thought) of Eli, of Matthat, of Leui, of Melchi, of Ianna, of Ioseph, of Mattathias, of Amos, of Naum, of Esli, of Nagge, of Maath, of Matathias, of Semei, of Ioseph, of Iuda, of Ioanna, of Rhesa, of Zorobabel, of Salathiel, of Neri, of Melchi, of Abdi, of Cosam, of Elmodam, of Er, of Iose, of Eliezer of Iorim, of Matthat, of Leui, of Symeon, of Iuda, of Ioseph, of Ionan, of Eliacim, of Melea, of Mainan, of Mattatha, of Nathan, of Dauid, of Iesse, of Obed, of Booz, of Salmon, of Naasson, of Aminadab, of Aram, of Esrom, of Phares, of Iuda, of Iacob, of Isaac, of Abraham, of Thara, of Nachor, of Saruch, of Ragau, of Phalec, of Eber, of Sala, of Cainan, of Arphaxad, of Sem, of Noe, of Lamech, of Mathusala, of Enoch, of Iared, of Malaleel, of Caina^, of Enos, of Seth, of Ada^, of God.

1 Here Children should begin first to rede: and to compare the sorowfull combat of Adam killed on his first day from life of soule made dead in sin, with the glorious combat of our Lord resisting the old serpent; and driving him to flight. Luke. ch. 4.
2 Mary the mother of our Lord is in name left out: but in matter conteyned. For the terme Sonne through all these hath relation to Iesus, as in the Last: Sonne of God. They vse small judgment that hould Adam called the S. of God S. Luke in Satans spech ch. 4. sayeth that Iesus was meant by him, Son of God.
3. Iosephs father who begate him was named Iacob Math. 1. But as all maried men haue tvvo fathers, so Ioseph: Dauid had Iessai and Saul; Ioseph had Iacob natural, and Ely in Lavv. yet by argument only, Ioseph is Elyes S. not expresly.
4. Ievves and Gentiles, that cam not to the story of the resurrection, shevving Christ to be the son of God, by the might that raised him, vvold haue made a scoff, to see the mother layd dovvne in the Genealogie. And so the holy Gh. pi^ying ma^^ vveakenes leaueth Mary for name, out: but in, by argument and sure collection; as thus: Iesus, Mary Ely. etc.
5. The vvhole number is disposed in order fit for memori^ Ten to the flod; ending the old vvorld; ten to Abraham heyr^ of the nevv vvorld* repeating him, tvvise seauen of most Godly fathers are to Dauid; Then his S. NATHAN, 1. Chr.
6. Beginneth a tvventy; vvho Liued priuate obscure men vnder the Kinges of Salomons house: vntil the captiuity of Babylon. Tvvo Liued in the captiuity. Salathiel and Zorobobel. He vvas governour vvhen the Ievves vvere sent home by Cyrus; vpon the Angel Gabriel his Message for redemption, and ending of Moses at 490 yeres. Rhesa beginneth, and out Lord endeth a nevv tvventy. Heathen in Eusebius making a Chronicle by ages vvold make but 400 yeres of 20. The Olympiq folovvers that vvold make 590 yeres; to disturbe Daniels*
 light to all the Bible, and our Lordes house, shevved smal iudgement; The tvventy from Rhesa to our L. vvill be heauenly Championes for salvation joyning vvith Daniel in their nu^ber; to kepe men from feining moo yeres then God reckoned.
7. When Ievves refuse the auctority of S. Luke; and all the Nevve Testament, they should be told that for ciuil recordes all nations vvold blame them. So for the 15 of Tiberius, vvhen Pilate vvas governour of Iudea, and Herod Tetrarch of Galily, and Philip his brother Tetrarch of ^turea, and Trachonis, and Lysanias Tetrarch of Abylene, vvhen Annas and Caiphas vvere high Sacrificers, for all those, civil recordes stand, knovven to many nationes; and one mans auctority is not considered in them. So for the familie of a King. Nationes nere Knevv it; and Theophilus vvold examine the matter yf doubt had bene: and Scribes S. Lukes foes had confuted him yf fault had bene; But none did; as none could. So vvhen S. Mathevv maketh Rachab wife to Salmon he speaketh according to Iewes ciuil recordes vvell knovven. And so vvhen S. Paul Sayth he vvas an Ebrevv continually by fathers and mothers, he knevv that other of Gamaliels scholers could examin that. So vvhen he calleth Andronicus and Iunias, and Herodion his consins, his Kinsemen, that vvere yet Pharisces, had reproved him yf he had lyed. So vvhen S. Luke Sodenly calleth Saul Paul, he had felt reprofe yf the matter had not bene vvel Knovven. As vvhen he telleth King Agrippa and Festus, hovv he vvas spoken to by Iesus our Lord: Saul, Saul, vvhy dost thou persecute me; Festus vvold not haue sayd, to him; thou are mad Paul; too much lerning maketh thee mad: yf he had not knovven that he had tvvo names. So vvhen Iohaiada, the father of Zacharie the martyr is called B^rachias, by the like notation, S. Mathevv knevv him self vvarrantedI^^ and Zach: one man in 2. names Math. 27. by many like examples; and vvhen Zacharie the auctour of the prophecie of Christ his exaltation; and of the King ^iding vpon an asse, and sold for 30 sicles, is called of him Ieremie the exalter of God, he had vvarrantes enough from old
 ages so to do. And for Genealogies knovven to heathen: Moses in Edoms story for the Kinges of Seir that reigned sucessours before he vvas King in Israel, vvas an ancient vvarrant to S. Luke. So vvhen S. Mathew maketh King Iechonias that died without issue, father in place of Kingdome to one of Salomons brother Nathan in very far descent, he knew that other Ievves foes to the Gospel vvho knevv the Kinges familie vvold herein mainteine him. So Hercules familie and Sparta^e Kinges; and Macedonian; and Cyrus the Persian, and his cosyns Kinges of Pontus, and Seleucidae and Lagidae, are famous in sundry Graecians; and none vvill deny any vvithout bringing better record: So Ievves should be required to bring other families of Zorobabel, yf they despise our Euangelistes: and vve should not suffer them to deny that, vvhich a Turk or any heathen vvold be ashamed to deny.
8. The names of our Lordes Line are evident to be sagely geuen; and in more vvise sort, then ever any feigner could think vpon. Many are from the Patriarkes; Ioseph cometh oftnest to shevv hovv Iudah honored the old Ioseph, vvho bare in his Beryll all tribes names: next Levi and Symeon and Iuda but once: But no name of inferior Patriark; no Ruben, no Isachar, no Zabulon, no Beniamin: the house vvold kepe the dignity.
9. Some in notation haue singular great vse, to shevv the ende of Salomons house; and the hope of Nathan, to come i^ lieu of it, as Melch-j the King is mine; Ner-j The light, Candle or King is mine. So they svvare; (2. sam. 21. 17.) to Dauid; Thou shalt go no more to vvar: for thou shalt not put out the Ner, light, or Candel of Israel. The holy and humble Dauid geveth God that name in his psalme, 2. Sam. 22. 29. For thou Eternal art my candle; and the Eternal vvill lighten my darkenesse. So Ner-j beareth a name for the throne of Dauid; that shall continue for euer.
10. Melch-j the King is myne, this name tendeth to the same mark plainly and properly shevving the belefe to Sophony.
 Dauid knevv from Moses, and by Spirit of prophecy, no lesse then Moses, that his house wold not be vpright with God. But one should rule man, perfectly iust: ruling in the feare of God. 2 Sa. 23. There, the lerned chaldy Ionathan, thus expoundeth Dauids vvordes. The mighty of Israel promised to place me a King vvhich is Christ, vvho shall rule in the feare of God. But Salomons house vvold be in many very bad; and as thornes to be thrust avvay; and to be brent in their place. Salomons brother Natha^, marked and vvold not neglect the spech of Dauid, against Salomons house: and the old Nathans prophecie concerninge the yonge Nathans Sonne; And the Ebrevv tongue shevveth in the names of Nathans posterity, their hope and expectation of great glory. Here Academiq studies come far short: bestovving many yeres in humane vvorkes; and takinge no time to the holy tongue; vvhich in the very names of stately personages conteyneth all the marrovv of the holy story. An for so much to knovv the simple vvordes, for termes touching man, in Adams tongue, one vveke vvith good direction vvold furnish any sage mind sufficiently. And all should geue so much honour to our redemer, as to serch to the bottome, all that could be serched for his fathers after the flesh. We may be sure that all the sage vvisdome that could be in names should appeare in his familie: to ordein strength out of the mouthes of Babes and sucklinges aginst the enemy; that vvold deny our Lords genelogie. The Ievves all, but the hand laborers, brought vp theirMaim^ny in Thalmud Thorah. children from seauen to fourtene, in lerning the plain tongue; and all their time, for some fevv hovvres vvekely; not minding gaines therby; but the delite to knovv God. And such haue bene to heathen the Salvation of our state. And assemblies of such sagely opening scripture vvold much edifie. And vvher the King is lerned, fevv yeres vvold frame vniversities to that course; to make thousandes of sound skill in the Bibles tongues and matter. So vve should mark vveighty matters closly contrined in fevv vvordes; and Sophonyes castinge off Salomons
 saing: This shall come to passe: In that day I vvill make a riddance of the Princes; and of the Kinges Sonnes. In the dayes of Iosias Sophonie spake this ch. 1. 8. Now the Sonnes of Iosias were Iohn, the first begoten in Kinges phrase: othervvise yonger then ^oakim tvvo yeres; but reigning first, he is first sonne of the Kindome. Next is Ioakim properly the Eldest: next Sedekias, who reigning after his brothers sonne, is called in Kinges phrase, Iechonias son. Novv of these Iohn or Ioachas was sone caryed to Egypt, and died in prison: vnlamented Ier 22. Ioakim vvas caried for Babel. 2. k. 25. and died by the vvay: and vvas cast avvay vnburied; to the buriall of an asse, as he brent Ieremies Lamentationes. Sedekias had in the ende his eyes pulled out; for rebellion against the King of Babel; and his children vvere Killed before his face: 2. k. 25. vvhen the high sacrificer Saraias father to Ezra vvas killed. That story of Saraias death-time vvill serve anone to great vse, for Dan. 9.
10 Of Iechonias God svvare that he should die, leaving no child alive behind him; vvherefore, it vvere flat Atheisme, to prate that he naturally became Father to Salathiel. Though S. Luke had never left vs Salathiels family Vp to Natha^ vvhole brother to Salomon; to shevv that Salatiel vvas of another familie; Gods oth should make vs beleeue that, vvithout any further recorde, Ier. 22. So God made a riddance of the Ammonean race of Iorams. And vve are closly vvarned of that in the names Ner-i and Melch-i, comparing them vvith Sophonies Prophecy, and the Kings story; shevving the truth of the Prophecie, That Nathan his house loked for the Eternal kingdomes prerogative. They vvho vvill nor build such Gold from the most kingly familie, had great neede of Colyrion to annointe their eies.
11 Of Salathiel vve must consider manie poincts, beginning in, Name. Samuel and Salathiel are both one; Anna the mother called his name Samuel, because of God Saalti, I have prayed to haue him. Novv Samuel vvas borne at the removing
 of the glory from Sylo and Ephraim of Iosephs house vnto Iuda our Lord his Tribe. So vvas Salathiel borne at the fall and end of Salomons race; and at the remouing of the glory vnto Nathan, that Nathan the Prophet might be called into mind for old Samuel, vvho taught of Christ his true kingdome.
12 Compare the contrarie Prophecies of Iechonias and Sal.

Prophecie of Iechonias.
As I live* saith the Eternal, yf Chonias the son of Ioakim King of Iudah, vvere a signet upon my right hand, I vvold pluck thee thence. O earth. earth, earth, heare the vvord of the Lord: vvrite ye this man Conias childles, a man that shal not prosper in all his dayes, for none shall grovv from his sede, to sit vpon the throne of David; or to beare rule anie more in Iuda. Thus all may see a plain end of Salomons house; and hovv dangerously those Doctors be deceaved, vvho bring Christ from Iechonias. They are litle better vvho take in hand to teach, and make not this plain to the simplest. The Bishop of our soules vvil hate such blind contemners.


Of Zorobabel, Agg. 2.
Thus Aggai sealeth his Prophecy; In that day, saith the Eternal of hostes, I vvill take thee Zorobabel son of Salathiel, and I vvill make thee as a signe^; for thee have I chosen, saith theAn heauenly translatio^ of the title Ps. 22. Eternal of hostes. This conclusion of Aggai, compared vvith Gods oth against Iechonias, should have stayed vs from conspiring vvith the dogges that despised Aieleth ha Sachar Ps. 22 The morning star, as our Lord Ap. 3. and 22. and kimchi there, translate the Ebr. He hath not yet davvned to such Doctors.


Of zacharie teaching hovv zorobabel cometh of Nathan, chap. 10. 12.
Thus zacharie joineth to Aggei; In that day the Land shall lament ech familie apart; the familie of David apart, and their vviues apart; the familie of the house of Nathan apart, and their vviues apart; the familie of the house of Levi apart, and their vvives apart; the familie of Semei apart, and their vvives apart.



The notation of Zorobabel.
Zorobabel his name conteineth the stately prophecy of Babels fall; vvher vvith Ieremy comforteth Iuda. ch. 51. 2. I will send against Babel, Zor-im; fanners, vvhich Zor o Babel. Mark here vvith-all hovv the golden head is fanned to chaff. And this much doth (...) Zorobabel conteine in name. And vvhen Babel the house of Nemrod and Cham vver fanned by Sem and Iapheth, then cometh an Angel to tell vvhen Christ the signet of God from Zorobabel should be sealed: that all men might reckon from yere to yere, hovv nere they came to the Kingdome.


of ther names notation.
As Zorobabel vvas also called Sa^betzar, glad in affliction; so his eldest son vvas called Mosollam: that is: he shalbe settled in Salem; as Naasson called Salmon in that sense, so he is called 1. chr. 3. and by an other notation, Abihu; Math. 1. The second sonne is called Ananias; in remembrance of Ananias the noble martyr, the glory of men; that quenched the fyer. He vvas fitly termed so; a father to Christ; that quencheth Hell fier from burning his servantes; The same man is called by an other name Rhesa, principal; being the second brother; Because he that is principall over all, shall come from him; and make the second brother principal to the first.


Names from famous ancient men.
The name of Nathan Dauids sonne might not be geuen to moo; as no^e but one vvas called Dauid, nor any in the right Li^e to Adam: to kepe the story from confusion. But the Like in notation are full many. Nathan is, HE (God) geveth and Mattatha, Matthat, Mattathias tvvise coming, and Matth* n Mat. 1. be all reme^brances of Nathan Dauids sonne; named after the prophet, vvhich promised Christ to Dauid. So they still knevv that Christ should come of them. So Ianna, short, or Ioanna longe, Iona^ as the lxx expresse Ebrevv, all be Iohn: by vvhich name Iohaiada the good high sacrificer vvas called. So the second
 Melchi, Amos and Nachum reuiue stories, and loke for Kingdome, strenght and comfort; So Elmodam reuiueth the story of Iockta^s Elmodad vvher to avoyd loth some doublyng of D. the one is changed. Iocktans house highly angred God; falling to Babels Idols after many from, Sem Arphaxad, Sela, and Eber, folovved the godly fathers. Therfore God scattered them further to fill east and vvest India. Yet Christ vvold once call all; and one of his fathers shevved that, in his name, from Iocktanes Eldest son Elmodad. Others haue religions foundation, as lose, all one to Iesus, a Saviour; Eliezer, God hath strengh, Iorim, and ^liakim God setteth vp. Her, the vigilant. These conteine the ground of religion; Others touched the lot of the particular familie; As Malea fulnes, Majnan, vvaters of encrease; vvhen Roboams house vvas decaying quickly. Some express the fathers confort in a sonne, as Chesly, my glory, Addy an ornament(...) and one remembrance of hard lot; Mahath, vexation. All be vvittely named; and our Lord Er the Aey vigilant, sayth; ye shall not seke me in vain. An idle syllable shall not be found in the names of Iesus his fathers. By these argumentes the vvicked Ievves that reiect the Kinges record knovven over nationes might be avvnsvveared and musselled.


Of Cainan, ioyned to Arphaxad; vvhich Cainan neuer vvas in the vvorld.
S. Luke shevveth to all lerned in tongues that he folovved the very syllables of publiq recordes: othervvise moo names from one Hebrevv as Ianna, Ioanna, and Ionan, he had expressed in one tenour. So he folovveth the lxx for Cainan, son, as it was supposed, to Aaphaxad. the lxx knevv that he never vvas in the vvorld; as nether Cainan the sixt son to Sem; Gen. 10. in the lxx; as they knevv that; Ioseph vvas father but to Manasses and Ephraim: vvhen Iacob came to Egypt; and not yet to the fiue added by them gen. 46 ch. vvhich make for Ebrevv lxx soules; in the lxx. they make 75. vvhich thing also S. Luke folovveth act. 7. I haue in my Consent shevved the reason. But here also
 it may fiitly be handled: yet a long discourse must come to open the vvhole nature of the matter.


Why the lxx hid their mind.
The lxx ij Ievves, six for every tribe are named, in shortnes lxx. vvhen Ptolemy Philadelphus ambitious of a great librarie sent to Iudah, to haue them bookes in Greke; so many transla^ters vvere sent to Egypt vvith the holy volume; vvhich they turned into Greke; but vvith exceding departing from the Ebrevv. And they caryed not vvith them the pomcted Bible, that they might more frely dally vvith the prophane heathen. One example may be in the yeres a thousand and many hundre the^ vvhich they feigned. Of that I haue vvritten at large to Melchisedeck. An other strange departing from Ebrevv appeareth in Gen. 4 to this Ebrevv vnpoincted:
Halo im tetib sheeth, ve im lo tetib le petach chatathrobets. or thus le patteach, chatatha; Rebatz.
Is ther not vpon vvell doing, recompence? and yf thou do not vvells syns pay is nere at the dore. Because heathen should not plead hense in heathen maner; Do vvell, and haue vvell, they adde vovvls thus; yf thou offre well, and devide not vvell, thou hast sinned; be quiet. And this mockage they thought fittest for heathen scorners of truth. This vvas the vvell doing, spoken by God; That Cain, yf he vvold come to God, must beleue that God is; and is a revvarder of them that seke him. But Lagidae and Chemmis land, vvold not sone conceaue this sense. Therfore he that sitteth in heauen vvold scorne them: and the Eternall vvold make a mock of them. For this rule was from the beginnig; Cast not pearles to hogges; nor holy thinges to dogges.
An other daliance vvas this: Deut. 32. when the only High scattered the sonnes of Adam, he settled the borders of nationes according to the number of the Angels of God. The Ebrew hath: According to the number of the sonnes of Israel. They savv vveighty cause of this dalliance; vvhich I haue printed in a dedication to my Grek translatio^ of the prophets dedicated
 to the B. of Mentz.
The 2. Psalme speaketh in this sort. Kisse the sonne lest he be angry; vvher is anger sone Kindled. Happy are all that trust in him. Flesh and blood could not open this vnto the vvorld, only the father which is in heauen should reveale it. How God so loued the world that he gaue his only begoten son, to the end that vvhsoeuer beleue on him should not perish but haue lift everlastinge. At this they would haue skoffed; as hovv often skoffed they the King of glory in the dayes of his flesh. Therfore the holy vvordes vvhich proprely say Kisse the Son, they turne craftily thus; Lay hould vpod dostrine lest. vvicked men should say: Dauid maketh him self the Son of God.
So they vvere in danger of more then skoffing, in a comon brag. Thus they triumphed: as yet recordes shevv in Zohar vpon exod; Col. 27. IACOB OVR father went to Egypt with LXX Soules: to recover the LXX families which cursed Cham bred by parted tongues for Babels Idolous tower. And the seauenty soules of Iacob match in valew all the families of the world; and he that will rule over them is as great a tyrant as an vsurper to reine ouer all the world. This bragge all Barbers and blear-eyed knevv; and yf they had not hid the trueth of lxx families Gen. 10. and somvvhat in Gen. xj. by tvvo feined Cainans, and by fiue Gen. 46. fiue then not borne, they had bene more in danger the^ vnder Aman; differing from all nationes in the feast of tabernacles; For that vvas their greatest open difference, as the Chaldy Esther toucheth. The lxx having thus dealed, and the Sanedrin or Synedrion having enacted a lavv that none should alter the lxx. Euseb praep. 8. S. Luke vvas to folovv the Greke; as a recorder; and not as a judge both in Cainan; and in soules 75. act. 7. And he vvrote not to Siculis and Consentinis; but to vvise men that had their eies in theri head. He vvho vpon act. 7. feigneth that some late man added fiue act. 7. and to the lxxij gen. 46. vvold make all the Christianes in the vvorld very simple; that could not espie that; but marre all copies; and Arabiq translationes.
 Moreover vvhat vvill he say to the old Greke Philo; Equallaged to S. Luke; handling Abrahams 75. yeres and Iacob 75. soules Gen. 46. and exod. 1. and again but 70 in Deut. 10. 22. He discanting after his maner telleth hovv in dalliance soules vvere 75. in trueth but lxx. That number of fiue then vnborne to Ioseph, I vvil not here declare vvhy to him more then to other enlargement vvas; and vvhy the number of fiue: my consent and aduertisement conferred may giue aduertisement. Further for Cainan one sayth he had a copy vvhich had not Caynan. I can vvell beleue it. For vvher the Apostles excede in vvisdome: as S. Mathevv in omitting hatefull Ioakim, some vvicked praesumptuous copier vvold nedes amend the text; to say for; Iosias begate Iechonias and his brethren; that is, Sedekias the vncle that reigned after him: Iosias begate Iakim: Iakim begate Iechonias and his brethren. Geneva printed this about 60 yeres; and vvith their folollovvers filled Europe vvith corrupt copies. Yet Beza revoked the vvicked copie; But vvho can revoke the milliones of the corrupted. The old consent of the Church hauing truth, should haue stood as vvell at the first as at the last: and a tovvne that feared God, should not brag hovv they giue the best Bible vvher they misse most deadly. And so vvhen they leaue out Cainan here Luc. 3. vvhen God set him in the text: pretending a vvarrant as praesumptuous that they savv a copy void of that Cainan* they should not be folovved in England. Morouver marke this; that Grekes in Eusebius make Abraham the tenth after Noe in story: though the 70 vvold make him the eleventh: and so Epiphanius maketh Iacob not the tvventy three, but after the Ebrevv the tvventy tvvo. And I had an Arabiq commen^arie vpon Genesis vvhich in dede folovved the lxx but vvith a note of misli king: But novv I haue not that. For one Mattathias Holmes caried my Arabiq bookes and Bibles Massorite, and greate Plantine and others the best in the vvorld all mine, to Ierne-land; and at his death told as M. Trauerse vvill testifie and others that they vvere
 mine, yet one that maryed his sister, dealt vvorse then any Turk; he sould them as his bookes of 100 lib sterling, lent of curtesie; vvithout any peny l^nt for pavvne: as, Middleburge knovveth. I humbly request the King to call him to accompts and all others to hould him as he deserueth for euer. Yf my ovvne book had bene left me, Canian from Arabia might be handled. And this much for S. Luke. Only one bad note of a Genevean calling the Gospell into doubt, I must touch. He vvriteth hovv he hath a copy venerandae vetustatis, vvher not S. Lukes men, but S. Mathevves be vp vnto Adam. He should haue brent, not sent to posterity that vvicked vvork. Some vvicked copier, that dreamed Ioseph his familie, to be handled in S. Luke, and knovving that Ioseph could not haue naturall fathers in severall families, thought good to frame a Gospell of his ovvne head: and to leaue out the most glorious familie in the vvorld. This rule the reader may take at my hand: That comonly the places in which the holy Apostles excell in Thalmudique or Attique Lerning, some rude copiers alter after their owne braine. But as any eares can discerne Cyclops Polyphemus Musike to come short of Aristoxenus: so any one Thalmudique and Attique vvhat the holy Apostles left, Rude copiers can never bring that vvhich hath rare vvisdome. So the copie of rare vvisdome must nedes be holden the copy of God: vvhen ther is difference betvvixt the barbarous and them. And the church in most Greke copies and old Arabiq, folovv the best. And none but voyd of iudgeme^t and vvicked vvranglers, vvill deny that both testamentes stand in the original sure enough for copy.


What vse the forged Canian hath.
The foolish of God is vviser then Men. The lxx departing from Ebrevv truth, because heathen vvold not suffer it, shevv for all Diuinity, hovv the natural man cannot abide it. Specially they shevved, that in the 75 soules and in Cainan. And that vvold our Lord teach Children in his ovvne familie; Bringing irony or mockage for a Cainan that never vvas in the vvorld.
 And by a man, that never vvas a man, teache wicked men, how they will become worse then nothinge: eternally miserable. So the forged Cainan hath great vse; and corrupt translations after corrupt copies should not be sold vnamended, after vvarninge: such as leaue out Cainan vvhom God left vs. And specially because Ievves in every corner be thornes in our sides, and prickes in our eyes, vve should loth help to them; as in vvicked blaming the most heauenly purenes of the Greke testament. And this much for our Lordes fathers set in S. Luke vnto Dauid. The notationes of all from Adam to Dauid conteyne the Abridgement of their story. But the vnebrevved vvold not sone conceaue them. All vvise studentes that take to Diuinity vvill lerne the holy tongue: and such, of them selues may sone see vvhat the names import. Novv Let vs look hovv S. Mathevv shevveth Messias to be man, Emmanuel, (as S. Luke) from Abraham to Dauid: and to be God in man: and King of the Ievves. These be the groundes of our faith: and our darkenes vvilbe exceding great, yf vve misse in these poinctes. S. Mathevves text shalbe first layd dovvne, vvith so much of the persones story as principally argueth doctrine for the Kingdome of the vvorld to come: and of right faith in them, as in vs novv. The fathers of our Lord the first fourtene should haue their story knovven among their spirituall sonnes, to beimitated of vs; and the Kinges should be knovven: to consider imperfectiones, arguing that Christ his Kingdome should not be as an earthly one. Novv the third rovv, vvill force vs to examine stately stories of their enemies destruction: and hovv they by Daniel seauens, did knovv vvhen. Christ vvold come into the vvorld; and there I must defend our church: and many others against betrayers of the truth vnto Ievves: vpon that occasion in sundry sortes. They notorioushy vexe vs for our Doctours Babyshnes for confunding our Lordes holy fathers, vvith Acabean Kinges of Roboams Ammonean ^ace; and for disagreing for redemption time; and for Daniels fourth Kingdome.




OF THE FATHERS CITED IN S. Mathevv his holy text.
A book of the Kindred of IESVS Christ: the sonne of Dauid: the sonne of Abraham. Abraham begate Isaac. Isaac begate Iacob. Iacob begate Iudas, and his brethren. Iudas begate Phares, and Zara, of Thamar. Phares begate Esrom. Esrom begate Aram. Aram begate Aminadab. Aminadab begate Naasson. Naasson begate Salmon. Salmon begate Booz of Rachab. Booz begate Obed of Ruth. Obed begate Iessaj. Iessaj begate Dauid the Kinge. Dauid the King begate Salomon, of her vvhich vvs Vriaes. Salomon begate Roboam. Roboam begate Abia. Abia begate Asa. Asa begate Iosaphat. Iosaphat begate Ioram. Ioram begate Ozias Ozias begate Ioatham. Ioatham begate Achaz. Achaz begate Ezechias. Ezechias begate Ma^nsses. Manasses begate Amon. Amon begate Iosias.
 Iosias begate Iechonias, and his brethren nere the captiuity of Babylon. After the captiuitie of Babylon Iechonias begate Salathiel. Salathiel begateas a King for a successour: as Baasa for Achab. 1. King 20. Zorobabel. Zorobabel begate Abihud. Abihud begate Eliakim. Eliakim begate Azor. Azor begate Sadok. Sadok begate Achim. Achim begate Elihud. Elihud begate Eleazar. Eleazar begate Matthan. Matthan begate Iacob. Iacob begate Ioseph the husband of Mary, of vvhich vvas begotten IESVS, vvhich is called Christ. So all the generations from Abraham to Dauid, are fourteene generations: And from Dauid vntill the captiuity of Babylon, fourteene generations: and after the captiuity of Babylon vntill Christ, fourteenegenerations. Novv the berth of Iesus Christ vvas thus. When his mother Marj vvas betrothed to Ioseph, before they came together, she vvas found vvith child of the holy Ghost. Novv Ioseph her husband being agratious man: and vnvvilling to make her cause seen, vvold haue put her avvay secretly. And as he vvas thus minded, Behold, the angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dreame sayng: Ioseph sonne of Dauid feare not to take Mary, thy vvife. For that vvhich is begoten in her is of the holy Ghost. For, she shall
 bear a sonne: and thou shalt call his name Iesus: because he shall saue his people from their sinnes. And all this came to passe to fullfill that vvhich vvas spoken of the Lord by Esaj the prophet, sayng. Behould a virgin shalbe vvith child, and shall beare a sonne, and his name shalbe called, Emmanuel, vvhich is by interpretation, God vvith vs. Then Ioseph avvaked out of slepe: and did as the Angel of the Lord commaunded him, and toke his vvife: but knevv her not, vntill she bare her sonne, the first-borne and called his name, IESVS.

Observationes.
This narration dependeth vpon the demaund of the Persian Philosophers, vvho by Daniels prophecy, ch. 9. came to Ierusalem, to seke the late borne King of the Ievves the most holy. Daniel the vvise, full of grace, vvold not misse to take order that his nation and Susan vvher is rombe vvas yet honored of Elam, should reckon most exactly yere by yere, vvhen the King of glory vvold make his covenant, vvith all nationes. And the half seauen, of teaching the Gospell, vvas made knovven; and thirty yeres for to be a father in nature, Solon the old and Hesiod noted in poetry; and Sala, Paleg, Saruch, our Lords fathers shevv it in practise, fathers at thirty. And for governement; Ioseph as King in Egypt at thirty; and Dauid King in dede at Hebron: and the lavv for the Levites to begin their office of sad or heay charge at thirty. So all the vvorld as the Philosophers of Susan might knovv in vvhat yere since Iudah came from Babel, Christ vvas to come into the vvorld.

And a comfortable light in the ayer appearing at Susan strange aboue the course of nature, could not but move the Persian lerned men, to knovv Gods counsel, to loke for the King, told off by holy Daniel, so longe before. For this cause the Persians Sages come to Ierusalem. But Herod better knevv the time, as the Sacrificers and the vvhole nation; of vvhom none brought exception that vvay; none of any striving against the truth, for other poinctes. But Herod mistoke the nature of the King; and knevv not that God vvas in Christ, reconciling the vvorld vnto him self. To teach Herod, and the Thalmudique and all the vvorld, vvhat kind of King Messias should be, S. Mathevv vvriteth this chapter; shevving fourtene, fathers after the flesh to the sonne Eternal; vvho savv his dayes afore and rejoyced; and although they vvere nor perfitect in doctrine seuerally from vs; yet heauen, the perfect blessing for the soule, they had vvhen they left this vvorld. All good men in priuate life; But the first King hardly saued him self; after he came to rest. Fourtene be of them: After them come fourtene Kinges: fathers for the Kingdome: but not natural fathers, to Christ all faulty, for governement, and many, greatly sinful; and not in Gods favour. So, S. Mathew doth teach such as knew the law, that Christ his Kingdome was not of this world. And he leaueth Salomons house: vvhose natural succession did end vvith Iechonias: and thence he cometh to Salathiel, of Nathan: and to zorob. vvho ar (...). And then he turneth aside to the Kinges line: vvher be ten. Mary and Iesus make vp the third fovvertene: and all be called in Daniel heyres of the Eternal Kingdome. Great matters depend vpon their story: vvherby allshould be considered severally; as they are severally set dovvne for that purpose. And the principal matters that touched their story, shall be handled vvith them.


Of the first fovvertene; and of Abraham severally.
Dauid the King is once named first, because Herod demaunded of the King; and to Dauid first, the Eternal Kingdome vvas
 promised. After a touch that vvay, Abraham is set fyrst and the rest in order to make fourtene; vvher the last is King.


Why Abraham geueth the beginning of the story.
The Land of Chanaan vvher the Kingdome should arise, vvas first promised to Abraha^: and Christ vvas promised to him first of any man in open distinct plain vvordes. And he is made father of the heathen; vvhich vvold folovv his beliefe; and the heathen might offer first frutes at Ierusalem; as Maimony noteth Bechor. Per. 4. So for Ievves and gentiles the beginning from him is very fit.


Of Abrahams glory.
Abraham is often commended vnto vs; vvhose commendation all his children by faith should gladly knovv and publish. He left the field of the Chaldeans being nere Babel, in the most propre Mesopotamia nere the meting of the tvvo rivers Tigris and Euphrates; and stayd at Charan till he make many Soules; and his father died there, aged 205. yeres. heauy by yeres, who toke his journey for Chanaan, and had not broken off, but by heauy yeres, and death: then was Abraham 75. by Moyses text: by S. stephans note vpon it; by the Greke Philo; whose (wordes I haue cited in the Concent in Latin:) and by sundry Ebrewes in Midras Rabba. And reason wold tell vs that Thara was dead before God promised Abraham that Christ should come of him: Otherwise as he took journey tovvard Chanaan; he had not stayd in Charan but by vveakenes.


An aunsvvear to M. Scaliger.
Because it is vvritten Thara liued seauenty yeres, and begate Abraham, Charan and Nachor, M. scaliger fighteth vehemently against Beroaldus and all that vvere afore of his mynd. And vvher he saith, still brethren be named in seniority; and for the obiection in Sem, Cham, and Iapheth; vvher Iapheth is eldest in the lxx he vvold haue Sem eldest, Cham next and Iapheth yongest, I aunsvvear; yf any vvil be contentions the church of God hath no such custome to S. stephen act. 7. he sayd: None yet
 vnderstood S. Luke. Then vvher is the fault in our vvit, or i^ his pen? And in Bathshebaes sonnes 1. Chr. 3. Salomon the Eldest is named last; and Nathan the second is named third. And Ioachaz the second sonne of Iosias both is named first, and called the first borne. And seing Ischa or Sara vvas Harans daughter and but ten yeres yonger then Abraham, the Babylonian Thalmud gathereth sensibly that Abraham vvas not the Eldest. So all the Eldest Ievves fight for S. stephen; and for S. Luke. And for S. Mathevv that Thara vvas dead before Abraham receaued the promisse. That still Abraham might be alone in the dignity of the promesse. So M. scaliger might haue spared disturbance of S. Mathevves begininge.


Of Abrahams Idolatry.
S. Paul calleth Abraham (...) as he vvas once Idolatrous; and such an one Philo and Rambam make him to haue bene; but by faith he vvas iustified. So S. Paul disputeth vpon him; against the Ievves thus; vvhat shall vve say then that Abraham our father found by the flesh? yf Abraham vvere iustefied by vvorkes he hath vvherin to reioyce. But he hath no vvorkes to reioice in before God For his request vnto Sara to hazard her Chastity vvas a fault; as Rabby Bechaia vpon gen. 15 doth make it, an egregious trespas, a gross fault, an exceding sin; bred fro^ great mistrust in God; and the cause of Israels sorovv and fall in Egypt. So he hath not to rejoice before God: Therfore he vvas not iustified by vvorkes before God. S. Iames dealing vvith Ievves vvho then, as novv, think theyr reverence to the lavv, and belief in the trueth of the story, iustifyes them, shevveth that they are deceaued. For Abraham and all Godly shevv good vvorkes, to tell others that they honour God; as Abraham did: in not sparing his Sonne. Novv, vvher as God sayd to Abraham; Because thou hast not spared thy only sonne; I svveare, I vvill multiply thy sede; The very Ievves in Midras Rabba shevv the meaning thus; by the similitude of a physician, vvho promiseth to heale a great man of a dangerous sicknes; and after his promess geueth
 a most bitter potion; vvhich the patient taketh boldly; and then the physician sayth; Because you haue so taken the drench; I vvill svvear I vvill heale you. Thus the party is confirmed; and not called to a nevv beginnig. So Abrahams manifestation of regeneration is re^ompensed, in a confirmation: not vvith the fountain of his iustification. And still the Prophetes require open iustice; and God punisheth every sin; but lesse, vpon charity; and in that sense charity covereth many sinnes. But the fountaine vvas Abraham beleued in God: and that vvas recokned to him for iustice; as Dauid sayth that they are happy vvhose sinnes are forgiuen. So Abraham vvas iustified by faith; beleving that Christ sbould come of him; and should be raised from the dead, as he knevv that yf he had killed Isaac God wold haue raised him again. So faith shalbe reckoned vnto vs for iustice; vvich beleue that God raised Iesus our Lord from the dead: vvho vvas killed for our sinnes: and raised for our iustification. These poinctes the Greke Crede handleth plainly; and the Greke fathers* and Porphyry and the oracles, that our Lordes soule vvent hence to heauen. And Ben Arama, vvho saith; Christianes beleue our Lordes soule vvent to Hell, doth the Gospell great iniury. Fot through infinite mention of death and resurrection, ther is never one syllable of going to Hell but in one oration in Iohn six times express mentio of going to the father. A vvise vvriter never repeates, but vvith some addition yf any can be. And seing the going of a iust soule to Hell, is more strange, then (...), the dvvelling of God in man; or resurrection; it had bene oftener handled in plain termes, yf it had bene true. One R. Man a Ievv obiected vnto me our Crede of going to Hell. I told him it vvas an heathen phrase; but meaned, as theyr Thalmudique to go to Parad^se; and So descending in Moses Iosue, Iudges, Ruth, and Kinges, is for (...) and so translated; and more then once translated (...) asce^ded. And (...) to go is translated Ascend and Descend and So (...) is vsed of passage; as from Nazareth to Capernaum
 ^aum in our Lord: and exceding often in the actes of the Apostles: and Hades, for Abraham, is heauen or Paradise. For as Britanie conteyneth tvvo partes, England and Scotland; So Haides conteyneth Heauen and Hell; and in Abraham set in the beginnig of the Nevv Testament, God vvold vse Haides Luc. 16 and tell expresly that God praepared Heauen to receaue Abraham the pilgrom and stranger, loking for the heauenly city. and hence the Ievves might haue lerned the meaning of our Crede: and for Paradise Luc. 23. the matter vvas plain; that our L. vvent thence thither. And no Ievves of Modesty vvold haue slaundered our Gospell to Mach mad: to forge beter Keys of Paradise. A pha^tastical Black smith, not a B^ssaleel he proued. Although this article should here be handled largely in Abraham the Patron of faith; yet I may be short: because L. Th. vvinton proveth against Geueveans by Iosephus, Ignatius, Iustin martyr, Eusebius, Athanasius, (in his sermon) Cyrillus, Epiphanius, Nazianzen, That Haides or Ca^achthonia to Godly, is heauen; and he fortifieth Geneveans faith; that by Grek our Lord vvent hence to Paradise; and iustly reiecteth Hell grefe from (...), as hated of Bible, Rabbines vpon Ebrevv, and Attiques vpon the Gospell. I shevved in six Greke vvorkes left in Germanie hovv lernedly the R. R. F. healed the Geneveans disease; vvho denyed a going to Haides vvher Abraham is; Luc. 16. and all faithfull soules, to crosse theyr ovvne faith: and deny soules immortality: and vvold haue all heathean, enemies for f^endes; and all Greke fathers, enemies, for frendes offering help. In that lerned paines, fortifying Geneva, L. W. doeth confute DD. B. and B. Purgatorie and Limbum. And vvith Abrahams story Children learne Abrahams religion; for the trinity, Incarnation, and resurrection; and Paradise hence receauing the faithfull, as hoat fyer, the vvicked; and not to be vvaving vvith every vvind of Hellish Diuinity. The notation of Abraham is an high father of many nationes handled Rom. 4. from Genesis Ch. 17.



Of Isaac.
Abraham after the flesh begate Ismael: vvhence came the vncleane spirit of Machmad, and that nation the poyson of the vvorld. Yet Isaac, though conceaued in sin, as others, vvas quickened vvith Christ: and raised, and placed in heauen vvith him; vvho being vvilling to die, knevv that he should be raised vp again; Faith vvas in him the stay of thinges hoped for; and tryer out of thinges not sene. In Isaac shall Abrahams sede be called. But Esavv of Isaac cast off God; a profane man: vvho sold his birthright for a mess of Pottage. Isaaks name is laughter; or gladnes; the Ioy of the vvorld. Iacob in name is a supplanter; as Esavv complaineth, he tvvise supplanted him Gen. 28. He shevved most plainly his hope for riches, in Christ his Kingdom; vvhen he requested no more but diet and clothing gen. 28. Iob and Paul teach all to folovv him Iob. 3. 1. Tim. 6. Yea and this Epigramme diuine from one prophane.

(...).
(...).
Naked came I vnto the vvorld, and naked go I into the earth; and vvhat labour I in vaine; seing a naked ^nd.

Iacob savv a lather, reaching from the earth to heauen; and God vvas in the top of it; and Angels ascended and descended by it. He knevv that Christ vvas the Sonne of God; and that Angels should ascend and descend vpon the sonne of man; yf Herod had knovven so much, he had not sought to kill the lateborne King of the Ievves. The Trinity Iacob knevv; and nameth one and the same Angel that vvrestled vvith him, the Angel that vvold bless Ioseph; and the God of Bethel. And he taught his tvvelue Sonnes not to say: vvho can go vp to heauen to bring Christ dovvne? or vvho can go dovvne into the depe of the earth, to bring Christ from the dead; but to beleue that the God of Bethel vvold come man of him, and of Iuda: and that (...) as S. Paul Rom. 4. translateth Es. 53 after the 70 vvold
 pour his soule to death; and be recovered from death; as Isaac in type; and go from the cross to the father; and that all the faithfull should so do; as the nevv Testament teacheth continually; That Isaac Ben Arama after old Siphri might be ashamed to say our Gospel beleued that ether the Prophets or old iust, or our Lord euer vvent to Hell. The Church never beleued that; But the Deuels here triumph over such teachers. God left his vvord sure: and teacheth nothing in corners. And they are gods hated for Lerning that dreame of proving rules of faith from corners. The Patriarches rested in the incarnatio^ and resurrectio^. And our Crede Goeth no further for (...) is any passage, vp, dovvn; Ether term is co^mon for journeys in al autours and all Kind of vvriters speak so; and Haides most be told incessantly to Babes that it is heauen in the light part for the Godly; as in the dark part hell for the vvicked. The dull and vnthankfull vvightes that raue against this, shall see Isaak and Iacob in Abrahams bosom in Haides; but in their course they hast vp to Gehennia.


Of Iudah and his brethren.
The tvvelue Patriarkes might haue taught Herod of what nature the Kingdome of Christ vvas. Ruben savv nothing here but Sorovv. Yet he liueth Eternally and passed from death to life; Symeon and Levy heard of a curse vpon their trespas; Iudahs confession of fault by sham^ found glory: that none but such a Iudah shall haue praise of God; and as Iohn the fourth vvas dearest to Christ, so he to Iacob most glorious. All the rest had theyr sorovves for Ioseph; vvhen some sayd, come let vs kill him; as the Scribes, of Christ; and Beniamin became Ben-ony a sonne of Sorovv: For losse of his brother; and printed his sorovv in his sonnes name: in Ros and Bicrj, Gall and biternes haue I for my Elder brother and Iosep vvas among his brethren sold for Sicles by Iudas aduise to saue his life: bus Christ by Iudas to losse of life: Ioseph in durance betvvixt tvvo, told the one of salvation, the other of death: so Christ told the one in durance
 with him, that on the right hand, of ioy: and left the railer to perish with the scribes: and the other rauers: that set their mouth against heauen. Briefly all the Patriarkes were bishops for their families: (...) vsing all care to teach theyrs fro^ their fathers spech what Sem or Melchi-sedek lerned of Mathusala taught of Adam, of the holy trinity: and hovv Christ by death should vanquish him that had the power of death. They wold not misse to Catechize their sonnes in these poinctes: and how our Lord should come of Iuda: the king of glory, the eternal, the framer of the world, of that poor shepheard, to be a man: to haue his tabernakel in vs; to loke throvv the vvindowes within our wall. They did fede vpon his flesh and blood, comforted in sorow by this hope. As Ioseph gaue (...) to fede his brethren. So all good Math. 25. giue (...) to fede theyr families soules. In one vvord (...) never vsed afore but in Ioseph vvith the 70. our Lord his gracious tongue calleth vs to the Patriarkes story: to look to heauen, not vnto Thalmudiques Kingdome in the earth that God cursed. S. Mathevv requireth so much to be consydered in these Patriarkes; to marke by induction through them all, the nature of the Kingdome of heauen. And for that vse they are so particularly set dovvne. Othervvise their pedegree vvas vvel knovven from other places. But Christ vvold haue vs to mark that these vvere the sonnes of Adam in vvhom the Eternall vvisdome delited.


Of Phares
Midras Rabba noteh vpon Genesis, hovv God playd delitefully vvith these sonnes of Adam. Iacob vvas busied in mourning for Ioseph, as being dead; Ioseph vvas busied in his afflictiones, the other Patriarches vvere busied in theyr mariages, and the blessed God vvas in disposing counsel hovv Messias should come of Thamar; of Thamar, a Chananean: of Thamar, Iudas daughter in lavv: of Thamar, by Iudah. Again Phares striving to be borne before Zara, (vvho first stredched out his hand) hath his name of violence, shevving at his byrth that he
 vvold lay strong hand vpon the Kindome of heauen; and is a patren for all, as Iacob, to striue for the Kingdome from yong yeres.


Of Ezron.
Fzron is by interpretation the midde of Ioy; as Eron vvas borne at Iacobs going to Egypt; 215 after the promess and 215. before the Pascha. Iacob knevv that yeres 400 from Isaacs affliction vvhich vvas thirty after the promesse, Abrahams sede should come from Egypt; and the promesse vvas 30 afore the affliction, vvhen Isaac entred six yeres and 55 after, Iacob is borne; vvhen Isaac is 60. and at 130 he goeth into Egypt so 215 vvere spe^t in Chanaa^; and Ezron vvas borne at the middle of their hope The notation of his name vvold haue lightened their darkenes vvho thought that the dvvelling of Israel vvhile they dvvelt in Fgypt, vvas 430. yeres. The meaning of the Ebrevv text is open in my concent and aduertisemen to; they that vvill, may fetch it thence. Wher I brought demonstration that Mose^ should be dead forty before the lavv, by Genebrard: vvho vvold haue Israel 430 yeres in Egypt. And I cited old Rabbines moo^ then one, for 215 and 215. as in my Ebrevv vvorke dedicated to Prince Maurice. That also I turned into Latin.


Of Aram And Aminadab.
The immortality of the soule vvas taught by Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, by spech of their peregrination; shevving hovv they vvere strangers in Chanaan; and loked for an heauenly countrey. So Ioseph, svvearing his brethren to bring his bones from Egypt, shevved that he folovved Abrahams hope. And Genesis ending in Iosephs bones calleth all myndes to Ezekiels valley of bones, and to the generall resurrection. So Aram and Aminadab in theyr notation, teach the soules eternall happines; Aram is high, as Israel base in Egypt, vvas high in hope of heauen. So Ammi My People Nadab is noble, loketh to the nobilitie of the fathers from Adam to Noe; vvherin all faithfull are tvvise noble. Diodorus Siculus commendeth Egyptianes
 for their resolute opinion that Soules in (...) had florishing soiles for the Godly; and a prison for the God lesse. And Homer the Eldest, and Plato, and troupes, Elder and later Grekes, are truely reported; to haue lerned that, from Egypt. Novv from Israel did the Egyptianes lerne the same. As our Lerned, Clemens, Eusebuis, Theodoret, and vvho not, a^^ taught. And from the dayes of Aram and Aminadab, the high and noble in Christ did the Egyptianes lerne, that, (...) as Plato sayth. The soule aeides vnsene, goeth to the Aides, a place noble and pure and vnsene, vvith good iourney, to the good and vvise God. Novv the proud heathen trimmed them selfs vvith the ostriches of Israel, all in mynd as Aram and Aminadab in name. So vvhen the Romanes florished in lerning their best from Tully dovvne 300 yeres shevved small resolution for Soules immortality: vntill Christianes in our Symbolon or note of faith taught the true foundation of a sound common vveael; That the iust crucifyed to death vvent to the father, by the holy phrase: to Haides by the heathen; vvher Abrahams bosome receaued the faithfull. Abrahams bosome in Haides, as Iosephus or Ireneus, or Iustine Martyr, or Lerned Caius teach. For the vvork is fathered vpon all these. Iohn of Zorobabel and other poor taught Luke of Anti^ch and Theophilus the Soules immortallitye. And the Deuels at the last could not retaine theyr auctority for vvisdome but by the same philosophie. Porphyry a frend of the Ievves, and ioyning vvith Iosephus for Haides to be the heauen for the godly: and not ignora^t vvhat our Crede spake, and as good a Grecian as euer could be, and vvith the Deuels an enemy to the resurrection of Christ, yet recorded from oracles that Christ vvent hence to heauen. His vvordes are vvorthey to be cited Thus the oracle speaketh of Christ: Euseb. Ap. 3.

(...)
(...)
(...).


 That mans soule in Godlines passeth all soules; and the soule of the Godly goeth to the rest of Heaven.
In that place of Porphyrie Christ is called of the enemy Porphyrie, (...), Godly and a dvveller in the arches of Heaven. But he said Christianes vvere mad that held him a God: for he knevv not that God vvas in Christ.
And yf he had not knovven full vvell, that Plato vvold have made him ashamed, yf he had denyed, (...) in the Godly, and (...) to be a most happy passage to Heave^, he vvold not spared vvrangling vvith Christianes, yf they had taken that article in anie other sence, then this absolute meaning, that all just goe hence to Heaven. In Cant. 6. 12, My soule hath set me in the chariotes of Ammi Nadib, my people the noble; So all Godly be Aminadab, as the laten tra^slation speaketh; because they teach Egyptianes, that the faithfull in Haides, be in Abrahams bosome.


Of Naasson.
Naasson hath a badge of faith in his name; that he should have EXPERIENCE hovv Israel should come from Egypte. So they loked to the very yeare vvhen their deliverance should be. As since Babel fell, they reckoned yere by yere, hovv nere they came to the kingdome of Christ. And vve should not be as Parrets, to regard the bare sond of name, but to knovv vvhat the notation told.


Of Salmon.
Salmon shevveth in his name that he should come into the rest of Chanaan. Naasson died in the vvildernes. But had great glory in the offringes: appointed first, as father of Christ. To Salmon Rachab vvas maried; vvho had greater faith then sixhundred thousand of Israel; for she beleued that God vvold giue Israel the La^d of Chanaan. S. Mathevv citeth for Rachab
 priuate recordes; as S. Paul had for him self vp to Beniamin.


Of Booz.
Booz cometh next; hauing a name fit for one that vvold be a piller in the hovvse of God. By it Salomo^ termeth one of the tvvo pillers; Boos, vvith strength, Iachin, he vvill settle. Ruth vvas maried to him, aged as an Abraham: and in Ruth leauing countrey, Kinsfolk and fathers house, lot is reuiued, vvho folovving Abraham out of countrey, Kinsfolk, and fathers house vvas felovv in the blessinge: by Ruth that did the like.


Of Obed.
Of Booz and Ruth cometh Obed, (...) a stay in old yeres, to Boos.


Of Iessaj.
Of Obed cometh Iessaj. His name is substanciall; and is honerably mentioned a father of Christ; the root of Iessaj. He had many valiant sonnes; and again Seruiah his daughter had valiant sonnes; as Ioab and Asael.


Of Dauid.
Novv Dauid is one most glorious. The letters of his make, Christ his name; BELOVED through Salomons songes. To him Christ is promised vvith an Eternall throne. That is; in the vvorld to come. 1. Chr. 17. He, vvhile he vvas afflicted, vvas godly; at rest, he fell; in Vriah, and Bathseba; To be an example for all that shall beleue. And this much for the natural fathers of Christ; al, teachers in theyr cariage, of the Kingdome of heauen. And Bathseba the adulteress* rarely Godly in the end, is a grandmother of Christ; celebrated in the psalme of repertance. 51. and pro. 31 and all prophetes are in the King^^me of heauen. Lu. 13.


Of the Kinges that vvere not fathers to Christ.
Salomon and his brother Nathan vvere sonnes of Dauid, by Bathsheba; But knovvledge of the holy trinity, and of Christ his incarnation and resurrection made them the best soules. And
 all vvho blame them for sodain in^^mities, and commend the^ not for their heauenly vertues, shall not be of Christ his brethren. Salomo^ glorifyed God in his infirnite vvisdome; compa^ing thinges visible to shevv the vnvisible of God; his eternall povver and God head; and speketh of the Eternall sonne Prov* ^. hovv his delite is in the holy sonnes of Adam: as he governeth his peoples state in a most pleasant frame: that the blindest may see a clear provocation of all to salvation. His grea^ povver, and building of tovvnes* suffred not his hart to rest i^ the night; and his vvomen only overravvght him: to suffre, and by his charges to build, Idole places; vvher upon he savv that Gods threat vvold overthrovv his Kingdome; and before, he knevv from Moyses, Deut. 28. that the Kingdome should be overthrovven; and that in a stra^ge countrey Iuda vvold pray looking tovvard the temple Leu. 16. 1 k. 8. and God vvold hea^^ them. And vvhen by his practise suffring Idolatry, he occasioned the renting of his Kingdome; and foresavv destruction ^f temple, city, comon vveale he vvriteth his Gospell, That al^ vnder the sonne is vain, and the Kingdome of Christ is not of this vvorld; but the promesse of the Eternall throne to Dauid, vvas for the vvorld to come, that vve, should loke for the la^^ iudgement. Herod should most carefully haue lerned this much; vvhen he first lerned the story of Salomon. vvho vvas the first and last that had all this vvorld at vvill; to shevv that Christ his Kingdome is not of this vvorld. And yet this day the Ievves look for a pompous Kingdome; as I haue layd dovvne theyr vvordes, in Ebrevv and English, to Ecclesiastes* And Salomons case alone might haue taught Herod, Pilate, Cesars and concision that the Pompe of this vvorld is not fit to brede povertie in spirite; to brede morning, to brede mekenes, to brede hunger and thirst for iustice, to find the Kingdome of heauen vvhen the vvhole fovvertene pilgromes in this vvorld folovving heauen in a quiet priuate hope could not move Herod,
 all being our Lordes fathers, and all best* in pri^a^e state, the first turning aside fro^ his liue noble in the vanity of this world, and leauing no hope for others to com nere, should haue vvarned that 'the King eternall vnvisible blesseth men only to his vnvisible Kingdome that is not of this vvorlds. So Herod had not Killed the yong children; nor had come to such an horrible death as Iosephus recorded, to haue shevved an entrance to his Eternal flames: because he vvold knovv vvhat the Angel and Daniel taught the Persian sages for the Kindome of Christ.


Of Roboam.
Roboam being forty vvhen his father vvas fifty tvvo; as Ievves vniversally and old Grekes from them do gather his whole life, might vvell be knovven of Salomon, and touched in Kohe^^th or ecclesiastes vvhether he vvold be a vviseman or a foole. A foole he sone proved: and could not rule that vvhich his fathers gate and mainteyned by greate care. And his mother Namah the Ammonite vvas not like Ruth the Moabite. And vve should not hope for both Lots daughters to be rare; vvithout speciall vvarning from God. Novv Roboam vvas vexed by vvar from Ieroboam all his time; and left for Herod a vvarning that Christ his Kingdome should not be like his; and that the sages of Persia came not by Daniels Chronicle to look for such ^ Kinge. Abia his sonne is vvell coupled vvith him, to giue vvarning of the same.


Of Abia
Abia vvalked in all the vvayes of Roboam: a second vvarning to Herod that Salomons house vvold not be vpright vvith God.


Of Asa Iosaphat and the rest
Asa good, yet imprisoned the Prophet, a Pope father or Bishop from God; as yf he had imprisoned Christ him self. Iosaphat a good King made bad affinity vvith Achabs house that Ioram should mary Achabs Daughter. Iezabels also she might vvell be. Athalia is the vvoman. Another Iezabel. Hence Ioram
 killeth his brethren his ovvne bovvelles: and his Moth^^ Iezabel, as vvell she might be, killed the prophetes; and the lo^^ some muckhil, that her name soundeth, dreamed to kill the ho^ses and chariot of Israel: Elias the nevv Enoch. Then folovv exemples for Herode; to knovv matters to come, by former notoriours. Tvvo and forty yeres Omries house vvas a plage to Israel; and ochozias King of Iuda aged 22. vvhen his father died at forty, in the first yere of his regne, fell by partaking vvith Omries house against Iehu, fell to be Ben, in the giltines of the forty and tvvo yeres. Esra cunning in Ebrevv, vvhen he penned the Chronicles, littel thought that men vvold be so barbarous as to make him aged 42. and tvvo yeres Elder then his father, vvhom the propre story of the Kinges vvritten by Ieremy, made aged 22. for the same yere. Ezra a repeaters, pennyng the story eloque^tly, of one caught in the giltines of the familie so long vvicked and caught in theyr sin; in the tvvo and fortieth yere. The spirite vvhich beautified the heauens, vvold haue the story beautified vvith Eloquent Ebrevv, that they should be Barbarous that vvold not mark this to the bottom. Novv Herod might see in Athalia fit Motherhood for Antipaters sonne. Such a vvife vvas fit to be Herodes mother. and Herod might knovv by her end vvhat his ovvne vvold be. And any might see that a Kingdom geuen ouer by God to the svvord of Athalia, vvas not of that throne vvhich God promised to Dauid to stand for euer. Athalia Destroyed all the sede of Roboams mother the ammonitilh, that might be Kinge^ for her children by a former Husband; except Ioas vvhom his aunt saued, being an yere old Who is called of God six time^ at the lest for propriety sonne to ochozias; a miserable so^ to a miserable father. Ioas the Cain killed the Prophet zacharie that prophecied of Christ his Kingdome: killed him, betvvi^^ the alter and the temple; vvher none but sacrificers might come; The vvight most vnthankfull, and Gods hated killed him vvho s^ father by his vvife saued his life. Herod might see and the Pharisees
 might see them selues the sonnes of this Cain Ioas; vvhen they vvold shed blood speaking more forcible then Abels.

Touching a forged Table, pretending to reconcile S. Mat. and S. Luke, bringing Ioas and all after him to be holy-Fathers and our Lordes (...); attributing folly vnto the Eternal wisdome of God, to bring the most holy, of the most wicked: I gave advertisement, and as I here, through Britany, it is wel taken. Other countreys also have it: I wold wish them also to marke these short speaches.

They, vvho vuold make the Apostles to teach all Thalmudistes, that they sinned, holding Ioas and all after him, to be of Salomon; and not to be holy men in S. Luke, termed by other names; passe Machmad infinitely in all extremity of impudenty: and Lucian the Dog vvold say, the vvheston vvas vvonne from his true story; by them vvho vuold feigne tvvelue men together, to be Kinges of tvvo names; and the one kind neuer ^eard by the learned of that nation. I hope D. B. vvil hold this true at the last: and vvho could euer haue thought, that reasonnable vvightes vvold euer print or buy such a Table. And the miserie of the familie, might teach Herod, that Christs his Kingdome vuas not like theyrs. Wher Ochosias, Ioas, Amasi as, vvere all three sent up to Haides by bloody death, to give acompt before Cods Throne, of theyr Sceptre; and the pleading ther at judgement vuold be as tolerable for the Kinges of Acab by father, as for them, thence by mother; and S. Mat. leaueth them out, as a shame to be named in Salomons hovvse; and unvvorthy of reckoning in the Nevv Testament. And here he teacheth Herod and all, by silence, more then any by anie cries, that none heauenly mynded, vuold bring Christ the King ^ro^ such, or from such a Kingdome, since Dauid vvrote; Thy Throne, o God, is for ever and ever: the Sceptre of thy Kingdome, is a Sceptre of righteousnes: thou lovest iustice, and hatest sin. Therfore it is
 most evident, that God thy God hath annointed thee with ^yle of gladnes above thy felowes. Yet in the sixt generation from Acab the vvicked, King Azarias found mercy; aged 4 yeres vvhe^ his Father vvas kild; and vvas ruled by the Councell, about 12 yeres; and so somvvhat better brought up, then yf he had bene ruled by his Father. Yet he dyed in a Leprosie, for offring in the Sacrificers office, in Christ his Kingdome; in vvhich office Sem the great by the name of Melchisedek, vvas described a Sacrificer in phrase still abiding, as still alive. Azarias should have lerned that of his Father David; and that none of Iuda vverto come nere the altar. By Lavv death vvas the payment for the action: for endeuour a Leprosie brake out in his forehead: vnto his death shut up from comon companie. And by this punishment of Salomons hovvse, Thalmudiques should have lerned, that Christ should be a King in an higher person and office; as the Eternal, the brightness of glory; having all the nature of God in him; vvho carieth about all thinges by his mighty vvord* and by himself performing a clensing ransome of our sinnes, should sit on the right hand of God. Vnto such a King Herod and the Scribes might hav looked, and to an Eternal thro^ for the^selues. And in this age God shevved a shaking of Salomo^s house. In the yere that Vzias died, the glorie of Christ filled the te^ple, vvith a smoke of anger; and the posts of it trembled by the terrible earthquake, mentioned by Zacharie; at vvhich the people fled. Then Esay seeth Seraphin in the te^ple; Angels representing the Chaldeans vvhic shall burne the temple; and i^ taught of ten calamities to come afor the last destructio^; vvhich I haue ordered in tables in my Concent. These terrours made Ioatham a good King: but Achaz vvold not beleue, as did Eue, that the Sonne of God vvold be a man of a virgin. He had be^ vvel plagued by Pekath; and his childre^ vver kiled by the Arabianes. Ezchias vvas a good King; but after deliuerance from Sanacherib famous in Herodotus, he shevved the Chaldean his vvelth; as hauing some trust in it; and is told that his posteritie
 (by daughters) shal serue in Babels court. Manasses that savved Esay, savv all sin and slauerie; Amon vvas sone killed; holy Iosias, for vvicked subjectes vvas killed: Ioachas died in prison: Ioakim vvas captiued* and cast avvaie unburied; Iechonias vvas kept. yeres 37 in closse prison. Sedekias eies vvere polled out. And his children vvere killed; and the state felt Ieremies Lame^^ations. And novv let us come to the third fovvertene.


Who made the third fowrtene;
These be the third 14; Salathiel; Zorobabel, Abihud, Eliakim, Azor, Sadok, Achim, Elihud, Eleazar, Matthan, Iacob, Ioseph, Mary, IESVS* These be called the holy of the most high Trinitie. Dan. 7 The Chaldean golden head vvas beaten to dust, the tree had the axe set to the root, the Lion vvas cast into fyre, for afflicting these. So vvere used the armes and brest of siluer, the Beare in the trobled sea, the Ram, of Madai and Pares; for not tendering this familie; so the Grecianes vvhole in Alexa^der and his sonnes; sone rooted out* came to nothing, for Tyrannie ouer the nation vvher these should have bene honored. So the P^olemies in Egypt, the south to Iudea, and Seleucidae of Assyria north, both chalenging Iudah, and fighting stil vvith duble campes in Iuda, so wasting it, perished for injuries unto these. These Grekes whole and parted wereall the Image after the brest and armes. The Leopard and the fourth beast, and the whole Buck. And seaven times be every one of these set furth in the Prophecy of Daniel. The gracious Prophet so describing the afflictions of the third fourtene. And Iesus in Daniel cha. 2. is the stone which beateth the great image into dust, one like the Sonne of God. Chap. 3 one like the Sonne of man coming in the cloudes: chap. 7. Messias, or Christ, the holiness of all holiness. Chap. 9 Michael chap. 10 and 12. And the holy Prophet D. should be co^pared with this last 14: touching, Herod Ievves and Cesars, that the Kingd. of Chr. is not of this world.
 And the vvhole booke which I Ebrevved for Ievves, goeth upon the house of David, and chiefly toucheth these last fourtene; and may profitably be joined to the Commentarie upon the Parcels of these tvuo Euangelistes. And this much for them; profitable, as I deme, for all studie touching our Lords Familie. Certen further helpes shalbe added as tyme serueth. But thus endeth the explicationes of both Euangelistes, fo^ our Lordes Fathers and Predecessours in right of Kingdome.
(...)


Positiones explicative of matter tow ched brieflie, and first against the slander of Isaak Ben Arama; sayng untrulie, That our Gospell teacheth that the Patriarkes had no^ the perfection of ioy; but were in Hell, and that Christ went thither to redeeme them. Thus he writeth vpon Levit. 26. fol. 205 of the Venice Edition.
The first occasion of the Iewes fall; and the harme that cometh by it;
SAINT Paul speaking of the old faithfull, hath ben mistake^ of Christianes, some, for these vvordes; ch. XI. V. last. All these, glorious by faith, receaved not the promess: God providing somwhat better for us: that they should not have the f^lnes without us. It is euident through the vvhole Epistle, that the Apostle disputeth on this; That the Fathers vvere taught
 in the old time, of Christ by the Prophetes; in sundrie maners; but at the fulnes of time, he spake by the Son, that God made him Heyre of all; by vvhom he made the v^orldes. But some Christianes thought he spake not of doctrine; but of joy to the Faithfull soules gone hence; that the old Faithfull had not the joyes of Heauen at the first. Vpon that, the Ievves inferre that vve taught the Patriarkes vvent to Hell* Yf they vvent not to Heauen. And that could not be true, that Abraham and Moyses, so familier vvith God in hovvses of klay, should not haue grerter familiaritie after their soules vvere freed from the corrupt bodie. This errour of Chrysostomes upon* Heb. XI. the Ievves uexed.
Euer since Chrysostome uexed them for Dan. 12; and limited times for affliction under Antiochus; and limited for yeres 400. Gen. 15; and yeres 70 under Babel; and so 490; Dan. 9. under Heathen. So that God had limited time of hope. Ben Arama cited an old vvork named Siphry; vvho uexeth us novv a thousand yeres; whence Machmad might feyn righter keyes of Paradise; and strenghten Arrianisme: as Arius, in Athanasius; that yf Christ vvent to Haides, He had not the highest joy. And thus Ievves help Machmad, by mistakers of S. Paul*


the 2* occasion:
To this day the Ievves continue the slaunder by the Crede; ill translated through all nationes; and badly expounded to disturbance of all Faith. To aunsvver them vve must shevv that by the Nevv Testament, our Lord and all just vvent hence to Paradise; as the Church did alvvayes expound the scripture; and the Crede.


the Church of Englands faith:
First England shalbe cleared, vvhich allovveth and comma^deth
 the R. R. F. Th. Bilsom Bishop for his sermon: wher he handleth scripture and Fathers: and proveth by both, that our L. went hence to the high joy.


D. Bilsons profe by scripture from his sermon fol: 219
We haue no warrant in the vvord of God to fasten Christs soule to Hel, for the time of his death, that he vvent not hence to Paradise to the unspeakeable joy of the Faithfull: Thus the R. R. F. co^mended for one of the best of England; shevveth that all auctoritie vvil, that all faithfull vve^t hence to Paradise* And yf anie Ievv say, Engla^d holdeth faith vvithout scripture* Nabal is his name, and Nab^la his fame for folly haunts him* and for a foole vve vvill taunt him:


An other vnuincible profe brought on from Luc 16, for the terme Haides, which in Abrahams and Eleazars ioy, is a feasting
Thus from D. Bilsons vvordes a full syllogisme may be framed: of truth unvincible;

Yf our Gospel place Abraham in Haides in joy, as th^ vvicked in torment, Haides must conteine Paradise for Abraham, as Gehenna for the vvicked.
Novv, as Iosephus, so S. Luke, makes Abraham boso^ in Haides: and the place of torment: on high both; a^ all Ievves confession in Cether Malcuth fol. XI
Therefore D. Bilson proueth Ben Arama to be a sla^derer; and himself a R, R, F.


A second syllogisme often printed, breaking all Europe. a work of Iohn Cant. and Th. Winton.

The place vvhich receaued our L: soule vvas Haides of the Crede, Ioh; Cant; and all Grekes:
Paradise receaved our L; soule, Th; winton, Lavv, and Gospell, and the old Grekes and late reformed Churches.

Therfore blasphemous Ievves may see they slaunder us; and vve conclude plainlie, the sound in Divinitie and tongues as the BB. and Nobles of England, BB. in their place by the scripture tongue, vve conclude, that Paradise is the Haides of the crede; and Ben Arama slaundereth, teaching that the Christian church ever beleved our Lord vvent to Gehe^na. Never vvent he saith the Church, so beleved vve, that he neuer vvent; but vvent to Paradise. And thus our R. R. FF hau made a syllogisme of high esteeme: that moved all Christendom to yeld vnto them The rarest in Fraunce, novv ten full yeres since L; W: made Paules tremble at his syllogisme, honour and celebrate this conclusion; That the barbarous translation, to descend to Hell meaneth in learned spech, fitted unto the most eloquent Greke of the Crede, plain to all Grek countreis, a going vp to heaven. The rarest in Holland, the floure of Leyden, folovv our Ecclesiasticall Bishops, Other in policy, Bishops of good calling; The best of Frisia, Westphalia, Steinford, and floure of straungers in Marpurge, and the vvhole Churches in Francfurd, and the learned of Hanavv, and the rarest in Eidelberg, vvhose letters be at Hanavv, yeld vnto our Ecclesiasticall and Politicall Bishops: teaching or allovving this conclusion; And the Senatours in Geneva spake to the penner of this syllogisme; vpon demaund vvhat our Bishops thought of their; D: Beza and such, vpon avvsvver sayd, Deus benedicat tuis studiis; Damus tibi licentiam imprimendi quicquid voles: Also Nicol; Serarius a principal Iesuite, being thrise demaunded, vvhat should be aunsvvered for Pope to Ievv: thrise vvrote: the Pope never beleued that our Lord ever vvent to vvorse lodging then the Patriarkes had; vvher Athan. Basil, Cyrillus, Theod; place them*
 who in all their vvise thoughtes place them in the highest joy for men: upon Davids Psalmes: Basil vpon Psal. 15 in his ^olume. The other in fragmentes printed by Commelin; and so say the best Diuines in Theophyl. upon Luc 23.


of Athanasius seming to differ;
Because Athanasius saith of our Lords Resurrection (...), some thought, that Porters of Hell vvere here meant, but they are deceaved. For the vvordes being of the lxx. Iob 38. can meane no more then doth the Ebrevv there meane. And thus goeth the Ebrevv in the vvordes of God to Iob. cha. 38, 16; Haue the gates of death bene reuealed unto thee? Or hast thou seene the gates of the shadovv of death? The te^ hath no more nor lesse then this. And this later is Greked as I cited. The levv vvhich translated Iob, vvas excelent in Poetry; and by veres might be Prophets scholer: to Aggay and Zachary, and knovv that Christ might tell Iob thus; Thou hast not seene the state of the dead; but in manhood I vvill breake these barres; by a resurrection that shall neuer again see death: as shaking the postes of that hovvse. So Athanas. amazeth none lerned. And thus Athanasius striueth not vvith the syllogisme of the R. R. F. vvhen judgement in Ebrevv and Greke is used; Othervvise a Ievv, or one bent to help Machmad for nevv keie^ of Paradise, might find a trap to himself, and to as vvise as him self* But none, that can call the Greke Father to the lxx, and the lxx unto the Ebrevv, vvilbe anie vvhit moued. And if anie Alexandrean Ievv or Machmadist toke offence at Athanasius to brede nevv keies of Paradise in despit of our Gospel, he hath felt judgement. Athanasius saing, that our Lord vvent to Haides, neuer meaneth that part of Haides vvhich is Hell, but that part vvhich the faithfull held; vvhom he placed in high joy. Whither yf he had not gone, our soules should never come to
 their bodies. And so all the Greke Fathers aunsvver Arrianes, objecting as a basenes the going to Haides; vvher yet the faithfull soules be, as the most lerned Photius speaketh in Oecumenius, upon 1 Cor. 15. One D. ignorant of that, spared a truth to the K. of three Kingdomes; for vvant of surveyng Hell as aright. But yet he joined to the making of a good syllogisme, the best vvork that euer vvas made by our Bishops, the best to stop vvicked slaunders of Ievves for Machmad, against the Gospell. And all expositiones of the Crede out of this sence betray not onlie the Greke Fathers; vvhom yf Ievv and Turk foile, all is gone, but betray also the Gospel; vvhich vvill not be defended by Hell-forget tormentes, rooting out all auctority of Divinitie, of Ebrevv, of Greke, of conscience in speach.


of a thyrd syllogisme; which the surveyer in an Enthymeme made vnto the King.
The usual Greke must be holden the Credes meaning (...): to Catelthein ^is Haidou in the Godly, is a passage to heaven by usual Greke. Therfore a passage to Heauen is meant by the Crede. Ih. Whitg. rightly held Rhodaneanes senseles, that embraced not the Proposition.
And B. Winton in second thought surveyd that by the Grekes the phrase meant the soules comon lot: to have distinctio^ by the qualitie of the perso^; Parad^se Haides light for the good; Tartarus darkenes for the other. For the assumption, I commended to the K. 145 Greke Epigrammes from all sortes of Grekes in An^hologie: vvher all countreys and ages shevv vniformitie. And so three syllogismes, the R. R. F. hath made against Ben Aramas slaunder; Syllogismes all vnvincible, yee though, he himself vvold goe about to ouerthrovv them, he neuer could; they be so fortified; for Geneveans good; yf they had one drop of thankfulnes to accept it.

I mentioned Scripture, to prove going hence to heauen; and that Abraham, Isaac and Iacob and all faithfull be there; but I hold all Britanes rude, that knovv not so much; yet the simple may take these; Mat. 8, Luc 13, Iohn 5, Luc 23, 2 Cor 5. 1, co^pared vvith Lev. 26 10, Heb. 11, vvher Abraham desired the heauenly citie; and God had prepared it for him, and Eb. 9 and 10. I cited in my reply against a Patroclean dreame, and vvorse then Patroclean, for he feared not, but desired Hades. And novv I nede not cite mo places. Reason vvold tell, that all use litle reason, that reason not thus; seing the Apostles infinitly cite of our Lords death and resurrection, and neuer have one syllable of going to Hell; they be of infinite impiety and contempt of God, that dare vvrite of a going to Hell; seing no Prophet repeateth a former matter; but vvith some change, yf the matter suffred anie more to be spoken. So all these repetitions be stained, by the unlearned vightes, that honour Hell against all Gods vvisdome; and against Christ his vvordes, that six times in one sermo^ saith, I goe vnto the Father; Who vvold euer think that Christianes should so contemne God; or Scholers be so barbarous, or men so senseles. Novv because the se^seles barbarousnes pretendeth English custome from Davus in the marked take Positiones for the terme descending; and the terme Hell; then I vvill returne to the Greke Fathers.


Of tvvo vvordes, Descending and Hell, hovv the unlearned and unstayd do turne aside.
The termes Descending and Ascending are vsually taken for passages: vvher the ungrounded barbarous ignorant of vsuall speach, make ship vvrach of faith. By these particularitez they may be instructed.
Descending to Egypt, Gen; 262; and Ioseph Hurad vvas caused to descend to Egypt, that is in our Church Bible: Ioseph vvas brouhht to Egypt; Gen: 37; So Iuda vvent from his brethren; Ebrevv Iarad: Descended; And so infinitly in Genesis for passage to Egypt

And usuallie in Iosuae borders of land reching or going fro^ tovvne to tovvne, are said to descend:
And it vvold vvearie one to reckon the Iudges or defenders phrase of Descending, for going to an exploit;
In Samuel* Kinges and all the stories, Descend is the vsuall passage; and so Ascend; as Anabasis expeditio Cyri.
Some time it is translated (...) to goe, by the lxx, Gen. 43 5, or (...) 1 Sam. 294. To go, and (...) to pass through. And in double active; to cause to descend up the Arke; that is, to carie it. And the lxx translate it; to ascend Ruth 3 3 Io. 13. So Ievves and Ievv like may be aunsvvered: that the terme Descending is plain for anie passage; and al passage of soules he^ce is ascending Koheleth, or Eccles. 3. for they returne to God, Eccl. 12.
(...) is used in the same sence, for passage from Nazareth to Capernaum; passage to Samaria, Cyprus, Seleucia Cesaria Antioch, from Macedonia: likevvise (...) in Suidas; for passage avvay. So scripture should muse* sl^underous Ievves and Ievv-like barbarous. For the other vvord Haides is knovven to milliones in Britanie; and both together heard for 3000 yeres use to meane a passage of soule to God: and in our Soile they are holden barbarous unlerned, that daregape against this. Shortly Germanie vvill so stop Ievves railinges, the vvicked helpers of Machmad. Let us marke Hades in the Nevv Test.


Now of the woord Haides or Hades, Hell in comon sense, but never for to particular, Gehenna.
The R. R F. cited thrise vvher God vvrote Gehenna, Mat. 5, tvvise, and ^oonce; in al these places, he cited Hades, as though it had ben ther* not regarding the Test. vvhich God gave us: but making a nevv from his ovvne vvise head.

Yet all humane recordes, all together, all laid in a balance^ are to S. Mathevves thrise Gehenna, lesse then the dust of a balance. The true terme Gehenna, being a Thalmudique terme for soules place, confirmeth the Ievves comon place, vvho most learnedly teach, that the Ebrevv neuer nameth place of joy properlie; or of torment. Thus both are taught, Lev. 26. Yf you kepe my commaundements, I vvill dvvell amo^gst you. In Paradise, saith the Rabbin; by a borovved spech from Ada^s garden. Yf ye kepe not my Lavves, my angry face shalbe upon you, Wher? before the throne of God, and the Lamb, Apoc. ^4. on high. Cether Malcuth; as the Ievves in proprietie of spech express their mind. For their Midras or fabling comme^taries, they have a rule; that none may stay upon them. And he that cited them shevved in fevv vvordes, that he vvas a babe in judgement. When the Zohar agreeth vvith the Nevv Test: then it is certen old sage, not late discanters bred the spech. Aben Ezra checketh mightily the comon Midras; and comonly and notably Pref: to Moses; The valley of Hernnon nere Ierusalem vvas a place vvher children vvere offred to Deuels; bre^t to death; And the old holy Rabbines borovved that terme, to expresse Eternal torment; and our Lord confirmeth that, and their judgement therin, for all their vein in the Lavv; and layng that dovvne once, tvvise, thrise, he teach^^h all learned, to kep that terme in all translationes. All bodies shalbe cast to Haides; for it is the grave to the bodie; the miserable bodies only shalbe cast into Gehenna so the R. R. F. vvold by Greke of his ovvne making haue marred all faith.
To forged textes I nede not to aunswer. The Pentheus in Euripid., that seeth a double Thebes and a double Sunne, savv one; but this Pentheus seeth none. But vvhere Haides is in dede, he shalbe aunsvvered. The builders on the rock vvere not hindered by the gates of Haides. They feared not (...), the passe to the grave, death, and region of soules, as A thanasius speaketh. Capernau^i Hades is in Ebrevv Abne Bor;
 the stones or clods of the pit; vvher bodies vvithout life lye, a child might sone see so much Ebrevv and Greke; and Scheol for building tentes cattels and mens bodies num. 16 had no vvorse. A sound Divine vvill not say, that all men dead there, died the second death. Abrahams Hades, I often handled. That in 1 Cor 15 nothing helpeth the vvicked; ther for bodies it is the poison of Rottednes; Keteb a plagy ayer; Ps. 91, and Rekabon. Rottednes ar centron sting in the lxx, the comon sting of the body: and Hades to the body is but grave and death. And ther Hades to the soule, as the most learned Photius in Oecumenius teacheth, conteyneth all faithfull soules vntill the resurrection. wicked and barbarous vvrangling vvith Scripture bredeth fevvell for Hell. Death and Hades vvherof Christ hath the keys, as the Rabines speak, should not take Iohn before the time, as Arethas saith Ap. 1. Hades that receaved Cesares and their troupes, had bene no nevves to the serpentes sede to be soules Hell; a gulf of buriall vvas there meant. When the sea and Hades geueth up the deade, the grave, and ayer as Origen and Methodius think, yeld the bodies. Andreas saith truly, though lesse fitly for a vision; (...). The place vvhich receaveth our soules is Hades, there the vvicked are Death and Hades, Apoc. 20, as Arethas lernedly expoundeth the place; and they are cast into the Sea of fyer and Brimston and second death. Elihu vvas not bolder to say: Men of hart vvold speake as he; then the penner here; that Grecianes and Ebricianes, sound from childhood, vvill speake as he; that Haides is neuer hell in the Nevv Testament. But their tongues are set on fyer from Gehenna, that so teach; Haden properly to meane Gehenna Hell, either ther or in the Crede. None can deliver his soule from hell, Ps. 89. all faithfull shall deliuer their soules from Gehenna. So our Bibles ne^er meane hell of torme^t: but vvhen Gehenna is in the Greke. Neuer in all the old testament; but by consequent; that death to all the vvicked, comonly an hasted Scheol, or hades, hath
 Gods-hated in Hades the place of torment. An this much against the spech of Dauis in the market for the true meaning of Descending and Hell. Now let vs go to learned Euseb. wher Haides is most nobly handled and by B. Winton for Geneva: wher they could not help them selues. And now the R. R. F. his auctoures will confirme for poor Geneva all that theyr hartes can desire: and more then wicked Ievves vvish to stop theyr vncleane mouthes foming out theyr ovvne shame, as raging vvaues of the sea. Lyers and railers against all honesty.


Of Eusebius hovv B. vvinton citeth him: so that he might stop Ievves vncleane mouth.
Eusebius is cired by L. vvinton, speaking thus Eccl. hist. lib. 1. Cap. 13. He raised the longe layd in slepe; and brake the vvall, that never vvas broken afore. Here the raised be the iust: and from Haides: and the difference is; that theyr bodies never more returned to Haides. That is meant by breaking the vvall vnbroken till then. Here Ben Arama might be sayd to haue a brasen hard face, yf he vvold gather a going to Hell, or the long dead to haue bene raised thence: they gather vvell and truly, that the soules vvere raised to theyr bodies from that part of Haides vnto vvhich our Lord vvent. But because all heathen should tell vvhat Eusebius should meane: and they vvold say he m^ant heauen by Haides: and Eusebius doth so expound him self; B* vvinton might tell Ben Arama, that Euscbius vvold tell Siph^i and the Alcoran, that they greatly iniuried the Gospel; to gather Hell vvher heauen is plainly meant. And herein B. vvinton fighteth for England and Geneveans, and theyr partakers, that the old iust, and our Lord, vvent to Hades vvhere Paradise Lyeth. Genevea^s vvish Grekes for that; and the BB. of England cite auctoures that vvill suffre no other meaning for their vvordes, And the right referend fathers should be the skumme and scomme of the vvorld, yf any Ievv Lerned in Ebrevv and Greke, as all ought to be checkers of Bishops, yf he could prove they meant hell, vvher the Auctours meant heauen. perverting
 so grosly, and so crosly for to make their Hell from Eusebius Ecc. Hist 1. 13. vvho meaneth heauen Apod. 3. in handling the same matter by other termes. So Eusebius doth expound him self; that all might be Hesiodean old sucklinges that should mistake him. Also B. vvinton might prove that Eusebius meaned as Ievves for soules place by Citing the Ievv Aristobulus, The Peripatetique as agreing vvith Christianes, and citing heathen poetes of our mind: in praepar. Euangel. li. 13. fol. 401. in these vvordes.
(...)
(...). The sum is; from Empedocles in Aristob. The Ievv allovved by Euseb. saith; the Godly going he^ce are happie vvith divine vvightes in the same dvvelling. Thus the Athean Ievv vvas a lyer and a railer against all duty by B. W. that blaphemeth us, in teaching that the holy vvent to hell.
So Eusebius, B. vvintons auctour being soundly expounded stoppeth Ievves mouthes; and teacheth, that Christanes haue Ievves and Grekes for them; that the good departing hence are vvith the happiest. And Eusebius vvas to make good to heathen, the judgment of Christianes in comon plain agreement; and not to be a vvicked sophister speaking as to the heathen capacitie; and yet having on thing ready in his tongue: and an other thing hid in his heart. A Ievv, or vvorse then a Ievv should he be that vvold then peruert Eusebius seing he teacheth so plainly, that the godlies going to Hades meaneth in Ievves phrase; an adioining unto the Fathers; vvher they are equales to Angels, as Philo speaketh of Abraham; hovv (...). No Christian checketh Philo for this. But some had, yf they vvere of an other mind and durst combat. Therfore Ievvee should hold the best



of Gregorie Nazianzen for tartaros and Catachthonia: wherein Epiphanius and Cyrillus, and S. Paul Phil. 2 be expounded.
Yf anie Buzantian and Ievv, angry that Chrysostome drove them there to shame, vvol be reuenged also of Gregorie Nazianzene, vvished to be Bishop of Constantines Citie* and in great election, vvold quarell vvith him for Tartarus, or Catachtonia, in vvhich vvord Cyrill of Ierusalem folovveth him, vvith Epiphanius, or upo^ S. Pauls vvord (...), aunsvver is readie. These auctours, vvhich meant that our Lord vvent hence unto the happie, are cited by B. Winton, for the right meaning of the crede; vvho expreslie telleth, that no scripture denieth the going hence to Paradise, in ser. fol. 219, often cited, and in manie vvorkes, vvhich may stop the uncleane mouthes of Ievves. Novv they shallbe expounded, hovv they nothing help Machmades frendes for better keys of Paradise S. Paul saith, that in the name of Christ all knee shall bovv, of them in Heauen, or Angels, of them on earth, or the living here, or the lodged in the earth, of the dvvellers in heaven, or men liuing, no doubt can arise. The Thalmudiques celebrate infinitely, the high familie and the Lavv familie; and to their maner S Paul speaketh. So because the Psalme 22 entitled the morning starre, as D. Kimchi most lernedl^e expounds the Hebrevv title in Ail, doth speake of the morning starre, the auctour of resurrection, S. Paul in the ^ame argument vvold heavenlie touch the phrase. The phrase vvent thus. Before him all that descend into the dust shall bovv the knee. And none (other) can quicken his soule. Before he had said, all the endes of the earth shall vvorship him; And the Angels are knovven for their vvorship Ps; 97, and Eb; 1; So S; Paul speak^th no nevv matter; but speaketh of the dead, as the Psalme: and Esa 26 19 of them that dvvell in the dust: vvho (...), or by a short spech, from the bodie are vvholy called, (...), the dvv^llers
 in the earth; as in the heate, in Homer cited by B. vvinton. Esays spech for this place must be remembred. Thy dead shalbe made aliue; my carcases shal arise. Avvak and reioiee yea that slepe in the dust. Novv as the Angels are called (...). So (...) be the men dead; or in heathen Phrase the comon Haides as Nazian. speake^h vpon Coheleth. 3. vvhose vvordes I cited; hov^ ther the faithful rest in ioy: as heathen vvold speake. And therin he expoundeth the other tvvo fathers saing that our Lord vvent (...). And Cyril of Alexandria is evident vpon the psalmes, to meane that all the holy vvent hence to Kingly tabernacles. And Nazianzen being as one soule vvith Basil, vvold meane in this comon place, as Basil meant vvho teacheth vpon ps. 15. that Dauid and the old iust vvent hence to Gods holy hill as Mamony tract Poenit in the end bringeth the Ievves comon opinion; and he vvas ^he conningest in the Ievves affaires of all that euer they had, Moses Mamonides: that Ben Arama vvriteth of him the comon saing; Fro^ Moyses to Moyses, no^e like to Moyses. And this great Egle as they terme him, serching all the termes that in the Hebrevv touched Gehe^na, yet durst not bring scheol for any. The citers o of Midrash^th, speaking to memory of phrases as one c^te^s Midras Tillin for le Sheola ad Scheol vsque, that Scheol is ther Gehenna, such in fevv vvords may shevv great vnskilfulnes in Rabbique studies. And this m^ch for Grekes against Ben Arama; from those Grekes by vvhich the lerned father. B. Th. vvinton proueth most soundly for Geneva, that vvhich he affirmed, soundly: That our Lord vvent hence to Paradise. And no Ievv ever d^rst say, that any old Christian thought of a ^ourney from Paradise to Gehenna; or of going to Haides after the body vvas buried. Lesse thought of triumphing ther over Devels; or that Deuels are yet tormented ^here.


Of an other Iudaique poinct.
A Ievv of Amsteldam named Rabbi Dauid Farar, a revolted
 Christian, as of late I have ben informed, and as it semeth, for he is readie in our I a^in scholmen, and a great sercher of aduantages, by our ouersightes, vvas savvvd in hart, vvhen he savv my Ebrevv Catechisme for R. Abr. Ruben: wherin Nathans Prophecie to Dauid, vvas deriued from Dauid, not by Salomon, vvhose house, Ammonean, and Achabeam came to r^ine; but by Nathan Salomons brother, 1 Chron. 3. 5, vvo, vvas (...) Father in the flesh, to the Sonne Eternall: vvho then vvas in his loines. This ouerthrevv all Ievves hope: vvich upon Ecclesiastes I shevved to be a spiders vvebd. He vvas further greueth, vvhen I gaue him my Latin Concent: vvherin he savv S. Mathevv, not a Publican, but a most eloquent Lavvier; vvho in Kinges spech, maketh the successour, So^ne; though the predecessour died vvithout children: as Achab is Sonne to Baasa; no kind to him, 1 K. 20; and Sedekias Sonne to his brothers son, yonger three yeres then himselfes. So Salathiel the heire, exceding far off, vvas sonne, in Lavviers phrase, as Iulian, to Romulus, in Caesarib. This greued the scholeman Ievv. For he thought a longe time to haue vvon the spurres here; to proue that our Gospel could not be of God: vvher Salathiel and Zorobabel should haue Fathers up to Salomon by Iechonias, and up to Nathan by Ne^i and Melchi: and he vvas sure to oue^throvv the Gospel, against all, that graunte, that Iechonias had naturallie children. For they vvho here faile, bring ruine to the narration. In the which, if anie lie or falshood be found; all the hope of life is gone. Our traitours, vvil not marke that; but the enemies doe observe it: and dravv revolters. The heaven might be astonished, hovv the Doctours of the Lavv could be blind: on Ieremie 22, all savv, that Gods decree passeth absolutelie upon Iechonias, that he should die childlesse. Maimonie saw that, tom. 1. tract. Poenit. as in a common place to all consent: Ialcut noteth Gods oths passed; which Moses repentance could not call back being passed: all note this* Yet the Ievv seing my resistance, and the Dutch of his mind, desired
 that I vvold giue him leaue to reply on me an vvhole af^er none in open audience; I vvas content; the place vvas appointed; a Great colledge hall vvas appointed; and many vvillingly met: I gaue him the vpper end of a long table, and I took the nether; and vvrote all his reply; that non should giue fal^e report: experience taught me that. For vvher, I once defended the Greke, Act. 13, (...), af^er a sort 450 yeres; to be pure in letter, against Rhemists rejecting the Greke, and folovving the Latin, vvherby Pope or vve, lost the ground; and vvere vvicked in our foundations; an ungrateful Libeller, brutish for vvant of lerning, cauterized for conscie^ce, vvold be winning the whetston, writting that I defended the lxx; whom all learned, these 1300 yeres, knevv to haue i^finite milliones of faultes; and I, who made a nevv Greke translation, should be thought to knovv so much, so well as another; and no wit could tell to what conclusion Papistes and I should theri^ striue. But wher our side graunted the Pope, that ether, the N. Testament was corrupt, or Dauid neuer borne, wherbie Pope and Iew fell the Gospell; I de^ended, that wee had a pure N. Testament, and the Remistes modestlie told, that none of their, spake ill of me, but (...) Lucianes or Iulianes.
In memorie of this I wrote the ^ewes argumentes, and still made him wearie by plaine aunsweares, and to flee t^still; and then he touched other poinctes, a^ Daniels Image in E^sebius meaning, worse then Iudaique; and Daniels seauens, in the Thalmudique meaning; and priuatelie since, the text of the N. Testament. Wherin if I haue no more thankes then of the libeller for the yeres of the Iudges, my labour wil bring labour upon labour. This much I wish all to weigh, that we must defend not onelie the Hebrevv text to be pure, but also the Ne^u T. and our hartes might blede to see our p^uishnes to help ^euues to hold the ceremonies neuer ended; and to place East matters in the West, and precedent tokens going before the incarnation, to folouu (...), or the daies of Christ his flesh.
 Of these I vvill vvrite alitle for Amsteldam and the portugalles, and our Iscariotes, vvho for 30 sicles vvold sell Machmadean notes vvith the Bible.


Of the fourth Monarchy.
He at the first vvold haue Syrianes, Persians, Grekes, and Romanes. But being vvarned hovv so he left out the Chaldeanes, denyng all the Prophetes, left Eusebius in that poinct: vvher in all Ievves held the trueth: and cometh to the fourth Kingdome: vvherin since, he hath vvritten in Latin a treatise to me and against me.


Thus reasoned D. Farar.
Yf the fourth Kingdome, vvhich must be dust in the image befor God of heauen his Kingdome is set vp, yf this Kingdome be the Romanes, yee mistake the true Christ
But the fourth Kingdome is the Romanes.
Therfore the true Christ is not yet come


Br.
I denie the assumption; The fourth Kingdom is not the Romanes; But the parted Macedonianes; a parted Kingdome from the third; and called one in respect of clayming Iuda, to both sides; and by ioyning mariages still, Syria vvith Egypt; and the Romanes had bene vnfitly figured by tvvo legges being one Kingdome. Besides the mariages together had bene no distinctiones. For all nationes mary vvithin them selues. But the mariages of Seleucidae and Lagidae pass al in all stories; continued nere 300 yeres handled in many vvriters, Strabo, Appiane, Pausanias, Livi Trogus, and moo full many. Besides the Romanes had made the inages legges longer then the gyant Typhoeas vvhom Iuppiter buryed in Tinacria vvhose head vvas vnter one mout; and his tvvo feet reached vnto the other. But Gods providence contriued all to a fit proportion of a mans body. The Chaldean of short time to haue a short part; 70 yeres. the Persianes in brest and shoulders to let dovvne the armes 130. nere double to the other Alexander and his captaines sone
 destroyng one another 23 beside Seleucidae and Lagidas, to belly and as so many ribbes: and all sone cutt off to haue the shortnes of a belly: and the reason is plain, that Alexander vvas to be sone cut off; because he vvold be a God, proud by successe; And a Poet vvold say, he should be cut off least he vvold make vvarres for heauen. Novv the tvvo legges vvhich continued double the Persian time; and in mariage; that Cybiosactes a supposed Seleucides maried the late Gleopatra these haue a fit proportion; and, strong a vvhile, are thick thyghes: vveaker are the slenderer legges; And vvhen Antiochus Epiphanes ruled Egypt and Syria, Gyges Asia, and Egypt, and Phayt or Phaytons Lybia, as Ezekiel told. Ch. 38 and 39. and Polychronius the Greke vvhom I gaue you vvith porphyrie and other Grecianes, doth him and these matters rightly handle: vvhen Epiphanes ruled both; then the tvvo vvere one Kingdome; and for vvarning touching his altering of the lavv, the visiones vvere chiefly shevved; and Ch. 7. 8. 11, and 12. agree to the parted Macedonians to every vvord of Daniel; and your expounders confesse that the Grecian Epiphanes vvhole rage is of dayes 2300* and Rabbag sayeth that the legges conteine the same matter; and that the Kinges of the north and south Ch. XI are the tvvo legges; and for Ch. 12. Iosephus sayth as Daniel, that he held Ierusalem three yeres and an half; and your Machabees note that sone after (at a month) his army smarted; and sone he (after dayes 45) fell by Gods hand. And heathen stories agree to Euery svl^able; vvhich by chaunse could not fal out one vvord by chaunse may fal fit to a matter not purposed; But as an hog may dig the letter A, vvith the nose, yet cannot dig Andromachaes vvork of Ennius; so heathen could never fit Seleucidas and lagidas to every vvhit of Daniel vvhom they never savv, but that God closly ruled the Balamites to teach Israel. Moreover it is most senseles to think that the Macedonians vexing your nation, vvith double campes in your nation; eating as vvith teeth of iron; for fiue Kinges of one side and fiue of an other, and treading all dovvne by campes
 vvhich they coul not eate; it is most senseless in you to think^ that no prophecy should tell you of these poinctes, but 300 yeres should be passed over; and Turke, and Caesar, and south Kinges late in Aben ezra vpon Dan. should be meaned. Gehenna i^stly devoureth your natio^, as fevvell ready for it, that despise Gods goodnes, leading you so clearly by Daniel vnto Christ his birth, by the Image; and vnto his death by Aben ezraes vvordes Dan. 9. That seauenty seauens of yeres are from Daniels prayer to Seale the Messias the holynes of all holynesse. And doth not this speake as vve, that God vvas in Christ reconciling the vvorld vnto him self; vvho in death overcame him vvhich had the povver of death; and the vvorld vvas subiect to the son of Enos, a litle inferiour to Angels by suffring death, but Crovvned vvith glory, by resurrection and ascention. To vvhat sonne of Enos could the vvorld be subiect being a bare man? vvhat bare man durst the Angels vvorship at his coming into the vvorld: by ps. 97. and Kimchi confesseth that to be spoken of Messias coming into the vvorld. And Sadaias vpon Dan. 7. confesseth Messias the sonne of man coming into the vvorld; and sitting vpon the right hand of God by ps. 110 And vvher your Thalmud denyeth that vpon ps. 110 Iarky and Aben ezra cannot agree. But Iarki vvith Sadaias vpon Dan. 7. say Messias is ther meant; and the person ther sone returneth to the Euerlasting: and thence ruleth all Kingdomes: coming into the vvorld as sone as the Romanes tribute shevved that the Macedonianes the fourth Kingdome had not one tovvne of governement vnder the cope of heauen. And hovv can you be saued despising so great salvation; vvhich telleth by so many stories in Daniel; yf this and this for 500 yeres fall out as vvas foretold lok for the redemer in the yere that Aben ezra told; and to be Mes^^as and the most holy by Aben ezra: and to sit on Gods right hand by Rabbi Sadaias. Thus ye may se that not the Romanes but the Macedonianes vvere to be the destroyed, before Christ came into the vvorld. And you might rede vvhat a gracious
 commentarie the N. Testament maketh vpon this poinct; yf you haue any vvorde to gainsay speak on.


Farar the Iewe.
None but you and D. Iunius make the parted Macedonianes the fourth Kingdome M. Plancius and the Preachers of this tovvne are against you for Salomo^s hovvse, for Daniels Chronicle, for the Crede, and for the fourth Kingdome; and hold not the nevv T. to be pure in text. And the BB. of England be against you in their notes vpon the Bible for the fiue poinctes; and specially that yee haue no Nevv Testament from God. For they vvrite plainly vpon many places, that your testament is most corrupt; Ievves of vs vnderstand English; and Beza far passeth in that: him in latin I can rede.


Broughton.
Of all I haue vvrirten yonger then novv by 20 yeres; and combaters yeld; therfore, doe not oppress me by them vvho reiect them. But for the present Question of Kingdome, you iniurie many. Not Iunius only but also Tremelius, and all Geneva in there last Bible, and D. Piscator a very learned man, and D. Polanus, after that I came to Basil, as once he yelded for Dan. 9. but revolted again to the groser Olympiades, all these stand to me for the legges; and many in dutch Homilies, and Romistes after Bodinus full many* and tvvo very lerned of Bretany; and no B. of England that the Prince of the nation made B euer despised my book of Conce^t; and many Britanes and others think that none vvold; but some one counted the skum and scomme of the vvorld.

The Iesuites of Mentz humanelie confessed, that they vvold graunt all that book; and long agoe by tvvo Cardinales advise, vvold haue moued me to haue taken a principal Cardinalship; sayng, th^t I might do much good to the Church, yf I had a Prince that fauored my studies; and I told them, I hoped I had: all these I must defend against you. A Bishop in syrname, bre^t certen bookes of mine, hindring his gaines for notes upon the Bible, damned of old. But of him I complained to the Lordes; so B; Cot; exc. brent bookes comme^nded by the K* and Arch. VVh.; most highlie a litle afore his death; and others against you; vvhich none but a Ievv in hart or errour, vvold hav^bre^t: and complaint vvas made to the Lords against him; and some promised to moue the K. for a verie great stipend to teach you Ievves in Ebrevv. And for the Bishops of England, none of the Princes making, or vnlothed deadlie as enemie to the Bretish nation vvill thank you, forsayng onlie D. Iunius is vvith me. Milliones of milliones through ^urop vvold shevv, they agree vvith me. As you maie think Polychronius and enemie Porphyrie haue bred milliones novv manie ye^es. Thus your citation of testimonie is aunsvvered, as untrue: and here your Iev^es vvhom you lead ^o Gehenna, should knovv by one crime, all your trecherie; and vvhat a Sinon you are. You knovv Virgil, and as Sinon, Incendia mis^es, ridentem dicere veru^, Quid vetat?


DAVID THE IEW. I will write a book in Latin; that aunswer you in print. BR.
As the Thracian modestlie prouoked me in Ebrevv, so therin vvill I aunsvver, from Rabbines ovvne syllables. To turne your nation, and you seeme little modest to call me to combat vvith you in Latin; vvith you, vvhom milliones of our yonge
 men could breake. I told you sadly that you spake many vvordes, for fevv. But never one vvise to my hearing. But your vvork shalbe printed, send it me. And this much for our disputation, vvhich occasioned all the former booke. A book he sent vvhich Hidelberge hath to avvnsvvear, or to shrink.


Of the Angels determining Clearly vvhen Moyses lavves should be buried, by the burial of Christ.
I translated the Angel Gabriels spech into English, as circumspectlie, yf manie be not deceaued, as anie hath done into anie tongue; omitting no letter of aduantage, for the clearnes of Chrsstianitie; nor vvresting anie vvhit; that a Ievv might say I vvas partial in a Grammer cause; and some thankfull DD. of Oxford thought it dutie, to tell others: that I translated the Angel spech, better then anie before me. Yet, some R. R. F. allovved M. Livelie to translate ridiculouslie, Ievvishslie, and dead lie; and to raue against me, being at the Alpes farr off, in Zuit zerland; vvho to my face, neuer durst hold himself my equall: but hath bene often blamed of me, for extreme vvant of judgement, in Ebrevv; Arch. Wh. cannot be blamed: for, M. Liue lie told a Bohemian, felovv in vvagin for Cambridg, that he vvrote against Beroaldus and me. But the Arch. shevved no countenance to him; but all of high discontent. For heathenisme in the Persian Kinges he shevved him senseles, to astonisment against the last propheticall bookes; Daniel, Ezra, Nehenias, Esther, Agges, Zachary. And his commender shevved him self most vvicked, and vnlerned extremely to astonishment: and impudent extremely to athean madnes; that vvold foyle the bishops rightly folovving the Ebrevv text; For, To Seale sin: though the margent haue; To Finish. Readinges are 848 in the Ebrevv; vvher the text, and the margent are both pure: and the margent checketh not the text, as corrupted in Babylon; but
 both text and margent are from God. Arias Montanus hath made an whole work of textes, as corrupted; and so Plantines great Bible is printed in deede corrupted. For this I have blamed Arias of extreme ouersight: otherwise the man was of rare learning; but for scripture tongues; I feare not to censure him. And I have shewed in Helue^ia, Marpurg, and Mentz, the reason of the double reading, and none euer before me, from Iewes testimonies, or plain reason. The commender of a foiler of our BB. so referend, and so learned as the libeller him self commendeth them to be, should be counted a brainsick foole: and receave into his owne bosome, all the vilenie of his libel. who the partie may be, that determine I not. But all will determin, that he was a shameles asse: that wheras the Bishops held the right: the Line word, allways the safe, and not chect, but expounded by the margent: and so protest in word, that our nation holdeth not the text corrupt, in none of the 848 margent readinges (for they are all of one auctoritie;) he wold stain the sagenes of our BB. and commend a blasphemer eight hundreth forty eight fold, of the pure text: which, yf we betray, the scripture may not judge controversies; as a corrupt judge, but Rome, clayming to be the Church, must judge, as not erring. This Lonchios the blind Knight, that can perce the scripture to the hart, with his prophane speare, shall see what he hath perced: and the disgracer of the BB. wher they better deserved, then in all their desertes, this Lonchios should be estemed, as a blind Bayard; and no^e should for this, gev him honour.


Of Farar the Iew.
Farar the Iew, that openlie in a Colldge Hall at Amsterdam, as I told, disputed vpon Daniel to disgrace Christianes: yet neuer durst blame our BB. for translating the text. But the libeller is more Iewish then anie Iew, to disgrace the BB. and stealeth their auctoritie, to prove, that they missed of the Bibles words; Yf a straunger had so condemned them; namely that they knew not what the Bible was: theyr pleading had bene easier.
 But now a creper into their bosome, damneth them by their owne auctoritie; to make them befoole themselves, whe^ they deserued rarelie well, 848 times wel: by honoring one place, that draweth al of the kind 847 with it. So the hart of the foole was on the left hand. And herein he is Iew is her in rancour against Christian good, then anie rancourous Iew. In these other poinctes, the Iew is equall and a felow And the Iewes damne him in the former; but in the folowing, he joineth with the Athean dogges.
1 In denial, that our Lordes supper ended the lawfulnes of sacrificing. M. Livelies wordes I cited in my advertisement; how he held sacrifice lawful in Vespasianes times; So the Iewes hold, and none moo; but M. Livelies commender. So Farrar the Iew, and they, be equallie enemies to Christian faith. Christianes think, that our Lordes death ended sacrifice and offring; and we celebrate our Lordes supper, as a seale, that our Lord ended Moses sacrifice; when he went through the veile of his flesh into the holy, to find eternal redemption. Both these the libeller denyeth; he denyeth that he went hence from the cros into heaven; and holdeth sacrifice lawfullie continued; as did M. Liuelie; the first he did, commending Patrocles.
2 Farar the Iew denyeth, that 490 yeres just, were from Daniels prayer, vnto the sealing of Christ. So doth M. Livelie: and his commender. More Iewish then Aben Ezra; who being an enemie, as well lerned as ever was enemie vnto Christianes; yet protesteth this to be most certen (as I touched afore, and often may profitablie;) that the seaventie seavens are, from Daniels prayer, vnto the sealing of Christ the holie of holie. His syllables I haue expressed in copies Ebrew, Greke, Latin, English; in copies, above ten thousand and the best lerned in Christen dome haue in print shewed thankes; But M. Livelie and his libeller wold be more Iewish then Aben Ezra: and not cite Iewes for Christ; but folow Iewes against Christ: and likewise also against all Christianes.



Of the name Messias twise in Daniel Ch. 9. meaning Christ properly, and vndeniably.
Vhersoeuer the name Christ is in all the Nevv Testament, it calleth the reder to returne vnto Daniel, specially the tvvo places, vvher Messias, the Fbrevv vvord, is in Greke letters; and that in the mouth of simple folk; as Andrevv the fisher; and the Samaritane vvomans, shevving that the Samaritanes then as all he Ievves, knevv vvhen Christ should come into the vvorld. M. liuely denyeth Messias in the Angels tongue, to sound the redemer. Thirty yeres agoe I checked him, speaking so, sayng that he should be forced to alter his mynd. And then he sayd: he v^old not stand in his opinion. Yet finding a commender, he returneth to agree vvith the basest of the faithles Ievves, to greue all Christian mindes, for euery place of the nevv Testament vvhich still calleth vs vnto the holy name Messias, or Christ: and vnto the holy ministring spirit the Angel Gabriel: from vvhose doctrine, vve are called Christianes. So the comme^der of M. liuely (...) returned to God, should plead of force, vvhy he commandeth a joyner vvith the grossest athean Ievves; vvher their better lerned vvold be ashamed to Cross Gods vvord: but in one place or other, vvold shevv that Daniel spake of Messias; vvhich vvord vvas never simply propre before the Angel spak it. So his commender commendeth layng an axe in a lunatique phantasy, to the rote of the tree of life (...) Deutero. 32. 2 and Pet. 2. And this much for the Ievv Farar; to vvhose hate of Christ, Iscariot Liuelisequa ioyneth, vvho the party is, I vvill not resolutely affirme. The Bishops, vvhose auctoritie he drevv, to countenance Iudaisme, should find him out; as their deadliest fo: and a blasphemer vvith the Ievv Farar. God Killed the printer of the libell: against the scottish mist; and yf milliones haue not payd for it, the plague and deluge
 payd. And God called, afore Liuely, the stationer, charge man of printing liuelea. Let all mark hovv God vvill deale vvith the vvounder of all the Bible; vvounder of the holy name of Christ; and stayner of the auctoritie of Christianitie: a vvonder to be extolled in a common vveale of Christianity. And this much for Farar, and Liueli sequa yoked together for infidelitie of Heathenisme in Liueleis and his commender, and vvorse then Heathenisme, in madnes, putting tvvo Kinges betvvixt good Artax; and him self, and cutting of him into Kinges tvvo; and of being in Cimmerian darknes for Ezra vvith Nehemias; of these I haue giuen aduertiseme^t elsvvher. And because the defender hath no lerning to defend him; and Athean railing framed from his ovvne cariage, vvill not novv serve, vvhen the mist is turned into a sun: and he can never avvnsvver to one poinct of a thousand of his errours: and madnes, it is better to leaue him to the iudgement of God and the King; vvhile the party may be mistaken, then to press him further. But some think the levvish vvell knovve^ For one and the same vvork, telleth that one and the same man four times skophed the scottish mist; vvhen the Nero hoped to see his ovvne cuntrey on a flame; and ioyned vvith Ben Aram for Hell; vvher D. Bilson proved most substantially that as (...) in African us and Euseb. Apod. 8 fol. 242 is the Ievves going vp, as the scripture speaks, from Babel to Ierusalem. So it is, for our Lord to go vp from the Cross to Abrahams Haides; vvhence me^ should think of revenge and the same ma^ is auctour of both equaly bad doctrines A noble of Scotland noted fovver times vvith vermilio^ his scoph; and milliones novv note the poison of his heresie; though D. Bi. vvrite to the King only of tvvo, having forgotten him self in his vnvincible syllogisme to be a third. But vvisdome vvill make all yeld vnto obedience tovvard King and Gospell; and cover much mischieff. Yf God meane not to pluck avvay all Bishops landes; vvhich yf it be vvithdravven, both vniversities vvilbe cold. Bishops in learning so far passing tvventy vicares in learning, as in revenues, vvold make our nation the glory of all Kingdomes.



Of M. liuelies skill in Iudaisme to translate against Christianitie; and what learning a translatour should have.
I request the gentle reader to mark M. Livelies skill in Ebt. and mine; by both our translationes of Gabriels wordes Dan. 9. Yf God sent me and lent me anie judgement, M. Livelie used litle; and his commender as much. In the advertisement, both our skill may be tryed, of him and his learned defendour, I will dispute no more. His translation vvill shevv agrement vvith Iudaisme; and fight against all Christianes; and here for all, I vvill lay dovvne a fevv rules; to shevv vvhat learning a tra^slator should haue, for Ebrevv and Greke: and for all artes, to judge of Equiuocationes.


Of Ebrew.
1 He must knovv that the letres Ebrevv, the 22 vvhich vve have, vvere not invented by Ezra; as manie fabled, but giuen in the Tables to Moyses, and knovven of old.
2 The Greke Alphabet, vvhich deuided Homers Iliad and Odyssea, is elder much then that age; of Babels captiuitie; and it is named from the Ebrevv; and the Ebrevv much elder then it; and the Characters that gaue the name, yet much elder; and ordered in the Alphabet, for like forme; and so ordered in the Psalmes Prov. 31; and six times Lam. in all, 21 times; therfore an Ebrician vvold not be found Analphabetus, to learne his, A, B, C.
3 In Noas time Podamim and Dodamim; Piphath and Diphath. Thubal and Chalyb by transposition, noted the letters to be of old as this day; and manie countreis in Heathen named from Noes familie; differing by mistaking letters. David Kimchi noteth manie such 1 Chr.
4 The lxxii, had old dimme copies; as 1000 yeres old, or more; wher theyr eies often missed, by letters like; as yet they be. D. Drus. noted that vvell in Ciun and Rempham; a translator of courage vvold put Ciun Act. 7. from Amos 5.
5. Vovvels had Gods auctority in the tables; as Tiphereth Israel teacheth. Their infinite varietie could not be from man; and no mans auctority could prevaile to force a nation to ^ake them; yf the prophetes in all ages had not settled them, as theyr age spake.
6. Accentes haue vse to stay spech by the argument; as Demosthenes excelled by pronuntiation. I brevv accentes teach that to Ebrevves: and that, not Musique, is theyr vse.
7. Elias Leuita doted vvhen he denyed that any old grammarianes afore him of renovvne: sayd, that vovvels vvere of old. kimchi vpon Hoseas expresly ^elleth, that Ionathan Coaeual to S. Pauls Rabbi, the sage Gamaliel, had Hoseas poincted.
8. Azarias blameth Elias; by that all nationes haue vovvels; then specially Israell; more curious in style, then all Greke poetes.
6. Tiphereth Israel sayth sagely, that all the lavv is now at this day vvith vs, in the 22. Letters in vovvels and in accentes, as in Moses time. The Pope, vvho beleued Elias, vvarring against them vvho say the poinctes, and so the accentes are from God, the Pope beleving Elias, and vvekeninge the auctoritie of Gods vvord, herin dealeth not vvell: nor any of ours that folovv him. No mans vvit could invent 14 vovvels; vnless at the first they had them; nor nedeless variety of poinctes, to great difficulties of grammer, vnless autours had vvritten so at the first. So Benj, my son, hoseas 11 and Math. 2. might as vvell be Banaj, my sonnes. So Gnasaj, God, my makers, for mysticall trinity in Elihu, might as vvelbe Gnosi, my maker. And seing Iewes (...) from Babel, as Iulius Africanus in Euseb. Greketh, ascending to Ierusalem, folovved Arabians to haue vovvels, comon, as Mariam and Miriam, Salomon, and Solomon, Abel, and Ebel, Gog, and Gyg, Cores, and Cyros, it vvas not possible for late Ievves to persuade one man to rest in many late-in vented vovvels.
10 Two kindes of Chananean Bibles we have now; vowelled, and vnvowelled; so they had at the first. The one for certentie, yf doubt came; the other for expedition. As we write vnvowelled. So R. Ruben to me; and I to him, in my late printed workes. The lxx vsed only the vnvowelled; to hide with more facilitie, holy thinges from dogges; when danger was.


What Auctours we have to help translation in Hebrew.
The Apostles translate exceding much of the old testame^t, even as the lxx have done before them. So much must be followed: and the harmony deliteth: and the Apostles Greke wordes, in notable places, migh be set profitably in the margent. Also the Apostles translate much of themselves. Therin they will be dull contemners of God, that follow not him. Wher Apostles translate not, Arabiq Moses, the Chaldy Paraphrastes, and Thalmudiques in Moses Chair, are good warrantes. Super intendans are slender in learning that are Babes in this kind. And knowledge (...) haumeth me^, which spent short life in longe discourses, for matter wherin, all mindes know more then any tongue can tell. The incarnation and resurrection, how it hath ben folowed or contemned from the beginning: with civil plain cariage in Gods; and Satanean in the contrarie, this conteineth the summe: and they will lie against this infinitly* or spend their life in idle Ceremonies and heavy lawes, whose soules are not seasonned, with the exact style of Gods word; Burst with envy towards painfuller student; and as sure to hav pay, returned upon their heades. More Academies of Alamanie then one wold sone see these wordes just.


Of the New Testament.
All the New Testament is penned from God in Greke. The
 Reporters that S. Math. vvrote in Ebrevv, or S. Paul to the Ebrevve; neuer marked the Greke styles of both in Attiq formes of spech, that Salem hath not. And the holie Ghost neuer translated book; but kept still the originall, of all that he vvold have translated. Here be four Dialectes, the Attiq, Iudean. Thalmudiq, and Apostoliq. By ignorance of vvhich, much darknes covereth dealers vvith the N. Testament: as I haue co^victed one Doctor, to haue shevved ignorance of all these in one question, so grosse, that a man vvold marveile vvith vvhat face he durst chalenge anie disputation.
Being cumbated,


Projicit ampullas, and sesquipedalia verba.
The vvise man casteth off Attique and vvhen Homers commenter vvas cited for hard vvordes; he could not think of Aristarchus in old Didymos; but of late Eustathius, as vvhom S. Peter could not reade; shevving yet therin all his learning; as though Eustathius cited his ovvne; and not Heathen, elder the^ the Machabees. (...) are the plague of quiet opening holie truth. Ignorance of Iudean Septuagint hath apeared strange; vvhen he said; Aey Sheol is Hades; and the Greke Fathers vnderstood not the lxx. But S. Augustin had great skill. Forsooth (...) for erroneous Latin; Quinta generatione exiverunt ex Aegypto, droue him to a tedious disputation. It is strange, that a sage man should speak, so voide from the vvho le tenour of learning. And vvher S. Augustin knevv not vvhy the lxx added so manie hondred yeres, and vvhy Mathusala by them lived beyo^d the flood; the blind vnthankfull vvight vvell might haue sene that, handled first in England. And vvithout observing vvhat Ebrevv the Apostles translate a nevv, he cannot hear the dum stones Apoc. 21, tell all the old story of both Testamentes; a matter precious, and better then all the Iev^els of the vvorld. Lastlie, for ignorance of Thalmudiq: vvorld to come, or Haides, the vvorld of soules: he placeth hell in this vvorld; and vvold rob Grekes for the one part of Hades. Thalmudiques,
 compared vvith Attiques, had here holpen him. The Nevv Testamentes translater should profitablie joine to the Greke, the Ebrevv, set to the lxx, or to their ovvne nevv translation: and the Thalmudique to their phrases; and note the Attiq by their auctours; and Thalmudiq: and joine an absolute Table of all these; and regard all in English.


Of the Text purenes. Rabbi Farar.
Your Nevv Testament is corrupted in text. And that your Preachers graunt; and some Amsteldamean Ievves haue dvvelt in London: and read English condemnation of the text; and Beza in Latin, often amendeth the text. Novv you vvill graunt, it is not of God, yf it be corrupted.


Br.
Much rancour is vttered in your fevv vvordes. Matters to have made you a Christian, plain, is there; vvhich your vveak head might learne; and not put quarels as (...), to proue your self full of poison, and voyd of lerning. I vvill for disputation sake, make my self an enemie to the Lavv, and thus reaso^ vvith you. Rabbi Farar vvill graunt, that yf the old Testament be corrupted, God gaue it not, and I am sure it is true. For Gods Prouidence vvold kepe pure, all bookes that he vvold haue co^tinued; as vvhen Ieremie and Ezra abridged manie bookes nedles for all aages; those God vvold not haue more copied; but left at the Ark, vvhich vvhen the Temple vvas brent, could not escape: or othervvise, God vvold haue to decay. But Ieremies Kinges, and Esraes Chronicles, to be kept to euerie letter. Yet I, as an enemie vvill thus dispute.
Yf in Carui Ps. 22, for Caru, all ye Ievves, have corrupted all copies this 600 yeres against the Massoreth, and haue in Dan. 8 Chaldean Kings name prophane vvith shin afore Aleph in this notation; Bel enricheth, and not as ch. 7 vvith Aleph afore Shin; Bel giues a fire of vvoe: a^ the Massoreth vvarneth; yf all you herefolovv corruption,
 God gaue not the Lavv; or you are vvicked;
But all eyes may see vvhat you doe:


Therfore by you God gaue not the Lavv.
Novv Rabby Farrar, vvhat yf a Turk thus disputed vvith you: vvold you not be turned into a stone as (...), or, in vvordes unvvise, of Hecate God vvold stir diligence: and I dare defend the copies pure Psal. 22 and Dan. 8. But I cannot defend your troupes. So you should not object unto me our troupes. You haue my Latin Concent; ther you see my judgement; that the Bible is settled all as one bodie; pure, clear, and perfect; Trinitie, Sonnes Incarnation, and Assumption to Heauens, is the Diuinitie; Life by the light uniforme in all soules for cariage, is the humanity; as perfect as Moyses in the 613 Lavves; No good thing can be taught; but that is required in the Nevv Testame^t; No ill thing can be thought, but that is reproued in the Nevv Testament; Ben Arama might have sene this, and all Thalmudiques from S. Paul 1 Tim. 1. But Esaias sixt, makes you as I doles, that have eies, but vvill not see. But you vvil be carpinge, as seing to much. You could not see Gods vvisdome in geving Zachary the name of Ieremie. And knovv you not that, to be most usuall in Ezra and Nehemia speciallie, and in Ieremie speciallie; in Nechlemite, and Magor-Missabil. And vvhy could not you carp at Barachias Mat. 23. for Iohajada. He is neuer called so in the old Testament: but you knovv the notation to be all one. Novv Zachary vvrote Christs his exaltation, a King riding upon an asse, sold, for 30 Sicles, as a servant kild by an oxe, but destroier of Ierusalem: after vvaters of life made to spring from his heauenlie Ierusalem: vvher all thinges shalbe used to Gods glory; horse bridles, as Temples vessels. So Zacharie hath the name Ieremie, abridging all his vvorke. And Christianes had neuer taken the strange vvord, but for the glorious exalting of Christ; who did giue the ox that kild the seruant to the Romane butchers.
But Enuie bursted your panches, vvhen you see all Scripture,
 and all learning, contrived unto Christ. And thus I haue aunswered for S. Luke; that Iesus, Fil. Ioseph opinione, est vere filius Eli, etc. filius Dei; and for S. Mathew, that Iechonias, the man childles, a King, neuer childless, begate his successour: and (...)ee (...) or bipotentes Macedonas; parted Grecianes in the Image legges; and Moyses clearlie ended by a set time for our Lordes death. And that vvhich Ben Arama moued, was handled by collaterall occasion, that our symbolum, or mark of faith speaketh in Greke, as the Gospell in holie spech: to go to the Father. I haue proued that by a B. D. Bilson, from Grekes abondant, that our (...) tels so much. And for Scriptures old, I have shevved, that vve Christianes, know your Hebrew, better then your selues, for Massoritiq exquisi^enes, for preseruation of euerie letter. Massoreth is a rule; and Massoritique: one cunning in rules that way. And your Ievves confess to the Princes of Germanie, that fro^ us ye rede the purest Hebrevv, that vvas written since the Prophetes wrote. That confession should make you know, that Chist is God, who maketh Iaphets sonnes his seruants so speak with lippe of Chanaan. Yf you be of God, you will teach your contreyme^ what is aunswered to al your objectiones: at which you stumbled to Gehenna hitherto; Now walk in the light of Christ: whom God made Heyr of all; Psal. 2, by whom he made the world, Prov. 8: who being the brightnes of glorie, Esa. 4. hauing the name of the Father in him, Exod. 23. by himself hath payd a clensing of our sinnes, Esa. 4; and sitteth on the right hand of God in the highest; Ps. 110. Therfore while it is sayd, to day, give glorie to our God, the rock Deut 32.


To the learned Nobilitie, and all other Chrestianes.
As Iewes exceding busied in the Prophets, serched all meanes to disgrace the Gospell, by errours of teachers unskilfull; true defenders should raquite them with groundes of Faith*
 that wold make them in their owne harmes Gods hated: and force them, yf they haue anie drop of grace, to bow their knee at the name of Iesus. For this, I will heare laie downe a few rules; with this humilitie, that yf anie can laie downe better, he yeld, upon occasion, the better.


1
The meanes to know God, is the Word of the old Testame^t and of the New.


2
The Ievves and vve, hold the old Testament, to conteine as great wisdome, as God shewed in the frame of the vvorld.


3
Ther is nothing there, vvhich allureth not, unto the knowledge of God, for saluation; and all of abilitie, should spend daielie a parcell of time that vvaie.


4
As the Prophecies of the old Testament, conteine the vvisdome of God; so the Ievves should think, that the unchangeable God being the first, and manifest in Prophicie, vvold be the last, and shevv performance.


5
The Nevv Testame^t is in euerie respect, equal in vvisdome, to the old; although the Greke tongue doth not express naturall Philosophie in termes fittet to matter as the Ebrevv; yet the wisdome of God is equal in both. The old Testament was to shew, what wisdome Adam once had. The Nevv Testame^t is fittet in spech to the Heathen weakenes.


6
In the litle book of the New testament, God hath sent so great a varietie of pure wise wordes fittet from the dept of wisdome, to the present matter, that the language might tell God to be the auctour of the work; and all are worthie of eternall flames which may spe^d their life in it; and delite more in wordlie pleasures, then honoring God for his wisdome to life in it.



7
The small N. Testament from fishers of Galilie, and the tet maker of Tarsus, and the Physician of Antiochus Magog, will call a learned reader, to the best Grekes through their troupes; from their first to the last; from Homer to Philemon, and Menander. He that knoweth Grecianes, from Homer to Menander, should find, that the little New Testament, will call his memorie through all. One fit for an Archbishoprick in England, wold be commended with such knowledge; and the LL. of a Kinges counsell; who, by Attiq Greke, are all, Episcopi, and Kinges, as Antigonus for all Asia.


8
The Greke translation of the old Testament, made by Ptolemie Philadelphus request, by 72 of Iuda, and used of Iewes, wher the Macedonians scatered them, to South, East, North, and in part to west, this translation, is so skilfullie cited of Galilean fishers and the rest, that all the wittes in the world to this day, cannot folow their steppes, to applie their Greke unto Ebrew. Disdain not, dulnes is the cause of the blindnes. Bishops of Kingdomes should all be Papae, Popes of their owne soile; all (...), Overseers; as in the lxx; All of anie charge be (...). Babes be deceaved in termes. But God deliteth not in fooles. That Episcopus, that knoweth not what God speaketh in the old Testament in Ebrew, nor what in the New in Greke is too too lerned; when he dareth teach others, that which he neuer lerned himself.


9
The Apostles had disputationes with the Thalmudiques; who speake after the maner of the whole natio^ upon the 613 Lawes of Moses: because the letters grauen by Gods writing, were 613; and the Law and Gospel, hath no more matter, they devided all Moses Lawes into 613. A few moo or less they might have made them; but they saw, they fell out verie fitlie to that number. To these Lawes al the Apostles write; and most
 upon these two; Iehovah, thy God, Iehovah is one: and, thou shalt make thee a King of thy brethren. Because the Eternall Sonne, who made the world, sayd, he was the Sonne of God* the Atheist high Bishop, in Bishop Eleazars roome, rent his clothes; as he, and all after him, deserue to be rent with wild horses, that after will take his place; or nevve Ievves Policie. So, because he sayd, he vvas King of the Ievves; they made this a meane to haue him King of the Heathen, and themselves slaves to Cesar. And, vpon this Lavv, Thou shalt reuerence my sanctuarie; vvhen the vvord Eternall, vvho had his tabernacle in us, expounded most graciously hovv the Tabernacle and Temple called unto him; they vvold make this, death, to say: Destroy this Tabernacle, and in three dayes I vvill raise it vp againe* And they as he bade, destroyed the Tabernacle, to their eternall fall, and he raised it up again the third day. They vvho knovv not to vvhat Lavves of Moses these thinges are penned, can neuer take delite in Moses: vvherin Kinges speciallie, as David and Salomon, should spend their time, to be Papes and Bishops of their people; the King able to confer Moses vvith Iesus, vvold be the glory of the vvorld. Novv the holy Apostles folovving the Thalmudiq plain comon places, force all men, eyther to despise God in them: or to be cunning in them. And all vvho protest learning should be ashamed to have them in their librarie, and not in their head. As Bodinus, vvriting of English Lavves, vvas found vnskilful, so al that speak of Sale^ Lavves, not brought vp in the^, vvill trip in speaking of the^


10
A fourth kind of Greke the holie most vvife Apostles have. Termes of Athenes, applied unto voices of Salem in most heavenly brightnes. (...) the brightnes of glorie Ebr. 1. 3. from Esay 4. is used to break the revolting Rabbines. That is spoken of the eternall son our Saviour; and Esay al goeth upon that terme; and Ieremie and Zacharie, alias Ieremie, Mat. ^7, termed by notation, the exalter of Christ, and Zachariefather
 to the second Elias.
Very manie such pearles, the Apostles have, vvhich I vvold handle, yf the King giue that, vvhich novv elv yere, upo^ vvord, I looked for.


11
Manie before me, and I after others, have shevved, that the Thalmudiques haue speches, that proue the Trinitie, vpon Ecclesiastes, and in my two bookes in Ebrew, that, to the Grave* of Hanaw, and the other to the Landgraue, I have shewed that* and Iewes without envy speak the best to all the Princes of Germanie. S. Paul saith for further matter, that he differeth not from the Scribes, for the incarnation and resurrection.
Touching all that the Apostles have written, this must b^ vnderstood; that they wrote to the simple of Iudah; speaking most plainlie to their capacitie. And all their speches differing from Heathen maner, are plain to all Thalmudiques; and the Apostles tendered the weake of the world; speaking to the capacitie of the plainest: that no City but the dullard, that crucified the God of glory, wold say, the scriptures are hard; and religio^ is reduced to these principles.


Conclusion.
Thus I have shevved our Lordes familie; and questiones depending therupon; and I wish all that hope for life, to know first the familie of life. No familie in the vvorld, nor all together match it. Geve glory to our God.



(...)
(...)
 (...)
 (...)
 (...)
 (...)
 (...)
 (...)
 (...)
(...)


