



THE PLAINE Logicall Analysis of the first Chapter.
THis CHAPTER stands of three parts: a Proaeme, a Proposition of Doctrine, an Exhortation to constancy and perseuerance. The Proame is continued from vers. 1. to 12. the Proposition from vers. 12. to the 23. the Exhortation from ver. 23. to the end.
The Proaeme is intended to winne attention and affection; and stands of two parts, the Salutation and the Preface. The Salutation is contained in the two first Verses, and the Preface in the third Verse, and those that follow to the twelfth.
In the Salutation three things are to be obserued: first, the Persons saluting; secondly, the Persons saluted; thirdly, the forme of the Salutation it selfe.
The Persons saluting are two; the Author of the Epistle,Verse 1.2. and an Euangelist, famous in the Churches, who is named as one that did approue the Doctrine of the Epistle, and oommend it to the vse of the Churches. The Author is described: first, by his Name, Paul: secondly, by his Office, an Apostle; which is amplified by the principall efficient, IESVS CHRIST, and by the impulsiue cause, the Will of God. The Euangelist is described: first by his Name, Timotheus: secondly, by his adiunct Estate, a Brother. Thus of the Persons saluting.
The Persons saluted are described; first, by the place of their abode, and so they are the Citizens and inhabitants of Colosse: secondly, by their spirituall estate, which is set out in foure things: 1. They are Saints: 2. They are faithfull: 3. They are Brethren: 4. They are in CHRIST.
The forme of the Salutation expresseth what hee accounteth to be the chiefe good on earth, and that is, Grace and Peace, which are amplified by the Causes or Fountaines of them, from God our Father, and from our Lord Iesus Christ. Thus of the Salutation.
In the Preface the Apostle demonstrateth his loue to them by two things, which hee constantly did for them: hee prayed for them,Verse 3. and
 hee gaue thankes for them: and this hee both propounds generally, vers. 3. and expounds particularly in the Verses following.
In the generall propounding, three things are euidently exprest: first, what he did for them, hee gaue thankes, hee prayed: secondly, to whom, euen to God the Father of our Lord Iesus: thirdly, how long, alwaies, that is, constantly from day to day.
Verse 4.5.Now, in the Verses that follow he expounds and opens this: first, his Thankesgiuing, vers. 4.5.6.7.8. secondly his Prayer, verse 9, 10.11. In the Thankesgiuing hee shewes for what he gaue thankes; which hee referres to two heads, 1. their Graces: 2. The Meanes by which those Graces were wrought and nourished.
The Graces are three, Faith, Loue, Hope, vers. 4.5. Their Faith is amplified by the Obiect, your Faith in Iesus Christ: and their Loue, by the extent of it, your Loue to all the Saints: and their Hope, by the place, which is laide vp for you in heauen.
Verse 5.6.The Meanes of Grace was either principall, vers. 5.6, or Instrumentall, vers. 7.8. The principall ordinary outward meanes was the Word; which is described and set out six waies: 1. by the Ordinance in which it was most effectuall, viz. Hearing, whereof yee haue heard, 2. By the propertie that was most eminent in the working of it, viz. Truth, by the word of truth. 3. By the kinde of word, viz. the Gospell, which is the Gospell. 4. By the prouidence of God in bringing the meanes, which is come vnto you. 5. By the subiect Persons vpon whom it wrought, viz. you and all the world. 6. By the efficacy of it, it is fruitfull and increaseth; which is amplified by the repetition of the persons in whom, and the consideration both of the time, in those words, from the day that you heard, etc. and also, of the adiuuant cause, viz. the hearing and the true knowledge of the Grace of God, from the day that you heard of it, and knew the grace of God in truth.
Thus of the principall Meanes, the ministerie of the Word.
Verse 7.8.The Instrumentall, or the Minister followeth, vers. 7.8. and he is described, 1. by his name, Epaphras: 2. by the adiunct loue of others to him, beloued: 3. by his Office, a Seruant: 4. by his willingnesse to ioyne with others, a fellow-seruant: 5. by his faithfulnesse in the execution of his Office, which is for you a faithfull Minister of Christ: and lastly, by his delight in his people, which he shewes by the good report he chearefully giues of them, viz. who also declared vnto vs your loue in the spirit. Thus of the Thankesgiuing.
Verse 9.10.11.Now in the opening or vnfolding of his practise in praying for them, first, hee affirmes that he did pray for them; and then, declares it by shewing what he prayed for. The affirmation is in the beginning of the ninth Verse, and the Declaration in the rest of the words to the end of the eleuenth Verse.
In the affirmation there are three things: first, an Intimation of a reason, in those words, for this cause: secondly, a consideration of the time, since the day we heard of it: thirdly, the matter affirmed, we cease not to pray for you.

In the Declaration hee instanceth in one thing hee principally prayed about, and that was their Knowledge; which he sets one, first by the Obiect of it, the will of God: secondly, by the Parts of it, Wisedome and Vnderstanding: thirdly, by the End, viz. that they might walke worthy, etc. fourthly, by the cause, his glorious power: and fiftly, by the Effects, Patience, Long-suffering, and Ioyfulnesse.
In setting downe the Obiect, hee expresseth also the measure hee desired; hee would haue them filled with the knowledge of Gods will, and that he addeth in the second part, when he saith, all Wisedome and vnderstanding. The end of all their knowledge hee expresseth more largely, verse 10. which in generall is the eminence of holy life, which hee expresseth in three seuerall formes of speech, viz. 1. to walke worthy of the Lord: 2. to walke in all pleasing: and 3. to be fruitfull in all good workes: vnto the fuller attainment of which hee notes the meanes to be, an increase in the knowledge of God.
Hitherto of the Proaeme.
The Proposition of Doctrine containeth excellent matter concerning our Redemption: where hee proceeds in this order: first,Verse 12.13.14 hee considers the worke of our Redemption; and secondly, the person of our Redeemer. The worke of our Redemption, verse 12.13.14. the person of our Redeemer, verse 15. and those that follow to the 23. and all this he expresseth in forme of Thankesgiuing.
The worke of our Redemption hee describes two waies, after hee hath touched the first efficient cause of it, viz. God the Father: for in the twelfth Verse hee seemes to shew, that in respect of Inchoation, it is a making of vs fit; and in respect of Consummation, it is a causing of vs to enioy an immortall happines in heauen, better then that Adam had in Paradise, or the Iewes in Canaan. And therein hee expresseth, first the manner of tenure or title, in the word Inheritance: secondly, the adiunct praise of the company, viz. the Saints: and thirdly, the perfection of it, it is in light.
Now, in the end of the thirteenth Verse hee seemes to shew that our Redemption stands of two parts: first, deliuerance from the power of darkenesse: secondly, translating into the Kingdome of the Sonne of his loue, one of the many excellent priuiledges of which estate, is noted in the fourteenth Verse, to be remission of sinnes, through the bloud of Christ. And thus of the worke of our Redemption.
The person of our Redeemer is described three waies: first,Verse 15.16.17. in relation to GOD; secondly, in relation to the whole World; thirdly, in relation to the Church.
First, in relation to God, hee is described in the beginning of the fifteenth Verse; and so hee is said to be the Image of the inuisible God.
Secondly, in relation to the whole World, fiue things are to bee said of CHRIST: first, hee is the first begotten of euery Creature, in the end of the fifteenth Verse: secondly, he is the Creator of all things, verse 16. Where note the distinctions of Creatures: 1. they are distinguished by their place; some, in Heauen; some, in Earth: 2. they
 are distinguished by their qualitie; some are visible, some inuisible: 3. the inuisible are againe distinguished, by either Titles or Offices, some are Thrones, some are Principalities, etc. thirdly, all things are for him, this is in the end of the sixteenth Verse: fourthly, he is before all things, in the beginning of verse 17. lastly, all things in him consist. verse 17. the end of it. Thus the Redeemer is described in relation to the whole World.
Verse 18.19.20Thirdly, hee is described as he stands in relation to the Church: and so either to the whole Church, vers. 18.19.20. or to the Church of the Colossians, verse 21.22.
As he stands in relation to the whole Church, hee is said to be the head of the Church, in the beginning of the eighteenth Verse, and this he proues, by shewing that he is a head in three respects.
First, in respect of the dignitie of order towards his Members, and so in the state of grace he is their beginning, and in the state of glory he is the first begotten of the dead; that both among the liuing and the dead he might haue the preheminence.
Secondly, in respect of perfection in himselfe, in that all fulnesse dwells in him; which is amplified by the cause, viz. the good pleasure of the Father, who made him head of the Church, verse 19.
Thirdly, in respect of efficacie or influence through the whole body: for from him flowes Peace and Reconciliation, verse 20. concerning which Reconciliation there are eight things to be noted: 1. the mouing cause, which is to be supplied out of the former Verse, as the Coniunction [and] importeth, viz. it pleased the Father: 2. the Instrument, by him, viz. CHRIST the head: 3. the Benefit it selfe, viz. to reconcile: 4. the subiect Persons in generall, all things: 5. the End, to himselfe: 6. the Effect, making peace: 7. the Meanes, through the bloud of his Crosse: 8. the Distribution of the Persons who, in those words, things in earth and things in heauen. Thus of his relation to the whole Church.
Verse 21 22.In the description of his relation to the Church of the Colossians, he vrgeth them with two things: first, their miserie without Christ: 2. the remedy of their miserie by Christ.
Their miserie stands in two things: first, they are Strangers: secondly, they are Enemies, and both are amplified: 1. by the subiect wherein, viz. not outwardly onely, but in their mindes: 2. by the Cause, viz. wicked workes, verse 22.
In setting downe their remedie hee notes: 1. the Meanes: 2. the End. The meanes is the death of the body of Christs flesh: The end is, that hee might present them holy and vnblameable, and without fault in Gods sight, verse 22.
Thus of his relation to the Church of the Colossians: and thus also of the second part of this Chapter, viz. the Proposition of Doctrine.
The Exhortation followes: where is to be considered; first, the Exhortation it selfe;Verse 23. and then the Reasons. The Exhortation is to perseuerance, both in Faith and Hope.

In the Exhortation to perseuerance in faith, there is worthy to be noted: first, the manner of propounding it, which is with an If: secondly, the dutie required, Continue: thirdly, the manner of the dutie, grounded and stablished: fourthly the obiect, Grace, in Faith.
In the Exhortation to perseuerance in Hope, two things are to be obserued: first, he sets downe the euill to be auoided, viz. vnsetlednesse or reuolting, in the words, Be not mooued away: secondly, hee quickens them by remembring the cause and fountaine of their hope: viz. The hearing of the Gospell preached.
Thus of the Exhortation, the Reasons follow.
There are seauen Reasons to inforce this Exhortation to perseuerance. The first is taken from the consent of Gods Elect, Which are through the world, who haue in the preaching of the Gospell receiued Faith and Hope, as their common portion.
The second Reason is taken from the testimony of PAVL himselfe: and that is two-fold; the first is the testimonie of his Ministerie; This is that hee preacheth, and therefore it should bee that they should keepe fast: the second is the testimonie of his Sufferings; hee hath endured much for the Doctrine of Faith and Hope; and therefore they should continue in it: and to stirre them the more concerning his sufferings, hee sheweth that hee suffered with great Ioy: which hee confirmeth by expressing the reasons of his ioy; first, because they were the afflictions of Christ; secondly, because hee had his part allotted him by the decree of God; and it was his ioy that hee had almost finished what was left for him to suffer; there was but a little remaining: thirdly, because they were but in his flesh: fourthly, because they were for them, and the good of the Church, Verse 24.
The third Reason is taken from the testimonie of God, who inioyned vnto PAVL and other Ministers this dispensation of the Doctrine of Faith and Hope, with a charge that they should see his Word fulfilled herein, Verse 25.
The fourth Reason is taken from the excellencie of the Gospell: which is set out; first by the nature of it, it is a mysterie: secondly, by the antiquitie of it, it was, and was hid since the world beganne, from Ages and Generations: thirdly, by the time of the reuelation of it, now, in the new world: fourthly, by the persons to whom it is reuealed, viz. onely the Saints, all which should moue to care and constancie in keeping of it. Verse 26.
The fift Reason is taken from the excellency of the Subiect of the Gospell, which is no lesse nor worse then Christ reuealed by the preaching of the Gospell. In this reuelation of Christ in the Gospell, consider, first, who reueales him, God: secondly, the cause of his reuelation, the will of God, hee would: thirdly, the manner, viz. in a rich and glorious mysterie: fourthly, the persons to whom, viz. the miserable Gentiles: fiftly, the effects or fruits of it, which are, first, the inhabitation of Christ: secondly, the hope of glory, Verse 27.

Verse 28.The sixt Reason is taken from the end, which is the presenting of them perfect in Iesus Christ, which is amplified by the meanes to bring to this end, which is preaching: and that is amplified, first, by the parts of it, which are teaching and admonishing: and secondly, by the manner, in all Wisedome, Verse 28.
Verse 29.The seuenth Reason is taken from the holy strife of the Apostle, to bring men to this: which is amplified by the great successe which the LORD had giuen. Verse vlt.



A METAPHRASE vpon the first Chapter of the Epistle to the COLOSSIANS.
PAVL,Verse 1 PAVL, an Apostle of Iesus Christ, by the will of God, and Timotheus our Brother. the Messenger or Embassadour-generall for all the Churches of the Gentiles, by Commission from the promised MESSIAH, now come in the flesh, the Lord annointed, separated hereunto, not for his owne worthinesse, or by any priuate motion of his owne, or by commandement of any man, but by the expresse will of God, according to his euerlasting counsell; as also Timotheus, a reuerend Brother, an Euangelist of Christ, with full and free testimonie approueth this Epistle written
To the Citizens and Inhabitants of the Citie of Colosse,Verse 2. To them which are at Colosse, Saints and faithfull brethren in Christ: Grace be with you, and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord IESVS CHRIST. that are separate from the world, and sanctified with true Grace, and faithfully walke in that holy Calling, in brotherly communion one with another, and indissoluable vnion with CHRIST your Sauiour: Grace be with you, and Peace, euen the free fauour of GOD, with all internall, eternall, and needfull externall blessings, from him that both will and can, euen God our Father, through the merits of the Lord our annoynted Sauiour.
We giue thankes vnto God,Verse 3. Wee giue thankes to God, euen the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, alwayes praying for you. Verse 4. Since wee heard of your faith in Christ Iesus, and of your loue toward all Saints. euen that God that by an eternall and vnexpressible generation is the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, remembring you earnestly and constantly in our daily Prayers, being exceedingly fired and inflamed, since we heard by continuall and true report of your precious Faith; by which you haue with firmenesse and stedfastnesse of assurance laide hold vpon IESVS CHRIST, for life and righteousnesse: and the rather, because wee likewise heard of your holy affection to such as haue separated themselues from the prophanenesse of the world, to the seruice of God, especially considering that you haue not the glorious Faith of Christ in respect of persons, but loue all the Saints as well as any.
And (as a People not destitute of any sauing Grace,Verse 5. For the hopes sake which is laid vp for you in heauen, whereof ye haue heard before by the word of truth, which is the Gospell.) wee reioyce to heare of that liuely hope, by which you haue laid hold on the Promise of eternall glory, which God the Father hath prepared and laide vp in Heauen. And the more are we confirmed in this resolution, constantly,
 to praise GOD for these excellent Graces, because they are not sodaine Fancies, or presumptuous Conceits, raised out of the Forge of your owne braine, or conceiued for some corrupt or carnall ends, but were indeede begotten in you by the mighty working of the most sweet Doctrine of Reconciliation, proued in it selfe, and by effect, to be a Word of Truth: euen that word of the LORD, long foretolde, now truely reuealed and accomplished also, begetting the true forme of pietie in you, with constancie and true vprightnesse, both of heart and life.
Verse 6. Which is come vnto you, euen ^s it is vnto all the world, and ^s fruitful, as it is also among you, from the day that yee heard and truely knew the grace of God.This is the word of Reconciliation which is come vnto you, as by incredible power and swiftnesse, it is now to the greatest part of the world, euen to people of all sorts and Nations, causing them to shew the soundnesse of their Conuersion, by the daily fruits of amendment of life: and this increaseth continually in all places, as it doth, and hath done with you, since the very first day that you truely heard and effectually beleeued this rich Doctrine of the grace of GOD.
Verse 7. As yee also learned of Epaphras our deare fellow seruant, which is for you a faithfull Minister of Christ.And this very Doctrine, which you haue heard of Epaphras, is the selfe same diuine truth that is gone all abroad the world: of Epaphras I say, whom wee all reuerence as our deare fellow-Seruant, being assured that he is for your best good, a faithfull and most humble Minister of Iesus Christ.
Verse 8. Who hath also declared vnto vs your loue, which yee haue by the Spirit.Verse 9. For this cause wee also, since the day wee heard of it, cease not to pray for you, and to desire that yee might be fulfilled with knowledge of his will, in all wisedome and spirituall vnderstanding.Verse 10. That yee might walke worthy of the Lord, and please him in all things, being fruitfull in all good workes, and increasing in the knowledge of God.Hee hath with great contentment boasted of you, in reporting to vs your spirituall and heauenly affection to God, and godlinesse, and one towards another: and for the same cause since the first time we heard of your praises in the Gospell, wee haue beene importunate without ceasing, praying for you, and beseeching God to increase in you, and make compleate your knowledge of his reuealed will, not only for contemplation, but for practise also, with a gracious experience of the working of the Spirit.
That yee might carry your selues in a holy eminency of godly conuersation, striuing to proportion your Obedience in a greater degree then ordinary, as might become the great measure of Gods Mercies of all sorts towards you, expressing a liuely kinde of pleasingnesse, both in carriage towards God and man, being refreshed with the sweetnes of acceptation in your seruices, and that you might extend your carefulnesse to beare fruit, not in one kinde or some few, but in all kindes and sorts of good workes, daily increasing in a holy acquaintance with the sacred nature of God, which is both the effect and cause of all comfortable progresse in holy life.
Verse 11. Strengthened with all might through his glorious power vnto all patience, and long-suffering with ioyfulnes.That so growing vp to a ripe age in CHRIST, in the sanctification both of soule and body and spirit, in all the Graces and Duties of CHRIST and Christian life, through the assistance of the glorious power of GOD, in the vse of all meanes and helpes appointed of God, yee might accomplish your most holy profession, with singular comfort and contentment, being able cheerefully and with all patience and Long-suffering to beare the Crosses, Tentations, Infirmities, Persecutions, and whatsoeuer Wrongs or Indignities might befall
 you waiting for the Promise of GOD, being neuer weary of welldoing.
And as wee haue thought good thus to let you vnderstand our loue towards you, and our reioycing for the prosperity of your soules;Verse. 12. Giuing thankes vnto the Father, which hath made vs me^te to bee partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. so wee thought good to write vnto you, both to put you in minde of the most holy doctrine of CHRIST, as also to exhort and beseech you to be constant in the Faith and hope you haue receiued, without listening to the entising speeches of false Teachers, which as wicked Seducers would beguile your soules of that high prise of your most holy Calling.
What thankes can we euer sufficiently giue vnto GOD the Father of CHRIST and Christians, that of his meere Grace and free Loue, hath by a holy Calling, made vs, in his account, meete to haue a Lot in that heauenly Canaan, in that sweet and eternall fellowship with the spirits of the iust, not onely reuealed vnto vs in this light of the Gospell, but to be inioyed by vs in the light of Heauen?
And hath also already deliuered vs from that wofull estate,Vers. 13. Who hath deliuered vs from the power of darkenesse, and hath translated vs into the Kingdome of his deare Sonne. in which the darkenesse of Gentilisme, and Sinne, and Ignorance, and Aduersitie, and Death, and Damnation, had power ouer vs, and hath translated vs into the Kingdome of Iesus Christ, the Son of his loue, inrolling our names among the liuing, and accounting vs as Subiects of this Kingdome of Grace, and Heyres, euen Coheyres with Christ, of the glory to be reuealed.
And howsoeuer our Sanctification be as yet vnperfect,Verse 14. In whom wee haue redemption through his bloud, that is, the forgiuenes of sinnes. yet are we not onely bought with a price, but effectually and truely redeemed, and in some sort fully too: for in our Iustification we are perfectly reconciled, and all our sins absolutely forgiuen vs, as if they had neuer beene committed, through his merits that shed his bloud for vs.
Who is a most liuely and perfect image of the inuisible God,Verse 15. Who is the Image of the inuisible God, the first borne of euery creature. not onely as hee workes Gods Image in man, or because he appeared for God the Father, to the Fathers in the old Law; or because as man he had in him the likenesse of God in perfect holinesse and righteousnes; or because he did by his Miracles, as it were, make God visible in his flesh; but as he was from euerlasting the very essentiall naturall Image of God, most absolutely in his diuine person resembling infinitely the whole nature of his Father: and therefore is to be acknowledged as the begotten of God by an eternall generation: so the first begotten of euery Creature, as he was before them; so is he therefore the principal heyre of all things, by whom, and in whose right,Verse 16. For by him were all things created, which are in heauen, and which are in earth, things visible and inuisible; whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Princip^lities, or Powers, all things were created by him and for him. all the Saints doe inherit what they haue or looke for.
For by him all things in heauen or earth, whether visible or inuisible were created; yea, the very Angels themselues, of what Order or Office soeuer, whether Thrones or Dominions, Principalities or Powers, were all made my him of nothing; and therefore he, and not they are to be worshipped: in short, all things were created by him; yea, and for him too.

Verse 17. And the is before all things, and in him all things cons^st.And hee was from euerlasting with GOD the Father, before all Angels or other Creature was made, and still all things are preserued and continued as consisting in him; yea, the very Angels haue their confirmation from him.
Verse 18. And hee is the head of the body of the Church: hee is the beginning, and the first borne of the dead, that in all things hee might haue the preeminence.And he is that glorious and alone Mysticall head of the Church, which in an holy order and relation, by the admirable worke of the Spirit, as a bond vniting together, is a true body vnto CHRIST: and worthily is he to be acknowledged a head vnto the Church, for three great Reasons: first, in respect of Dignity: for hee alone hath the primacy: and ought to be acknowledged to haue preheminence in all things: for if wee respect the estate of Grace, he is the beginning of all goodnesse, and if wee respect the estate of Glory, hee is the first borne of the dead; not onely because he is risen himselfe in his body, from the graue, but also because by his onely power all his members shall rise at the last day: and also, because that in the death of all the righteous, he doth still continue to, and in, the very last gaspe, his assistance and holy presence,
Verse 19. For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fulnesse dwell.Secondly, hee is fittest; yea, onely fit, to be the head of the Church, because it hath pleased the Father, that in him should all fulnes only dwell, so that he is a head in respect of plenitude, for the behoofe of the members.
Verse 20. And by him to reconcile all things vnto himselfe, and to set at peace through the bloud of his Crosse both the things in earth, and the things in heauen.Verse 21. And you which were in times past strangers and enemies, because your mindes were set in euill workes, hath he now also reconciled.And thirdly, hee is a head in respect of influence; for from him onely comes downe to the members, all peace with God, and all the fruits of that reconciliation: for it is hee that made peace, by the bloud of his Crosse, and that hath estated happinesse vpon all the Saints, reconciling them to God: I say, all the Saints, both those that are in heauen already, and those that being yet on earth, hope for that glory in heauen hereafter. And that this is so, you are able out of your own experience to auouch: for whereas by nature you were strangers from GOD and the life of God, you were very enemies to God and all his goodnesse: and this alienation and enmitie was apparantly seated in your very mindes, through the euill workes of all sorts which abounded in your liues;Verse 22. In the body of his flesh, throgh death, to make you holy, and vnblameable, and without fault in his sight. yet you know that CHRIST taking our Nature vpon him, and in that nature suffering death for you, hath reconciled you to GOD and by the Gospell a-new created you, that hee might present you to GOD, as holy and vnblameable, and without fault in his sight, couering your wants and hiding the euill of your workes, through his owne Intercession, and allowing you the benefit of the Couenant of Grace, through which vprightnesse will be in him accepted in stead of perfection.
Verse 23. If ye continue, grounded and stablished in the faith, and be not mooued away from the hope of the Gospell, whereof yee haue heard, and which hath bin preached vnto euery creature which is vnder heauen, whereof I Paul am a Minister.Now what remaines, but that seeing wee haue such precious Doctrine, you should be exhorted to hold out with all Christian perseuerance, setling and establishing your hearts in the beleefe of the truth, suffering your selues not to be carried away with any contrary winde of Doctrine, from the confidence of that hope of your reconciliation with God, which hath been propounded and wrought in you, by the preaching of the Gospell; and the rather, because vnlesse you doe so
 perseuere, you cannot haue sound comfort in your right to the ben^^^^ before named. Besides, there are many reasons may induce you to the resolutenesse of perseuerance in the Doctrin you haue already beleeued and hoped in. First, it is the Doctrine which all Gods Elect, with one consent, haue receiued throughout the world; and vpon it haue founded their Faith and Hope. Secondly, the consideration of what yee see in me may somewhat moue you, and that if you eyther consider my Ministery or Sufferings: for my Ministery, I haue so throughly informed my selfe concerning the Doctrine which Epaphras hath taught you, that I see it in all things, for the substance of it, to be the same which I my selfe haue taught in euery place.
Now for my Sufferings, it is apparant to all sorts of men,Verse 24. Now I reioyce in my sufferings for you, and fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake which is the Church. that I haue endured my part of all kindes of Troubles for the Gospell, which I would not haue done, if I had not had full assurance of the truth of it, neyther doe I repent me of my afflictions, but reioyce in them rather, and that for diuers reasons. First, because they are the afflictions of CHRIST, that is, such as he accounts to be his. Secondly, because I know that in Gods Decree I haue my part of troubles assigned me; and it is my ioy, to think that in so good a cause I haue almost fulfilled them. Thirdly, because these Afflictions extend but to my flesh and outward man. And lastly, because it is for your good I suffer, euen for the confirmation of your Faith, and for the good of the whole body of Christ, which is the Church.
Thirdly,Verse 25. Whereof I am a Minister, according to the dispensation of God, which is giuen mee vnto you ward, to fulfill the word of God.Verse 26. Which is the mystery hid since the world beganne, and from all ages, but now is made manifest to his Saints. I haue receiued this Commission concerning the Gospel immediately from GOD himselfe, with strict charge, that for your good I should pursue the execution of it, till not only Faith and Hope were wrought, but till we saw the worke and word of God, euen accomplished and fulfilled.
Fourthly, what can there be more excellent and worthy to be beleeued and trusted in, then this Gospell of IESVS CHRIST, and our reconciliation in him, seeing it is that dreadfull Mystery, which worlds of men haue wanted, as being hid from whole Ages and Generations hitherto, and now by the vnspeakeable mercy of GOD is reuealed by preaching vnto the Saints, as a peculiar treasure entrusted to them.
And fiftly, the rather should you hereupon settle,Verse 27. To whom God would make knowne what is the riches of this glorious mystery among the Gentiles, which riches is Christ in you, the hope of glory. considering the admirable subiect of the Gospell: for it is the good pleasure of GOD in this rich and glorious Mystery of the Gospell, to make known to the poore Gentiles, Christ Iesus himselfe, and that by giuing him therein to dwell in your hearts by Faith, and as your assured and onely hope of immortall glory.
Sixtly,Verse 28. Whom we preach, admonishing euery man, and teaching euery man in all wisedome, that we may present euery man perfect in Christ Iesus. neyther should you euer cast away the confidence of your assurance and hope, or grow weary heerein, seeing it is the drift and end of all our preaching, wherein wee eyther admonish or instruct you, leading you through all sorts of wisedome in the word of GOD. I say, the end of all is, to present you, at the length, perfect and compleate euery one of you, in CHRIST IESVS,
 in some acceptable measure of Sinceritie and Knowledge in him.
Verse. 29. Whereunto I also labour and str^^e, according to his working which worketh in me mightily.And s^^^hly, being incouraged with that successe which the LORD hath giuen to my ministery, I will labour, at I haue laboured, and still striue with all possible diligence and endeauour in this glorious worke: hoping that this also may proue a motiue, among the rest, to perswade with you, to keepe Faith and Hope to the end, with all Constancie and holy perseuerance.



CERTAINE OF THE Chiefest things obserued in the Notes vpon this first CHAPTER.

WHat rules wee must obserue in alledging the examples of godly men sinning. fol. 4.
The assurance of a lawfull Calling serues for many vses. fol 5.
Gods Children called Saints in this life, in foure respects. fol. 7.
Comforts for the dispised Saints, with answere of some Obiections. fol. 7. 8.
How Saints may be knowne. fol. 9.
Christian faithfulnesse is to be shewed in fiue things in spirituall things, and in three things in temporall things. fol. 10. 11.
Idlenesse in Professors, taxed. fol. 11.
Seuerall Vses arising out of the consideration of this, that wee are Brethren. fol. 13.
How wee may get into Christ, and how we may know whether we be in Christ. fol. 13. 14
Spirituall things are the best things for nine reasons. fol. 15.
The Motiues and the manner of Thankesgiuing to God. fol. 20.
Foure Rules of tryall in our Thankesgiuing to God for others. fol. 21.
A Child of God neuer giues thankes but he hath cause to pray; and contrariwise. fol. 21.
Foure sorts of prayers for others. fol. 21. and 68.
Fiue reasons to warrant praying euery day. fol. 22.
The Sorts, Obiects, Parts, Degrees, Benefits, Lets, Signes of Faith, with the misery of the want of Faith, the incouragements to beleeue, and the defects of the common Protestants Faith. fol. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28 29. 30. 31. 32.
Indiscretion is not the cause of the reproaches and troubles of Christians. fol. 33.
The surest way to get Credit is to get Grace. fol. 34.
Foure Signes of Vaine-glory. fol. 34.
Seauen Obseruations about Loue. fol. 35.
Seauen things to be shewed in Christian Loue. fol. 36.
Foure things in the manner of our loue. fol. 37.
Motiues to perswade to the exercise of mutuall loue, fol. 38. 39. 40.
Eight helpes of Loue. fol. 41. 42.
The defects of the common Protestants Charitie or Loue. fol. 42. 43.
Eight Differences betweene true Hope, and common Hope: and seauen meanes to breede true Hop^* fol. 45. 46.
What wee must doe if we would haue heauen when we die. fol. 46.
What profit good men get by hearing Sermons. fol. 49. 50.
The sorts of euill hearers, with their miserie. fol. 50. 51.
How the Word is said to be a word of truth: and that it worketh truth in vs six wayes. fol. 52.

Concerning the Gospell, what it containes, who may, and who doe receiue it: and the effects of it. fol. 53. 54.
Motiues to fruitfulnesse, what fruit wee should beare, and the meanes to make vs more fruitfull. fol. 55. 56.
There is a season for fruit. fol. 58.
Seauen things to be done, that we may heare the Word in truth. fol. 59.
The causes of fruitlesse hearing. fol. 60.
The great commodities of assurance. ibid.
Who loue not God, and who loue not men. fol. 64.
To loue as Christ loued vs, hath foure things in it. ibid.
Incouragements to prayer. fol. 66. 67.
Why many pray and speede not. fol. 67.
What wee should seeke to know. Motiues to knowledge, and rules for attaining knowledge. fol. 70. 71.
Signes of a naturall man. fol. 73.
Who make Schisme in the Church. fol. 73.
Rules for Contemplation. fol. 75.
Tenne Obiections against Knowledge answered out of Prou. 8. fol. 75. 76.
Wherein Wisedome consists: Wisedomes order in seauen things: Wisedomes specialties in the behauiour; first, of the Heart in fiue things; secondly, of the tongue in seauen things; thirdly, of the Conuersation in eight things. fol. 76. 77. 78.
Motiues to holy life: the causes of prophanenes: rules for holinesse, and the gaine of holinesse. fol. 78 79. 80.
Nine Reasons against merit. fol. 81.
What it is to walke worthy of the Lord: it hath sixe things in it. fol. 82.
Eight rules to be obserued if we would please God: and sixe rules if we would please men. fol. 83. 84.
How Gouernours in families may walke pleasingly: and how inferiours in the familie may please their superiours: and the like of Ministers and the people, and Magistrates and their Subiects. fol. 84. 85.
Seauen things to be obserued if wee would walke in all pleasing towards our owne consciences. fol. 85.
What workes are not good workes: and what rules must bee obserued to make our workes good: and what workes in particular are goodworkes: and seuen ends of goodworkes. fol. 86. 87.
What are the lets of increase of Knowledge: and how wee may know when wee increase in knowledge: and what we must doe that we may increase. fol. 88.
How God is made knowne, and who are charged not to know God: and how it comes to passe that man knowes not his God: and what wee must doe that we may know God. fol. 88. 89.
Signes of a weake Christian or an infant in Grace. fol. 89.
What is in the weake Christian, notwithstanding his wants. fol. 90.
Comforts for a weake Christian, and helps for his strengthening. fol. 90. 91.
Signes of a strong Christian. fol. 91.
The extent of the power of God: and what God cannot doe. fol. 92.
Of the glory of God, and how many waies it is reuealed. fol. 92. 93.
About falling from Grace and Perseuerance. fol. 93.
Motiues to Patience: and what wee must doe that wee may bee patient: and seauen things wherein we should shew patience. fol. 94. 95.
Of Long-suffering, and how to preuent anger and desire of reuenge. fol. 95.
What wee must doe that we might get constant Ioyfulnesse of heart. fol. 96.
How the Father may be said to redeeme vs. fol. 97.
Markes of a Childe of God. fol. 98.
How Christ died for all men. fol. 98. 99.

Fi^e sorts of men in the Church not made fit for (...). fol. 99.
The diuision of Canaan by Lot, shadowes out many things in the kingdome of he^^^n. fol. 200.
Our inheritance is in light in six respects. fol. 201
A threefold light. ibid.
A sixe-fold darkenesse in euery vnregen^rate man. fol. 102.
Nine things in euery one that is deliuered from darkenesse. fol. 103.
The excellencie of Christs Kingdome, and the priuiledges of his Subiects. fol. 105.
Foure waies of Redemption. fol. 108.
The comforts of the Doctrine of remission of sinnes. ibid.
The terrour of the Doctrine of remission of sinnes. fol. 109.
What a man should do to get his sinnes forgiuen him. ibid.
Christ more excellent then all Monarches in diuers respects. fol. 110.
Difference betweene image and Similitude: Gods image is in man three waies: the difference betweene the Image of God in man and in Christ: Christ is the Image of GOD three waies: hee is the Image of God as God: and as man three waies. fol. 110. 111.
How many wayes Christ is said to be first begotten. fol. 113.
Foure words confute foure errors about the Creation. fol. 115.
Diuers opinions about the meaning of the words, Thrones, Dominions, etc. ibid.
All things are for Christ in diuers respects. fol. 117.
The eternitie of Christ described and explained. fol. 118.
How all things consist in Christ. ibid.
Many obiections about the preseruation of the righteous answered out of the 37. Psalme, fol. 102. But if we would be thus preserued, wee must looke to nine things, noted out of that Psalme. fol. 121.
The benefits that flow from Christ as Head of the Church. fol. 121.
Of the Church. fol. 122. 123.
How Christ is the beginning. fol. 124.
A three-fold primogeniture in Christ. fol. 124.
Christ was first begotten among the dead in three respects. fol. 125.
Christ is first in diuers respects. ibid.
What it is to yeeld Christ the preheminence. fol. 126.
All fulnesse is in Christ in fiue respects. fol. 127.
Tenne fruits of the bloud of Christ. fol. 132.
How many waies men sinne against Christs bloud. ibid.
Whether Angells be reconciled to Christ or no. fol. 133.
Wicked men are strangers in fiue respects. fol. 136.
Wicked men are enemies both actiuely and passiuely: and how. fol. 137.
The reasons why most men minde not their misery. fol. 138.
Sixe distinct things in our reconciliation by Christ. fol. 139.
Why the Church is called all things. ibid.
Christs body better then ours in fiue respects. fol. 139. Not like ours in two things, and like ours in three respects. fol. 140.
How many waies Christ doth present vs to God. fol. 141.
How Christians may be said to be holy, vnblameable, and without fault in Gods sight in this life. fol. 142.
Internall holinesse must haue seauen things in it. ibid.
What externall holinesse must haue in it. fol. 143.
Signes of an vpright heart. 143. and Meanes and Motiues.
By what meanes men are induced to fall away. fol. 144.
How the faithfull may fall away. ibid.
Seauen things from which the Elect can neuer fall. fol. 145.
Concerning perseuerance, 1. Motiues, 2. Meanes, 3. Helpes. ibid.

How many helpes a Christian hath from the very spirit of God that is in him, and from the Word. fol. 146.
The priuiledges of an established and grounded heart: and what wee must do that we might be grounded and stablished. fol. 147.
What a free spirit is. fol. 147.
Why many after so long profession are so vnsteled. fol. 147. 148.
Concerning Hope: 1. what Hope is not true Hope: 2. what persons haue no Hope: 3. what are the effects and properties of true Hope. fol. 149.
How the Gospell is preached to euery creature. fol. 151.
Why godly men are so cheerefull in affliction. fol. 153.
How Paul was said to fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ. fol. 154.
How our afflictions are the afflictions of Christ. fol. 155.
Twelue Arguments against the Crosse. fol. 157.
How we may know we are of Gods houshold. fol. 158.
What good men get by their Ministers. fol. 157.
How many waies the Gospell is hidden: 161. and how reuealed. fol. 165.
What a ciuill honest man wants. fol. 165. 166.
What we must do to preserue affection to the word. fol. 167.
The Gospell is a glorious Mysterie. fol. 168.
Nine Vses of the Doctrine of the calling of the Gentiles. ibid.
How Christ is conceiued in the soule of the faithfull. fol. 170. 171. 172.
How we may know that Christ is in our hearts. fol. 170. 171. 172.
The Benefits that come by the inhabitation of Christ. fol. 170. 171. 172.
What entertainment we ought to giue him. fol. 170. 171. 172.
Who haue not Christ in them.
The honour, dutie and reproofe of Ministers. fol. 173.
Reasons to perswade vs to suffer admonition. fol. 174.
How we are perfect in this life. fol. 176.




AN EXPOSITION VPON THE WHOLE Epistle to the COLOSSIANS.




COLOS. 1.1.2.

Verse 1. Paul an Apostle of IESVS CHRIST, by the will of God and Timotheus a Brother.
2. To them which are at Colosse, Saints and faithfull Brethren in CHRIST. Grace be with you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord IESVS CHRIT.


TWO things are worthy our consideration in this Epistle, the Author and the Matter:A Description of the Author of this Epistle. the Author was PAVL, concerning whom memorable things are recorded: he was an Hebrew, of the Hebrewes, of the tribe of Beniamin,Phil. 3.5. a Pharise, the son of a Pharise, born in Tharsus of Cilicia, circumcised the 8. day, brought vp in the knowledge of the Law, and Pharisaicall institutions, by Gamaliel, a great Doctor among the Iewes,Acts 23.6. acquainted also with the languages of forrain nations, as his quoting of the authorities of Greeke Poets shewes:Acts 22.3. Titus 1.12. and in his youth, for the righteousnes externall, which was after the Law, he was vnrebukeablePhil. 3.6. and full of zeale, but withall a violent and blasphemous persecuter.Gal. 1.13.14. His calling was exceeding glorious, his Office vnto which he was called, was great and honorable, (viz.) to be Legate of CHRIST,1 Tim. 1. the Doctor of the Gentiles,Acts 9.15. Acts 26.16. the Minister of God, of Christ, of the Spirit, of the new Testament, of the Gospell of reconciliation and of righteousnesse;1 Tim. 2. 2 Cor. 6. and 11. and 3. Ephes. 3. 2 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 3. 1 Cor. 15. He was famous for his labour in the Word, by which hee caused the Gospell to runne from Hierusalem to Illiricum with admirable swiftnesseRom 15.19., as also for his faithfulnesse of mind, for his pure conscience, for his affection to the faithfull, for his humanity and curtesie, for his continencie, for his humility, for his care for the Churches, for his honest conuersation, innocencie and constancie2 Cor. 1.12.. he was of nature earnest, accute and heroycall.
Adde vnto these, the praises of his sufferings, what reproach, what stripes, what imprisonments, what beating with rods, and such like wrongs did he endure, fiue times of the Iewes receiued hee forty stripes saue one;2 Cor. 11.22. to 30. once was hee stoned, thrice hee suffered ship-wracke, night and day was hee in the deepe Sea; in iourneying often in perils of waters, of robbers, of his owne Nation, of the Gentiles; in the Citie, in the Wildernes, in the Sea, and among false brethren; how hee was daily pressed with wearinesse, painefulnesse, watchings,
 hunger, thirst, fastings, cold and nakednesse, besides the incumbrances and cares for the businesse of the Churches.
A foure-fold testimony co^cerning the doctrine of Paul.Finally, we may consider the testimony giuen to his doctrine to proue it to be without al mixture of error. And this testimony standeth of 4. branches: 1. His immediate calling: 2. His immediate instruction and information. 3. The visible donation of the holy Ghost, which was not onely giuen to himselfe, but he also conferred it, by imposition of hands to others. 4. His working of Miracles,Acts 9. Acts 19.6. 2 Cor. 12.12. Acts 20. for so he saith of himselfe, The signes of an Apostle were wrought among you, with all patience, with wonders, and great workes: hee raised a man from the dead. Neyther could the myracles wrought by him be small, when Handkerchiefes were brought from his body to the sicke, and their diseases departed from them;Acts 19.12. yea, Deuils went out of them.
Lastly, this noble Iew, more famous among the Apostles then euer the great Saul was among the Prophets, was beheaded by the Emperor Nero, the 29. of Iune, in the 70. yeare of the Lord. And all this should cause vs with all reuerence, both to teach and learne the Celestiall doctrine deliuered in writing to the Churches by him.
Conceits about the Apostles writings.Thus of the Author, the Matter followeth: I meane not to search after the descants and conceits that some obserue concerning the workes of this Worthy, as that he should write ten Epistles to the Churches, to answer the number of ten Commandements; and foure Epistles to particular persons, to expresse his agreement with the foure Euangelists; onely this in generall for his hearers or Auditorie: hee had the Romanes, the greatest in the earth for power: the Graecians, the most famous for witte and learning: and the Iewes or Hebrewes, of greatest note for diuine vnderstanding of the Law of God. But to leaue this, I come to the Matter of the Epistle, and obserue three things.

1 To whom he writeth.
2 Vpon what occasion.
3 The treatise it selfe.

What Colosse was, and how the people were conuerted.For the first, Colosse was a Citie in Phrigia, in Asia the lesse, neere to Laodicea and Hierapolis. The Church in this citie was not first gathered by Paul, but as some thinke, by Epaphras, whom they take to haue bin one of the seauenty Disciples, and an Euangelist. Some say they were first conuerted by Archippus who is mentioned, Ch. 4.17. and that Epaphras, one that was borne amongst them,Chap. 4.17. being instructed by Paul, was sent thither to build them vp further.
The occasion of the Epistle: Crosse-teaching in his timeFor the second: the Occasion of this Epistle was this; After that there was a Church here gathered by the power of the Gospell, Sathan after his wonted manner, stirred vp corrupt teachers, who by crosse and contrary teaching did mightily labour to disgrace the Ministery, and hinder the efficacie of the doctrine of their faithfull Minister: these men taught Philosophicall Positions, and vaine Speculations, vrged the ceremonies of the Iewes, and brought in praying to Angels, and such like infectious stuffe. Epaphras hereupon being oppressed with the madnesse and fury of those Impes of Sathan, resorts to Paul, who lay in prison at Rome, and acquainting him with the state of the Church, procures him to write this Epistle.
The Epistle diuided into fiue parts.Thirdly, the treatise it selfe stands of fiue parts: first, an Exordium, ch. 1. to v. 12. Secondly, a Proposition, liuely expressing the doctrine of Christ, and his Kingdom, from v. 12. to the 23. Thirdly, an Exhortation, containing a perswasion, from v. 23. of ch. 1. to v. 8. of ch. 2. and a disswasion, from v. 8. of ch. 2. to the end of ch. 2. Fourthly, an institution of manners, giuing rules first in generall, ch. 3.1. to 18. secondly in speciall, from v. 18. of ch. 3. to v. 2. of ch. 4. And lastly, a conclusion, from v. 2. of ch. 4. to the end. Or briefely thus, setting aside the Entrance and the Conclusion, the Apostle entreates of matters of Faith, in the first two Chapters, and of matters of Life, in the two last.

And thus in generall of the whole Epistle, with the persons to whom,The Exordium and the parts thereof. and the occasion thereof. The first part of the Epistle in the Exordium, and i^ stands of two members, a Salutation and a Preface. The Salutation, vers. 1.2. and the Preface from vers. 3. to the 12.
In the Salutation I consider three things: first,The salutation diuided. the persons saluting: secondly, the persons saluted: thirdly, the forme of the Salutation. The persons saluting are an Apostle and an Euangelist; the Apostle is described by his Name,The Persons saluting. PAVL; by his Office, an Apostle; by the principall efficient that preferred him to that office, and both appointed him his seruice, and protected him in it, (viz.) IESVS CHRIST; and lastly by the impulsiue cause, (viz.) the will of God. The Euangelist is described: first, by his name, TIMOTHY: secondly, by his adiunct estate, a Brother.
First, of the words that describe the Apostle; and heere first the meaning of them, and then the Doctrines to be obserued out of them.
Paul.] The Apostle at his Circumcision was called Saul. For,The name of the Apostle. being of the Tribe of Beniamin, it seemes the men of that Tribe did in honour of their King Saul, who was the first of all the Kings of Israel;Why he was called Saul. and by a kind of emulation to retaine the first glory of their Tribe (more respecting the outward honour of Saul, in that he was a King, then the curse of God in his reiection) did vse to giue the name of Saul to their Children very often as a name of great honour.
And not vnfitly did this name light vpon this Beniamite: both if we regard him as he was before his calling or after: before his calling, as the olde Saul persecuted Dauid, so did this youngling Saul (comming freshly out of the mint of a Pharise) persecute Christ, who came of Dauid. And after his calling, as it was said of olde Saul, by way of Prouerbe, Is Saul also among the Prophets? So may it be said of this Saul, by way of honour, Saul is among the Apostles: and that not the least of the Apostles, for hee laboured more abundantly then they all.
Concerning this other name PAVL, Writers are diuersly minded.Diuers opinions about the name Paul. Some thinke that thirteene yeeres after Christ, by the condict of the Apostles, he receiued both his Apostleship ouer the Gentiles, and this name. Others thinke, that hee tooke vnto himselfe this name of Paulus, to professe himselfe the least of all Apostles. Others thinke the name was giuen him for some eminent prayse of some quality or action, as Peter was called Cephas, and Iames and Iohn called Boanarges, and Iacob called Israel. Some thinke hee had two names, as Salomon was called also Iedidiah, and Matthew called Leui, and these should seeme to bee giuen by his Parents, to professe his interest amongst both Iewes and Romanes. Among Iewes by the Hebrew name Saul, and among the Romanes, by the Latine name Paulus. Some thinke it is but the varying of the language, as Iohn, Iochanan, Iehan, and Iohannes, all are but differing in seuerall languages. Lastly, it is most likely he was called Paul for memory of the first spoyles hee brought into the Church of Christ, not the head but the heart of Sergius Paulus, that noble Romane,Acts 1.3.9. and this is more probable, because in all the Chapters before, hee is neuer called Paul.
Apostle.] This worde in the generall signification importeth one that is sent, and so Epaphroditus is called an Apostle:Phil. 2.15. The signification and Etimology of the word Apostle. but the Etymologie of the worde is larger then the vsuall application of it: for, it is vsually giuen to the twelue principall Disciples, and to Paul and Barnabas: and so it is vsed as a tearme of distinction from other Church-Officers: for, for the body, they had widdowes for the sicke, and Deacons for the poore: and for the soule, they had Pastors and Doctors for exhortation and instruction.And what Apostles were. And these were standing and ordinary Officers. Now there were extraordinary, viz.
 Apostles and Euangelists: the Apostles were men immediately called by CHRIST, and had generall charge ouer all Churches, for planting and gouerning them: the Euanglists were called most by the Apostles, and sent with spirituall charge whether the Apostles saw most conuenient.
The vse and signification of the worde Iesus Christ.Iesus Christ.] These titles giuen to the Messias are not in vaine vsed, or ioyned together: for, by these names both his Office and his Worke are described. In the one name (CHRIST) shewing what he vndertooke to be, in the other shewing what he was, viz. IESVS, a Sauiour: the one Name, (viz.) IESVS, an Hebrew word, is for the Iewes, and the other Name CHRIST, a Greeke worde, is for the Gentiles: the one shewing that he was GOD (for,Esay 45.21. besides mee there is no Sauiour) the other shewing that hee was Man, (viz.) Christ the annointed. For, in respect of his humane nature chiefly is this annoynting with graces or gifts attributed to Christ.
Againe, Christs were of two sorts, (viz) false Christs, Mat. 24. and true Christs:Diuers Christs the true were eyther Typicall, and so the Prophets, Priests and Kings were annointed (hence in the Psalme, Touch not my Christs, etc.) or Essentiall, and so onely the Sonne of Mary.
By the will of God.] These words are expounded, Galat. 1.1. where hee is said to be an Apostle, not of men, as Princes send ciuill Embassadours, or as the Iewes sent false Apostles; nor by men, as Timothy, Titus, Luke, etc. who were ordayned by man:Titus 1.4. and as Titus did ordaine Elders. Or else not by the Commendation, paines or instruction of any man.
Three Doctrines from the first wordsPaul an Apostle.] Here three Doctrines may be obserued: first, great sinners may proue great Saints; a great enemie of sincere Religion may prooue  a great founder of Churches; a great oppressor of Gods Seruants may proue a great feeder of Gods flocke.Great sinners may prooue great Saints. In a word, a persecuter, as we see heere, may be an Apostle. This Doctrine as it doth excellently sample out Gods vnsearchable mercy, so it teacheth vs not to despaire of any, but to continue  to pray for euen the vilest and most spitefull aduersaries, and the most open oppugners, and vsuall traducers of Gods causes and people; and to waite vpon God to see if at any time hee will giue them repentance to build that they haue destroyed, and to gather that they haue so much striuen to scatter. Secondly,2 Affliction of conscience. this Doctrine is of singular vse in the cure of the hardest of diseases, viz. affliction of conscience: for in some of the deare Seruants of God (that haue appearing vpon them some signes of effectuall Calling, a right euidence of hope from Gods promises, sweet pledges and signifying seales of Gods fauour, by the witnesse of the spirit of Adoption) yet there ariseth some scruples about eyther the multitude or greatnesse of their sins: now the healing of their errors,Dangerous mistaking. and vncomfortable mistakings doth most an end arise from the right application of such examples as this. I say, a right application: for, the most men doe dangerously and damnably mistake in alleadging the instances of the great sins of Gods seruants.4 Rules to be obserued in alledging examples of great sinners repenting. But if thou obserue these foure rules thou canst not mistake or misapply: First, if thou bring not in the examples of Dauid, Peter, Paul, or any other, to patronize thy sinne, or to defend or nourish thy selfe in a sinfull course. Secondly, if thou alleadge them not to wrest Gods promises, as to make the promises of mercy generall, when they are restrayned with their seuerall limitations. Thirdly, when they are not brought out to fortifie a prophane heart against the ordinances of God, as reproofes eyther publike or priuate. Fourthly, when thou dost as well vrge vpon thy selfe the necessity of the repentance was in them, as seeke the comfort of the remission of so great sinnes committed by them: These rules being obserued, the example of Pauls sinnes may with comfort bee applied, as he himselfe testifieth. 1 Tim. 1.16.

Secondly, the Apostle to bring his doctrine into greater request, doth  in the entrance of the Epistle insinuate himselfe into their respects,Doctrine is seldom effectuall when the person of the Minister is despised. by ^etting downe the authority and praises of his office and person: which sheweth vnto vs that vsually where the persons of the Ministers are not regarded, their Doctrine worketh little. The Doctrine is not long in credit, where the person and function it selfe is contemned.
And this yeelds vs one Reason, why a number of prophane men get so  little by the doctrine they so ordinarily heare: And the cause is, they are contemners, and scoffers, and reprochers of Gods Ministers; and therefore God will giue them no blessing by their Ministery. Againe, it shewes how  heauy and hurtfull a sinne it is to detract from the name and good esteeme of Ministers, by tales, lyes, and slanders: for,Defamation of Ministers. though men beleeue thee not in thy slanders, yet it is the property of most defamations, that they leaue a kinde of lower estimation many times where they are not beleeued. Thirdly, it serues to teach all Ministers and others that are in gouernment, to preserue by all lawful and holy endeauors the authoritie and credit both of their Persons and Callings. There is no doubt but the base carriage and indiscreet  and sinfull courses of many Ministers haue brought a contempt and barrennesse vpon the very Ordinances of God; they can do no good with their doctrine, they are so wanting to that grauitie and innocency that should shine in the lights and lampes of Christ.
Lastly, here may be obserued, that he that will beare rule ouer other mens  consciences, must be an Apostle:Lesse then an Apostle must not haue dominion ouer mens consciences. Vse. Doct. No knowledge auaileable to saluation without the knowledge of Christ. lesse then an Apostolicall man cannot prescribe vnto other mens consciences: and therefore it is a prophane insolencie in any whatsoeuer to vrge their fancies and deuises, and to presse them, master-like, vpon the iudgements or practises of their brethren, when they are not warranted in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles.
Of Iesus Christ.] No knowledge can bee auaileable to saluation without the knowledge of Christ, and therefore the Apostle in the very forefront of the Epistle, professeth to teach the doctrine of Christ, and to ayme at such a course of framing of doctrine, as aboue all things Christ Iesus may sound in his instructions, and be receiued into honour, application and practise. And he doth in the very entrance intimate what the corrupt teachers must looke for from him: viz. that hee will batter the whole frame of their building, that haue led men from CHRIST crucified, to vaine Traditions, Philosophicall speculations, Iewish obseruations, and giuen his glory to Angells.
By the will of God.] That is, by his approbation, direction, protection, but especially by his singular vocation. The Apostle then holds his calling from God, and therefore beleeues Gods protection and blessing because God had called him to his function. And as the Apostle, so euery member of the Church holds his particular standing and function from God; hee is ranked into order by the speciall prouidence and calling of God.
And it is to great purpose that men should know it in their owne particular. For first, it inforceth diligence: if God haue set thee in thy calling,The assurance of a lawful calling serues for foure vses. then it stands thee vpon to discharge the dueties of thy calling with all heedfulnesse and painfulnesse. Secondly, it may teach men not to passe the bounds  of their calling; for seeing they are in their places by Gods will, they must  take heede of going beyond their limits, eyther by vsing of vnlawfull wayes and courses, or by intruding into other mens functions. Thirdly, it  doth plainely appoint the particular calling to serue the generall. Euery Christian hath two Callings:Euery Christian hath two callings. the one is the externall designement of him to some outward seruice in the Church or Common-wealth, and this is his particular calling: the other is the singling of him out by speciall
 sanctification to glorifie God, and seeke his owne saluation in the things of the Kingdome of Christ, and this is a calling generall to him, with all beleeuers. Now it is manifest, that Gods commandement is, that men first seeke the kingdome of God, and the righteousnesse thereof. And therefore he neuer meant that men should so follow their outward businesse and imployments, as to omit the meanes of knowledge and grace, prayer, reading, hearing,  conference, and such like. Lastly, the consideration of this, that wee hold our particular callings from God, should teach vs contentation in the willing vnder-going of the daily molestations or troubles and crosses that do befall vs, and to be content with our kinde of life, seeing wee are thus set and placed by Gods will.
The Euangelist described.Thus farre of the Apostle. The Euangelist is described: first, by his name, TIMOTHY: secondly, by his adiunct estate, a Brother.
 Three things briefely may be obserued here; first, that consent in doctrine is a great meanes and effectuall to perswade both to incorruption in Faith,The profit of consent in doctrine. and integrity in liuing. This made Paul to ioyne Timothy with him; and the  consideration of this, as it should teach all faithfull Ministers to make themselues glorious by a brotherly harmonie in matters of opinion: so it doth giue occasion to bewaile that great sinne of wilfull opposition and crosse-teaching,Wilful opposition and crosse teaching. which doth in many places too much abound; a course that is taken vp by some of purpose to hinder the growth of knowledge and sincerity: some of these instruments of the Diuell, hauing for the most part, no life or hart, eyther in study or preaching, but when enuy and malice, and a desire to be contrary, doth instigate and pricke them forward. These are like them of whom the Apostle complained, that were contrary to all men, and forbid vs to preach to the Churches that they might be saued,1 Thes. 2.15.16. and fulfil the measure of their sins alwaies: God they please not, and the wrath of God is come on them to the vttermost.
 Secondly, here we may learne that spirituall aliance is the best aliance; for, it is a greater honour to Timothy to bee a brother,Spirituall aliance. then to be an Euangelist: for, hee might haue beene an Euangelist, and yet haue gone to Hell when he had done, as Iudas an Apostle did. And this cannot but be exceeding comfortable, seeing there is not the meanest childe of God but he may attaine to that which was Timothies greatest title.
 Thirdly, the Apostle doth intimate by the taking in of Timothies assent, that the most glorious doctrine of God doth need the witnesse of men,Gods doctrin needs mans witnesse. such a vanity and secret sinfulnes doth lodge in mens hearts. Which should teach Ministers with all good conscience and heedfulnesse, to weigh well and consider throughly of their doctrine before they deliuer it,Vse. because there is a weakenesse too commonly found in the very deare children of God, namely, to receiue doctrine vpon the trust and credit of the Messenger, without searching the Scriptures as they ought to doe.
2 The persons saluted.Thus farre of the persons saluting: the persons saluted are described, both by the place of their habitation, at Colosse, and by their spirituall estate: in which he describes them by foure things: they are Saints, they are faithfull, they are Brethren, and they are in Christ.
Foure general obseruations.Before I come to the particular handling of each of these, I consider foure things in the generall: First, heere we see the power of the Gospell. But a little before,1. The power of the Gospel. if Colosse had beene searched with lights, as Ierusalem was, there would not haue beene found one Saint nor one faithfull man or woman in the whole Citie:2. Who be the true members of the Church 3. The Church may be true and yet faulty. and now behold by the preaching of the Word, heere are many Saints and faithfull Brethren to be found in her. Secondly, wee see here who be the true members of the Church. The Apostle acknowledgeth none but such as are Saints, faithfull, and in Christ. Thirdly, wee see heere that a Church may remaine a true Church, notwithstanding grosse corruptions
 remaine in it vnreformed, as heere these titles are giuen to ^ C^^^ch much poysoned with humane traditions and vile corruptions in wo^^^ip. Lastly it is to be obserued, that the Apostle ioynes all these together,4 One grace or priuiledge cannot bee without another. Carnall Protestant. to note that one cannot be without the other, one cannot be a Saint vnlesse he be faithfull, and in Christ, and so of the rest. The last clause cuts off the Iewes apparantly from being Saints or true belieuers, seeing they receiue not Christ: and the first clause cuts off the carnall Protestant, so as he cannot be a beleeuer or in Christ, seeing he cares no more for sanctitie: and the two middlemost cut off the Papists and all Heretikes and Schismatikes, seeing they haue with insolent pride made a rent and Apostasie from the true Apostolicall Churches,2 Thes. 2.4. etc by aduancing themselues with their Man of sinne aboue their brethren, nay, aboue all that is called God.
Thus farre in generall, the first thing particularly giuen them, is, that they are Saints.
Saints.] This Word is diuersely accepted in Scripture.The acceptations of the word Saints. Sometimes it is giuen to the Angels, and so they are called Saints, Deuter. 33.2. Iob. 15.15. Secondly, men are said to be holy by a certaine Legall or Ceremoniall sanctitie, Leuit. 11.44. And in this sence the superstitious are holy: This is the holinesse and sanctitie of Papists and Popish persons, which place all their holinesse in the obseruation of Rites and Traditions, and superstitious Customes. Thirdly, all that stand members of the Church, by the rule of Charitie, or in respect of outward visibility and profession, are called Saints, and so all that couenant with GOD by offering Sacrifice,Psal. 50.5. are called Saints Lastly, and properly it is a tearme giuen to men effectually called: the children of God truely conuerted are called Saints; not because they are perfectly holy without all sinne, but in foure respects. First,Gods children are called Saints in foure respects. in respect of Separation, because they are elected and gathered out of the world, and ioyned vnto Gods people, and dedicated to holy seruices and vses, and thus the word is often taken. Secondly, in respect of vocation; and therefore the Apostle 1 Cor. 1.2. When he had said they were sanctified, he said by way of explication, they were Saints by calling. Thirdly, in respect of regeneration, because they are now new creatures. And lastly, in respect of iustification or imputation, because the holinesse and sanctitie of Christ is imputed to them.
The sence being thus giuen, the doctrine is plaine,Doct. Men may bee Saints in this life. that men may be Saints in this life: there are Saints in Earth as well as in Heauen. This is apparant also in other Scriptures, as Psalm. 16.3. To the Saints that are in earth. And Psal. 37.28. Hee forsaketh not his Saints. And Psalm. 132.9.16. Let thy Saints reioyce. So in the Epistle to the Ephesians, ch. 2.20. Citizens with the Saints, etc. chap. 3.8. Paul calleth himselfe the least of all Saints, etc. chap. 4.12. For the gathering together of the Saints; with many other places.Vse. The vse of this serues first, to confute the grosse folly of the Papists that acknowledge no Saints till three things come to them: first, they must be Canonized by the Pope:Three things needfull for popish Saints. secondly, they must be dead first: thirdly, it must be an hundred yeeres after their death. This last prouiso was well added, lest their treasons and most vile practises should be remembred. Secondly, this serues for the seuere reproofe of numbers in our owne Church, that liue as if there were no sanctitie to be looked after, till they come to heauen. Thirdly, the Scripture is not without singular comfort to the poore despised Saints:Comforts for the despised Saints and se^uants of God Psal. 16.3. Psal. 30.4.5. I will take them in order as they lye. Deuter. 7.6.7. If wee be sure wee be a holy people to the Lord, then this is our comfort, that God accounts of vs aboue all the people vpon the earth: and no man loues his Pearles or precious Iewels so much as God loues the meanest Saint. Dauid saith, these are the Nobles of the earth. And Psal. 30.4.5. These are willed with all cheerefull thankfulnesse to laud and praise God, and that before the remembrance of his holines (as they
 before the Arke, so wee before all the Tokens and Pledges of Gods loue, both the Word and Sacraments, and sweet witnesses of the Spirit of Adoption, and all other blessings as Testimonies of Gods fauour.)
Obiect.Oh but it seemes the Saints haue little cause of ioy or praise, for they are much afflicted, and that by the iudgements of God too, eyther in their consciences within,Solut. or in their bodies, or estates, or names without. The Prophet answeres: that the Lord endureth but a while in his anger, but in his fauour is life,Psal. 37.28. though weeping may abide at euening, yet ioy commeth in the morning. And in the 37. Psalm. 28. vers. a charge is giuen to flye from euill, and doe good: in which words a Saint is desciribed by his practise.
Obiect.Oh but what shall they get by this precisenesse? Sol. They shall dwell for euer:Solut. no men haue so certaine, sure, and durable estates, as those that make conscience of their wayes, hating the infection of all sinne, and delighting themselues in well-doing.
Obiect.Oh but wee see they are much maliced and hated, disgraced and wronged in the world.Solut.Sol. The Lord loueth iudgement: if men right not their wrongs, God will;Psalme 7. nay, it is a delight vnto the Lord to iudge the righteous, and him that contemneth God euery day: those spitefull aduersaries of sincerity shall neuer escape Gods hands.
Obiect.Oh but we see not onely wicked men, but God himselfe smiteth and afflicteth those that be so holy.Solution. Sol. Though God afflict and chastize his people, as a Father his beloued Sonne, yet he forsaketh not his Saints.
Obiect.Oh but the Saints themselues are full of great doubts, whether they shall perseuer,Solut. or God will change. Sol. It is Gods vnchangeable promise, they shall be preserued for euermore.Psal. 85.8. Againe, in the 85. Psalme, though the Church be in great perplexities in respect of outward afflictions, yet this comfort the Saints haue: First, that though Gods stroakes seeme to bee the stroakes of warre, yet Gods words are the words of Peace: the Word and Spirit of God are sure fountaines of rest and peace to the heart and conscience of Gods afflicted people. Secondly, when God smites his people, hee euer hath a regard to this, not to smite them so long, as they should bee driuen to turne againe to folly: by folly hee meaneth sinne, for all sinfull courses are foolish courses. The Lord by crosses intends to bring them out of sinne, not to driue them in, and if men finde not these priuiledges true, it is because eyther they doe not hearken, that is, obserue and marke the Word, Spirit, and Workes of God, or else because they are not his Saints. In the 149. Psalme, there is an Honour giuen to all the Saints:Psal. 149.5.6.7.8.9. viz. that they should with a two-edged sword, execute vengeance vpon the Heathen, and corrections vpon the people, they should binde Kings with chaines, and Nobles with fetters of iron: thus should they execute vpon them the iudgement that is written. So forcible and powerfull are the publike threatnings and censures of the Saints assembled in their holy ranckes, as also their priuate prayers, that all the swords of great Princes cannot so plague the enemies of the Church, as doe the Saints by these weapons: So fearefull are the corrections and iudgements which the Saints by prayers and censures may bring vpon whole troopes of wicked men, as no swords or fetters in nature can be comparable to them.
Dan. 7.27.When Daniel had described the greatnesse and glory of the Princes, Potentates and mighty States in the foure Monarchies, at last hee comes to speake of a Kingdome which is the greatest vnder the whole Heauen: and that is the Kingdome of the Saints of the most High. So glorious is the state of the poore despised Seruants of God, euen heere in this world, in the Kingdome of grace. Daniel 7.27. And if there bee such suing, on earth, to become free-men of great Cities, especially to liue in the Courts of great princes, how great is the felicitie of euery childe of God, who is no more now a
 forreiner or stranger, but a Cittizen with the Saints,Ephes. 2.20. and of the hous^^^ld of God.
To conclude, this may be a great refreshing to euery childe of God against al the discomforts of this present transitory life, that in that great and last, and terrible day Christ will be glorified in them, and made maruellous in the Saints.2 Thes. 1.10. And last of all, though the Saints be here despised and trodden vnder foot, iudged and condemned by men, yet the time will come,2 Cor. 6.2. when the Saints shall iudge the world.
Oh but some one will say, all the difficulty lyeth in this,Qu. Who are Saints? to know who are Saints. Ans. To this end,Ans. besides the foure things generally laid downe before, I will for triall alleadge two or three places of Scripture: first, in Deut. 33.3.Deut. 33.3. When Moses had praised the loue of God to the Iewish Nation,The first signe hee specially commendeth Gods speciall care towards the Saints of that Nation, whom, as most deare to him, hee had alwaies in his hands,Psal. 16.3.5.6. and giueth this signe to know them by, (viz.) They are humbled at his feete, to receiue his words.
Secondly, Dauid hauing spoken of the excellency of the Saints on earth,Dauids foure signes. to proue himselfe to be one of the number, he yeeldeth his reasons from foure  experimentall signes: First, the Lord was his portion, though hee had hopes or possession of great things in the earth, yet Gods fauour was that hee did most prize,Psal. 16.5.6. and spirituall things were vnto him the fairest part of his inheritance, and though he had many crosses, yet the line was fallen vnto him in a faire place: so long as hee could see grace in his heart, and the GOD of grace to loue him freely. Secondly, he could as heartily praise GOD for  spirituall blessings, (viz.) Counsell, Knowledge,Psal. 16.7. and direction out of the worde of God, as wicked men could for temporall Honours, Riches, Pleasures, and such things as they loue best. Thirdly, his reynes did teach him in  the night. Some thing can wicked men learne by the Word without, but God did neuer honour any with the feelings of the Spirit of Adoption, but onely the Saints.
Obiection.Obiect. Oh but might not Dauid bee deceiued in that signe by illusions, etc. Ans. Dauid giues two reasons why hee could not: first,Solut. Difference between illusio^s and the feelings of the Spirit of Adoption. his feelings did not make him more carelesse, presumptuous and sinfull, as illusions doe wicked men, but they taught him, that is, hee learned by them many worthy lessons, and directions, and encouragements to holy life, and neuer did hee conceiue a greater hatred against his sinne, then when his reynes taught him: secondly, he shewes that hee had them in the night; that is, when hee was alone and withdrawn from company, and the things of the world, and worldly occasions. Fourthly, his last signe is, that hee did set the Lord alwaies before  him: hee could be content to walke euer in Gods presence, and to haue him the witnesse of his actions, hee was not carefull onely to approue himselfe to men (as wicked men may doe) but his chiefe care was to walke in all good conscience before God,
Lastly, in the fourth of Esay,Esay 4.3.4. the Prophet fore-tels of men that vnder the Gospell should bee called holy or Saints, and these hee describes by their happinesse, they shall be written among the liuing in Ierusalem; and by their holines, which will discouer it selfe by these signes: first, they are not acquainied with  the damnable and hatefull extenuations and qualifications of sinnes: they are not heard to say, it is a little sinne, a small fault; no, their sinnes in their eyes are filthinesse and bloud. Secondly, they are men that haue felt the  power of GOD in the practise of mortification; they are new creatures, they are washed and purged. Thirdly, the Spirit of God in them hath beene a  Spirit of Iudgement, and a Spirit of burning: a Spirit of Iudgement, not onely in respect of knowledge and illumination, but also because it hath kept
 an Assize in the soule of the sinner, hee hath beene arraigned, indicted, and hath pleaded guilty, and beene condemned: a Spirit of burning, both in respect of the inward purifying of the heart from the drosse that cleaues vnto it, as also in respect of zeale and ardor, for the glory of God: And thus farre of the first thing giuen vnto the people of God: they are Saints. Now followeth the second.
The acceptations of the word faithfull.Faithfull.] This worde is diuersly attributed in Scripture. It is giuen to2 Cor. 1. God, and God is said to be faithfull in the accomplishment of his promises. It is giuen toReuel. 19.11. Christ, and hee is called faithfull and true. It is giuen to thePsal. 89.37. Psal. 19 7. and 111.7. Sunne in the Firmament, because it keepeth his certaine course. It is giuen to the Word of God, so as whatsoeuer it promiseth or threatneth men may certainely binde vpon it, for heauen and earth may faile, but one iot of it shall not faile. Lastly, it is giuen to Men, especially and most ordinarily to such men as are true beleeuers, and walke in all good conscience both before God and Men: and as it is thus taken, the words of the holy Ghost, Prou. 20.6.Prou. 20.6. may be taken vp, Many men will boast, euery one of his owne goodnes, but who can finde a faithfull man? These are they that Dauid so earnestly searcheth for, and hauing found them, doth so stedfastly set his eyes vpon them, and entertaineth them into his Court, Psal. 101.6.Psal. 101.6. The names of these wee doe for the most part take vpon our selues, but the signes of these are but sparingly found amongst vs. That we may examine our selues, I will consider what is required of vs that we may shew our selues faithfull.
Faithfulnesse in spirituall things Hereunto fiue things are requisite.The Christian mans faithfulnesse ought to shew it selfe, first, in spirituall things; secondly, in temporall things: vnto faithfulnesse in spirituall things fiue things are requisite. First, faith in Christ, to get sound reasons from the Word and Spirit of God, and a sure euidence for the particular perswasion of the heart, that God in Christ is graciously reconciled with the sinner. He  cannot bee a faithfull man that hath not a iustifying Faith: all that time of a mans life, onely receiueth hee this honour, to be accounted faithfull, when aboue all things hee trauels after the sense of Gods fauour in the forgiuenes  of his sinnes. Secondly, faithfulnesse stands in the performance of all those Promises, Purposes and Vowes, which men in their distresse inward or outward doe make vnto God.Psal. 78. And therefore the Israelites are charged not to  bee faithfull, because when the wrath of God turned vpon them, and the strongest of them were slaine, and their chosen men were smitten, and that  their daies did consume in vanitie, and their yeeres hastilie, then they crie  vnto him, and seeke him in their distresse, they returne and seeke him earelie,  they acknowledge that GOD is their strength, and the most High their Redeemer:  but when the Lord had beene mercifull vnto them, forgiuen their iniquities, so as hee destroyed them not, and called backe his anger; then they  returned and prouoked the LORD againe, they flattered him with their tongue, they tempted GOD and sinned still, and therefore they are censured  thus: Their heart was not vpright, neyther were they faithfull in Gods Couenant.  Thirdly, it shewes it selfe in constant sincerity in Gods worship, when men will worship God according to the rules of his reuealed will, without mixture of mens inuentions, or the customary sinnes of prophanenesse and hypocrisie.Hos. 11. vlt. And thus Iudah is said to be faithfull with Gods Saints, because as yet the worship of God was preserued amongst them in the auncient puritie, in which the old Patriarkes and Saints, did sincerely worship the God of their Fathers: hee is a faithfull man that will worship God no otherwise then the Saints haue done, that is, precisely, according to his will reuealed  in his Word. Fourthly, faithfulnesse is exercised in the conscionable imployment of the Gifts, Graces, and Talents receiued in our generall calling, to Gods glory, the increase of our gifts, and the inriching of our soules
 with true spirituall gaine. And thus hee is said to bee a good Seruant and faithfull, that hauing receiued fiue Talents, hath gained with them fi^e mo^,Mat. 25.21.23. or two Talents and doth gaine two moe, and this we doe, when hauing receiued Knowledge, Faith, Loue, Hope, Patience, Spirit of Prayer, etc. wee doe by a constant and daily practise bring them out into exercise for our selues and for others. Thus doing, two commodities wee shall reape: first it is a signe of our faithfulnesse: secondly, the gifts will increase, and to him that  hath such gifts to vse them, shall be more giuen. Lastly, faithfulnesse shewes it selfe in mens sinceritie, diligence, constancie, and care to promote and further the causes of God, and the Church, with the conscionable discharge of all such dueties as belong vnto such seruice. Thus Timothy is praised to bee faithfull in the Lord, 1 Cor. 4.17.1 Cor. 4.17. And thus the Apostle and Apostolicall men were faithfull, when they could doe nothing against the truth, but for the truth: and thus men are faithfull that can patiently beare,2 Cor. 11.8. and willingly take vp the Crosse of Christ, and that daily; so as they may further the building vp,Luke 9.23. and edification of Gods people. Those then are not faithfull that doe the worke of the Lord negligently, that set their hands to the plough, and looke backe, that minde their owne things, honours, pleasures, profits, and preferments, and those that in the time of temptation fall away: these specialties of faithfulnesse receiue a great increase of praise if two things come to them: first, that mens hearts be faithfull; that is, that though they haue many wants and infirmities, and faile much and often in well-doing, yet the desire, delight, endeuour, resolution and affection is in all pleasing and firmnesse to walke before God, without eyther hypocrisie or presumption: this was Abrahams praise, Nehem. 9.8. Secondly, that men continue faithfull vnto the death,Nehem: 9.8. with all constancy and holy perseuerance, beleeuing in Christ, and worshipping GOD, euen to the ende of their dayes, this is called for, and crowned, Reuel. 2.11. Thus of faithfulnesse in spirituall things.
Faithfulnesse in temporall things stands in three things. First,Reu: 2.11: Faithfulnesse in temporall things. in the sincere, diligent, and carefull discharge of the duties of our Callings. It was a singular prayse in Daniel, that when his enemies sought occasion against him, they could finde none concerning the Kingdome,Daniel 6.5. hee was so faithfull  and without blame, and therefore they must take him (if euer) concerning the Law of his God. Then doth the glory of Gods people shine,A Caueat for Professors. when together with their constant zeale in matters of religion, they are found carefully diligent and faithfull in their callings; then whatsoeuer befalls them for the Law of their God, they may beare it with all comfort and constancy, as did Daniel. But how doth it blemish the glory of profession, when men can say and see that Professors are idle, deceitfull, busie-bodies, and carelesse in their places and callings? they cannot build so much by profession, as they destroy by their scandalous and carelesse courses.
Secondly, in the right vse and profitable disposing of our riches, euen  the outward things God hath giuen vs. This lyeth vpon vs, as one of the tokens of our faithfulnesse: nay, this is necessary to the being of this praise: In the 16.Luke 16.9. of Luke Christ exhorts to the wise and liberall bestowing of our riches vnto the necessities of the poore, and for other holy and needfull vses. And because there lye in the hearts of carnall men, many Obiections against this Exhortation, therefore hee forceth it with reasons that meete with mens carnall conceits.
And first, whereas men out of an ouer-great estimation and liking of these  earthly things doe easily obiect that they must be carefull of the sauing, and sparing in the vse of their riches: for they are all the comfort they haue in this world.Solution. Hee answereth that men should not so much loue these earthly things: for they are riches of iniquitie, that is, sinne (that makes a man
 miserable and accursed) is most an end mixed with riches:Verse 9. eyther they are wrongfully gotten, and sinfully kept, or they are causes of much sinning against God, or men, or himselfe.
 Oh, but what good shall a man get by parting with his goods? Sol. They shall receiue him into euerlasting habitations:Solut. they, that is, eyther the Angels, or the Poore, or thy Riches shall let thee into heauen; euen to sure dwelling places: and this should moue the rich; because the time will come when thou shalt want, and all the riches in the world cannot helpe thee.
 Oh, but a man may bee saued and enioy these euerlasting habitations, though hee doe not so part with his riches.Solut. Sol. Hee cannot: for, a man cannot bee saued without Grace, and God will neuer trust him with Grace (the true treasure) that is not faithfull in bestowing riches:Verse 10.11. and good reason; for, if God gaue a wicked worldling grace, hee would neuer be faithfull in vsing it: for, he that is vniust in the least, that is, Riches, would be vniust in much, that is, Grace.
 Oh, but our goods are our owne, and therefore why should we giue them to others?Solut. Sol. Ver. 12. That is false, for Grace onely is a mans owne, but Riches are anothers;Psal. 24.1. Prou. 3.27. for God is the Lord of the whole, and the poore is the owner of a part.
 Tush, but a man may haue a good heart to God, and yet not deliuer out his goods to other mens vses, nor leaue his content that he hath in the fruition of them.Solut. Verse 13. Sol. That is false too: for, a man cannot serue two Masters: one man cannot serue God and Riches. And thus our Sauiour meeteth with the Obiections of worldly men. The wordes also containe notable reasons to perswade to faithfulnesse, which lieth in this good vse of Riches: first, they are riches of iniquity: secondly, the right vse of them makes way for heauen: thirdly, hee is like to be a godly man in the vse of Grace, that is a faithfull man in the vse of Riches: fourthly, God else will not trust vs with Grace: fiftly, he will else be a very vniust man, and his riches wicked: sixtly, Grace onely is his owne goods, and to be without Grace is to liue and dye a beggar: lastly, thou canst neuer serue God and Riches.
Thirdly, in temporall things Faithfulnesse shewes it selfe in the vprightnesse and harmelesnesse of our carriage towards others; as in keeping of promises, Psal. 15. in the honest discharge of the trust laid vpon men, eyther in Church or Common-wealth. Nehem. 13.13. Prou. 13.17. in witnesse-bearing, Prou. 14 5.25. in iust gaines and lawfull meanes vsed for profit in our dealings with others, Prou. 28.20. And such like dueties of iustice.
Thus then we see who is a faithfull man, euen hee that knoweth his owne reconciliation with God by faith; that performeth his vowes to God; that sincerely worships God, and laboureth the increase of holy graces; that will doe nothing against the trueth, but for the truth; that is diligent in his calling, that is seruiceable with his riches; and lastly, that is iust in his dealing.
Priuiledges of the ^^ithfull.Now, if wee be such, then is our estate most comfortable: for first, God will bee faithfull to vs in the accomplishment of all his promises: secondly,  the Worde will be faithfull, euen a sure fountaine of true comfort and  helpe in all distresse: thirdly, Christ will be a faithfull, both High Priest in  heauen, by his intercession making request for vs to God, and both to earth and heauen he will be a faithfull witnesse,Hebr. 2.17. Reuel. 15. and 3.14. so as while we liue, we shall finde the testimony of IESVS in our hearts, and when wee die hee will not bee ashamed of vs before his Father and the holy Angels; and lastly, wee shall be sure to haue a faithfull reward.Prou. 11.18. And this of the second title giuen to Gods Children.
Brethren.] The Children of God are said to be brethren in a foure-fould relation:1 To Christ. 1. to CHRIST: 2. to the Apostle: 3. to the Saints abroad: 4. to
 the Saints at home. For the first, are wee brethren to CHRIST?1 To Christ. then it should teach vs two things; first, to liue comfortably, for an higher est^te of  excellencie canst thou not haue; secondly, to liue nobly, like the Sonnes of  the most High, not basely, like the Sonnes of the Earth. Why wallowest thou in base and filthy pleasures? why dotest thou vpon vncertaine and sinfull profits? why doth thy heart degenerate to regard, and so aspire after worldly preferment? Remember whence thou art descended, and with whom alyed,Romanes 8. and walke as becomes the coheyre of Christ.
Secondly,2 To the Apostle. are they Brethren to the Apostles and other great Gouernours of the Church? it should then teach Ministers, Magistrates, and Masters of Families, so to rule as to remember that they rule their brethren:Vse. neyther to neglect their good, (for why should thy brother perish?) nor with proud insolency or tyrannie, eyther in correction, or seuere carriage to Lord it ouer them.
Thirdly, are they Brethren to the Saints abroad?3 To the Saints abroad and are they of the same familie with them? then it should teach them to pray for them, and to lay the distresses of other Saints and Churches to their hearts: for, though they be remoued in place and carnall knowledge; yet are they neere in the mysticall vnion, if it be considered that the same Mother bare them; and the same Father begat them.
Lastly, are they Brethren to the Saints at home?4 To the Saints at home. then they should learne to conuerse brotherly, to liue and loue together, as becommeth Saints and Brethren. Oh that it could sinke into mens mindes, or that this were written in mens hearts! then could there be nothing more glorious and comfortable in this earth, then this communion of Saints, especially in the fellowship of the Gospell.
In Christ.] Men are said to be in CHRIST three waies: first, as the Plant  in the Stocke: Iohn. 15 secondly, as the Member in the body: 1 Cor. 12.12. thirdly, as the Wife is one with the Husband, Ephes. 5.25.
Dost thou aske then how thou maist get into Christ?How thou maist get into Christ. Ans. Obserue three things.
First, before thou canst be ingrafted into Christ, thou must be cut off the  old tree; eyther a new man or no man; eyther lose the World, or neuer finde Christ; eyther disarme thy selfe of all vaine confidence, loue, delight, and support from the world and wordly men, or the arme of the Lord will neuer beare thee vp and nourish thee.
Secondly, a true Member is not but by generation in nature, nor canst thou  be a true member of Christ but by regeneration: great oddes between a wodden legge, though neuer so exquisitely made, and a true legge; all members in Creation be begotten, and in Grace begotten againe.
Thirdly, as they are not Man and Wife, where there is no sure making by  Contract or Marriage going before; so neyther can any be in Christ, vnlesse hee be receiued vnto the Couenant of Grace: and, as it is a mad thing in Nature, for any woman to say; Such a man is my Husband, for hee is a kinde man, and did cast his eye vpon mee, or did me a pleasure at such a time, etc. So, it is as great spirituall madnesse for any Soule to plead interest in Christ, when they can alleadge no more but his generall loue to man; or that hee offered Grace to vs in the Word and Sacraments, or that wee together with the Gospell receiued outward blessings, or such like; when men can shew no contract, no mutuall entercourse betweene CHRIST, and the SOVLE, no manner of euidence for their hopes, no witnesses from the Word, Spirit, or Children of God, for their spitituall Marriage.
Againe, would a man know whether hee bee in Christ?Who are in Christ. these Comparisons likewise resolue his doubt, by a three-fold Answere: first, hee is in
 Christ, if he blossome, grow, and beare fruit, euen such fruit as is to eternall life. If a man bee abundant in the workes of the Lord; and grow in such graces as are communicated onely to the faithfull, hee is certainely a true Plant in this Stocke: for, by growing and fruit, is the Plant that is ingrafted knowne from the sprigge that is lopped off, and lyeth by, and is withered. A life barren and void of the workes of Pietie and Mercy, is a manifest signe that the person is not in Christ.
 Secondly, if there be in our soules the sense, and feeling, and motion of spirituall life, then are wee members: for, in a wodden legge is there no sense nor naturall motion. When men haue as much sense and feeling, sauour and delight in the things of the Spirit, as the Word, Prayer, fellowship in the Gospell, with the exercises of holy Graces in the duties of Gods worship, or things otherwise belonging to the Kingdome of Christ, as the carnall man hath in the profits,Romanes 8. pleasures, and fleshly things of this world: These certainely are men after the Spirit, and by the Spirit mystically vnited to Christ the head: and on the other side, a more plaine and palpable signe cannot be giuen to proue demonstratiuely, that a man is not in Christ, then when a man findes no taste, hath no feeling, can take no delight in spirituall Meanes, Graces, or Persons, and yet is easily affected with the least profits and delights of the world.
 Thirdly, it will appeare by the holy communion betweene Christ and the faithfull Soule, by his co-habitation and spirituall entercourse, when Christ meetes a Christian with holy Comforts, with heauenly refreshings, with sacred answeres, with spirituall direction, and other sacred signes of the presence of Christ, in the vse of the meanes, sporting himselfe with the Christian Soule: this entercourse I say, this secret and chamber-meeting,  these inward and hearty feelings, wrought by the Worde and Sacraments, by Prayer, and Fasting, by Reading and Conference, are certaine and sure signes and seales to prooue a marriage going before. And thus farre of the foure titles giuen to the Children of God, and also of the second thing, viz. the persons saluted. Now followeth the Salutation it selfe.
Grace and Peace be vnto you, from God the Father, and from the Lord Iesus Christ.
Of Salutations.IT hath beene an ancient custome, both in the Iewish, Christian, and Pagan world, to beginne Letters and Epistles, with Salutations; and in these they were wont to wish to their Friends, that which was accounted the chiefest good. Hence the Heathen as they were opinionated about the chiefe good, they did differently wish good things to their friends in their salutations. Some wished health,(...). some wished welfare or safetie; some, to doe well; some, ioy and a merry life; as they were eyther Stoickes or Epicures. But the Apostle finding that true felicitie was in none of these, doth religiously wish that which in the Kingdome of Christ was in greatest request, (viz.) Grace and Peace.
The acceptations of the word Grace.Grace.] This worde is diuersly taken. For kindnesse, 2 Samel. 16.17. for abilitie to affect or perswade, Psalm. 45.2. for the happinesse that is had from Christ in this world; and so it is opposed to glorie, Psalm. 84.11. for the preaching of the Gospell, Rom. 1.4. Titus 2.12. for approbation from God, Pro. 12.2. For the spirituall liberty that wee haue from Christ: and so it is opposed to the Law, Rom. 6.14. lastly, it is taken for the loue and fauour of GOD, receiuing the Sinner into couenant in Christ, as it is an euer-flowing spring of celestiall Grace to the soule iustified: and so it is taken heere.

Peace] This word also is diuersly accepted, for rest and ease from paine,The acceptations of the word Peace. Psal. 38.4. for familiarity, so the man of my peace, Psal. 41.9. for concord, Ephes. 4.3 for prosperitie in generall, 1. Chron. 12.18. Psal. 125.5. Ier. 29.11. for all that felicitie we haue by Christ, Luke 19.42. for glory in heauen, Esa. 57.2. Luke 19.38. Rom. 2.10. Luke 1.79. for reconciliation it selfe, Luke 2.14. Esay 53.5. for the meanes of reconciliation, Ephes. 2.14. for the signes of reconciliation, Esay 57.19. Psal. 85.8. for tranquilitie of conscience, Rom. 14.17. and 5.2. Lastly, it is also taken for all that rest of conscience within, and Synecdochically it signifieth all those blessings spirituall which either in this world, or that other better world we receiue from Christ, together with Gods fauour and grace: neither is temporall prosperitie excluded, though not principally meant; and so I thinke it is taken here.
The meaning being thus found: I consider the obseruations first generally.
First, in that the Apostle doth in the very Salutation sow the seedes of the whole Gospell, we might learne euen in our ordinary imployments, to mind Gods glory and the saluation of others.
Secondly,Three reasons why children may be taught the principles they vnderstand not. we may hence see that it is lawfull to draw abridgements of holy things, and commend them to ordinary vse: as here these graces to an ordinary salutation from man to man; and so I thinke of teaching the Lords Prayer and Commandements, with other Scripture, to children or seruants, that yet vnderstand not, and that for such reasons as these: first, that so they might haue occasion much to thinke of the things are so much and commonly vrged: secondly, that if any time of extremitie should come, they might haue certaine seedes of direction and comfort, to guide and support them: thirdly, that their condemnation might be more iust, if hauing Grace and Peace, and other principles of Catechisme so much in their mouths, they should not get them into their hearts.
Thirdly, a question may here be moued:Quest. how the Apostle can here in these words wish vnto them their chiefe good or felicitie, seeing these are not all the graces or blessings needfull to our happinesse?Ans. I might answere this diuersly. 1. Here is a Synecdoche, all are vnderstood, though not all named:  or thus, these are the beginnings of all graces and blessings: or thus, one or  two graces is worth a world besides: or thus, these are chiefly aboue others  to be sought: but lastly, it is certaine these cannot be had without the most  of sauing graces: as for example, true Peace cannot be had without Christ,  nor without godly Sorrow, Confession, Knowledge, Meekenesse, Desires, Faith, Humilitie, Loue, and the like, as men may easily see, if they will bee informed either by Scripture or experience.
But the maine Doctrine which generally I obserue out of these words,Doct. is this; that spirituall things from God in Christ are the best things,Spirituall things are the best things. and most to be sought, and desired, and wished, both for our selues and others. The reasons are: 1. They serue for the excellentest part, (viz. the soule) 2. They serue for eternitie, and these outward things but for this life: 3.Reasons. Spirituall things are giuen by God in Christ; the other by God without Christ:  4. They onely are able to satisfie the Soule: 5. In respect of continuance;  for outward things can last but till death, but then their workes will follow  the faithfull into the graue, yea, into heauen; and therefore much more  these graces: 6. Spirituall things are onely proper to the Saints; temporall  things are common both to good and bad: 7. These are to be had by  vertue of an absolute promise; the other but conditionally assured: 8. These  are more pleasing and acceptable to God. Gods acceptation prooues them  best: lastly, What shall it profit a man to winne the whole world, and loose his owne  Soule?Math. 16.

 The vse is first for the iust reproofe of the wonderfull carelesnesse and strength of folly, that hath possessed the most people, in the prophane neglect, nay, contempt of spirituall things, with the meanes of them. Indeede, if men could be rid of Death, the Graue, Hell, and Gods Curse; or if these things could be had without seeking, it were to some purpose for men to sleepe still and neuer wake. Many are the sleights of Sathan. Some are stubborne, and will not regard: some with very preiudice runne wittingly to hell: some confesse it to be meete that the best things should be chiefely sought, but forget: some purpose, but giue ouer, for difficulties in the beginning: some no sooner ridde of terrour, but as soone off care for the life to come.
 Secondly, this doctrine may be a singular comfort to vs, if wee can finde grace and peace in our hearts, how euer it be with vs in our bodies or estates otherwise.
 Thirdly, it should teach Parents to be more carefull to leaue grace in their Childrens hearts then treasures in their Chests for them: and friends should more endeauour to helpe one another in the comforts of an holy fellowship in the Gospell, then in the ciuill furtherances they doe so much engage themselues to.
 Lastly, it should teach vs to learne the lesson giuen by our Sauiour Christ, Math. 6.Math. 6. Ver: 19. to 25. Ver: 25. to the end. neither to inlarge our affections to the immoderate desires of superfluitie in outward things, nor yet to racke our hearts with the faithlesse and fruitlesse care of things necessarie. This latter branch is vrged with eight or nine worthy reasons: but of these in another place afterwards. And thus much generally.
Grace] If Grace (that is, Gods fauour, and the graces spirituall that flow from thence) be of so great worth and excellencie; diuers things may be inferred  by way of profitable instruction, for our vse, out of seuerall Scriptures. First, if it be so great a priuiledge to obtaine grace from God, wee should striue to be such as are within the compasse of the promise of grace;James 4.6.  especially, we should get humble and lowly hearts: for, God giues grace vnto the humble, but resisteth the stubborne, wilfull, and proud sinner. Againe, if Gods Loue, and Christs Grace be Iewels of so great value, it should teach vs, when Grace is offered in the meanes, or any way bestowed by Gods Spirit,1 Cor. 6.1. neuer to receiue it in vaine: so as it should be tendered without effect,  or kept without aduantage; but especially, let it euer be farre from vs, to turne the grace of God into wantonnesse,Iude 4. to abuse either the promises of Grace, or the pledges of Gods Loue, to become either bawds for perseuerance  in sinne, or props to secure and bolde presumption. And aboue all things wee should with all watchfulnesse take heede of wronging the Spirit of Grace,Heb. 10. eyther by resisting, tempting, greening, quenching, or dispising  it. And further; wee should learne by all good meanes, as constant hearing,2 Tim 1.6. 2 Tim. 2.1. prayer, reading, conference, and meditation, to stirre vp the Graces giuen vs, to labour for spirituall strength in Grace, and to search so carefully into the euidence of Faith, for what wee haue, and Hope, for what wee want, as neuer to giue ouer to examine our selues by the signes and promises  of Gods Loue, till our hearts were setled and stablished in Grace. Lastly, Gods Children should solace themselues in the feeling and experimentall knowledge of Gods grace;Iob 15.11.12. so as their hearts should neuer carry them away to make them account the Consolations of God small, or to despise the Grace giuen them; but rather in the middest of all combats with temptations within, or afflictions without, to support their Soules with that gratious Promise, My Grace shall bee sufficient for you,2 Cor. 12.9. and my Power made knowne in your weakenesse.

Peace.] The second thing here wished for, and to bee desired of all that loue their owne good, is Peace, that is, tranquillity of heart, with other spirituall blessings accompanying it with outward things also, so farre as they may further our happinesse: but the Scripture layes a restraint vpon the getting of this peace, and giues rules for the vse of it. For if euer wee would haue Peace, wee must first be righteous persons, that is, men that are broken in heart for our sinnes, humbled at Gods feete for forgiuenesse; and such as hang vpon the Worde of GOD, to receiue the certaine meanes of our soules reconciliation, and the righteousnesse of CHRIST imputed vnto vs: such, as to whom there is a way, and their path is holy.Esay 35.8: But on the other side, vnto the wicked is no peace: and they are taken by the Prophet for wicked men, that are neuer humbled in the duties of Mortification for sinne, that in the hardnesse of their hearts frustrate the power of Gods Ordinances, so as they cannot worke vpon them:Esay 57.21. these haue no Peace, neyther with GOD, Angels, men, the Creatures, or their owne Consciences.
Againe, hast thou gotten peace and tranquility of heart, euen rest and ease from CHRIST, then let this peace preserue thy heart and minde,Phil. 4.6. Col. 3.15. and let it rule. Be carefull to reiect all matters in thoughts, or opinion, in affections, or desires, in words, or actions, that it might any way interrupt thy peace: but by all meanes nourish it, delight in it, and let it guide to all holy meditations, and affections, and gainefull practises, and endeuours. Let the peace of thy heart, and Gods spirituall blessing be a rule for all thy actions. And lastly, with all good Conscience and holy conuersation hold out, that when Christ shall come, eyther by particular Iudgement to thee in death, or by generall iudgement to the whole world in the last day,2 Pet: 3.14. Esay 9.6.7. Luke 1.79. thou maist be found of him in Peace, so shall Christ be vnto thee a Prince of Peace, and guide thy feet for euer into the way of Peace.
And thus farre of the good things he wisheth vnto them, now follow the efficient causes (viz) from God the Father, and our Lord Iesus Christ.
Diuers things may be here obserued.
First, a proofe of the Trinitie, or, at the least, a plaine proofe of two persons, the Father and the Sonne, vnited in one essence.
Secondly, GOD is here plainely affirmed to be a Father, and that hee is in diuers respects: first, to all by Creation: secondly, to all the faithfull by Adoption: thirdly, to Christ, by the grace of Vnion as man, and a naturall Father, as God.
Thirdly, heere wee may obserue, that grace and blessings must not bee looked vpon without some honourable meditation of God and Christ the giuers.
Fourthly, seeing beleeuers haue a God, a Father, a Christ, a Sauiour, a Lord, they are sure to be in a happy case, and may haue what is needfull, if they will seeke for it.
Fiftly, wee may obserue, we can haue no comfort in the enioying or hope of any fauour or blessing, spirituall or temporall, vnlesse, first, God be our Father; secondly, we be in Christ.
Lastly, if GOD be a Father, and CHRIST a Lord, it stands vs vpon to looke to it, that we performe both honour and seruice. And thus of the Salutation. The Preface followeth.




Verse 3. Wee giue thankes to God, euen the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ. alwaies praying for you.

The Diuision.THE Salutation hath beene handled already, the Preface followeth, and is contained in this Verse, and those that follow to the 12. Verse: in which the end and drift of the Apostle is, to winne affection to the Doctrine afterwards to be propounded: and this he doth by shewing his exceeding great loue to them, which he demonstrates by two things which hee did for them, (viz.) he both gaue thankes vnto God in their behalfe, and also made many a prayer for them: which spirituall duties are better kindnesses and signes of true affection and respect, then all ciuill curtesies or outward complements are or can be.
These things in the Preface are first generally set downe in this Verse, and then particularly enlarged in the Verses afterwards: first, the Thanksgiuing, from ver. 4. to the 9. Secondly, Prayer, v. 9.10.11. In this Verse hee doth two things: ^^rst, hee giues thankes: Secondly, he prayes. In the Thankesgiuing consider, first, what hee doth, in these words, Wee giue thankes: Secondly, to whom he doth it, in these words; To God, euen the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ. Thus farre of the order of the words.
The Doctrines follow, which must bee considered generally from the whole Verse, and specially from the seuerall words.
Two generall Doctrines.The first generall Doctrine is this, that it is not enough to salute others kindly, but we must doe and performe the sound duties of loue: this is from the coherence, and condemnes the sinfull barrennesse of many that know a necessity of no duties of loue, vnlesse it be to salute curteously.
Secondly, wee see heere that Tyrants may take away the benefit of hearing, reading, conference, and such like; but they cannot hinder vs of praying. Paul can pray and giue thankes in prison, for himselfe and others, as well as euer before. Let wicked men doe their worst, Gods children will still pray vnto God And looke how many promises are made in Scripture, to the prayers of the Saints, so many consolations are inuiolably preserued vnto them, against the rage of whatsoeuer extremitie wicked men can cast vpon them: this is a singular comfort.
Miserie breeds vnitie.Wee] Doct. Miserie breedeth vnitie. The Apostle that in more prosperous times iarred with Peter and Barnabas, can now hold peace and firme vnitie with meaner men; and therefore he saith Wee, not I. And thus wee see it was in the times of persecution in Queene Maries daies, the Bishoppes and Pastors that could not agree when they were in their Seates and Pulpits, willingly seeke agreement when they are in prison, and must come to the Stake. And so it many times falls out in common Iudgements, as the sword and pestilence:Esay 24.2. in such times the words of the Prophet are fulfilled, Like People like Priests, like Seruant like Master, like Buyer like Seller, like Borrower like Lender, like Giuer like Taker to vsury. Great and preuailing Iudgements take away all that vanity of conceit and swelling of pride, which difference of gifts and places bred before.
The Lord for his mercies sake grant, that at the length there may be found some remedie to cure the wound and heale the breach which proud contention hath made, and continued, with effects prodigious and vnheard of: lest the Lord be at length prouoked to plague with more fierce and cruell Iudgements; and worke vnion, at least in one furnace of common calamitie: the same God, for his Sonnes sake, worke in all that any wise loue the prosperitie of Ierusalem, on all sides, that they more regard the glory of God and the good of the Church, then their owne greatnesse either of place or
 respects amongst men, and that they may more seeke the truth then victorie. And as for those that neither loue the truth nor peace, the Lord open their eyes and conuert them, or else giue them to eate of the fruite of their owne wayes.
Doe.] It is not safe to put ouer good motions.Not safe to deferre good motions. Note. When Paul findeth fitnesse to pray and giue thankes, he doth not omit the occasion. In spirituall things delay is alwaies dangerous, but in sinfull motions the only way many times is to deferre the execution. Many sinnes are preuented by the very benefit of taking time enough to execute them.
Giue thankes.It is good to praise before thou reproue.] Paul giues them to vnderstand before he comes to dispraise their vices, and the corruptions crept into the Church, that hee takes notice of their praise-worthy vertues: hee reserues his taxation to the second Chapter; and this course hee holds with them for diuers Reasons. First, to assure them of his loue, and that he did it not of malice, a thing especially  to be looked to in all admonitions, in familie, or else-where, as well to praise for vertue, as dispraise for vice. Secondly, hee holds this course to let them  see that he did account them as Christians, though they had their infirmities. It is a secret corruption in the affection of the reproued to conceiue that the Reproouer likes them not at all. They are not fit to reproue others, that cannot loue them for their vertues at the same time that they dispraise their faults: and therefore they are farre short of holy affections, that say, I neuer liked him since I saw that fault by him. Thirdly, hee did thus, that they  might the more hate sinne, seeing it did darken their graces, which else would more appeare. Fourthly, that they might be made thankefull themselues for their owne graces; a shame that others should praise God for his  mercies to vs, and we neuer praise God our selues. Lastly, it carrieth with it  a secret taxation of vnthankfulnesse, as the cause of their fall: for, had they beene more thankfull for the sinceritie of the preaching of the Gospell, and for the riches of the grace of Christ offered, the honourable opinion of the excellencie and sufficiencie thereof, to giue all sound contentment, would haue preserued them from mixing the worship of God with mens traditions, or admitting contrary doctrine, and from dishonouring the mediation of Christ with Angell-worship. Then did Popish traditions ouerflow, when the Scriptures were contemned, and the light of them suppressed: and in generall, an vnthankfull man is euer a vicious man.
More specially, in the dutie here mentioned two things are to be considered.

1. What they doe: Wee giue thankes.
2. To whom: (viz.) to God euen the Father, etc.

We giue thankes] Eucharist is sometimes appropriated onely to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, but most commonly is generall to all holy thankfulnesse, especially to God.
There is a flattering thankefulnesse to men,Acts 24.3. Luke 18.11. and a Pharisaicall proud conceited thankesgiuing to God.
Concerning the spirituall mans thankefulnesse to God, I propound three things onely in the generall briefly to be noted: First, Reasons to incite vs to the practise of continuall thankefulnesse to God. Secondly, for what things we are to be thankfull. Thirdly, what rules to bee obserued for the manner of performance of it.
There are many reasons scattered in Scripture,Motiues to thankfulnesse. to incite vs to Thankefulnesse: first, because it is a speciall part of Gods worship, or one way by which we yeeld worship to God. Hence,1 Cor. 14.16. that the Apostle accounts it a great losse, if the people cannot say Amen, when the Teacher blesseth in the spirit, or giueth thankes. Againe, when he would exhort them to liberality, hee vrgeth
 them with this reason, that the supplying of the necessities of the Saints would cause much thankesgiuing to God,2 Cor: 9.12.13. 1 Cor. 4.16.2.. And in the 4. of the 2. of Corin. he sheweth that the thankesgiuing of many would breed both a plenty of grace, and an abounding of much praise to God. Secondly, the Apostle hauing dehorted the Ephesians  from Fornication and all Vncleannesse, and Couetousnesse, Filthinesse, Iesting, and foolish Talking; hee addeth, but rather vse giuing of ThanksEphes. 43.4.. As if hee would note, that thankefulnesse for Gods Blessings and Graces duely performed,  would preserue them from the filth and power of these base vices. Besides, it is a thing that becommeth the Saints, nothing better. Thirdly, it is a signe of three worthy things, wherein it behooueth euery man to be well assured: first, it is a signe of a heart that hath rightly receiued Christ, and is firmely rooted, built, and stablished in the FaithCol. 2.6.7.. Secondly, if men in all things let their requests be shewed vnto God with giuings of thankes, it is a signe of the peace of God, euen that the peace of God that passeth all vnderstanding, will preserue their hearts and mindes in Christ IesusPhil. 4.6.7.. Thirdly, it is a signe, nay, a very meanes of a contented mind. He that can pray vnto God for what he wants, and is able thankefully to acknowledge what he hath in possession or promise, hee will in nothing be carefull,Phil. 4.6. as it appeareth in the same place to the Philippians. Lastly, it is one of the sixe principall meanes to make a man reioyce alwaies, as the Apostle writeth, 1 Thes. 5.18.1 Thess. 5.18. Thus of the Reasons.
For what wee must giue thanks.Secondly, wee must consider for what wee must giue thankes. First, for spirituall things as well as temporal, as for the Word2 Cor. 4.16., for Mercies in praierCol: 4.2., for Victory ouer a sinneRom. 7.26., for KnowledgeRom. 1.21.. Secondly, in aduersitie as well as in prosperitie, and that in all sorts of afflictions; in dangerActs 27:35, in wrongs. Thirdly, in outward things wee must bee thankefullCol. 3.17. 1 Cor. 10 3., not onely for great things done, for our states or names, but euen for the lesser and more daily fauours, as for our foode, and the creatures for our nourishment. And in speciall manner haue the Saints in all ages bound themselues to a set course of prayer and praise ouer and for their food: and therefore their grosse swinish prophanenesse is so much the greater, that sit downe and rise from their meate,Scripture for prayer and Thankesgiuing for our very food. like brute beasts, without any Prayer or Thankesgiuing. If any aske whether there be any expresse Scripture for Grace before and after meate, I answere, there is, and alledge these three vndeniable and plaine places of Scripture, 2 Tim. 4.3.4. Iohn 6.23. Rom. 14.6.
Thirdly, for the manner of Thankesgiuing, it may bee found in that phrase vsed by the Prophets in the olde Testament of Sacrificing the calues of their lipsPsal. 5. vlt. Hos. 14.3..The manner of Thankesgiuing. For heere foure things may be obserued. First; it must be a dead Calfe, to note that all Thankesgiuing must proceed from humble and mortified minds; and therefore the Pharisies thanks did not a whit iustifie themLuke 18:11.14.. Secondly, it must be a sacrificed Calfe. Now, in the Sacrifice three things were required; an Altar, Fire, and to lay the hand vpon the head of the Beast: An Altar, for not onely our prayers must be made in the name of Christ, but our prayses also must be tendered to God in his mediation, or they will neuer be accepted, no more then a Calfe not laid on the Altar: neyther is it enough to lay the Calfe on the Altar, but Fire must be put to it: to note, that the bare throwing out of words of thankefulnesse, though in the name of Christ, will not serue, vnlesse wee doe also get some feeling ardencie and zeale to burne the Sacrifice. Thirdly, we must lay our hands on the head of the Calfe; that is, in all humilitie wee must confesse our vnworthinesse of all the blessiings or graces wee giue thankes for. Againe, in that they offer a Calfe, it signifieth that wee should not offer our thankefulnesse to God of that that costs vs nothing: wee should desire to expresse our praise by doing some thing to further Gods worship, or relieue the necessities of others. If GOD blesse vs at home, wee should carry a Calfe to the Temple. Lastly, we must
 not sacrifice to a strange God, when we giue thankes, and that men doe when they sacrifice to their nets, as the Prophet speaketh, that is,Hab. 1.16. when men attribute the glory and praise of God to the meanes or second causes.
Thus of thankfulnesse in the generall.
But that which is here entended, is,We must giue thankes for others. Foure rules of triall. that we should giue thankes for others as well as for our selues, which is not a curtesie but a dutie. This dutie of praising God for others, growes exceeding commendable, if wee can exercise it in these particulars. First, if wee can giue thankes for those blessings vpon others, which the world accounts shamefull to enioy, as Zeale  for Gods glory, religious Sinceritie, and vprightnesse of heart, the Crosse for Christ his sake, and such like. Secondly, if wee can first giue thankes,  that is, be more apt to praise God for the vertues of others, then be forwards  to taxe their faults and frailties. Thirdly, if we can doe it for all sorts of men,1 Tim. 2.1. euen our enemies. Fourthly,1 Thes. 3.9. if wee can bee thankefull for the true ioy wee  haue had in other mens prosperities.
To conclude this point, if wee would haue others to giue thankes for vs,As any are more heauenly minded, they are more frequent in praises. we should labour to be such, as for whom thankes may be giuen. And thus of what they doe: Now, to whom.
To God.] These words hauing beene vsed in the very Verse before, teach vs two things. First, that it is no cloying to a sanctified minde to be much and often, yea, vpon euery occasion in the honourable mention and lauding of God, ascribing in euery thing glory to God: so, in heauen they shall neuer be weary of Gods praises, no not vnto all eternitie. And certaine it is, that the more men grow in sanctification, the more easie and apt are their hearts to entertaine all occasions of communion with God, without wearinesse or deadnesse.
Secondly, (to God) shuts out the praises of themselues or of men. It is fit our reioycing and praise should be directed thither from whence the blessing came.
The Father] These words are considered in the former Verse. Thus much of his Thankesgiuing.
Praying for you] First,A childe of God neuer giues thankes but he hath cause to pray, and contrariwise. in generall from the ioyning together of these two duties, two things may be obserued: First, that a childe of God neuer giues thankes but he hath cause to pray: for, if it be for temporall things, hee must pray both for their sanctified vse, that they become not occasions of sinne; and for their preseruation according to Gods will: if it be for spirituall things, he hath reason to pray for increase, strength, and preseruation against falling, and such like. Secondly, on the other side, I say also, that a childe of God doth neuer pray, but hee may finde reasons to giue thankes, wee may finde mercies in any miserie; yea, it is a singular mercy to haue a heart to pray, and to haue so many large promises made to them that call vp on God in their distresse. But the maine particular Doctrine is, that we ought not onely to pray for our selues but for others. And the Apostle, 1 Tim. 2.1. seemes to make foure sorts of prayers for others, viz. Deprecations, Requests,Foure sorts of prayers for others. Intercessions, and Giuing of Thankes: Deprecations are Prayers for help against hurtfull things; Requests are Prayers for profitable things; the word rendered Intercessions, is by some taken to signifie complaints vnto God against such as wrong them, for whom we pray: or else, it is a more set or serious imploring of Gods aide with the vnited forces of the godly: and lastly, Giuing of Thankes stands in the lauding of God for blessings or graces: and in the 6. of the Ephesians, and in the 1 of Tim. 2. the Apostle sets downe rules to bee obserued in Praier for others: in the Ephesians hee requires that they pray,Ephes. 6.18. 1. at all times: 2. with all manner of Prayers: 3. in the spirit: 4. with watching: 5. with perseuerance: 6. With spirituall importunitie: and lastly, for all Saints:
 And in Timothy he requires that they pray;1 Tim. 2.8. 1. euery where; 2. with pure hands; 3. without wrath; 4. without doubting.
Alwaies.] To pray alwaies, is to consecrate euery day and night to God by Prayer: and besides, to pray vpon all occasions, with lifting vp our harts vnto God; or by vsing short prayers, which they haue beene wont to call Eiaculations. Neither was it the dutie of Paul onely, to pray alwaies, that is, to keepe a set order of Prayers; but it is our dutie also to set apart time euery day,Reasons to warrant praying euery day. euening and morning, to pray vnto God our selues, and our households. And because these exercises of Religion are by the most wholy neglected, and in roome of it, vile prophanenesse staines mens houses, I will here set downe, by the way, some few reasons to warrant a daily set course  of praying.Math. 6.11. First, our Sauiour CHRIST teacheth vs to pray for the bread of the day, euery day: as God will not promise vs bread for a weeke, a month, a yeere; so neither will God accept of a prayer for the necessities of a weeke, month or yeere before hand, but will haue vs to make as much conscience to  pray daily, as we haue sense of daily wants. Secondly, we are commanded to pray continually:1 Thes. 5.17. now, what sense can be probably giuen of these words, if that a daily set course of prayer bee not included. Thirdly, the Saints  prayed euery day, an auncient practise some thousand of yeeres a goe; Dauid prayed seauen times a day; and Daniell, three times a day. Let wicked and prophane people say, what needes all this prayer; but let vs be assured, that as holinesse and grace growes in any, so are they more abundant in this worship of praier: the holiest men haue euer prayed most: for though they haue not most neede, yet they haue alwaies most sense of their owne needes  and others to. Fourthly, if our foode must bee euery day sanctified by the exercise of the Word and Prayer, then much more haue wee neede to sanctifie our selues,1 Tim 4.2. our housholds, our callings, and our labours by daily Prayer.
Lastly, Prayer is called Incense and Sacrifice. Now the Iewes held it an abhomination  of desolation,Psal. 141.2. and 51.17. if the morning and euening Sacrifice were wanting: neither do wee lesse need to seeke daily the benefits of the attonement made by the sacrifice of Christ, and his intercession; then did the Iewes: and wee are euery way as much bound, as often to professe our faith in CHRIST slaine, as they did in Christ to be slaine.
And thus of the demonstratiue and vndeniable signes of the Apostles loue to the Colossians, as they are generally set downe in this Verse.




Verse 4. Since wee heard of your faith in Christ Iesus, and your loue towardes all Saints.
Verse 5. For the hopes sake which is laide vp for you in heauen.


IN these words and the rest that follow to the 12. Verse, hee doth particularly explicate the two signes of affection: first, he sets downe his Thankesgiuing to Verse 9. secondly, he prayes, Verse 9. to 12. In the Thankesgiuing hee giues thankes for their Graces in these words: secondly, for the meanes of grace in the rest of the words to the 9. Verse.
Their Graces are three; Faith, Loue and Hope.
Of Faith] In the handling of the Doctrine of Faith, I consider it: First, in the coherence,Diuers things concerning Faith, noted from the coherence. Heb. 11.6. 2 Cor. 13.5. as it stands in the Text: Secondly, as it is in it selfe apart from that which went before or comes after. From the generall consideration of the Coherence I obserue, First, that wee can neuer be reconciled to God, or attaine the chiefe good without Faith, Without Faith it is impossible to please God. Therefore it is good for vs to proue our selues, whether we bee in the Faith, and to know whether Christ be in vs except we be reprobates.

Secondly, this Faith is not naturall: wee are not borne beleeuers, wee are  all concluded vnder sinne, and kept vnder the Law, and shut vp to Faith afterwards to be reuealedGal. 3.22.23 It is the worke of God; yea, of the power of God2 Thes. 1.11.: It is the gift of GodEphes. 2.8.: All men haue not Faith2 Thes. 3.2.: It must be gotten with much striuing1 Tim. 6.12.. As not by nature, so not by naturall meanes: and therfore we must seeke for better grounds, then I haue beene alwaies thus: neither will it auaile thee to shew thy education, ciuilitie, morall vertues, outward holinesse, etc.
Thirdly, whatsoeuer we gaine by the word of God, if wee gaine not Faith  and Loue, all is vaine; Knowledge is vaine, Zeale is vaine, etc. therefore it behooueth vs to gather in our thoughts, and to minde that one thing that is necessarie.
Lastly, though Nature deny strength to beare or power to giue this grace,  yet there is power in the word of God preached, to beget euen Faith as well as other Graces: Faith commeth by hearing, etc. Rom. 10.17.Rom. 10.17. and Gal. 3.2.5.Gal. 3.2.5. he saith, They receiued the Spirit, by the hearing of Faith preached, etc. Heare, and your soule shall liue. Esay 55.4.Esay 55 4.
Thus much of the Doctrines from the Coherence.
That the nature of this grace may appeare, the seuerall acceptations of the word, the sorts, obiects, parts and degrees of it must be considered. Faith is in Scriptures diuersly taken: sometimes it is giuen to GOD,The acceptations of the word Faith. and signifieth his faithfulnesse in his promises, as Rom. 3.3. Shall their vnbeliefe make the faith of God of none effect. And when it is giuen to man, it is taken: First, for Fidelitie, as it is a vertue in the second Table, Mat. 23.23. Secondly, sometimes it is taken for the Doctrine of Faith, Rom. 12.6. According to the Analogie of Faith. Thirdly, sometimes for Profession of Religion; thus Elimas is charged to haue laboured to turne the Deputie from the Faith, Acts 13.8. Fourthly, sometimes for Christ himselfe, by a Metonymie, who is both the obiect and cause of Faith Gal. 3.25. Fiftly, for Knowledge only: thus the Diuels are said to beleeue, Iames 2. Sixtly, for the gift of working Miracles: If I had all Faith, so as I could remoue mountaines, etc. 1 Corin. 13.3. Lastly, for that grace by which felicitie and the thiefe good is applied; and thus it is called the faith of Gods Elect, Tit. 1.2. and by Diuines, iustifying Faith.
Secondly, there are diuers sorts of Faith:The sorts of Faith. I will not speake of Faith generall or speciall, infused, or acquired, formed and vnformed, but leaue them to the troublesome Schoole-men; onely I rest in the vsuall distribution which hath ground in Scripture: thus Faith is Historicall, Temporary, of Miracles, and iustifying.
First, Historicall FaithHistoricall Faith. is to beleeue the doctrine of the word of GOD to be true: and therein is supernaturall; and differeth from all humane knowledge whatsoeuer; neither is it in the power of Nature alone to perswade men that the Scriptures are Gods word, further then the remnants of Gods former image doe giue a glimpse of it, and is cleared by the spirit of generall illumination.
This Historicall Faith doth both vnderstand the Doctrine, and giue assent that it is true, yet doth not iustifie: and therefore their case is so much the more fearefull, that haue not so much as their ignorance any way redressed, nor gotten so much as any knowledge by the Word of God.
Secondly Temporary FaithTemporary Faith. goeth yet further: for, such as haue that Faith doe not onely get knowledge, and yeeld assent to the truth, but also professe the truth with some earnestnesse, not sticking at it, to giue their names in some more speciall manner then others, to a respect of Religion; yea, they reioyce inwardly in the doctrine of the Word: and lastly; bring forth some kinde of fruit, and amend some faults,Luke 8.13. Heb. 6.4.5. onely because the Word of GOD would haue them so to doe. Therefore is this Faith vnprofitable, because
 they neuer had the particular assurance of Gods fauour in forgiuenes of sins, nor will bee brought to dislike, much lesse to humble their soules for those speciall sinnes wherein they haue transgressed; but nourish some one particular presumptuous sinne or sinnes, which raigning in them doth wholly engrosse and take vp that inward worship which is due to God onely. And this is the Faith of our better sort of people.
Thirdly, Faith of MiraclesFaith of Miracles. was that Faith by which many in the Primitiue Church were able to worke Miracles, and was of two sorts: eyther Faith to heale, or Faith to be healed: this Faith may bee in such as are reprobates, as Matth. 7. some shall say, Haue wee not cast out Deuils by thy name? to whom Christ shall answer, Depart, I know you not.
Fourthly, but that Faith in the enioying of which is comfort for euermore is iustifying Faith.Iustifying Faith. The nature of this Faith will appeare if wee consider:
The ObiectsThe PartsThe Degrees of it.
The obiects of Faith.First, of the Obiects: this Faith may be perceiued by that which it carrieth the minde vnto, and from which it seeketh the comfort of the chiefe. good: and thus the obiect is three-fold.


The Merits of Christ.


The Promises of God.


The Prouidence of God.


So that, wouldest thou trie thy Faith? consider then what it is that thou makest thy refuge, and the foundation of thy comfort. What is it that thou most laboured after? is it the assurance of Gods fauour, by the application of Christ? is it the distinct applying of such and such promises of life in Scripture? dost thou liue by thy Faith in the course of life? if so, thou hast met with the right Faith, without Christ it is not possible to attaine the chiefe good, neyther is it enough to beleeue that Christ dyed for sinners, etc. vnlesse we labour in the day of our visitation, for the certaine and particular apprehension of the efficacie and merit of Christs righteousnesse, for the particular assurance of Gods fauour in remitting such and such our transgressions. And because it is not easie at all times to discerne by the working of the Spirit of Adoption, the imputation of righteousnesse from Christ, therefore hath the Lord discussed the cases of conscience so comfortably in Scripture, that if men examine themselues before the conditions of Gods promises, they may finde in diuers of them the cleare determining of their estate. Here may bee iustly taxed the grosse ouer-sight and securitie of many, (otherwise the deare Seruants of God) that are no better acquainted with the promises of life, vpon the truth of which depends their happinesse, and both present and future comfort. And lastly, by the same Faith, whereby the iust are saued, by the selfe same they liue in the course of life in this world: the ground of his Faith for his preseruation, is the prouidence of his God, whiles the men of this world wonderfully please themselues in sacrificing to their nets, ascribing in their affections, the stay of their maintenance, vnto their labour, friends, inheritance, etc.
The Parts of Faith.Secondly, that the nature of this Faith may yet bee further opened, the Parts of it must be considered. Faith is eyther in the minde, or in the heart; and by the change of both it may be discerned.
Faith in the minde.In the minde it shewes it selfe in two things: Knowledge, Iudgement.
There is something in the very illumination of the Vnderstanding of the Saints, which is of the nature of Faith. Hence it is that the Prophet Isay saith of Christ,Isay 53.11. By his knowledge he shall iustifie many: that is, make iust.

Iudgement is either of truth or of goodnesse.
Iudgement of truth, is, when we giue glory so farre forth to the way of life, and the meanes of Reconciliation, that our hearts being conuinced, our vnderstandings doe clearely resolue, that this is the way to bee happie, and no other.
Iudgement of goodnesse, is, when we doe not onely beleeue the Doctrine of happinesse to be true as before, but to be the onely good tidings our hearts can rest vpon.
Faith, as it shewes it selfe in the heart, stands in three things.Faith in the heart.


Desires.


Fiduce or Confidence.


Perswasion, or Apprehension and application.


It may not be dissembled,Desire to beleeue is of the nature of Faith. that there are in the world many definitions or descriptions of Faith, such as doe not comprehend in them that only thing which is the chiefe stay of thousands of the deare Seruants of God; and that is, Desires, which may not be denied to be of the nature of Faith, I expresse my meaning thus: that when a man or woman is so farre exercised in the spirituall seeking of the Lord his God, that he would be willing to part with the world, and all the things thereof, if he had them in his owne possession, so that by the Spirit and Promises of God he might be assured, that the sins of his former life, or such as presently doe burthen his Soule, were forgiuen him; and that hee might beleeue that God were now become his God in Christ: I would not doubt to pronounce that this person (thus prising remission of sinnes at this rate, that hee would sell all to buy this Pearle) did vndoubtedly beleeue, not onely because it is a truth (though a Paradoxe) that the Desire to beleeue is Faith: but also because our Sauiour Christ doth not doubt to affirme that they are blessed that hunger and thirst after righteousnesse, because they shall be satisfied. And, to him that is a thirst,Math. 5.6. Reuel. 21.6. Psal. 10.17. I will giue to drinke of the water of life freely. And Dauid doubteth not to say, The Lord heareth the desires of his poore.
Fiduce, or Confidence in the heart, is a part of Faith, and shewes it selfe in this, when the Soule resteth vpon Christ, and the Promises of God, as the only ground of all that happinesse which he must euer get vnto himselfe.
Perswasion, or an apprehending application is the last thing in Faith, and that in the beginnings of Faith is more in the power of the Spirit then in the sense and feeling of the conscience; yet herein it appeares, that though the Soule be tost with many temptations, and feares, and terrors, yet more or lesse, one time or other, they are much refreshed with a sweet ioy arising they know not how, from the very perswasion, that they belong to God in and for Christ.
So that if wee would try our Faith, we must examine what knowledge we haue gotten, what Iudgement of the way of life, what Desires wee haue of remission of sinnes, how our hearts are setled, and what it is that supports vs.
There are two Degrees of Faith, a weake Faith, and a strong Faith:The Degrees. (...). a weake Faith is described before, for all the former parts of faith are found in the weakest Faith that is: a strong Faith hath in it a certaine and full assurance of Gods fauour in remission of sinnes, so as doubts and feares are stilled and ouer-come; and such was the Faith of Abraham, commended Rom. 4.18.19.20.21. and this faith may be attained vnto by all sorts of the seruants of God, if they liue and may vse the benefit of the ordinances of God; yet a grosse fault in the definition of Faith, as it is made by many, must be carefully shunned, and that is, that they make the Genus to be a full assurance which is onely proper to a strong Faith and is not vsually found in the weake Faith, and yet that Faith is such as doth iustifie for the present, and will saue for euer.

The Benefits come by faith.And that we may be affected with an holy desire after this necessary grace, two things are further to be considered.

1 The Benefits men might haue by Faith.
2 The wofull estate of those that want it.

The Benefits may be ordered into fiue rankes.

1 What Faith deliuereth vs from.
2 What it preserues vs against.
3 What the weakest Faith getteth.
4 What we might get if we laboured for a greater growth in Faith.
5 How it fits vs for heauen.

For the first: Faith doth deliuer vs;
 First, from the darkenesse and blindnesse wee liued in before; Whosoeuer beleeueth in mee shall not abide in darkenesse.What Faith deliuereth vs from John 12.46. Isay 25.8. Wee no sooner by Faith taste of the Bread of life, but the vaile of ignorance, which naturally couereth all flesh, is torne and rent, as the Prophet Isay sheweth notably, Isay. 25.8.
Secondly, it deliuers vs from those wofull euills, which as so many abhominations,  doe defile both the Vnderstanding and Affections: Faith purifieth the heart.Acts 15.9. No wonder though men bee continually surcharged with euill thoughts, and most vile affections, and strange euills within, seeing wee are so hardly gotten to set about the earnest labour after spirituall application of the merits and righteousnesse of Christ, which righteousnesse neuer can be imputed by Faith, but grace is infused by the Spirit of Sanctification at the same time. Neither is there any more clearer testimonie of the want of iustifying Faith, then the continuall preuailing of euill thoughts and affections.
 Thirdly, it deliuers vs from the Law, not onely from the Ceremoniall Law, and other biggerly Rudiments, but also from the Morall Law in two things onely; first, from the Curse of it, which is wholy taken away by the imputation of Christs Passion: secondly, from the Rigour of it; so that, as it is commanded in the Gospell, it may not exact of Beleeuers an impossible perfection, but onely an Euangelicall and accepted vprightnes: wee are not now vnder the Law,Rom. 6. but vnder Grace, as the Apostle shewes in the Epistle to the Romanes and Galathians at large. And hence it is that the same Apostle saith, that the Law is not giuen vnto a righteous man,1 Tim. 1.9. but vnto the lawlesse and disobedient, meaning that so long as we continue in our naturall estate, so long we haue this, as one part of our miseries, that wee are liable to the curses and impossible exactions of the most righteous Law, but from the time that we are effectually called, and gathered vnto CHRIST, wee are not vnder the Law in these two respects, which is an admirable mercy.
 Fourthly, Faith deliuers vs from the power of the first death, being by Nature dead in sinnes and trespasses,Iohn 5.29. hauing no more sense of the things that belong vnto the Kingdome of Chtist,Ephes. 2.2. then a dead man in nature hath of the benefits of life. By the power of Faith eternall life is begunne here, which is called while we liue here, the life of Grace, and after death is stiled by the name of the life of Glory.
Iohn 3.16.Lastly, it deliuers men from eternall destruction, for Whosoeuer beleeueth in him, shall not perish.
Thus of the first sort of benefits.
Secondly, Faith hath a power to preserue vs, and, that in three things.
 First, it preserues from many fearefull spirituall diseases in the soule: hence commeth that Metaphoricall speech of being sound or whole,Tit. 1.13. Heb. 10.39. or healthfull in the faith. Hence, that he saith, Wee follow Faith vnto the conseruation of the Soule. Heb. 10.39.

Secondly, it preserues vs against the vse of ill meanes: for, He that beleeueth  maketh not hast. Herein is a speciall triall of Faith,Isay 28.16. and is a worthy testimonie of vprightnesse, when men can so rest vpon God, that they will not be entangled with those profits that either the time makes vnseasonable, as the Sabbath, or the meanes make sinfull, as deceipt, lying, etc. but can chearfully beleeue, that the same God that now tries him with the occasions of profit in such time and manner, can giue him as much profit at a lawfull time, and by lawfull meanes. It is most difficult for an vnsanctified minde to forbeare either time or meanes when profit and pleasure intise.
Lastly, how miserable is our life here many times in respect of the temptations  with which Sathan doth fire vs?Ephes. 6.16. Now if there were in vs conscionable respect of certaine application of Gods fauour, there is a secret power in Faith, as a Sheild, not onely to keepe off, but extinguish the fiery darts of the Diuell. And the true reason why our life is continually assaulted, and why the world lieth vanquished vnder a thousand miseries, is onely because men doe not labour for a particular assurance of GODS loue in Christ, which being once had, wee should soone see an happy victorie ouer the World, Hell, and Death, in respect of the beginnings of many heauenly contentments.
In the third place we are to consider the benefits which the weakest Faith  obtaineth: and they are especially sixe.
First, it iustifies and giues vs a portion in the most meritorious intercession  of Christ at the right hand of God; it is no sooner had but it makes the sinner iust before God: this is euery where proued.
Secondly, it gathereth men into the familie of Abraham,Gal. 3.7.9. and that as Sonnes  yea, the least Faith makes a man blessed with faithfull Abraham, so that if Abrahams case were happy, then is euery Childe of God so.
Thirdly, it makes men not onely the Sonnes of Abraham, but the Sonnes:  of God also by Adoption. As many as receiued him,Iohn 1.12. to them hee gaue power to bee the Sonnes of God, euen to them that beleeue in his name.
Fourthly, by Faith the Sonne of God, by an vnutterable presence, doth  dwell in the hearts of the Sonnes of men. Ephes. 3.16.Epes. 3.16.
Fiftly, the meanest Faith, that is a true Faith, doth euer come attended  with many holy Graces: and therefore to dispute of Faith,Acts 24.25. is to dispute of Temperance, Righteousnesse, etc. Acts 24.25.
Lastly, Faith according to the measure of it, is the foundation of all the  hope that makes men happy:Heb. 11.1. therefore it is called the ground of the things which are hoped for, and the euidence of things not seene.
Fourthly, if men would labour for the increase of Faith, and once get a  certaintie concerning Gods fauour, they might enioy many blessings more then they doe, euen in this life.
First, it might be vnto vs according to our faith: what greater indulgence can  be desired from God?Math. 9.29.
Secondly, men might liue by their Faith, that is, they might haue from  their Faith continually arguments both of comfort and direction,Heb. 2.5. euen in their carriage about the things of this life.
Thirdly, we might haue the sense of peace with God, accesse vnto Grace,  wherein we might stand,Rom. 5.1.2.3.4.5. and be filled with ioy in the hope of the glory of God to be reuealed; yea, to be made able to hold vp their heads, and reioice in afflictions, etc.  
Fourthly,2 Tim. 3:15. there is a power in Faith to put such life into the sacred Scriptures, that they would be able to make vs wise, euen to saluation.  
Fiftly, how hard a thing it is for the Creature to haue accesse vnto the Creator with any boldnesse or confidence, the lamentable experience of the world shewes; insomuch that the Apostle saith, wee are naturally without God
 in the world,Ephes. 3.12. able to minde any thing, and to effect any thing but God. But now this which is vnpossible to Nature, is become possible to faith, as the Apostle shewes, Ephes. 3.12. And how vnspeakeable a mercy it is to haue a comfortable communion with God, and easie accesse for our prayers, the Saints may conceiue but not vtter.
 Sixtly, by Faith wee might be able to ouercome the world; so as wee might easily contemne the glory of earthly things,1 Iohn 5.4. the Millions of euill examples and scandalls, the thousands of temptations, allurements, disswasiues, lets, and impediments, which the world casteth in our way, and with which wee are often entangled, insnared, and many times most shamefully vanquished, to the dishonour of God and our Religion: the wounding of our Profession and our Consciences, etc. If men had that power of Faith which the ordinances of God were able to giue; how might they astonish Epicures, Papists and Atheists, which now differ little from them?
 Seuenthly, Faith would euen make our friendship and mutuall societie a thousand times more comfortable then now it is, as the APOSTLE intimates, Rom. 1.12.Rom. 1.12.
 Eightly, by Faith wee might worke righteousnesse, and attaine to innocencie of life,Heb. 11.33.34. wee might receiue the Promises, with all those sweet comforts contained in them, which are matters of as great wonder, as to subdue Kingdomes, to stop the mouthes of Lyons, etc.
 Ninthly, Faith would make vs to contemne the pleasures of sinne, and account affliction with Gods people better then perfection of pleasure for a season,Heb: 11:25. as it is obserued in Moses, Hebr. 11. whereas now euery base delight is able to captiuate our affections, and we haue scarse strength to stand against one temptation.
 Tenthly, Faith by continuance in the Word of God, would make vs free, euen Gods spirituall free-men,Iohn 8.32. so as wee should clearely see that no naturall Prentise or Bond-slaue could finde so much ease and benefit by his release, as we might by Faith.
 Lastly, we might haue the cleare apprehension of the remission of all our sinnes past, as is manifest, Rom. 3.25. Acts 10.43. onely for sinnes to come, God giues no acquittance before there bee a debt, and the discharge sued out.
 And as Faith furnisheth, or would furnish men with these wonderfull benefits in this life, so it prouideth an assurance of an immortall inheritance in heauen for all eternitie, as these places shew, Acts 26.18. Iohn 6.47. 1. Pet. 1.9. 2. Thes. 1.10. with many other.
Thus much of the benefits by Faith.
Quest.Obiect. Oh, but what if men doe not beleeue? Ans. First, I might answere that it is yet a comfort, that though thousands neglect Faith, yet their vnbeliefe cannot make the faith of God of none effect:Ans. The miseries of such as haue not faith. Rom. 3.3. though the whole world contemne the doctrine of Faith, and please themselues in their spirituall securitie, yet God knowes how to shew mercy to his seruants that desire to beleeue in him and feare before him.
 Secondly, I read in S. Marke that CHRIST maruailed at their vnbeliefe; and iustly:Marke 6.6. they were affected with his doctrine, it was confirmed by miracles, and yet they beleeued not: we miserable men are a wonderment to God, Christ, and Angels, and an astonishment to Heauen and Earth for our incredible incredulity.
 Thirdly, I read in S. Mathew, that hee did not great workes there for their vnbeliefe sake.Math. 13.58. Surely we are iustly debarred the benefit and comfort of many of the workes of God, which might discouer the glory of his goodnesse to vs, onely because of our vnbeliefe.

Fourthly, if the Iewes were cut off for their vnbeliefe, being naturall branches,  and such as God had reason to fauour as much as any people vnder the Sunne, how fearefull then is the case of many of vs,Rom. 11.20. that can haue no other standing then by Faith.
Fiftly, Nothing is pure to the vnbeleeuing.  
Sixtly, If we beleeue not we cannot be established.Titus 1.15.
Seuenthly, if men refuse to beleeue when they haue the meanes of Faith,  their sentence is already gone out, He that beleeueth not is condemned already.Isay 7:9.
Eightly, It is a matter of ease and profit, and pleasure, to liue in sinne,  John 3.18. especially some sinnes: but what is it to die in them? Except that yee beleeue  that I am hee, yee shall die in your sinnes.Iohn 8:24.
Ninthly, consider the contrary to the benefits before; if we get not faith,  we abide in darkenesse, we are vnder the rigour and curse of the Law, subiect to the dominion of heart pollutions, dead in sinne, full of spirituall diseases, hasting to euill meanes, pierced through with fierce temptations, wicked in Gods account, not iustified, neither the Seede of Abraham nor of GOD, without Christ, without hope of immortall blisse, without peace with God, comfort in afflictions, without Grace, without communion with God. The Scriptures (while we are in this estate) are but as a dead Letter, wee are easily ouercome of the World, vnconstant in friendship, without the Couenant of Promise, entangled with euery pleasure and baite, and as Bondslaues, abiding in the guilt and power of sinnes past.
Lastly, how fearefull are those threatnings, Marke 16.16. Reuel. 21.8. Heb. 3.12.
There remaine yet foure things to be considered:The incouragements to beleeue.
1 The Incouragements to beleeue.2 The Lets of Faith.3 How Faith may be knowne.4 How farre short the Faith of the common Protestant is. For the first: we haue many incouragements to beleeue:
First, because wee haue a Sauiour, in respect of merit, both in suffering  and dying, able to deliuer vs, his Redemption being both precious and plentifull.
Secondly, hee is ready to make Intercession for vs, at the right hand of God,  when we set our selues in any measure to seeke Gods fauour.
Thirdly, wee haue certaine and sure ordinances, vnto which if wee seeke  we may finde.
Fourthly, what greater ioy to Angells or Saints, then the comming home  of the lost Sheepe? none greater in the house of the Father, then the Prodigall Sonne returned.
Fiftly, there is no difficulty so great either in respect of sinne, or the  meanes, etc. but it hath beene ouercome by euery one of the Saints, to shew that we may be cured and get Faith.
Sixtly,Esay 55.1. Iohn 3.16. God maketh a generall Proclamation without exception of any  in particular that will beleeue, but he may be saued.
Seauenthly, Christ himselfe most graciously inuites men.  
Obiect. Oh, but he doth not call mee. Answ. He cals all,Mat: 11.28.29.30. Reuel. 3.18. Iohn 7.37. Obiect. Solut. Obiect. Solut. Obiect. therefore he excepteth not thee: but least men should encourage themselues in sinfulnes, he addeth a limitation, All that are weary and heauy laden. If we can once finde that sinne is the greatest burthen that euer our soules bare, and that once wee could come to be weary of them, we might haue comfort in Christ.
Obiect. Oh, but if I should take that course, I should lead a dumpish and Melancholy life. Ans. It is a false imputation cast vpon Religion and Christ, for the promise is, I will ease you.
Obiect. Oh, but to exercise such a communion with God and Christ,
 requires so many graces that I can neuer get them.Solut. Ans. Learne of mee, that I am lowly and meeke; as if he should say, Get this one grace which I my selfe haue laboured in; and thou maist continue in the case and comfort once had from Christ without interruption. If men still thinke this improbable, he wils them to put it to triall, and they should certainely finde rest to their Soules.
Obiect. 3. Solut.Obiect. Oh, but to be thus yoaked is a most irkesome and impossible seruitude Ans. This he reiects as most false, and saith, My yoake is easie, and my burthen light, both in respect of the power of the meanes, and the secret comforts of God, able to support the Soule.
 Eightly, we are commanded to beleeue, and therefore it is a heauy sinne to disobey.1 Iohn 3.23.
 Ninthly, God doth beseech men to be reconciled. Wonder at this admirable Clemencie in our God.2. Cor. 5.20. Nay, then perish and that iustly, if so great and infinite goodnesse cannot perswade. These things should the rather affect, if we consider who it is, that proclaimeth, inuiteth, commandeth, beseecheth; namely, GOD who is able to doe it, and speakes out of his Nature. If a couetous man should offer vs any great kindnesse, wee might doubt of performance, because it is contrarie to his nature; but it is not so with our God, his name is gracious, and his nature is to be faithfull in performance where he hath beene true in offer or promising.
Thus much of incouragements.
The lets of Faith. Lets in the Minister. Rom. 10.The hinderances of Faith follow to be considered of. The lets of Faith are sometimes in the Minister, sometimes in the People.
Ministers are guilty of the want of Faith in their Hearers: First, when they teach not at all, because Faith cannot be had without hearing. Secondly, if wee teach not Faith, and that plainely; if they intend not the chiefest part of their labours to informe men in the doctrine of Faith (vnder which is contained the whole doctrine of the Sinners conuersion with his God) though they informe manners both for Pietie and Righteousnesse, and busie themselues in other contemplatiue Diuinitie, yet haue they not answered their Calling, but are wofull hinderances of Faith in the hearers.
Lets in the People.Secondly, in the People Faith is letted three wayes:
1 By errors in their Iudgements.2 By corrupt affections in the Heart.3 By certaine things that befall their Conuersation.
There are fiue especiall Errors, with any of which whosoeuer is infected Faith is letted.
First, when men thinke they are bound to follow their Callings, and to mind their worldly imployments; and therfore cannot spend the time about thinking of Sermons,Luke 14.16. etc. Our Sauiour, Luke 14.16. in the Parable, showes, that though men giue Heauen faire words, yet they take not a course to get it: but what lets them? Is it Whoredome, Drunkennes, Idolatry, Murther, breach of Sabbath, etc. No such matter, but onely the abuse of lawfull profit and pleasures. What more lawfull then a Farme? what more honourable of all pleasures then Marriage? onely obserue that the voluptuous person saith flatly, He cannot come: and the worldly man, I pray you haue me excused.
Obiect.Obiect. Oh, but I confesse, it were a great fault to leaue minding heauenly things, to get superfluity and more then needes, as Farme vpon Farme. But I want necessaries, if I had but sufficient my minde should not bee so taken vp,Solut. etc. Ans. Our Sauiour shewes that this is no sufficient excuse, by bringing in the man that had bought his fiue yoake of Oxen, then which what could be more needfull, seeing hee could not follow his Husbandrie without Oxen?

Secondly, a second Error letting Faith, is a close opinion of merit, which  stickes fast in our nature.
Thirdly, Faith is hindered, when the minde is fore-stalled with an opinion,  Psal. 50. Esay 1. that an outward seruing of God will serue to bring them neere enough to God. If they heare Seruice and Sermons, and receiue the Sacraments etc. they haue done so much as they thinke is enough.
Fourthly, many therefore neuer labour to get Faith, because they thinke  it is impossible to take any such course, that they should get any assurance of the remission of their sinnes in this life, or if it be possible for others, yet it is not for them.
Lastly, others thinke it possible to be had, and it is good to bee humbled  so farre as to seeke it with teares and prayers; and they thinke they doe well that will not giue ouer, till they haue comfort that way, but yet they thinke all this adoe vnnecessary, and that they may be saued without it.
In the Heart Faith is letted fiue wayes.Lets in the heart.
First, when men nourish the secret euills of their hearts, both in thoughts and affections, and make not conscience to repent for them. An euill heart is alwaies an vnfaithfull heart;Heb. 3.12.13. therefore men are exhorted to take heede of being hardened through the deceitfulnesse of sinne.
Secondly, Wordlines is a great let of Faith, when men suffer their thoughts and affections to be continually taken vp with minding of things here below, though they cannot be charged with any great couetousnesse.
Thirdly, there is in mens affections an vnwillingnesse to part with worldly pleasures and delights, and they are loath to loose their credit with their carnall friends, which they say they must doe if they take this course.
Fourthly, the world is full of common hope and presumption of Gods mercy: men say, God is mercifull, when they haue neither comfort from the Promises of God, nor ground of assurance, nor witnesse of the spirit of adoption.
Fiftly, Faith is letted, and men are kept from vsing the meanes to get Faith, and to seeke God while hee may be found, onely through a feare least if they should examine themselues, and search whether they had a true faith or not, they should finde they had none, and then they should be troubled, and driuen into Melancholy despaire, etc.
Lastly,Lets in conuersation. there are some things in mens carriage which greatly let and hinder Faith.
First, a prophane contempt of the word of God, either men will not heare, or  but by starts, or they attend not, or not apply it to themselues, or not meditate of the doctrine afterwards, or not labour for the power of it in practise, etc.
Secondly, the example of the multitude hinders muchMath. 7.13.14. Luke 13.23.24, especially the example  of wise men and great men in the worldJohn 7.45. to 50..
Thirdly, some when they go about the duties of mortification and Faith, they are turned off before they get Faith; either because they finde hardnesse of heart, or are ouer charged with temptations or doubts of audience and acceptance, and that God will neuer looke after such broken desires, etc.  or else because they haue not comfort presently, they grow desperate and say they shall haue none at all, or else are vanquished with thoughts of Atheisme iniected, which many times preuailes so strongly, that they can hardly bee recouered againe to any care to labour for Faith, till either bitter crosses or feare of Death or Hell awaken them.
Lastly, Closenesse is a great cause of want of Faith, when people will not discouer their doubts and feares, especially to their Pastors being wise and mercifull, and yet know not what to doe, and cannot get information from publike hearing. Here may be taken vp a iust complaint of the strangenesse
 betweene the Shepheards and the Flockes: the one thinking hee hath done enough if he preach to them, and the other if they heare him.
There remaines two Vses of this Doctrine of Faith.
Vses.First, seeing there are diuers sorts of Faith, and that many benefits may be had by a true Faith, and seeing that on the other side, there are wofull effects of the want of Faith, etc. It should teach vs to try whether wee haue Faith or no: and that this may be knowne, we must vnderstand;
First, that before Faith can be wrought, the heart must bee mollified by afflictions,The signes of Faith. by the continuall dropping of the word of God, by the knowledge of our miserie, by Legall feare, or lastly, by terrors from God.
Secondly, before Faith can appeare, Repentance will shew it selfe, and that especially in two things:
First in godly Sorrow for sinne past.
Secondly, in the change of the thoughts, affections and life.
As for godly Sorrow, it may not be denied, but that it may be without terrours in some, but neuer so easie in any, but these three things are true: 1. That they grieue because they cannot grieue. 2. They hate their speciall sinnes. 3. They reforme both inwardly and outwardly.
Thirdly, Faith, after the softning of the heart and Repentance, shewes it selfe in sixe things: First, in an honourable opinion ready to belieue all the word of God, though it make neuer so much against our pleasure or profit. Secondly, by the Combate betweene the flesh and spirit. Thirdly, by the holy Desires after remission of sinnes, and holinesse of life, witnessed by constant Prayers, and diligent Vse of the meanes. Fourthly, by a fixed Resolution, reposed vpon the way of God, though they finde not comfort presently. Fiftly, by the forsaking of the world, and pleasures of sinneHeb: 11:25.. Lastly, by the purging out of the euills of the thoughts and affectionsMath: 5.7. Acts 15.9.. As for Ioy, Peace, Thankefulnesse, Admiration, Loue, and desire to conuert others, etc. they belong to Faith growne, not so apparantly to Faith begunne.
 Lastly, here might iustly be taxed the defects and wants that are found in the common Protestant.The defects of the common Protestants Faith. The Faith of the Protestant at large, is faultie: First, because hee knowes no time of spirituall birth, and yet he can tell to a day when he was borne in nature. Secondly, they seeke not vnto the meanes spirituall to get Faith. Thirdly, they rest in other things in stead of Faith, as Knowledge, Hope, etc. Fourthly, their Faith is commonly either Historicall or Temporarie; for either it is enough to beleeue that Christ died for sinners, or else if they beleeue the Articles of the Creede to be true, and bee no Papists, but sound in the matter of Iustification, and receiue the Sacrament, especially when they are sicke, all is well, or if they beleeue the word of God to be true, or especially if they can be willing to heare Sermons, etc. Fiftly, they regard not Gods promises to apply them, nor to liue by Faith, they hold both to be absurd. Sixtly, they want the iudgement that Diuines call the iudgement of goodnesse. Lastly, they doe not beleeue that application is of the nature of Faith.
Heard of.] In that their graces are heard of, and by seuerall relation the fame of them is spread, foure things may be obserued.
 1 It is hard to haue any sauing grace, but it will bee perceiued and obserued,Grace will be heard of, and obserued, if it be true Grace. and that for diuers causes:
First, Grace cannot be without fruit externall, and by their fruite yee shall know them.
Secondly, God doth not ordinarily giue sauing Grace, but it is gotten in or after some great affliction. A man may get much generall knowledge, and goe farre in a temporary Faith, without any great paine or perplexitie, but the paines of trauaile do vsually accompany the birth of any sauing Grace.
 Neyther is there any such hearkening after a childe borne in nature, as there is after an afflicted conscience now ready to bee deliuered of any eternall Grace.
Thirdly, Grace cannot be receiued but it workes a great change and alteration  of disposition and practise, of affection and carriage, it will worke an alteration generall, inward and outward. Now all this stirre in reforming is lyable to obseruation.
Fourthly, the Diuell vsually lieth still whiles men please themselues with  the effects of Historicall and Temporary Faith, because they feed presumption; but so soone as Iustifying Faith is got in the least measure, and workes by purifying both the heart and life from beloued sinnes (though it worke neuer so weakely) he bestirres himselfe and his agents by carnall counsell, temptations, reproches, slanders, difficulties, and a thousand deuises, to make this birth painefull, and if it were possible, abortiue: the Flesh boyles, the Diuell darts fire by iniection, the World hatefully pursues and wonders at the suddaine restraint and retyring, if Men runne not into the same excesse of riot.Iohn 16. 1 Pet. 4.4. Esay 59.15. Hee that restraineth himselfe from euill maketh himselfe a prey.
Lastly, the Graces of God are like Lampes on a hill in a darke night, and  like shining Pearles, and therefore cannot be hid.
Vse is, first, for confutation of their resolution that will serue God,Vses. but it must be secretly; they will be sincere, but they like not to doe it so as euery body may note them; they will goe to heauen, but for ease, it must bee in a fether-bed, and for closenesse it must be out of their Closets:Indiscretion not the cause of the reproaches and troubles of true Christians. these men meane to steale their passages; and these kinde of people commonly thinke, that the true cause why others are so talked of, is, their indiscretion, and rash and needlesse thrusting out of themselues into obseruation; but in the whole businesse they deceiue themselues: for it is not possible to be friends with God and the World; to haue God, his Word, People, and Spirit, to witnesse to vs, and to haue the World to praise and applaud vs. And for Indiscretion, it is a preiudice let fall by the Diuell, and taken vp by carnall men without considering that reproachfull obseruation hath beene the lot of the wisest and holiest Saints that euer liued; yea the portion of the Prince of the Saints. Secondly, it may be an especiall comfort to all the Seruants of God, that finde their names encountred with strange reports, and the World sodainely bent against them round about (when yet many times they rather finde purposes then practises of Grace) I say, they may gather comforts diuersly: first, it is the portion of all Gods people: secondly, it is a signe they are now no more carnall persons; for, if they were of the world, the World would not thus hate his owne: thirdly, their praises are with the Saints,Iohn 7.7. and as now they taste of the cup of their affliction, so they shall reape the incomparable priuiledges of their communion.
A Question in the second place may be propounded: and that is how their  Faith can be heard of? seeing it is an inward Grace,Quest. how it can so outwardly be knowne? Answ. Faith in it selfe hidden and secret,Ans. Faith makes it selfe knowne diuers waies. doth in people conuerted, make it selfe knowne by certaine demonstratiue effects of it, as by Confession in time of persecution, when the defence of the truth in any part of it is required; by constant Profession, notwithstanding the scornes and disgraces of the World; by Victorie ouer the World, when men retire themselues, and will not liue by example, contemne all earthly vanities, and vse the world as if they vsed it not; by their loue to the word of God more then their appointed food; by the reformation of their owne liues; by the exercise of Faith in their callings, not hasting to vse ill and vnlawfull meanes, not sacrificing to their owne nets; and lastly, by their loue to Gods people.
Seeing Grace and Fame are companions, wee may learne that the surest 
 way to get a good name,The surest way to get credit is to get Grace. Philip: 4:3. Math. 18. Psal. 15.4. Psal. 16.3. Prou. 19.1. is to get Grace: for then their names are written in Heauen: they are knowne of Angells, they are imprinted in the hearts of Gods people. A good man honoureth them that feare God: And Dauid saith, They are the onely excellent ones, and all his delight is in them: And of the same minde is Salomon, euen of the poore Childe of God, Prou. 19.1. Yea, they haue a name in the very conscience of wicked men, yea, their very enemies: which appeares in this, that they spend more thoughts about them then the greatest Potentate, and would gladly die their death; yea, a faithfull man is honoured when he seemes contemned. And on the other side, a wicked man is euer at the greatest in his owne eyes, and is not able to conceiue, that they that so much depend vpon him,A sinfull person is a shamefull person. and crouch to him, should contemne him, as certainly they doe: for euery sinfull person is a shamefull and vile person. Yea, so soueraigne and sure a meanes is Grace for the attayning of a good name,Esay 25.8. that it causeth the staines and blemishes of former infamous sinnes to be blotted out. When God takes away sinne in the Soule, hee will take away rebuke from the name. And this, God (that hath the hearts of all men in his hands) workes both wonderfully and secretly. Who doth not honour Dauid, Peter, Magdalene, and Paul, notwithstanding their great sinnes and faults?
 The last thing here to be inquired after is, whether it be not Vaine-glory to seeke fame and estimation,It is not alwaies vaine-glory to seeke fame. Eccles. Math. 5. Phil. 2. Foure things make glory vaine. and to be heard of amongst men. Ans. It is not simply a sinne to seeke an honest report amongst men; let them contemne their names that meane to bee allowed to liue in presumptuous sinne: A good name is better then riches. And Christ commandeth that our light should shine that men might see our good works. And the Apostle wils them to hold forth the light of the word of truth in the middest of a crooked and froward generation. But glory is then vaine, first, when it is sought in vaine things: secondly, when men seeke praise for the shew of that that is not: thirdly, when they make it the chiefe end of their actions: fourthly, when it makes men proude and vicious: otherwise it is an honest ioy that comes of a good name, and a reason to beare many crosses in other things patiently, where men may support themselues with this comfort of a good Name.
And of your Loue to all Saints.
HItherto of Faith, by which wee embrace CHRIST, the head. Now it remaines that I entreate of Loue, by which we embrace the SAINTS, the members. By the one wee are ioyned to Christ, by the other to the members of Christ.
Iohn 3.17.Loue is either in God, or in man: In God it is an Attribute: in man an Affection, or a quality in the affection.
Loue is a vice three waies.Loue, in man, is either a vice or a grace. It is a vice, when it is set vpon a wrong obiect, or is disordered, and that three wayes; first, when wee loue  things vnlawfull as Sinne; secondly, when wee loue things lawfull, but too  much, as the World; thirdly, when Loue is turned into Lust, and so is the  mother of Fornication, Adultery, Incest, and such like.
As Loue is a grace (for I omit bare naturall affections) It is onely in the Saints, and so they loue, first, God and Christ, as the fountaines of all Naturall and Supernaturall blessings: secondly, they loue the meanes of communion with God and Christ, and thus they loue the word of God, Psalme 1.2. and thus they loue the second appearing of Christ. 2. Tim. 4.8. thirdly, they loue man, and so their loue is either to all men, to their enemies, or to the Saints. Of this last heere.
Concerning this loue to Gods children, if the coherence and the generall
 consideration of the words be obserued, seauen things may be noted; first,Concerning loue 7. things may be noted from the coherence. that the loue to Gods children, is a grace supernaturall as well as faith; Hereby we know that we are translated from death to life, because wee loue the brethren. And againe, Let vs loue one another, for loue commeth of God, and euery one that loueth is borne of God. Hence it is called, The loue that God hath in vs. Yea it is  deriued from that precious loue wherewith God loue Christ.
Secondly, we must first be ioyned to Christ by faith,1 John 3.14. 1 Iohn 4.7. 1 Iohn 4.16. Iohn 17.26. before wee can get any sanctified affection to man; all humane affections in carnall men want their true comfort, profit, and constancie, because they are not seasoned by faith in God; till a man doe labour for his owne reconciliation with God, he  can neuer get a sound affection to Gods children, nor reape the heauenly priuiledges of communion with Saints.
Thirdly, to loue Gods children for any other respects, then because they  are Saints, is a meere Naturall affection, not a Spirituall grace; a wicked man may loue a childe of God, for his profit, pleasure or credit sake, for his company sake, or for his amiable qualities, in conuersing, and such like: but the right loue, is to loue them, as they are sanctified, as they are begotten of God,1 Iohn 5.1. and for Spirituall respects, and thus hee that giueth a Disciple a cup of cold water, in the name of a Disciple, shall not loose his reward.Math. 10.41.42.
Fourthly, nothing can make more to the praise and credit of men then  faith and loue, the highest praise of a mans good estate is to bee able to shew that he beleeueth his owne reconciliation with God, and that he loueth Gods children; He doth not say he was glad at heart when he heard of their riches, honours, etc. But when hee heard of their loue to the Saints, and their faith in Christ.1 Thessal. 3.6 The good tydings of the faith and loue in the Thessalonians was a great consolation to Paul in his affliction, and all his necessities. No better newes can be brought him, and therefore hee prayes the Lord to increase them, not in riches and the pleasures of this life, but to make them abound in loue one to another.
Fiftly, whosoeuer doth actually beleeue, doth actually loue, they are inseparable  companions; Faith worketh by loue:Galat. 5.6. Ephes. 6.23. 1 Tim. 1.14. Hence he wisheth the people not barely loue, but loue with faith: so as commonly they are together in the same degrees also: If no faith, no loue; if a shew of faith, but a shew of loue, if a purpose of faith, but a purpose of loue, if a weake faith, a weake loue; if an interrupted faith, an interrupted loue; if often at oddes with God, often at iarres with men, they are begotten by the same seede, giuen by the same God, receiued by the same Saints, and lodged in the same heart.
Sixtly, there is no hope of heauen, if no loue to the brethren; Hee that  saith he is in the light, and hateth his brother, is in darkenesse vntill this time. And,1 Iohn 2.9.10. 1 Iohn 3.16. Whosoeuer hateth his brother, is a man-slayer: And we know that no man-slayer hath eternall life.
Seuenthly and lastly, he that loues one Saint truely, loues any Saint; and  therefore the Apostle in the praise of their loue commendeth it, for that it was towards all the Saints: to haue Gods children in respect of persons, is not to respect them at all aright; he that cannot loue grace any where, loues not any for grace.
The vses of all these obseruations briefly follow; first, heere is reproofe,Vses. and that first of such wicked wretches as can loue any but the Saints; these are in a wofull and damnable case, whatsoeuer their estate be in the world; secondly, of such as allow themselues liberty to hold Gods children in suspence, they do not hate them,1 Iohn 5.1. but yet they will be better aduised before they be too forwards to ioyne themselues with them: But let these be assured, that till they be loued, God will not beloued.
Secondly, heere we may make triall by our Loue to Gods children, both
 of our faith and hope; as also of our loue to God; and lastly, the manner of our affection viz. for what wee loue other. For naturall affection hath his naturall rewards: Lastly, the doctrine of loue is a comfort two waies, first, if thou beginne to loue Gods children, it is a comfortable signe thou art not without loue to God, and faith in Christ: secondly, it is a comfort against slanders, reproches, and molestations from wicked men; thou hast as much credit with them as God: if they loued God, they would loue thee. It is a great comfort when a mans enemies be enemies to Religion,Note. sinceritie, and holinesse of life.
Thus farre of loue in generall; In particular I propound foure things to be further considered: first, the nature of this grace: secondly, the reasons to perswade vs to the conscionable exercise of it; thirdly, the helps to further vs: and lastly, what defects are in the loue the world commonly boasteth of.
 For the first, that the Nature of this sacred grace may bee the better conceiued, two things would be weighed; first, what things ought to be found in our loue;What things ought to be in our loue. Seauen things ought to be shevved in our loue. Rom. 12.15. secondly, in what manner loue is to be expressed.
And for the former of these two, true Christian loue hath in it these seuen graces or duties: first, Vprightnesse in our owne things, both in respect of Right and Truth: secondly, Peaceablenes in the quiet order of our conuersation: thirdly, Curtesie in needefull and louing complements: fourthly, Tendernes in the things that befall others, so as wee can reioyce for them as for our selues: fiftly, Liberalitie: sixtly, Society: seuenthly, Clemencie: Concerning these three last duties or branches of Loue, it will bee expedient to adde something for further explication of them.
LiberalitieLiberalitie is required, and it standeth of two maine branches; first, Hospitalitie, and then the workes of mercy, Hospitalitie is required in these places, Rom. 12.13.Wicked hospitalitie. 1. Tim. 3.2. 1. Pet. 4.9. Heb. 13.2. But this dutie stands not in the entertainment of drunkards, and vicious persons, or in keeping open house for gaming and such lewd sports and disorders, or in feasting of carnall men: for this is so farre from being the praise of great men, as it is a most shamefull abuse, and one of the crying sinnes of a Land, able to pull downe the curse of God vpon such houses,True hospitalitie. and such house-keeping; but Hospitalitie stands in the kinde entertainment of strangers that are in want, Heb. 13.2. and in welcomming of the poore, that are in distresses: and lastly, in the friendly, and Christian, and mutuall exercise of Loue, in inuiting of Gods children to our houses or tables.
Workes of mercyWorkes of mercy. are the second branch, and those are required of vs as the needfull duties of our Loue: and these workes are either in temporall things, and so are Almes-deedes; or in spirituall things. Loue must shew it selfe in Almes-deedes,Rom. 12.13. Leuit. 25.26. Luke 6.35. that is, in distributing to the necessities of the Saints: in relieuing those that are impouerished and fallen into decay, by giuing or lending, though they should not be paide againe, vpon the hope of a reward in heauen;1 Cor. 8.3.8. and this to be done both to our power and without compulsion, for that will shew the naturalnesse of our Loue. Thus being ready to distribute and communicate,1 Tim. 6.18.19 men may lay vp in store for themselues a good foundation against the time to come: and that that is well giuen will be a greater helpe in time of need, then that that is spared and kept.
Spirituall mercie.There are workes of mercy also in spirituall compassion ouer the soules of men: and thus the poore may be mercifull to the rich, to wit, in labouring to winne them to religion and sinceritie, in praying, admonition, incouragements, and such like needfull duties: and these are the best workes of mercy that we can doe for others, whom we loue or pittie.
Societie.Thus of Liberality, another thing required vnto the exercise of Christian
 Loue, is Societie: It is not enough to wish well to the Saints, or salute them kindely, or relieue them according to their occasions, but we must conuerse louingly and daily with them, make them our delight, company with them, and in all the mutuall duties of fellowship in the Gospell to sol^ce them, and our selues with them: This is that that Peter requires,(...). 1 Pet. 2:17. Rom: 12:11. when hee chargeth that we should loue brotherly fellowship: we should not liue like Stoikes, without all society; nor like prophane men, in wicked society, but wee should both intertaine a brotherly fellowship, that is, society with th^ brethren, and loue it too. This was their praise in the primitiue times;Acts 2.42. that they continued in the Apostles doctrine, and in fellowship and breaking of bread and prayers, making conscience, aswell of Christian society, as of hearing, praying, and receiuing the Sacraments.
The holy Apostle Saint Paul blesseth God for the Philippians, that they did not onely make conscience of receiuing the Gospell,Philip: 1:5. Phil. 2.1. but also of fellowship in the Gospell, and that from the very first beginning of their entrance into Religion. This was the comfort of their loue, and fellowshippe of the Spirit.
The last dutie of loue is Clemencie, and this stands in the right framing of ourselues in respect of others: and vnto the practise of clemencie, diuers things are required of vs.
First, to couer the faults of others, Loue couereth the multitude of sinnes:  Secondly, to auoyde the occasions of stirring the infirmities of others.1 Pet: 4:8. And heere we are bound to forbeare our libertie in indifferent things, rather than  we should offend our brother: If thy brother be grieued for thy meate,Genes. 13.18. Rom. 14.15. now walkest thou not charitably: It is to be obserued, that he saith, thy brother: for it matters not for the cauells and reproaches of idolatrous and superstitious persons  that neuer regarded the sincerity of the Gospell: Thirdly,1 Cor. 13:7. to take things in the best part, Loue belieueth all things, it hopeth all things: Fourthly,Ephes: 4.16. in our  anger both to be short (Let not the Sunne go downe vpon your wrath) and also to be more grieued for their sinne with whom wee are angrie,Ephes: 4.16. then kindled against their persons; as it is said of our Sauiour,Marke 3.1. Hee looked round about vpon them angerly, mourning for the hardnesse of their hearts: Fiftly, to appease  the anger of others; and that either by soft answeres;Pro: 15:1. 1 Cor: 6.7. Gen: 13.18:6. Mat: 17.25.26 Rom: 12:21. Ephes: 4:31. or by parting with our owne right; or by ouercomming euill with goodnesse.
Lastly, clemency stands in the forgiuing of trespasses done against vs; Be tender hearted, forgiuing one another, euen as God for Christ his sake forgaue you: So that vnto Christian loue, is requisite a peaceable, curteous and tender carriage, hospitalitie and a liberall distributing to their wants, both in temporall and spirituall things, a couering of their faults, auoiding of occasions of scandall, a louing composing of our selues in matters of wrong, and a daily and cheerefull association with them.
Thus farre of the gratious branches of Christian Loue. Now the manner how wee should loue Gods children, is to bee considered:Math: 19:19. and 22:39. Foure things in the manner of our loue. 1 Pet: 2.22. (...). first in generall, we should loue then as our selues: and therefore in all our dealings to doe as wee would bee done by: wee are to loue man in measure, viz as our selues, but God aboue measure. But to consider of the manner of our loue more specially, the particulars may bee referred to the foure heades mentioned 1 Pet. 2.22. First, wee must loue brotherly, that is, not as we loue our beasts, or as wee loue strangers, or as wee loue our enemies, but as wee would loue our dearest naturall brother, with all tendernesse and naturalnesse of our affection: Secondly, wee must loue without faining, without hypocrisie:(...). Rom. 12.9. 1 Iohn 3.18. (...). and this is explicated to bee not in word and tongue, but in deedes and in the truth: not onely, truely, for it cannot bee a true loue vnlesse it arise from a holy agreement in the truth: Thirdly, it must bee with a pure heart, and then
 we loue with a pure heart, first, when our affection is grounded vpon knowledge and iudgement:Phil. 1.9. secondly, when it is expressed in a Spirit of meekenesse: Thirdly, when it is free from wrath or aptnesse to be offended, from enuie, from pride,1 Corinth. 4 21. and swelling and boasting, from selfe loue, when men seeke not their owne things,1 Cor. 13.4.5. and from euill suspitions: Fourthly, when it is exercised in holy things,1 Cor. 13.6. so as no affection can make vs reioyce in the wickednesse of them we loue: Fiftly, when it is manifested in long-suffering, and all-suffering, when we beleeue;1 Corinth. 13.7. all things, and hope all things.
(...):Lastly, wee must loue feruently: and this hath in it Speedinesse,Prou. 3.28. Diligence1 Thes. 1 13., (called Labour in loueHeb. 6.10.) Cheerefulnesse2 Cor. 9.17., Earnestnesse and heate of affection (and this is to follow after LoueGalat 5.13. 1 Thessal. 3.12., and to the end it is without interruptionEphes. 5.2.3. Motiues. Math. 24..
Now, because these are the last daies, wherein the most haue no Christian Loue at all, and many haue lost the affection they had; so as their Loue is growne colde, and the most euen of the children of GOD in all places are exceedingly wanting to their owne comfort and spirituall content, in the neglect of the duties of Loue one to another, but especially in the duties of a holy fellowship, and mutuall societie in the GOSPELL, and the rules of Clemencie: and that men might bee kindled with some sparkes of desire to redeeme the time, and gaine the comforts they haue lost, and seeke the blessings of GOD in a holy Societie, I haue thought good in the second place to propound out of the Scriptures Motiues, as they lie heere and there scattered in the holy Writings, to incite and perswade all sorts of men, especially Professours, to a more conscionable respect of this mutuall loue.
From example.The first Motiue may be taken from Example, and that both of God and CHRIST; God made his infinite Loue apparant to vs in that hee sent his onely begotten Sonne into the world, that wee might beleeue in him, and hee might bee a reconciliation for our sinnes,1 Ioh. 4.9.10.11. and therefore ought wee to loue one another, yea so to loue one another. Shall the most high GOD fasten his loue vpon vs, that are so many thousand degrees below him; and shall not wee loue them that are our equalls, both in Creation and Regeneration? Shall the Lord be contented to respect with an appearing loue, and shall we thinke it enough to carry good affections to our brethren, without manifestation of the outward signes and pledges of it? Was there nothing so deare vnto GOD as his Sonne, and did hee giue vs his Sonne also to assure vs of his loue; and shall the loue of the Saints be euer by vs any more accounted a burthensome and costly loue! Hath God sent his Sonne, out of heauen into the world, and shall we stie our selues vp, and not daily runne into the company of the members of CHRIST? Was CHRIST sent that wee might haue the life of Grace in holy and heauenly and mysticall vnion, and shall not wee as fellow-members in all the duties of a Christian societie stirre vp, nourish, and increase that life so giuen?
Note.As Sinceritie is the life of Religion, so Society is the life of Sinceritie. Was Christ giuen a reconciliation for our sinnes, and shall not wee striue to ouercome one another in the religious temper of our affections, and the free and willing couering or forgiuing of trespasses and wrongs? Our Head, our Sauiour, our Lord, our Prophet, our Priest, our King (that wee might perceiue his loue) laid downe his life for vs;1 Ioh. 3.16. and should not wee imitate so incomparable an example, though it were to lay downe our liues one for another?
From Commandement.The second Motiue is, from Commandement: it is not a thing arbitrarie for vs to loue our brethren as is before expressed. Curtesie, peaceablenes, liberalitie, society and clemency, are not things we may shew, or not shew, at our
 pleasures, but they are necessarie; such as if they be wanting, a sin is committed, nay grieuous sins, euen against the commandement of Christ, Ioh. 13.Iohn 13.34. As I said to the Iewes, whither I go can ye not come, so to you also I say now, a new commandement giue I you, that ye loue one another, euen as I loued you. Hee shewes here, that whereas they might be grieued that they should loose Christs bodily presence, he had appointed them a course for their solace, and that was instead of Christ, as fellow-members in Christs absence in the world, to striue by all meanes to delight themselues in louing society one with another. And this Commandement he calls a new Commandement, not in respect of the matter of the duty; for that was alwaies required, but in respect of the forme of obseruing it; for the old generall rule was, That thou shouldest loue thy neighbour as thy selfe: but now that forme (as I haue loued you) hath in it somthing that is more expresse, and for the incomparable sufficiencie of the president, is matchlesse, and more full of incitations to fire affection. Againe, the person that giues it, and the time, is to be considered: I now giue this commandement. Men are vsed, that haue any sparks of good nature in them, to remember, and carefully to obserue the last words of their dying friends, especially if they charge not many things. Why, these are the last words of Christ, the night before his death; euen this one thing hee doth especially charge vpon vs: Namely, while we abide in this flesh, and are hated of this world, and want those glorious refreshings would come by the presence of Christ, to vnite our serues in a holy bond of peace and loue, to be kept and strengthned by mutuall indeauors in the performance of all the duties of holy affection,Iohn 16.12. and that till Christ shall gather vs vnto the glory that he hath with the Father.
The third Motiue may be taken from the benefites that may be gotten by loue: and these are diuers.
First, there is much comfort in loue: the Lord doth vsually and graciously  water the society, conferences,From profit. Philip. 2.1. prayers and other duties performed mutually by the Saints, with the deaws of many sweet and glorious refreshings, by which they are daily excited, inflamed, and incouraged to a holy contentation in godlinesse.
Secondly, Loue is the fulfilling of the Law: not onely all the duties belonging  to humane societies (of which he there intreates) are comprehended vnder loue, as by that great band that tyeth all estates and degrees; but also,Rom. 13.10. How Loue is the fulfilling of the Law. is the fulfilling of the Law by effect; in that, first it causeth astinence from doing euill to our neighbour: Secondly, it causeth men to make conscience of fulfilling the Law, and that which is there generally spoken if it be applied to the loue of the Saints may haue his speciall truth in this, that there is nothing in outward things doth more fire the heart of a man to the loue of, and labour after a godly life, then a daily louing societie with Gods children, in whom we see godlinesse, euen in an experimentall knowledge, not layd before vs in precept, but described vnto vs in practise, with the rewards and fruits of it. Yea loue may be said to be the filling vp of the Law,(...). as the word seemeth to import in this, that it clotheth the duties of the Law, with the glory of a due manner, and seateth them vpon their due subiects, with the vnwearied labours of constant well-doing.
Thirdly, the due performance, and daily exercise of the mutuall duties of  loue, would be a great testimonie and witnesse vnto vs for the satisfying of our consciences in the knowledge of such great things, as otherwise are exceeding hard to be knowne, as first it is not euery bodies case to haue the Spirit of grace, or when they haue it to discerne it, yet by this loue it may be discerned, for it is one of the inseparable fruits of the spirit: Secondly,Galat. 5.22. many men follow not Christ at all, and among the followers of Christ a great number are not true Disciples.Iohn 13.14. Now by loue may all men know that we are
 Christs disciples:Iohn 3. Thirdly, the winde bloweth where it listeth: And, that which is borne of the flesh is flesh: and therefore great Masters in Israell and Teachers of other men may be ignorant of regeneration;1 Iohn 4.7. yet thereby may wee know that we are borne of God, and doe rightly know God, if we loue one another.
Job. 23.8.9.Fourthly, if wee would seeke God to finde him; behold, If wee go to the East, hee is not there: if to the West, yet wee cannot perceiue him, if to the North where he worketh, yet wee cannot see him: he will hide himselfe in the South, and we cannot behold him:1 Iohn 4.12. How much more is the way of God in the heart of man vnsearchable? And yet though no man hath seene God at any time; if we loue one another, God dwelleth in vs.
Fiftly, the election of man before time, is like a bottomlesse gulfe, and the making of man blamelesse and holy in heauen is a dreadfull mysterie, and yet those two glorious branches, whereof thone sprowts foorth euen beyond time, and thother reacheth vp to heauen, nay into heauen; are both fastned vpon this stocke of loue in respect of one way and manner of comming to know them.Ephes. 4.1.4.
1 Iohn 3.14.To conclude, Saluation it selfe, euen our owne saluation is knowne by the loue to the brethren, as is cleare 1. Iohn 3.14. and in diuers other places of that Epistle.
Zeph. 1.14.Lastly, the day of the Lord is a terrible day, a day of trouble and heauines: the strong hearted man shall then crie bitterly: then the heauens being on fire shall bee dissolued and passe away with a noyse,2 Pet. 3.10.11 1 Thessal. 4.16 and, the elements shall melt with heate: the Lord himselfe shall descend from heauen with a showt, and with the voice of the Archangells, and with the trumpet of God: then shall all the kindreds of the earth mourne, and they shall see the Son of man come in the cloudes of heauen with power and great glory:Math 14.3. And who shall be able to stand in that great and fearefull day? euen all such as haue finished their course in the loue of God and his children;1 Iohn 4.17. as certainely as we now finde loue in our hearts, so surely shall we haue boldnesse in the day of iudgement.
 The fourth Motiue may be taken from the miserable state of such as finde not in themselues the loue of Gods children;From the miserie of such as loue not Gods children. 1 Iohn 2. and 3. First, it is a palpable signe they abide still in darknesse, and vnder the bondage of the first death: and in danger of the second death.
Secondly, a man can neuer enter into the kingdome of Heauen without it; for euery man can say, a murtherer shall not be saued (so continuing:) Now it is certaine, God hates a man that loues not his children aswell as hee doth murtherers;1 Iohn 3.15. he that loueth not his brother, is a man-slayer, and wee know that no man-slayer can inherit eternall life.
Ephes. 3.17.Thirdly, till we loue Gods children, we can neuer know what the length, breadth and depth of the loue of God and Christ is to vs. God shewes not his loue to vs till we shew our loue to the Saints: Lastly, for want of loue in the heart, and the duties of loue in conuersation, the mysticall body of Christ is exceedingly hindered from growing, both in the beauty and glory which otherwise would be found in the Church of Christ.Ephes. 4.16.
 Lastly, to incite vs yet more to the exercise of loue, I propound three places of Scripture more.
The first place is, Ephes. 4.12. to 17. where may be obserued 4. things, gotten by a holy vnion with the members of Christ and Christian societie and affection.Ephes. 4. It furthers our gathering into the body: It is an exceeding great helpe in the beginning of our effectuall vocation: Secondly, it furthers our edification in the building, and fits vs for our roome among the Saints. Godly society doth frame vs and square vs, and many waies fit vs for our place in this building: Thirdly, louing affection to the members of Christ and mutuall society doth much profit vs, in respect of our growth in the body: and
 that till we become perfect men, and attaine to the age of the fulnesse of C^^^st:Verse 13.16. Fourthly, this holy loue is a great fence to the iudgement against false and deceitfull doctrine: he is not easily carried with euery winde of doctrine, nor vnsetled with the vaine deceits of men, that can follow the truth, and the meanes thereof in a setled and well grounded loue to Gods children. But on the other side, how easily are such men deluded and throwne off from their purposes and comforts that did neuer ioyne themselues to Gods children?
The second place is, 1. Peter 4.7.8. where the Apostle exhorteth to sobrietie in the vse of the profits and delights of the world in meates and drinkes, riches, recreations and apparell, and withall to spend their time here in spirituall duties, especially Prayer; watching thereunto, both to obserue all occasions and opportunities to pray, as also noting the mercies of God wee finde in prayer, with our owne corruptions in the manner, and the glorious successe of praier, in preuailing with God: But aboue all things, hee wills them to haue feruent loue: and yeeldeth two reasons or motiues; first, the end of all things is at hand: and therefore it is best louing and making much of those, that after the dissolution shall be great heires of heauen and earth: secondly, Loue couereth the multitude of sinnes, it hideth the blemishes of our natures, and fitteth vs for the comforts of Society. Notwithstanding the infirmities accompany euen the Saints while they are in this vale of miserie.
The third place is, 2 Pet. 1.7. etc. where he largely perswadeth men to get holy graces into their hearts, and to expresse holy duties in their liues: among these, as chiefe, he instanceth in brotherly kindnes and loue; to this end he bringeth diuers reasons: first, it will set our knowledge aworke, which else would  be idle and vnfruitfull;Verse 8. and where should we vnloade our selues of the fruits of knowledge, which men get in Gods house, better then in the houses of the people of God: secondly, he that hath not these things, is blinde; or if  he haue sight and wit enough for this world, yet he is purre-blinde,(...). so as hee can see nothing that is farre off (as eternall things are) but onely things neere, such as are carnall things: the want of loue to Gods people is a palpable signe of a pur-blind carnall man: thirdly, the want of loue, and the other graces there named, is a signe of a spirituall Lethargie, euen that a man is fallen into  a forgetfulnesse of the purging of his old sinnes, that is,Verse 9. it is a signe that a man lieth vnder the guilt and filth of all his former sinnes, and neuer feeles the weight of them, or considers the danger of them: Fourthly, Loue, with the fruits of it, doe make our calling and election sure: Fiftly, louing society and  brotherly kindnes is a great meanes of perseuerance,Verse 10. if ye doe these things yee shall neuer fall: Lastly, by this meanes an entrance shall bee ministred vnto vs abundantly,  into the euerlasting kingdome of our Lord Iesus Christ; both because it  mightily furthereth faith and hope: As also,Verse 10. Verse 11. because by these meanes eternall life is begun on earth, in respect of communion both with God and the Saints.
Thus farre of the Motiues; Helps follow. These helpes are such as serue.The Helpes. both for the begetting and nourishing of a holy loue, to and with Gods people.
There are eight things that are great furtherances of holy life.
First, the conscionable hearing of the word of God, for in Gods house  doth the Lord fire the heart and holy affections, and teach the right ordering of them. How came those Colossians by their loue to the Saints, no otherwise but by hearing the word of truth, which discouered vnto them who were Gods children, and did daily fence them against the scornes and reproches which the world laded them withall.
Secondly, we must get faith and hope as the coherence shewes: for till wee  be soundly humbled to seeke Gods fauour, and find our hearts possessed with
 the care for and hope of a better life, we cannot receiue Gods children aright into our hearts: But no man was euer truely touched in conscience, and had vnfained desires of remission of his sinnes: Neither did euer a man seriously seeke after the things of a better life, but he did loue Gods children aboue all the people of the earth: and it is true of the measure, that as we grow in faith and hope, so we should grow in loue and in the comforts of Gods fauour.
1 Pet. 1.22.Thirdly, would we loue brotherly, without faining, and feruently; then we must get our soules purified, through the spirit, in obeying the truth, i. we must make conscience of the duties of mortification (as of so many purges) to clense our thoughts and affections, of dwelling and raigning lusts and euills: for secret sins intertained and delighted in within the affections and thoughts do exceedingly poyson affection both to God and man: this is that the Apostle meaneth where he saith,1 Tim. 1.5. Loue must come out of a pure heart.
2 Tim. 1.7.Fourthly, we must stirre vp the spirit of loue. The spirit of God is a spirit of loue, and we must stirre it vp by nourishing the motions of the same, putting courses or waies of expressing loue into our mindes; and by prayer, meditation, or any other meanes that may inflame our hearts to a holy affection.
2 Tim. 1.13.Fiftly, it profiteth much hereunto to get and keepe in our minds, a patterne of faith and loue, euen a draught of the things that concerne faith in God, and loue to the Saints: that we might alwaies haue a frame of all holy duties that concerne this holy affection: this was their care in the Primitiue times, as appeareth, 2 Tim. 1.13.
Sixtly, to be sound in these 3. things, Faith, Loue, and Patience, requires most an end Experience, and a daily acquainting our selues with the things of the Kingdome of Christ. When we are driuen by often crosses to seeke comfort in Gods children, and by much obseruation do finde the worth of the comforts that arise from holy Society with them; Many are the incredible weakenesses that discouer themselues in the hearts of yonger and weaker Christians: but it is a shame for the elder men, if they be not sound in loue, Tit. 2.2.Tit. 2.2.
Heb. 10.24. Note.Seuenthly, we must by all holy meane^ strengthen, and encourage, and set our selues vpon perseuerance in the profession of our hope, for if once wee giue ouer profession, it will be easie to see loue vanish; a wauering profession is vnconstant in Loue.
Lastly, if we would neuer forsake the fellowship we haue one with an other, as the manner of some wicked hypocrites and damnable Apostataes is, then we must with all Christian care, Consider one anothers weakenesses and wants; and be continually prouoking,Heb. 10.25. inciting and incouraging one another to loue, and to good workes.

Thus of the helps.

In the last place I propounded to be considered, the defects that are found in the loue that is abroad in the world,The defects of the common Protestants loue. with which the common Protestant pleaseth himselfe. I will not here complaine that loue is turned into lust, and that that damnable infection hath stained heauen and earth, and polluted our houses, brought a curse vpon our Assemblies, and debased our gentrie, dishonoured our Nobles, corrupted our youth, and made heauy our elder Age: or shew how it hath brought vpon vs famine and pestilence: but to let this passe, I will speake of the honester loue, and wherein thinke you standeth it?
First, in the ciuiller sort, in complements: neuer more complements and lesse loue: Secondly, in freedome from suites at Law, and quarrelling; they are in charity with all the world, if they can shew that they neuer were quarrelsome, or that they are friends againe: Thirdly, in the baser sort it is meere Ale-house friendship, their loue stands wholy in going to the Ale-house together; these are the onely fellowes and good neighbours; and commonly,
 here is set vp the Diuels bench, and Proclamation made of free (...) for filthy Rib^uldry, for drunken spewings, and Viper-like sl^nders (...) against good men. Fourthly, many out of their ignorance, know (...) other loue then of themselues, or for themselues of others: But yet more plainely the defectiuenesse of the common Protestants loue appeares diuersly.
First, by the vsuall sinnes which are rise amongst them, euen such as batter the fortresse of Loue. How can they please themselues in their charitie, if we consider how Malice, Reuenge, Anger, Slandering, Back-^iting, and all sorts of prouocations to anger, are euery-where abounding? What more vsuall then Selfe-loue? what more common then Enuy? Shall I instance? The Trades-man while hee is rising is so fleshed with successe, and stuffed with the greedy desire of profit, that hee cares not whom hee wrongs, nor how much hee becomes preiudiciall to other mens trade: But this man is not so filled with Selfe-loue, but the declining Trades-man that hath ouer-liued his prime, is euery way as well filled with Enuy. And thus men are not in charitie neither full nor fasting.
Secondly, it appeares to be defectiue in the Obiects of Loue, in a chiefe Companion of Loue, in the Parts of Loue, and in the Manner of louing.
For the first: the onely men that are chiefly to be loued, and our affection to be spent vpon, are the Saints; that is, such religious persons as make conscience of all their wayes: but are these the men the common Protestant loues? Oh times! oh manners! what men finde worse entertainment in the world then these? Is not the least endeauour after holinesse chased and pursued with open hates, dislikes, slanders? Can a man refraine himselfe from euill, and not be made a prey? Doth there any liue godly, and they persecute him not? Away false wretch: saist thou, thou art in charitie with all men, and yet canst not beare the Image of God in a childe of God?
For the second: all true Loue ought to be accompanied with Faith; yea, it ought to be founded vpon Faith: and therefore herein is the common loue of the world defectiue, that a communion with men is not first sanctified by vnion with God. These men that boast so much of their charitie neuer made conscience of seeking the assurance of Gods fauour in Christ, neither euer trauailed vnder the burthen of their sinnes, so as to seeke forgiuenesse as the true blessednesse.
Thirdly, the common Protestant is exceedingly to blame in the very maine duties of Loue; no tendernesse of heart, no true Hospitalitie, and for mercy to the poore the olde complaints may be taken vp,Hosea 4.1. Esay 57.1. There is no mercie in the Land: Mercifull men are taken away. Wee may now adaies waite for some Samaritane to come and proue himselfe a neighbour: and for societie and fellowship in the Gospell with Gods people, it will neuer sinke into the vnderstanding of these carnall men, that that is any way expedient: and finally, in all the branches of Clemency before expressed, where is the man that makes conscience of them?
And for the last, it is easily auouched, that the Loue that is found in the most men, is neither brotherly nor without grosse fayning and hypocrisie, nor proceedeth it from a heart in any measure purified; and lastly, it is so farre from being feruent, that it is stone colde.
Thus of Loue.



Verse. 5. For the Hopes sake which is laid vp for you in Heauen.

IN these words is mentioned the third Grace, for which the Apostle giues thankes, and that is Hope.

Hope is here taken both for the thing hoped for, viz. the glory of heauen, as also the Grace by which it is apprehended, but especially the latter.
Heauen is diuersly accepted in Scripture, sometimes it signifieth the ayreDeut. 28.12. Math. 16.16.; sometimes it signifieth the whole vpper world that compasseth the earthGen. 49.25. Math. 3.16.; sometimes for the Kingdome of Grace and the meanes thereofMath. 3.2. and 11.11.; but most vsually for the place of the blessed, and the glory thereof; and so it is taken here.
Hope, as it is here considered by the Apostle, lookes two wayes: first, by relation to, and coherence with Faith and Loue, [for the Hopes sake:] secondly, by a full aspect vpon the obiect of it, which is intimated in the Metaphore [laid vp] and expressed in the word [Heauens.]
Doctrines from Coherence.First, of Hope, as it is to be considered in the Coherence.
There is an admirable Wisedome and Mercy of God, in the very maner of dispensing of his Graces; for hee makes one Grace crowne another, and  become a recompence and reward to another: as here for Hopes sake Gods Children breake through the difficulties of Faith,One Grace crowneth another. and the impediments and discouragements of Loue. When God sees how many waies the heart of man is beset in the spirituall combat, about the getting and exercise of those two Graces, hee is pleased by his word and spirit to trumpet out victorie by shewing the glory of heauen, and to set on the Crowne of Hope, as the assured pledge of full and finall victorie: it is Hope that pluckes vp the heart of man to a constant desire of vnion with God by Faith, and of communion with man by Loue. And the true reason why so many men vtterly neglect the care to get a iustifying Faith, and an inflamed affection to Gods Children, is, because they haue no taste of the comforts of the euidence of a better life by Hope.
 Secondly, Faith and Hope are two distinct things: Faith beleeues the Promise to be true, with particular application of the Promise to ones selfe; and Hope waites for the accomplishment of it: Faith vsually is imployed about reconciliation and a godly life; Hope for the most part, is taken vp with the retyred and affectionate contemplation of the glory of Heauen, the comming of Christ, the resurrection of the body, and temporall blessings, and deliuerance, as they are shadowes and types of the last and great saluation.
 Thirdly, Hope is no more naturall then Faith and Loue: the carnall man is without Hope in the world:Ephes. 2.12. not that wicked men are cleane without all profession of Hope; for, few men are so vile but they professe and stoutly auouch their hope in God; but this Hope is vaine, emptie, without euidence or promise, such as can neuer profit them: and therefore in the eight of Iob hee saith,Job. 8.13. that the Hypocrites Hope shall perish, his confidence also shall be cut off, and his trust shall be as the house of a Spider. It is to be obserued, that he calls wicked men (euen all carnall and vnconuerted people) Hypocrites,Euery carnall man is an Hypocrite. and that fitly, for euery Sinner is an Hypocrite in some degree; and if there were nothing else to proue it, their very Hope and willfull Confidence in the mercies of God, without all warrant from the Word, or testimonie of Gods Spirit, or their owne Conscience, would vndoubtedly proue it: and for the vanitie of their hope it is fitly expressed in the comparison of the Spiders webbe. The silly Spider with many dayes labour weaues her selfe a webbe, in appearance able euery way abundantly to couer her, and fit her turne, but at the end of the weeke, the Maide with a Besome sweepes all downe. This poysonfull Spider is euery vnregenerate man or woman, this webbe is their Hope, in the framing of which they daily busie themselues, and in the couerture of which they vainely repose themselues; but when any Seruant comes out of the Lords armie to sweepe with the Besome of Iudgement or Death, the whole building of these imaginarie hopes come sodainely and
 totally downe. In the 11. of Iob and the 20. verse it is said,Iob. 1^.20. The eyes of the wicked shall faile, and their refuge shall perish, and their hope shall be sorrow of mind: In which words the holy Ghost shewes that the time shall come, when those vaine hopes shall be driuen out of the soules of the wicked, and in stead thereof they shall be filled either with desperate sorrowes on earth, or with eternall sorrowes in hell. What hope hath the hypocrite when hee hath heaped vp riches, if God take away his soule? Iob 27.8.Iob. 27.8. Noting that if carnall men (againe called Hypocrites) will not forgoe their fond presumptions while they liue, yet by too late experience they shall finde them vaine when Death comes.
Obiect.Obiect. But then they meane to pray God to forgiue them, and hope by their repentance then to finde mercy for their soules. Sol.Solut. In the 9. verse it is answered thus; Will God heare his crie when trouble comes vpon him?
Quest. But will not God heare mens prayers in the troublesome time of death? Ans. Not the prayers at that time made by such men:Obiect. Solution. for they are Hypocrites, hauing vpon them but the names of God and godlinesse, and will neuer in sinceritie pray vnto God at all times, neither in their death doe they pray vnto God because they delight in the Almighty; and therefore hee shewes Verse 10. that seeing they delight not in God and godlinesse, and will not pray at all times; that is, as well in health as sicknesse, in prosperity as in aduersitie, while they might yet sinne, as well as when they can sinne no longer: therefore their hope of mercy in death shall faile them.
Quest.Quest. But if true Hope be not naturall, what is the difference betweene the Hope of the faithfull, and this common Hope, that so ordinarily goeth vp and downe the world vnder the colours of it, or how may wee try our selues whether we haue a right Hope or no? Ans.Ans. The true Hope is described in seuerall Scriptures, by diuers properties, which are no where to be found in carnall men.
First, the true Hope layes fast hold vpon the merits of Iesus Christ onely,  and striues constantly to be established and assured.The signes or properties of true Hope. 1 Tim. 1.2. Psal. 31.24. But the common Hope is neuer emptied of carnall confidence and presumption, that God loues them for some good things or parts that are in them; neither doth it brooke assurance, for with one breath carnall people are assuredly confident of Gods mercy, and encounter the Doctrine of infallible assurance.
Secondly, true Hope makes a man more humble, but the common Hope  makes men more wilfull and obstinate against God and his Ordinances.Lam. 3.29.
Thirdly, true Hope makes a man cheerefull vnder all sorts of Crosses, by  vertue of the very reasons grounded vpon Hope;Rom. 5.2.5.4 but the common Hope of it selfe will not yeeld a mans heart support against any Crosse.
Fourthly, the faithfull man can suffer for his Hope, but a wicked man  can shew no chaine vnlesse it be for his sinne.Acts 28.20. Rom 8.24.
Fiftly, true Hope rests vpon Gods promise, though neuer so vnlikely to be performed by outward and ordinary meanes; but wicked men with their  common Hope are perhaps able to beleeue they shall liue well so long as they see and feele meanes, but without meanes they are without Hope.Rom. 4.18.
Sixtly true Hope will acknowledge as well as know; but the common Hope  cannot abide profession of Religion,Tit. 1.2. it is enough there be a good heart to God.
Seauenthly, true Hope is industrious in the vse of all meanes to come to  the end hoped; but the common Hope is singularly sloathfull,Psal. 37.3. it boasts of a sufficiencie of knowledge, and yet neglects the sincere vse of all Gods Ordinances; it affirmes deepely of going to heauen and yet cannot tell of one teare for sinne, nor one houre truely spent in mortification: but trust thou in the Lord, and doe good.

 Lastly, the true Hope seekes Gods presence, and striues in sence to drawe neere to God;Psal. 73.26. but the common Hope is then at best rest when the heart is furthest off from the care, desire, or sence of Gods presence, either in Gods house or abroad.
4The fourth thing that I obserue from the Coherence, concerning Hope, is the worth of the Grace. It is one of the three golden abiliments to adorne a Christian soule: and this I note the rather because it should moue vs to vse carefully and constantly all the meanes that serue to breed or increase true Hope in vs, and to get by prayer and practise all those things that cause Hope. And that we may get and increase our Hope, wee must labour for, First, true Grace, 1. Thes. 2.16. Secondly, sauing Knowledge, Psal. 9.10. and 78.7. Thirdly, Experience, Rom. 5.4. Fourthly, Patience and comfort of the Scriptures, Rom. 15.4. Fiftly, the ioyes of the holy Ghost, and peace of Conscience in beleeuing, Rom. 15.13. Sixtly, aboue all, and for all these, the Spirit of Reuelation, Ephes. 1.18. Seauenthly, the often meditation of Gods Promises.
Thus of Hope, as it is considered in relation to Faith and Loue.
Which is laide vp for you in Heauen.] In these words Hope is described in the obiect of it.
Laid vp] (viz) by God in his secret Coffers, as a most worthy Iewell: this Metaphore giues occasion to obserue three Doctrines.
 First, that Grace and Glory are a mans best treasures, and therefore wee should labour for them more then any thing else, and if we haue a comfortable euidence of them, to be contented though we want other things.
 Secondly, that Hope is no common Grace, in that amongst many faire vertues which are common to wicked men, hee locketh vp this Grace of Hope as a speciall Iewell hee intends to keepe onely for his owne Children.
 Thirdly, that the euidence and grace of Gods Children be in Gods keeping, and laid vp safe in heauen, and therefore cannot be lost; and besides, when they die, there is of theirs in heauen before they come.
Heauen] Here I obserue two things.
Doct. There is a Heauen.First, that there is a Heauen for the Saints after this life: the Doctrine of Heauen is onely proper to Religion; Nature hath but a darke glimpse of immortalitie, or any being after this life, and is full of stronger Obiections then Answeres: and as any are more lewd in life, they are more sencelesse of immortalitie. But concerning the estate of the blessed in heauen, Nature is wholy ignorant,Vses. yea, the doctrine hereof is so diuine, that Religion it selfe doth not fully purtray it out in this world to any, yet as any are more holy it is more discerned. The consideration of heauen may vrge vs to many duties in generall: if euer wee would haue heauen when wee die, wee must get holinesse both imputed or infused while wee liueMath. 5.16 2 Pet. 1.7. Math. 7.21. 1 Pet. 2.11.14. Psal. 15. Wee must bee sure wee be of Gods FamilieEphes. 3.16., and that we are borne againeJohn 3.5. Luke 13 5., In particular, we should therefore acquaint our selues with the Lawes and Mysteries of Gods kingdomeMat. 13.11 52.: and if we may come by the meanes to be effectually instructed in the way to Heauen, we should account of this Pearle, and rather then loose it, sell all we haue to buy itMat. 13.44 45.. And wee should aboue all things labour for the meate that perisheth not, but endures to euerlasting lifeIohn 6.27.: in as much as in the Ministerie of the word is many times found the Keyes that open vnto vs the Kingdome of heauenMat. 16.19. Rom. 10.6.. And in as much as riches may prooue a singular hinderance, we should take warning, and see to it that they do not intangle vsMat. 19.23.. And because in Heauen are our treasures, we should set our affections thereMath. 6.20 Col. 3 1., and prepare for our change and departure2. Cor. 5.1.2. 1 Thes. 1.10.. Giuing allowance to no sinne, no not the leastMat. 5.10:19: constantly professing and confessing Christ before men; that he may not denie vs in that dayMat. 10.32.33. and 5.10.. Yea, where God meanes to bestow heauen, he bestowes heauenly qualities on men in this life, they are poore in
 spiritMath. 5.3.: they are eager after heauen and the things thereofMat 11.12.: they are like Children, void of earthly carking and distressefull caresMat. 18.2.: they are mercifullMat. 25.34.36.: they loue their enemiesMath. 5.44..
Secondly, the meditation of Heauen serues for reproofe not only of Atheists, that would deny it, or Papists, that claime so great glory for their base merits; but also of the most Protestants: for, are not the most such as can discerne the face of the Skie, and yet haue no discerning of the season, to get Grace and Heauen? to say nothing of those that by their grosse and horrible sinnes haue forfeited ouer and ouer the claime of any interest in the kingdome of heauen, liuing in daily blasphemies, whoredoms, drunkennesses, etc. Yea, doe not the better sort giue Heauen faire words, and yet haue their excuses why they will not come to Gods Feasts when hee inuites them?Luk. 14.17. And thus while men blesse themselues Gods curses vsually deuoure them.
Lastly, it is a Doctrine of wonderfull comfort to Gods ChildrenHeb. 12.23. Luk. 11.20.;Note. neither is this the peculiar aduancement of some principall Saints, as Abraham, DauidMath. 8.11. and 13.31., etc. neither should the miseries of this life before we come to heauen trouble vs, seeing there is no comparison betweene the troubles of this life and the glory of the world to come, where there shall be no sinne, sorrow, labour, weakenesse, disgrace, feare, death; where we shall enioy the sweet presence of God, Christ, Angels, and iust men, with vnspeakeable Ioyes, perfect holinesse, exquisite knowledge, and a totall righteousnesse, and all this for euer.
Secondly, from hence also doth plainely arise this second Doctrine, viz.  that the hope of Christians is in another world; there is their stay and comfort. When they seeke by Faith the comforts of Gods fauours, and by Loue separate themselues to the communion with Gods Children, they finde presently such a rent from the world, and all sorts of carnall men assaulting so their rest, that a little experience learnes them the knowledge of this truth, that in this world, and from the men of this world, and the things thereof,Rom. 8.24.25. they must looke for no peace or contentment.
The Vse is first, for Instruction, to teach vs therefore to vse the world as if wee vsed it not, and so to care for earthly things and persons, as to resolue  that Heauen is our portion, and there onely must wee prouide to find some rest and contentment; yea,Heb. 11.13. therefore as strangers and Pilgrimes we should seeke and prouide for our abiding Citie.
Secondly, this Doctrine giues occasion to answere that imputation that  is cast vpon many professors, viz. that forwardnesse in Religion makes them mindlesse of their businesse; and much hearing of Sermons makes them carelesse of their callings. Men may here hence informe themselues, that howsoeuer Religion ties men to honest cares and daily diligence to prouide for their families (else the very Scripture brands such Professors to bee worse then Infidels, that make Religion a maske for idlenesse) yet seeing our hope is not in the world, therefore Gods children doe well first and chiefely to seeke the kingdome of God and the righteousnesse thereof; and so to minde an earthly calling as it hinder not an heauenly, and prouide meanes for a temporall life, as not to hinder the hope of an eternall life.
Thirdly, this Doctrine may much settle and comfort Gods Children against the scornes and hates of the World and all sorts of carnall people,  the World will loue his owne.
Obiect.Obiect. Oh but why should they hate vs? Ans. Because you are not of the world, and Christ hath chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you:Solut. And therefore both prouide for it, and beare it when you finde it.John 15.19.
Obiect.Obiect. But wee will not be so rash and indiscreete to prouoke men to hate and reproach. Sol. Vers. 20.Solution. They haue persecuted Christ who was the
 fountaine of all wisedome: and therefore it is a vaine perswasion for any childe of God to thinke by any discretion, wholy to still the clamours and hates of wicked men. And those men are grossely deceiued and preiudiced that thinke the true cause of the troubles of Gods children is their owne indiscretion.
Obiect.Obiect. It is strange they should hate vs so; wee neuer did them wrong. Sol. Vers. 21.Solut. All these things will they doe vnto you for my names sake: it is not your euill doing, but your holy profession of the Name of Christ, which is named vpon you, that they hate.
Obiect.Quest. But how comes it they should dare to be so presumptuous and so palpably malicious?Solution. Ans. It is because they haue not knowne my Father, ver. 21. their ignorance of the Maiestie and Iustice of God is the cause of it.
Obiect.Obiect. If it be of ignorance, it may be easily pardoned them. Sol. Ver. 22. If I had not come and spoken vnto them,Solut. they should haue had no sinne, but now there is no cloake for their sinne; that is, if Christ by the preaching of the Word had not discouered their sinnes, and set before them the way of godlinesse, then it had beene no such grieuous and monstrous sinne, but in as much as many men doe lie in wilfull ignorance, and will not be informed of the vilenesse of their course; therefore, before God, of all sinners, they are without colour or excuse.
ObiectObiect. But may they not haue good hearts to God though they do thus intemperately and vniustly maligne and abuse the Preachers and Children of God?Solut. Sol. Vers. 23. He that hateth Christ in his Ministers and members hateth the Father also, and cannot haue a good heart to God.
Obiect.Obiect. But it may be that Christ and Christians are hated the more securely by wicked worldlings, because they see nothing but their basenesse and humiliation.Solut. Sol. Vers. 24. If I had not done workes among them which none other did, etc. By which words our Sauiour shewes that no workes of God for, by, or amongst Gods Seruants, can be so great testimonies of the vndoubted certaintie of the goodnesse and holinesse of their cause; but wicked men will still, against all right, hate them. And therefore wee should so informe our selues by this and other Scriptures (vers. 25.) as to set downe our rest, that in the world we must haue troubles, and in Christ and heauen peace, and therefore lay vp hope in our hearts, as God hath locked vp our treasures in Heauen.
Thus of Hope. Thus also of the Grace for which he giues thankes.

Whereof yee haue heard before by the Word of truth which is the Gospell.




Vers. 6. Which is come vnto you, euen as it is vnto all the world, and is fruitfull as i^ is also among you, from the day that yee heard and truly knew the grace of God.

IN these words, with those that follow to the ninth Verse, is contained the second part of the Thankesgiuing (viz.) his praise to God for their meanes of Grace.
The meanes is either
Principall, Vers. 5.6. Or,Instrumentall, Vers. 7.8.
The principall meanes is the Word, and this is described by six things: First, by the ordinance in which it was most effectuall, viz. Hearing. Secondly, by the property which was most eminent in the working of it, viz. Truth. Thirdly, by the kinde of Word, viz. the Gospell. Fourthly, by the prouidence of God in planting it amongst them, is come vnto you. Fiftly, by the subiect persons vpon whom it wrought, You (the Colossians) and the whole world. Sixtly by the efficacie, It is fruitfull from the day. Thus for the order of the words.

From the generall I obserue, out of all the words, two things.
First, that Nature directs nor to the apprehension either of Grace or Glory:  The naturall man cannot perceiue the things of God:1 Cor 2.4. these Colossians had neuer knowne the face of God, nor gained the grace of Christ, had not God sent them the meanes. Briefely, this may informe vs of the lamentable condition of such as liue in their naturall estate, onely pleased with the desire or possession of the riches or gifts of Nature; and withall, shewes vs the Fountaine of the want of Sense or care of Grace, and holinesse. In the most Sense comes not from Nature, but from the Word:Who is a naturall man. and he is a Naturall man that is still lapped and couered with the vaile of Ignorance, whose wisedome is crosse to Gods Wisedome, that lyeth in grosse sinnes like a dead man without sense, that serues some particular gainefull or pleasing sinne,Esa: 25:8. Rom. 8.6. Ephes: 2:1. Rom: 6. without vsing aright any ordinance of God against it, and is without the spirit of Adoption, his heart neuer broken for sinne, and without desire of righteousnesse.
Secondly, it is a worthy blessing of God to any people, to haue the Word  of God amongst them. This is that men should be exceeding thankefull for to God, Psal. 147 19.20. Esa. 2.3. And by the contrary, the want of the Word is a terrible famine.
Vse 1.Vses. For reproofe both of mens prophanenesse in neglecting and contemning of the Word; as also of our great vnthankefulnesse for such a mercie.  2. For comfort to Gods children, that enioy the Word and esteeme it.  The Word should satisfie vs whatsoeuer else wee want, both because it doth abundantly make amends for all other wants: and besides, it fits vs with strength, patience, and comfort, to make vse of other wants. 3. For  instruction, not onely to such people as want the Word to seeke for it, and to plant themselues where they may haue it, but also to such Landlords and great men, and rulers of the people, as would bee thought louers of their Countrey, to vse all meanes to see the Countrey and the Parishes vnder their power, prouided of this holy treasure.
Thus of the generall Doctrines out of the whole Verses.
The first thing in speciall, is the kinde of ordinance in which the word was effectuall, (viz.) Hearing.
Whereof] That is, of which, Heauen or Hope.Doctr. It is a great mercy of God to heare of Heauen before the time come it should be enioyed, or lost. If we heard not of Heauen till death or iudgement, wee should continue still in our slumber, drowned in the lust after profit or pleasures; we should be so far from finishing our mortification, as wee should hardly beginne to set about the washing of our owne vncleanenesse both of hands and life; wee should looke vpon Grace and Holinesse with a dull and feeble eye: yea, it is good euen for Gods children to heare of it before they haue it, both to support them in their crosses and discouragements, as also to plucke vp their mindes to holy contemplation, and to weane them from the loue of base things; yea to inflame them to a greater desire to magnifie and glorifie the singular grace and mercy of God in these dayes of their pilgrimage.
Ye haue heard.] No man can get eternall graces,Doctr. or an enduring contentment, arising from the hope of a better life, without the hearing of the word of GodMath: 17:5. Luk: 16:29:30 John 8.47..
Quest. But tell vs distinctly, what good shall men get by hearing of Sermons? Answ. Many are the singular benefits come to men thereby.What good comes by hearing Sermons. First, the holy Ghost is here giuen, Acts 10.44. Secondly, mens hearts are here opened, Acts 16.14. Thirdly, the feare of God doth here fall vpon men, Acts 13.16. Fourthly, the proud and stony-heart of man is here tamed; melted, and made to tremble, Esa. 66.2. Fiftly, the faith of Gods
 Elect is here begotten, Rom. 10.14. Sixtly, Men are here sealed by the holy Spirit of promise, Epes. 1.13. Seauenthly, here the Spirit speaketh to the Churches, Reuel. 2. Eightly, Christ here comes to suppe with menReuel. 3.10.. Let men tell of their experience, whether euer their hearts tasted of the refreshing of CHRIST, till they deuoted themselues to the hearing of the Word. Ninthly, The painefull distresse of the afflicted Conscience is heere or no where cured: by hearing, the bones that God hath broken receiue ioy and gladnesse, Psal. 51.8. Tenthly, what shall I say, but as the Euangelicall Prophet saith? If you can doe nothing else, yet heare, and your soules shall liue. Esa. 55.4. Liue I say, the life of Grace, yea and the life of Glory: for Saluation is brought vnto vs by hearing, Act. 28.18. and 4.16.
 The vse of this point is, First, for instruction: Let him that heareth heareEzech: 3:27.: yea, let all reioyce in the mercies of their God, that haue tasted of this bountie of the Lord: blessed are your eares, in as much as you haue heard: Many Prophets, and righteous men haue desired to heare the things that you heare, and  haue not heard them.Math. 13.16.17.. Secondly, for humiliation; vnder the consideration of the lamentable estate of such people as haue not the Word preached vnto them. How doe the thousands euen in Israell, perish through the failing or wanting of Vision? Is there not almost millions of Men and Women that haue scarce heard (by preaching) whether there be any holy Ghost? Oh the cruell torments that abide those soule-murtherers! Shall I name them? I wish their repentance, that so they might haue a new name; but because lamentable experience shewes that the vnsauory Salt seldome findes wherewith it may be salted; therefore it is the dutie of all Gods people to bowe the knees of their hearts to God, beseeching him to inflame the hearts of those that are in authoritie, with such bowels of compassion, that they would in due time purge the Church of them, that so their names may no more bee heard amongst vs. Whiles men lie sicke of the spirituall Lethargy in their owne hearts, they are little troubled with the distresse of others, but if men would euen in Gods sight duely waigh, without shifting and preiudice, these propositions, viz. that the hearing of the Word is the ordinarie meanes to conuert mens soules to God, Rom. 10.14. 1 Pet. 1.23. etc. And that except men be borne againe they cannot enter into the Kingdome of God,Mourne and pray. Iohn 3.3. if I say these things be weighed, how should our bowels turne within vs to consider the case of some hundreds of Parishes in this famous Kingdome, that in the middest of this great Light, in this respect, yet sit in darkenesse? Thirdly, for the reproofe of the disorders and vitious dispositions of men in the hearing of the Word. Many are the sorts of euill hearers: exceeding many are the wicked humours of men, by which they sinne against the Word heard: the Scripture hath noted and taxed diuers corruptions in men, in hearing, and fearefully threatned them. For the better explication of this vse I consider two things; First, the sorts of euill hearers: Secondly, their state in respect of it.
The sorts of euill hearers.The sorts of euill hearers may be distinguished into two kindes: some are openly impious and audacious; some more ciuill and restrained. Of the first kinde. First, some are so wayward nothing can please them, either the Preacher is too terrible, or he is too comfortable. If Iohn fast, hee hath a Deuill, if Christ eate, he is a gluttonMat. 11.16. etc.. Secondly, Some heare and are scandalizedMath. 15 12.: Men are so wedded to their owne conceits, and stuffed with preiudice, that they many times wilfully study, and striue to frame scandale and offence out of the words of the Teacher. Thirdly, Some heare, and are filled with wrath and enuie, and that sometimes so as they cannot restraine the signes of their rage and fretting, no not in the Sermon-timeLuke 4.24. Acts 7.54.. They gnash with their teeth, and their harts are ready to burst for anger. And this comes many times because men
 cannot abide wholesome Doctrine, but are giuen to fables2 Tit. 4.3:4.. Fourthly, Some heare, and their mouthes make iests, while their hearts go after their lustsEzech: 33:30., they heare and mockeActs: 17.32. Fiftly, Some make the auditory of Christians the studie of all manner of base filthinesse: thither comes the Adulterer, the Couetous, the deceiuer, the accuser of the Brethren, etc. and there they damnably frame their dogged and swinish imaginations. Sixtly, Some heare, and if they finde any power in the Doctrine of the Preacher, they enquire whether hee be not a Puritane; for they haue heard so much euill of that Sect euery where, that that one colour may serue to make them cautelous, and better aduised then to be much troubled with his DoctrineActs 28:22.. Seuenthly, Some will heare if he speake of this world1 Iohn 4.5.: He is an excellent Preacher, that in their vnderstanding giues them liberty, and sowes pillowes vnder their fleshly and worldly elbowes. Eightly, Some heare fearefully, as loath to be drawne to the Sermon of any that rebukes sinne, as the people of Israell were to come neere the MountHeb: 12:19.. Ninthly, Some (like the chiefe Priests and Pharises) when they perceiue that the Preacher rebukes their sinnes, seeke to lay hands vpon himMat: 21:45:46., and as farre as the feare of the people restraineth them not, they practise to remoue him.
The ciuiller sorts of hearers are diuersly sinnefull in their seuerall humors: First, some heare but it is to be rid of their diseases, that is, to see whether by hearing Sermons, and comming to Church, they can asswage the trouble of their mindes, and dull the stinging cares of their hearts. Secondly, some are like the young man, for they goe from the Sermon sorry that the word requireth such things as they are not willing to doeMath. 19.. Thirdly, Some heare and say, God forbidLuke 20:76.: It is pitty it should be so as the Preacher sayes. Fourthly, Some heare because a great report goeth of the TeacherMath: 3:8.. Fiftly, But aboue all others, they are strang hearers that are mentioned Math. 22.22. they heare and admire, and yet leaue and forsake for any reformation or practise of what they heare.
Vnder this rancke I may referre the three sorts of hearers, Math. 13. The first sort suffer the Diuell presently to take away the Word. The second sort choake it with cares and lusts. The third forsakes the profession, and hearing, and liking of it, in the time of temptation or persecution. Thus of their sorts.
The state of men transgressing against the Word,The misery of euill hearers. by refusing to heare it aright, is exceeding fearefull; if they could see their miserie they would doe as the Prophets require, they would cut their haire and cast it away, vnder the sense of the horror of Gods indignationJer: 7:22:29. etc.. The dust of the feete of Gods messengers will rise in iudgement against such hearersMath. 10.14.. It shall be easier for Nini^eh, and Tyrus, and Sidon, and Sodom, and Gomorrah, then for such hearersMath. 12.41. etc.. Yea, all their suites for mercy are abomination in Gods sightProu. 28:9.. A heauie eare is noted for a singular iudgement, Math. 13.13.14. etc. Esa. 30.8.9. Yea, because men will not heare the Word they must heare the rod, Mich. 6.9. and their eares (if they belong to God) must be forced open by corrections, Iob. 3.3. To conclude, if all this cannot affect men, then I say, as the Lord said to the Prophet of such persons, Hee that leaueth off to heare, let him leaue off, Ezek. 3. vlt. Thus of the first part of the discription (viz.) the ordinance, in which it is most effectuall, (viz.) Hearing.
The second part is the propertie of the Word, which is most eminent in the working of it, (viz.) Truth.
Word of Truth.] Hee meaneth not the personall Word, which is Christ, but the enunciatiue Word, made knowne either singularly by Reuelation, Oracles, Visions, Dreames, or commonly by tradition of Doctrine, from hand to hand for 2000. yeeres; or by a more excellent manner, afterwards
 by Scripture: the Word of holy Scripture is here meant.
The properties of the Word.There are many properties of the Word of God, wherein it doth excell. First, it is diuine. The testimonie of Gods mouth. Wonderfull, 1. Thes. 2.13. Psal. 119.18.88.129. Secondly, It is eternall and incorruptible, a liuing Word, or the Word of life. Psalm. 119.89.144.152. Philip. 2.16. 1. Pet. 1.22. Thirdly, It is swift, Psal. 147.15.18. Fourthly, It is powerfull and terrible, Hebr. 4.12. The sword of the Spirit, Hos. 6.5. Esa. 11.2. Heb. 4.12. Eph. 6. Fiftly, It is nourishing and healing, it hath a propertie to nourish and heale. Psalm. 107.20. Sixtly, It sanctifieth both our persons and the vse of the creatures. Seauenthly, It is comfortable, ioyfull, sweete, Psal. 119.14.111.143.162. Eightly, It is apt for generation, it hath a quickening power, Psalm. 119.25.28. 1. Pet. 1.22. Ninthly, It is preseruatiue both from sinne, Psal. 119.11. and from shame, Psal. 119.22. So will not gold and siluer. Tenthly, it is wise and exceeding large, Psal. 119.96.98.99.100.104. Eleuenthly, It is light, and pure, and iust, Psal. 119.105.130.140.128.138. But heere the Word is commended for the Truth of it, and that as a most eminent propertie in mens conuersions.
Truth is taken diuersly: for a vertue in speech, in the second Table: for Truth of Doctrine, Iohn 5.33. for the substance of a type, Iohn 1.17. for vprightnesse and sinceritie, Iohn 3.21. for the true forme of a thing, Rom. 1.28.
How the word is said to be a word of truth.Here the word of God is said to be the word of Truth, in regard of the vse of the word in the conuersion of a sinner; and that, first, as it is apprehended to be in it selfe: secondly, as it is by effect in the hearer. For the first, before a man can haue experience of the power of the Word in the gathering of his soule, he must know it to be a word of Truth foure wayes.
First, that it is the very word of God, and therefore true: considering the admirable antiquity of the Story before all other Histories: the dreadfull miracles by which it was confirmed: the certaine euent of the vaticinies or prophesies, the immutable and euery way sufficient frame of piety, righteousnesse and diuine worship, contained it it: the dureablenesse of the wisedome thereof, which no punishments could euer extort out of the hearts of the professors thereof: and lastly, the dreadfull iudgements vpon the enemies of it.
Secondly, that it is true, whatsoeuer Doctrine it reuealeth, though it make neuer so much against our profits, or pleasures, or lusts: till a man be brought to this, the Word neuer worketh soundly.
Thirdly, that there is an especiall glory of Truth in the promises, both in the promise it selfe and the condition.
Fourthly, that we acknowledge Truth in the performance of what God hath promised, and so giue glory to his faithfulnesse: and thus of the word as it is apprehended in it selfe.
The word worketh truth in vs six wayes.In the second place the word is the Word of Truth by effect, because it worketh truth in vs, and imprinteth it selfe in vs, and fits vs for godlinesse Tit. 1.2. and thus it worketh Truth in vs six waies.
First, In that it worketh knowledge, and so Truth in the vnderstanding. Secondly, In that it worketh in the Truth of worshippe, Iohn 14.23.24. Thirdly, In that it worketh in vs plainenesse and vprightnesse, in the exercise of Grace and Holinesse, and so it is opposed to hypocrisie, Ephes. 4.24. Fourthly, In that it worketh Truth of Constancie, that is, an euerlasting resolution to heare and keepe the Word of Truth, Iohn. 8.37. 1. Iohn 4.6. Fiftly, In that it begets in vs the sinceritie and Truth that becomes our callings and behauiour in the world; as, we are free from lying, calumnies, perfidiousnes, slandering, boasting, flattery, etc. 1 Cor. 5.8. Sixtly, In that it makes all our conuersation vertuous, and so guids vs to do the truth; Ioh. 3.22. Iam. 3.17

Vse is both for Instruction, and for Reproofe.Vses.
For Instruction, therefore wee should labour that the Word may bee a Word of Truth to vs, and to this end; First, wee should pray God to giue vs the spirit of Truth, Iohn 16.13. Secondly, wee must repent, that wee may come to the knowledge of the Truth, 2. Tim. 2.25. Thirdly, wee may not rest in the forme of Truth, Rom. 2.20. Iohn 3.22.
For reproofe of foure sorts of men. First, such as will not receiue the loue of the Truth: With these gaine is godlinesse, 1. Tim. 6.5.2. Thes. 2.10.12. Secondly, such as strangle the light of the Truth either of Nature, conscience, or the Word; and with-hold it in vnrighteousnesse, that striue against the light of the truth in their hearts, that they might sinne the more freely, Rom. 1.18. Thirdly, such as will not obey the Truth which yet they admire, commend, affect, etc. Gal. 3.1. and 5.7. Fourthly, such as by their wicked liues cause the way of Truth to be blasphemed, which Truth they both heare, and professe to obey. Thus of the second part of the description.
Thirdly, the word of God is described by the kind of word, viz. the Gospel.The doctrine of a mans reconciliation with God, is principally to be taught and learned.
Which is the Gospell] By the Gospell is meant the Doctrine of the reconciliation of Man with his God after the fall. Concerning the Gospell, wee may in the generall here obserue; That of all other Doctrines, the Doctrine of a mans Reconciliation with God, is especially to be vrged and explained by the Preacher, and to bee most minded and enquired into by the hearer. The knowledge and experience of this point acquaints a man with the sauing power of God:Rom. 10.15. neuer doe men indeede see the beautie of the feete of Gods seruants, till they haue trauelled about the obtaining of their peace with God. If Ministers would bend the very force of their ministeries about the sound and daily inforcing of the Doctrine of mans particular assurance of his peace and reconciliation; it would produce, by Gods blessing, singular fruite. This Doctrine would iudge the very secrets of men, and giue them a glimpse of their last doome. It is a most preuailing Doctrine, and therefore extreamely enuied in the world. The high Priests and Scribes with the Elders of the people many times shew they cannot abide it, Luke 20.1. Hence it is that life is not deare vnto Gods faithfull seruants, so they may in the comfort thereof fulfill their course and ministration, receiued of the Lord Iesus, in testifying the Gospell of the grace of GodActs 20.24.. Of all other Doctrines the Deuill labours to keepe the world ignorant of the necessitie and power of this2 Cor. 4.3 4.: But woe is to those Preachers that teach it not1 Cor. 9 16., and horrible wofull shall the estate of those people appeare to be at the last day that obey it not2 Thes. 1.8.. And therefore we should striue to keepe afoot the sparkles of light in this point, and whatsoeuer wee loose in hearing, this Doctrine should neuer runne out.
In particular, concerning the Gospell, I enquire into three things. First, wherein this Doctrine lieth. Secondly, who receiue this Doctrine of the Gospell. Thirdly, what are the effects of it.
For the first; the Gospell, or the Doctrine of it, lyeth in two things.What the Gospell principally vrgeth.
First, in our true repentance for our sinnes, and secondly in the infallible assurance of faith in Gods fauour, in Christ, forgiuing vs our sinnes, Math. 3.2. Mark. 1.15. and this duly waighed, First, reproues those that dreame of saluation, and the benefits of the Gospell without mortification: and secondly, it should teach vs to nourish faith by all meanes, by nourishing of desires; by remouing of lets; praying for it; waiting vpon hearing; beholding the faith of Gods children, and deliuering vp our soules to some able and wise Pastor.
The second Question is, Who receiue the Gospell.Who receiue the Gospell. Answ. We must consider, First, who may receiue it: and that is answered Marke 16.15. euery
 Creature, that is, any Man or Woman, of what Nation, Language, Profession, Calling, State, and Condition soeuer: and secondly, wee must consider, who doe receiue it; and this may be answered generally, or more specially; generally, none receiue the Gospell but they finde in it the very power of GOD to saluationRom. 1.16.. None but such as are begotten againe by it to God1 Cor. 1.16.. If there be no change in thy life, thou hast yet no part in the Gospell: without conuersion, no glad tidings. In speciall, the persons that receiue this treasure, are signed out by diuers properties in Scripture: they are poore in spiritMat. 11.5. Luke 4.18.: they finde such neede of it, that heauen suffers violence, and they presse to itLuk. 16.16. Math. 11.10., and they so highly esteeme the comforts of it that they can be content to lose libertie, friends, meanes, and life too, for Christs sake and the GospellMark. 8.35. and 10.29., and it workes so forcibly vpon mens soules, that they consecrate themselues to God, to sinceritie and godlinesseRom. 15.16., and learne conscionably to practise the seruice of God in their spirit, minding the reformation of their thoughts and affections within, as well as of their words and actions withoutRom. 1.9..
The effects of the Gospell.And thirdly, for the effects of it; great are the praises of the power of it; it begets men to God: it is the power of God to saluation: it iudgeth the secrets of men. Of these before. It brings abundance of blessings, Rom. 15, 19. it makes men heires and coheires with CHRIST: it is a witnesse to all Nations, Matth. 24.14. And lastly, life and immortalitie is brought to light by it, 2 Tim. 1.10.
The Vses.The consideration hereof should much encourage Ministers to presse this Doctrine, and neuer cease to preach it in the Temple, and from house to house, and make vse of all opportunities when a doore is opened vnto them; either in respect of power in their owne hearts, or in respect of tendernesse and affection, and desire in the peopleActs 5.42. 1 Cor. 1.12.. Gods people also should so labour for the assurance of Gods fauour, and peace in Christ by the word, as they should store their hearts with prouision of that kinde, not onely for their death-bed when they die, but renue the perswasion of it in their hearts daily, the better to fit them, euen in their callings and speciall standings. This knowledge is not onely a Crowne and shield for their heads, but shooes also for their feete, against the filth of the times, and thorny cares of the world, and all the difficulties of a daily diligence in their standingsEphes. 6.15..
Thus of the third part of the description. The fourth followeth.
The manner of prouidence in planting it amongst them, in these words.
God sends the Word before we seeke it.And is come vnto you.] Where wee may obserue, that if the meanes of happinesse finde vs not out to worke vpon vs, wee would neuer looke after it: if God were not more carefull to send it, then we to seeke it, it would neuer be had. Wee see this by common experience, that whole multitudes of people liue without any sense of the want of the Word, and did not God by some great prouidence send it them, and perswade them to the vse of it; it would neuer be had: and this comes to passe because men are dead in sinne, and sicke of a Lethargie in the very vse of the light of Nature, in matters of godlinesse; and besides, there is an incredible inclination in our Natures to seeke for contentment in things below, and to bee pleased with any condition, rather then soundly to digest a sense of the necessitie of vsing the meanes for happinesse in better things. And lastly, this neglect of seeking the Word, comes from errours about mens estate, while they thinke that they may be in Gods fauour, and like enough to be saued, without any such adoe.
Thus of the fourth part.
The fift thing in the description is, the subiect persons to whom the Gospell came, (viz.) the Colossians, and all the World.

Vnto you, as it is euen vnto all the World.] Hence wee may note, First, the  Truth of God in his promises: hee promised flourishing Churches of the Gentiles; and loe, it is effected: the Word is gone out into all the World. Secondly, That the true triall of all Doctrine is by enquiring, whether it bee  agreeable to that Doctrine wherein the world was ouercome to GOD. Though an Angell from Heauen should preach otherwise,A triall of Doctrine. yet his Doctrine were to bee detested as accursedGal. 1.8.. And therefore wee may iustly complaine of the Papists, and all popish men that chaine men downe to a necessitie of looking vpon the hundreds of yeeres neere vnto vs, and will not beare it that men should seeke ground for their Conscience, by ouer-looking all the hundreds of yeeres since Christ, and minding onely conformitie to the Doctrine that first founded the Churches of the Gentiles; all Doctrines since then, though in the purest times, are to bee receiued no further then they agree with the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles.
Thirdly, that men are bound to seeke the word wheresoeuer it may bee heard: for if this had not beene so,Men must seeke the word whensoeuer it may be had. how could all the world receiue the light of the Gospell? and further, wee may see that the want of Teachers was no warrant to commit the Churches to the care of such as could not teach; a necessity lieth in the people to seeke the word where it may be had. And therfore those Church-gouernours sinne greeuously, that in this light, create so many insufficient men, and set them ouer the flocks of CHRIST. For if want of able men had beene a reason, the Apostles should haue seene into this necessity, to ease the labour and care of the Churches, but it is a more greeuous sinne to admit, ordaine, and place them, and yet see many worthy and able men wholly want places.
Fourthly,All the world cannot signifie euery particular man in the world. wee might heere note the vanity of their argument that would proue vniuersall grace, because Christ died for all men; for in this place here is not onely the world, but all the world; and yet here cannot in any reasonable sence be meant all the singular men and women in the world; for there were many thousands of particular persons, to whom the Gospell came not, and therefore by all the world (as heere, so in that question) may bee vnderstood all the Elect world: or if the world vniuersally, then it is true in respect of offer, or not excepting out of any of any Nation; or by all the world is ment men of all sorts and conditions in the world.
Fitftly,The swiftnes and power of the Gospell. Wee might heere note the incredible power and swiftnesse of the Gospell, that could ouercome, and that in so short a time; and the rather if that wee consider that the Magistrates generally drew the sword against it, and there were not wanting Ministers to oppugne it, euen false teachers of all sorts: and besides, the people had beene so long time settled in their false Religion: and lastly, if wee looke vpon the meanenesse or the fewnesse of those that were Gods Embassadours to the Gentiles.
Thus of the fift part of the description.
The last thing by which the word of GOD is described,(...). is the efficacy of it, and here the Apostle sheweth: first, what it doth, It bringeth fruit: and, It encreaseth.] for so it is added in some Copies: secondly, vpon whom, as euen in you.] thirdly, when it began to bee so, viz. from the day that you heard, etc. fourthly, what made it worke so, viz. the hearing and true knowledge of the grace of God. And is fruitfull.] Concerning fruitfulnesse required as an effect of the word, I consider foure things. First, the Reasons to mooue vs to fruitfulnesse. Secondly, the sort of Fruits wee should beare. Thirdly, the meanes to make vs fruitfull. Lastly, the Vses.
For the first, there are many things might mooue vs to make conscience of glorifying God in our places, by bearing the fruit of the Gospell, euen expressing the power of it in our liues.

First, it is a speciall glory to GOD, and to our adoption and callingIohn 15.8.. Secondly, it is a testimony that we are indeede Christs DisciplesJohn 15.8.. Thirdly, the practizing of those things which are within the compasse of Gods promises (such as are all the fruits of righteousnesse) is the very ground-worke of true prosperityPsal. 1.3.. Fourthly, To this end did God by election before time, and speciall vocation in the Gospell, choose vs, and call and single vs out of the worldIoh. 15.16.. Fiftly, It procures vnto vs an vnstained and inoffensiue glory, euen vntill the day of ChristPhil. 1.11.. Sixtly, If a man endeauour to bring foorth fruit, and to walke as becomes the Gospell, hee is sure to speede when hee hath any suit to GodJoh. 15.16.. Seuenthly, against such there is no lawGal. 5.23.. Eigthly, it shall bee to vs according to our fruitIer. 17.8.. Ninthly, The fruits of righteousnesse are better treasures for a Christian, then all richesIer. 17.10.. Tenthly, If wee bee not fruitfull wee shall bee cut off from CHRIST, and vtterly for euer remaine frustrate of all his merits and vertueIoh. 16.2.4.6.
What fruits wee should beare.Now for the second; the fruits that wee should beare, are such as these. The forsaking of our particular beloued raigning sinnes (this is all fruitEsa. 27.9..) The exercise of the true loue and feare of God in a conscionable, both worship of God, and practise of Life: the fruits of zeale for Gods glory, humility, patience, and the exercise of the duties of Mortification; as Prayer, Sorrow, Fasting, and the rest; Fidelitie in the diligent discharge of the duties required of vs in our Families and Calling; Sobriety in the vse of Gods Creatures, Contentation, Iust-dealing, and to be rightly ordered in matters of Report: Finally, workes of Mercy, and all duties of Loue.
What wee must doe that we may bee more fruitfull.Thirdly, that wee may be more fruitfull; first, wee must labour for greater tendernesse in our hearts, and plow our ground deepe with long furrowes of Mortification: the seed will not grow if it fall vpon the trampled and smooth heart of manMatth. 13.: the stones must be taken from the rootsEsay 6 2.: secondly, we must learne to make God our trust, and Gods promise our treasure, else in many parts of Christian fruitfulnesse, worldlinesse will teach vs to deny to obeyIer. 17.8.9.: thirdly, we may not neglect to send forth the leaues of profession: for as these leaues are of medicinable vseEzek. 47.12., so they are good inducements to force a necessitie of more fruit; if no profession, there will bee little fruit. Fourthly, wee should labour to bee abundant in storing vp of sauing knowledge; for the wisdome that is from aboue, is full of good fruitIam. 3.17.. Fiftly, wee should seeke the prayers of Gods Ministers for vs, and subiect our selues to be directed by their care and painesLuk. 13.6.7.: though the vngratefull world contemnes Gods Messengers and Vine-dressers, yet the truth is, that if many times they did not rise vp in the gap, woe would bee vnto men for their barrennesse. Sixtly, we should make vse of our crosses, and learne humility and acknowledgement of our sins by them, breaking our hearts in Gods sight, and beseeching him for the compassions of a Father, to be shewed to vs, that so we might after much exercise vnder our crosses, bring foorth the quiet fruit of righteousnesseHeb. 12.. Seuenthly, wee should importune the Lord for our sakes to visit the great Leuiathan, the Diuell, and to receiue vs vnder his protection to watch vs, and daily to water vsEsa. 27.1.2.3.4. etc..
Lastly, in the first Psalme are diuers rules; first, we must not sit with wicked men: secondly, wee must priuately and constantly exercise our selues in the Word of God: thirdly, wee must seate our selues vnder the powerfull ministery of the word, neere the Riuers of these waters of life: and lastly, we must take heede of procrastination, delay no time, but with great heedefulnesse respect the season, or due time of fruit: all the yeere is not Seeds-time or Haruest.
Vse.The Vse is for bitter reproofe of the barrennesse and peruersenesse of our hearts. Some men are so ignorant that they know not that they owe any
 thing of necessitie vnto Religion. Some beare fruit, and more then enough of it, but it is onely to the fleshHos. 10.1. Rom: 6.. Some heare the Preacher with Herod, gladly, but they mend but what they list. Some rest in the meanes of fruitfulnes. It is enough with them, for their praise, that they haue the meanes and freequent it. Some will beare fruit, but they choose which fruite; for some will doe somewhat in ciuill righteousnesse in their dealing with men, but are little or nothing in sincere pietie to God. Others beare faire Leaues of profession in the first Table, but in the second Table beare such wilde fruit, as it is a shame to behold it in this light; and a sorrow it ought to be to them to heare God, with disdaine, expostulate about it. Some are good abroad, but naught at home: but at the hands of all these will the Lord of the Vineyard require fruit, and iudge them according to their workes.
And increaseth.] This also is added in some Copies. Here I obserue two things. First, In what it increaseth. Secondly, By what meanes. For the first, the world increaseth fiue wayes.
First, in the number of hearers, so Act. 9.31. Secondly,The word increaseth fiue wayes. in the power of working, the efficacie of it is, and is felt of godly mindes, more and more. Thirdly, In the fairenes of the leaues of profession. It is noted of a good tree that his leaues shall not faile; and it is certaine that the word maketh the glory of profession both more and more inoffensiue. Fourthly, In the goodnes of fruit, it causeth men to bring forth more and better fruite at the last then at the first: yea, Christians refreshed with the daily comforts of Gods word, bring foorth new fruit euery monethEzech. 47.12.. Fiftly, in the height of growth Gods Children are made euery day more heauenly-minded then other.
Secondly,What wee must do that we may increase. that the word of God may increase by making vs to increase in fruitfulnesse, we must doe fiue things. First, wee must labour to continue neere the waters of the SanctuaryEzech. 47. Psal. 1.. We should neuer, but in case of necessitie, withdraw our hearts from the directions and comforts of a daily and setled effectuall Ministery. Secondly, we must take roote downeward, and then the world will be filled with fruiteEsay 27.6.. The Tree groweth two waies, vpward in branches, and downeward by rooting it selfe more and more in the earth: so ought a Christian to grow vpward in the externall fruites of holy life, and downe-wards in the rootes of faith, hope and other holy graces; and it is certaine, if men be carefull to fasten their rootes more and more, there will be a happy increase in the outward life of man. Thirdly, wee must arme our selues against the heate of tribulations, or persecutions, as against the meanes of failingJer. 17.8.. Fourthly, wee must abide in ChristJohn 15.4., labouring to nourish the sence of his presence, and the contentment arising from the Communion with his members, etc. Lastly, wee must be much in the exercises of Mortification, euery branch that beareth fruit the Husbandman purgeth, that it may beare more fruiteIoh. 15.2.3..
Before I passe from these words, it is to bee obserued, that hee saith not they were fruitfull, or increased: but the word is fruitfull, etc. To note that when men haue giuen their names to the Gospell, that which befalleth them is said to befall the Gospell: partly, because what good men do, they doe it by direction from the Word, and assistance of the spirit of Christ: and partly because the world attributes what is done by professors of the word, to the word they heare: if their liues be full of good fruits, the word of God is glorified, but if they bee any way vicious, the word is blasphemedRom. 2.. Then they say, this is their preaching, this comes of gadding to Sermons, and tossing of their Bibles, etc. The Vse is both for Instruction and Comfort. For Instruction, therefore Gods Children should worke out their saluation with feare and trembling, and labour to be filled with the fruits of righteousnesse, liuing inoffensiuely, and holding foorth the word of life in all holy conuersation,
 shining as lights in the middest of a froward and crooked NationPhil. 1.11. and 2.15.16.. For Comfort also, because the Lord is pleased to communicate the honour of his word to his people, so as where the word is in credit, they shall be in credit, and if they be despised, they are not despised alone, but the Word is despised with them.
Thus of the first thing in the efficacie of the Word, viz. what it doth. The second thing is vpon whom it worketh, or the subiect-persons.
As it is also in you] Doct.Doct. It helpes not vs that others (though many) bee wrought vpon by the word, gathered, made fruitfull, and increased: vnlesse we be sure of the efficacie of it in our selues. It had beene a small comfort to the Colossians to know that the word was fruitfull all ouer the World, if it had no power amongst them. There is a windie vanitie preuailes in the heades of many hearers, they thinke they doe worthily when they commend the Sermon, praise the Preacher, tell of the working of the Word in such and such, though they perceiue not that vnto them it is but a dead letter. Many are full-mouthed, but haue emptie hearts and hands: but it should be our discretion to labour the cure of this loosenesse and wandering of heart, and not to suffer our soules to be led aside from considering our owne way by any such smooth wiles of Satan. Thus of the persons; the time followeth.
From the day.] Here I obserue three things.
There is a season for fruit.First, that there is a season for men to be fruitfull in. We are naturally dry trees, or no trees: Wee are but dead stockes: neither if wee should stand in Gods Orchard to all eternitie, would we of our selues beare the fruits of the Gospell, or exercise our selues in those faire fruits that are vnto eternall life: if before this day the Citie of Colosse had beene searched with lights, there would haue beene found no true fruits of Grace or Righteousnesse amongst them: our season to beare fruit is then when God calles for it. At some time of our life, God (giuing vs the meanes) doth set before vs the wav of Life and death, affects vs inwardly with sence of our miserie, or the glory of conuersion, or the necessitie of our repentance. Now when the Axe of Gods Word is laide thus neere to the roote of the Tree, it is then time to beare fruit, or else we are in danger. The consideration hereof, as it shewes that the workes of ciuill honest men are but shadowes or blasted fruite: so it should inforce vpon vs a feare of standing out the day of our visitation. Consider with thy selfe, God calls now for repentance, and the duties of new obedience. If now thou answere Gods call, and pray God to make thee such as hee requires thee to be, thou maiest finde fauour in his eyes; for God is neere them that call vpon him if they seeke him in due time, while hee may bee found: but if thou delay; consider first, that thy heart of it selfe without dressing, will neuer be fruitfull: secondly, that thou art not sure of the meanes hereafter: thirdly, if thou werest sure, yet who can prescribe vnto the most high? Hee hath called, and thou hast not answered; therefore feare his Iustice, thou maist call and he will not answere.
Secondly, that it is exceeding praise-worthy, and a singular mercie of God, if the word of God worke speedily vpon vs; if wee yeeld and stoope with the first; if it make vs fruitfull from the first day. This liuely working of the word, first is a seale to the word it selfe; for hereby it is out of all doubt, that it is the true word of God, and this effectuall worke of Grace vpon our consciences, doth fence vs against a thousand obiections about the Word: secondly, it is the Ministers seale; as soone as hee seeth this power of Doctrine; hee hath his seale from God: the fruitfulnesse of the people, is the Preachers testimoniall2 Cor. 3.2.: thirdly, so soone as we finde the Word to bee a sauour of life vnto vs, it becomes a seale to our owne Adoption to life; and
 therefore we should againe, euery man, be admonished, to take heede of delaying the time; for not onely we want the testimony of our owne happinesse, while we liue without subiecting our soules to the power of the word, but exceedingly prouoke God against vs: wee should consider that the holy Ghost saith peremptorily, Now is the Axe layd to the roote of the Tree, and euery Tree that bringeth not foorth fruit is cut downe and cast into the fire. Note that hee requireth present fruit, or threatneth present executionMat. 3.10. Iohn 15.2.. Neither may we harden our owne hearts with presumption, because wee see not present execution vpon this rebellion of man against God, and the offer of his grace: for wee must know that men are cut off by more wayes then one. Some are cut off by death, as an open reuenge of the secret rebellion of the heart, not opening when the spirit of grace knocketh. Some are cut off by spirituall famine; God remouing the meanes from them, or suffering them to be their owne executioners, by withdrawing themselues from the meanes. Some men are cut off by Gods fearefull Iudgement, being cast into a reprobate sence. Some are cut off by Church-censures, God ratifying in Heauen, what is done in Earth by the Church.
Thirdly, hence wee learne, that if we would be truely fruitfull, wee must be constantly so; not lose a leafe, much lesse giue ouer bearing fruitPsal. 1.3. Ezech 47.12.. Sodaine flashes will not serue turne: the Lord knowes not how to entreat them, whose goodnesse is but like the morning deawHos. 6.4.. Either (from the day) constantly, or not (vpon the day) truely. Thus of the Time.
Fourthly, this efficacy is limited; First, by the kinde of Doctrine which especially makes men fruitfull, viz. the Doctrine of the grace of God: secondly, by the application of it, both by Hearing and Knowledge, and both are limited, in that they are required to be in the truth.(...).
That yee heard and knew the grace of God in truth.] In the opening of these words I consider, first, the words apart: secondly, the Doctrines out of the whole. For the first: heere are three things to be considered: 1. what grace of God the Gospell propounds to men: 2. what we must doe that we may haue the comfort of this, that we doe truly heare: 3. what it is to know truely.
For the first,Fiue things principally to be acknowledged from Gods Grace. the Gospell requires of men a deepe sence of the singular Grace or free Mercy of God towards men, and that principally in fiue things: first, in giuing Christ to mankinde fallen; and finding out so happie a meanes of our deliuerance: secondly, in accepting of the mediation of Christ in particular for the beleeuer, in the age that hee liueth in: thirdly, in forgiuing sinnes past, through his patience: fourthly, in blessing the meanes, for mans sanctification: and lastly, in allowing vnto men their lot in the inheritance of the Saints in heauen.
Secondly, that we may haue the comfort of this,That we may heare the word in truth seuen things are to be done. that we doe truly heare the word, seuen things are to be done: first, we must deny our owne carnall reason, wit, parts, and outward praises, and become fooles that wee may bee wise1 Cor. 3.18.: secondly, wee must feare God, and set our soules in Gods presencePsal. 25.14. Acts 10.33.: thirdly, wee must come with a purpose and willingnesse to bee reformed by itPsal. 50.16.: fourthly, wee must labour for a meeke and humble spirit, mourning ouer Pride, Malice and PassionIam. 1.22. Esay 57.15. 1 Chron. 34.27.: fiftly, wee must heare allDeut. 5.27., both at all times, that is constantly; and all doctrines that concerne the grace of God: sixtly, wee must heare with faith and assuranceHeb. 4 1. 1 Thess. 1.5. How men may be said to know and yet not truly.: lastly, wee should especially in hearing, wait for a blessing from God, in the particular knowledge of Gods grace to vs, else all hearing is to little purpose.
Thirdly, men may be said to know, and yet not truely: first, when they know false things, as in the Church of Rome, to know the doctrine of Purgatory, Intercession of Saints, Image-worship, the Supremacie of the Pope: or in Germany, to know the Vbiquitie of Christs humane nature, vniuersall
 grace, falling from grace; or that the Sacraments conferre to all, the graces they signifie, and such like. Secondly, when men haue the forme of words, and vnderstand not the meaning. Thirdly, when the notions of the truth are entertained in the minde, and not let downe into the affections; when men haue knowledge in their heads and no affections in their hearts: the Law should be written in their hearts. Fourthly, when men know things by opinion, not by faith, as the most men know the greatest part of Religion. Fiftly, when our knowledge is not experimentall in practise. Sixtly, when men know other things, but not the grace of God to themselues.
Thus of the words apart. The Doctrines follow.
 First, men may heare and yet not know. Knowledge is not attained by all that heare:The causes why many hearers get not knowledge. and this comes to passe either as a curse for mens home-sinnes vnrepented: Where Manners will not be informed, their Faith cannot: or by reason of pride and conceit of our owne wits, and that wee neede not bee informed: Thus the Pharises are blinde though they heare Christ himselfe: or it comes to passe by reason of mens faultinesse in hearing, they heare carelesly, or without application, or with preiudice, or not all: or else it is because men smoother their doubts, and seeke not resolution in priuate by conference, or seeking the law at the Priests mouth: and in many, fruitlesse hearing is caused by want of catechising, when people are not fitted for preaching by information in the principles before.
 Secondly, the hearing and true knowledge of Gods grace to a man in particular, doth make fruitfull: the salutiferous appearance of Gods grace in a mans heart, workes in a man a desire and endeauour to shew all good faithfulnesse that may adorne that doctrine, by which hee comes to know God to be his Sauiour. It teacheth men to deny vngodlinesse and worldly lusts, and to liue godly, righteously, and soberly: it purgeth vpon iniquitie, and inflames the zeale of good workesTit: 2.10:11.12.14.. When GODS Children haue the tydings of grace giuen vnto them, it kindles in them a singular incouragement to goe about Gods worke, and to hold out to lay the very last stone with ioyZach. 4:7..
 Thirdly, as other Doctrines, so especially the doctrine of our reconciliation with God,The doctrine of Gods grace hard to the most. or of our particular assurance of Gods grace to vs is exceeding hard, and men are strangely turned off from the right knowledge of it. This comes to passe (where it is effectually preached) because it is hindred by common hope, and by a resolution in many to part with no sinne for the attaining of it; and by a naturall darkenesse in the vnderstanding of man in matters of the Kingdome of Christ, and by the speciall malice of the Deuill, and by pride in other knowledges. And lastly, by an incredible auersnesse in our natures, that will not bee brought to set time apart to minde this point seriously, and to apply our selues vnto the meanes that might further vs thereunto.The great commodities of assurance. Whereas if men were assured of Gods fauour, and possessed of sauing grace, the profit of the knowledge of it, would appeare to be exceeding great: though the heart of man be exceeding dull, yet it could not but meruailously refresh vs to thinke of the pardon of all our sinnes; yea, if wee were sure of this point, and had trauelled soundly about the experience of Gods grace to vs in particular, it would for euer settle vs in the plerophorie of our religion. A man needs neuer care for disputes and the thousands of Volumes, about which should be the true Church or true Religion? for if a man by sound reasons from the word and Spirit of God, had gotten the assurance of Gods loue, hee would become as Mount Sion, that could not be mooued. This also would make a man able to contemne all earthly mutations, and liue in firmenes of heart, in some measure, out of the feare of any afflictions, or of death it selfe: and besides, it would
 preserue vs from the poyson and infection of earthly pleasures, and vaine delights and profits. And to conclude, it is to enioy a kinde of heauen vpon earth, as being an entrance into the first degree of eternall life.
When men get from vnder the Law to liue vnder Grace, it workes not onely a dissolution of the dominion of sinne, but a consecration of the members for the seruice of righteousnesseRom: 6:14.13: of the fulnesse of CHRIST do all the faithfull receiue euen grace for grace1 Pet: 1:13:;Joh: 1:14:16 the truth of Sanctification and new Obedience, together with the perfection of Redemption and Iustification. To conclude, euery faithfull man may say as the Apostle said, By the grace of God I am that I am1 Cor: 15..
The vse is first for instruction, euen to labour so much the more earnestly for the certaintie of assurance of Gods grace and free fauour to vs in particular, because it will make vs abundant in the worke of the Lord, and inrich vs with those things that may further our reckoning against the last day. But that wee may speede in suing for Gods grace, and waiting for the tydings of his speciall loue, wee must labour to be good men, and shew it by this, that wee be men of holy imaginationsPro: 12:2.. Our vnderstanding will neuer be capable of this knowledge till the euills of the thoughts be in some measure purged out and subdued. Besides, we must take heede of scorning and contemning the meanes of gracePro: 3:34., and labour for a hatred of euery sinne; for till then wee neuer get any sound experience of Gods fauour. So long as a man makes a mocke of any sinne, and securely against the light will commit it, so long he remaines vnder the power of folly and vnregenerationProu: 14:6.: but especially wee must labour to get and grow in humilitie; for God bestowes his graces on the humble1 Pet: 5:4. Iames 4:7.. And if God euer comfort vs with his grace, let vs so learne to make it our portion, and to trust perfectly vpon it1 Pet: 1:13:: as not to receiue it in vaine2 Cor: 6:2., but obey all the counsell of God and his Ministers that beseech vs to expresse the power of it in our liues.
Secondly, the doctrine of the power of Gods grace doth bitterly reproue foure sorts of men: First, such as neglect Gods grace, and seeke not any particular euidence for it. Secondly, such as fall away from the grace of God, and giue ouer the vse of the meanes of graceGal: 1:6.; which apostasie many times befals such men as will not wash off the pollution, nor by mortification stay the springing vp of some bitter roote or other within their hearts. Such Apostates, when they were at the best, had in their hearts some imperious lusts and passions or other, that they made not conscience of to subdueHeb: 12:15.. Thirdly, such as turne the grace of God into wantonnesse: men that before they haue any reason of comfort, vpon the bare hearing of the promises of the Gospell, take libertie to liue licentiously, and follow their sinnes with presumptuous abuse of Gods mercy. These are vngodly men, ordained before to condemnationIud: 4.. Lastly, such as cannot abide the doctrine of GODS grace, but despise and hate the very Spirit of Grace, how sore shall their pupunishment beHeb. 10:29.?
Thus farre of the Thankesgiuing for the principall meanes of Grace. The Instrumentall followes.




Verse 7. As yee also learned of Epaphras our fellow-seruant, who is for you a faithfull Minister of God.
Verse 8. Who hath also declared vnto vs your loue, which you haue in the spirit.


HEe hath giuen thankes for the Ministery:Diuision. now hee giues thankes for the Minister: who is here described by his name (Epaphras) by the adiunct Loue of others to him (beloued) and by his Office (a Seruant,) by his willingnes to ioyne with others (...), a fellow-seruant, by his faithfulnes
 in the execution of his Office (which is for you a faithfull Minister of Christ:) lastly, by his loue to his people, which hee shewes by the good report hee thankefully giues of them. Vers. 8.
 From the generall consideration of all the words I obserue.
What a Minister should be.First, it much matters to the efficacie of the doctrine what the Ministers be: hee that would profit his hearers must be; First, able to teach. Secondly, hee should be beloued, not a man against whom the hearts of the people had conceiued vncurable preiudice, or such a one as was scandalous. Thirdly, hee had neede to be a fellow-seruant, one that will draw with others. Fourthly, hee must consecrate his seruice to God and the Church. Fiftly, he must be faithfull. And lastly, one that will loue his people.
 Secondly, Ministers of greater gifts, or places, or learning, may here learne how to carry themselues towards their fellow-Ministers: Paul commends Epaphras, confirmes and countenances his doctrine, and giues him the right hand of fellowship. Which example much condemnes the haughtie pride and arrogancy of many great Cleargy-men, in whose eyes their brethren are despised; sometime swelling against them with enuie, sometimes openly pursuing them with censures, especially if God blesse their labours with any good successe; easily setting out with the formost to detract from their iust praises for gifts, sinceritie, or paines: woe and a fall will be to the great pride of Cleargy-men.
Thirdly, the Apostle striues to winne a greater estimation to the Minister that so hee might the better fasten their respects to his Ministery, to note that where the Messenger is not in credit, the Message is easily neglected or contemned. And therefore as men would desire good successe in the Ministery of the Word, they should labour to get and retaine an honourable opinion of the Ministers. And to this end consider that they are called Gods Coadiutors1 Cor: 3., Ministers of the Spirit2 Cor: 3:6., Gods Stewards1 Cor: 4:1. Tit: 1:2. 1 Tim: 3:4., CandlestickesReuel. 11:4., the mouth of ChristReuel: 1:16., Starres, AngelsReuel: 1.20.; and haue many other titles of dignity.
From these words (as ye also haue learned of Epaphras,) I obserue: First that if men would bee effectually wrought vpon by the word, they must plant themselues vnder some setled Ministerie: they that heare now one, and then another, at one end of the quarter heare a sermon of this man, and at the other end of that man, haue their knowledge much like their paines.
Secondly, he is a true member of the Church that can shew sound grace and knowledge, learned of the Teachers of the Church. It is neither the account of the world, nor profession of true Religion, nor comming to Church, demonstrates necessarily a true member of the Church, but the effectuall subiection of the soule to be formed and wrought vpon by the Ministery of the Word.
Thirdly, it is an ordinary infirmity in the better sort of hearers that in many points they receiue Doctrine vpon the credit of the teachers, yeelding no other reason, but Epaphras taught so; which should awaken affection and conscience in Ministers, out of the feare of God, and sound and infallible knowledge and premeditation to deliuer what they doe deliuer, and to vtter nothing for certaine but the word of God.
From these words (the beloued, our fellow-seruant,) I obserue, first, that common affliction for the cause of God, workes in men tendernesse of loue. The Prison makes a great Apostle imbrace with singular loue a poore and meane Minister; the smell of the prison, and sight of the stake, (if such times should euer come againe) would frame a better amity amongst our Churchmen; ambitious men might then lay downe their personall and guilefull eagernesse of hast and hate; and humorous men would then bee ashamed to deuise how to inlarge the dissention, by coyning new exceptions, and
 vrging of peremptory new scruples: modest and humble men on both sides that haue sought the peace of Sion, would then haue double honour.
Secondly, that hee that is faithfull is beloued; beloued I say of God and Gods houshold. It is an ill signe in a Minister that hee is not sound, when hee findes no tokens of Gods loue in his heart, nor signes of respect with Gods seruants in his life.
Thirdly, that to be Gods Seruant is an high dignitie: it is here the speciall glory of an Apostle, and was acknowledged and proclaimed to be the best part of a Kings title, Psal. 36. the title of it. Which may serue for comfort to poore Christians: they can get no Wealth, offices, nor Honours in the world; but here is their ioy, they may get to bee Gods seruants, which is better and more worth than all Honour. Besides, it condemnes the aspiring of the Cleargie: yet when they haue done all they can to make themselues great men, hee is a better man in Gods bookes, that by faithfull seruice can winne soules to God, then he that by his money or paines can only purchase many liuings and great dignities to himselfe.
Which is for you a faithfull Minister, or Deacon.] Concerning the word (...), rendred Minister, it is expressely a Deacon: and it is a title of Office, Seruice, or Administration, giuen sometimes to Christ, hee is called, The Deacon of CircumcisionRom 14.8.; sometimes to MagistratesRom. 13.4.; yea, sometimes to WomenRom. 16.1.; sometimes to a speciall calling or sort of Church officersPhil. 1.1. 1 Tim. 3.8.12.; sometimes, to the Ministers of the Gospell both ordinary and extraordinary: so Timothy is a Deacon, 1 Tim. 4.6. so Iudas, Acts 1.17.15. But the Doctrine I obserue is:
That euery faithfull Minister is Christs Deacon: and this may comfort painefull Ministers; for to be Christs Deacon is no base office; or to be called so, a title of disgrace: for it is a title giuen to Christ, and the greatest Magistrates. And concerning them is that promise that hee that receiueth one of them in Christs name, shall not be without his rewardMar. 9.35. with 37.. Besides, Christ saith of them, that where hee is, there shall his Deacon or Seruant bee, and his father will honour him, though the world doe notIohn 12.26.. Further, it may refresh them that they are said to be Deacons, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6.7.8. Lastly, wee may see what power these Deacons haue, Math. 22. They call, they perswade, they are heard of the great King, if they complaine and informe; and they binde men hand and foote and cast them into vtter darkenesse. Onely, if Ministers would haue the priuiledges of Christs Deacons, they must put on and practise their properties. First, they must become as little Children: for humblenesse of minde and confidence in Gods fatherly care and prouidence, and for freedome from maliceMark. 9.35.36.. Secondly, they must follow their Master Christ, in doctrine, in life, and in sufferingsIohn 12.26.. Thirdly, seeing they haue this Deaconship, as they haue receiued mercy, they should not faint, but cast from them the cloakes of shame, and not walke in craftinesse, nor handle the word of God deceitfully; but in declaration of the truth should approue themselues to euery mans conscience in the sight of God2 Cor: 4.1.2. So as for the daily expressing of their doctrine vpon the hearts and liues of the people, their people might be their Epistle2 Cor. 3.2.3..
Thus of the 7. Verse. Out of the 8. Verse I obserue diuers things.
First, from the word [declared,] as it is here vsed and applyed to reports, I note, that those things are to be reported and spoken, that may giue light to the hearers. A good mans report tends to cleare things in the mindes of them that heare him: there should be light and a Lantherne in our wordsProu. 6.23.. To this end wee should vse wisedome, and truth, and meekenesse, when wee speake: Wisedome, by preparing our selues to speake: Truth, to report things as they are: and meekenesse, to auoide passion; for anger is a great
 darkener. We should also take heede of diuers sinnes in both Tables, that greatly corrupt the hearers, not onely in the generall, but in this, that they greatly darken and make muddy the vnderstanding of man. As in the first Table, discourses or disputes of Atheisme against the Word, Religion, or Ordinances of God; Apologies for Idolaters or Idolatrous Religion, in whole or in part; the very naming of vices or Idols without disgracing or hating of them; Impatiencie or murmuring against God, and such like: And in the second Table, flattery, tale-bearing, false accusing, rash iudgement, answering of matters before they be heard, are great darkeners of the vnderstanding.
Secondly, in that Epaphras intending to complaine of them for their corruptions in opinion and worshippe, doth here first declare their praises and graces of Gods Spirit. It shewes that it is a worthy grace to be apt to expresse others iust praises, especially when we are to speake of their faults; for that will shew that we are free from enuie, ostentation or disdaine, and that wee seeke not our owne things, that wee are not suspitious, nor thinke euill, nor reioyce in euill.
Loue in the spirit] Loue is either in God or in man: in God there is the personall loue of Christ, the loue of the Creature, the loue of man, and the loue of goodnesse or good men:(...). In man there is both the loue by which hee loues God, and the loue by which hee loues man. I take it, here it is meant of whatsoeuer loue the Spirit worketh in man. Of Loue I haue spoken at large before, here onely I note briefely two things in generall. First, the necessitie of Loue: Secondly, the tryall of it; both in the negatiue. For the first. If the true loue of God, and Gods children, bee not in vs, wee haue not faithGal. 5.6., nor the Spirit of God; for Loue is the fruit of the SpiritGal. 5.22. 2. Tim. 1.7.: nor the Seale of our ElectionEphes. 1.4.: nor a pure heart or good conscience1 Tim. 1.5., nor strength to holde out against errours2 Thes. 2.20.. And for triall: first, of our loue to God. Wee must know, that hee loues not God that will not come to CHRIST for lifeJohn 5.42.; that keepes not his CommandementsIohn 15.10.; that is ashamed of the Crosse and profession of ChristRom. 5.5.; that loues not the word, so as to hide (as precious treasure in his heart) the instructions and comforts of the Word1 Iohn. 2.6.; that is not inflamed and inwardly constrained to an ardent desire of holy duties in that place God hath set him in2 Cor. 5.13.14.; that serues the lust or loue of his profit, sports and carnall delight1 Ioh. 2.15.. And for triall of our loue to men, hee loues not his neighbour; first, that cannot doe it in the Spirit, that is, in spirituall things, and from his heart, according to the directions and motions of Gods Spirit: secondly, that doth or worketh euill to his neighbourRom. 13.10.: thirdly, that wilfully will offend his brother in a thing indifferentRom. 14.15.: fourthly, that will not pray for his neighbourRom. 15.30.: fiftly, that is not prone to shew mercy1 Cor. 8.8..
Quest. But how must I loue my neighbour. Answ. As Christ loued vs; and that hath foure things in it. For, Christ loued vs first, and though wee were his inferiours, and for our profit, and with an euerlasting loue: so should wee; first, wee must loue with a preuenting loue; secondly, wee must loue, though they be meaner persons in place or gifts then wee; thirdly, we must loue them for their profit and good, not for our owne; and lastly, wee must loue continually and feruently.





Verse 9. For this cause, we also, since the day we heard of it, cease not to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be fulfilled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisedome and spirituall vnderstanding.
Verse 10. That yee might walke worthy of the Lord, in all pleasing, being fruitfull in all good workes, and increasing in the knowledge of God.
Verse 11. Strengthened with all might, through his glorious power, vnto all patience, and long-suffering with ioyfulnesse.


THese words are the second part of the Preface, wherein he sheweth that hee praied for them, which hee both generally affirmes,The Diuision. and specially declares.
The generall affirmation is in these words: For this cause, wee also, since the day we heard of it, cease not to pray for you.
The speciall Declaration is in the words that follow: And to desire that yee might be fulfilled with the knowledge of his will: and so forward to the end of the 11. Verse.
In the affirmation are three things: first, an Intimation of a reason, (for this cause;) secondly, the Notation of time, (since the day wee heard of it;) thirdly, the Matter affirmed, (we cease not to pray for you.)
In generall wee may plainely obserue that the desires of our hearts,We are neither borne, nor borne againe for our selues. and endeauours of our liues ought not to be imployed for our owne good onely, but for the good of others. Wee are neyther borne nor borne againe for our selues. Sanctified and holy men haue beene full of constant and ardent affections and desires after the good of Gods Children: The manifestation of the spirit is giuen to euery member to profit withall1 Cor. 12.7.. Religious Loue seeketh not his owne things1 Cor. 13.: wee should not seeke our owne things, as many doe, but that which is Iesus Christs, viz. that which tends to his glory, and the profit of his members: yea, Christians should serue one another by loue: hee is not of God that hath not holy affections to promote so farre as in him lyeth, the good of Gods Children1 Ioh. 3.10.. Herein are the Children of God, and the Children of the Diuell vsually knowne: certainely that which any man is in Religion, hee is relatiuely; if not fit to serue the body,Note. then not fit to be of the body; hee is not a Saint, that seekes not communion of Saints.
This may serue: First,Vses. to shew the miserie of such as haue no inflamed desires after the good of Gods Children. Secondly, it may giue vs occasion to examine our selues, what good the body of Christ reapes by vs. If any Christian of lesse power, gifts and meanes in the world, aske; what good can I doe to Christians? I answere, if thou canst doe nothing else, thou canst pray to God for them, and desire their good, reioyce in their prosperitie, and mourne for their miseries: neither let this be thought a meane and vnprofitable seruice to the body; for wee see here a great Apostle imploying himselfe about such worke: yea, thou dost benefit the body by keeping an holy order in thine owne worke, walking inoffensiuely. If one stone flie out of the building it may breede great annoyance to the whole. Thirdly, this should teach vs to auoide what lets our desires or abilities to serue the Brethren by loue, and what may wrong the body: Take heede of worldlinesse, euen these carking cares, or plodding thoughts, about earthly things: vse the world, but serue it not: take heede of irreligiousnesse or the common prophanenesse of the world: take heede of rash censuring, and the customary liberty of speech to iudge, and master-like to taxe the actions of others: lastly, take heede of presumptuous and scandalous courses of life. And here also may be gathered a comfort to afflicted consciences, that are
 distressed, because they finde not what they would in themselues: they must know that one great way of triall of sinceritie, is by the constant vprightnesse of their hearts, in the desires of good to the Church and people of God. And therefore though they cannot speake so much good of themselues as were meete, yet it is a great grace of God, that they haue inflamed affections to wish all spirituall prosperitie to Gods people, and to blesse them in the Name of the Lord.
Doctr. When thou seest the word begin to work in any place pray feruently to God.For this cause.] Doct. When we see the Word of God beginning to worke effectually in any people, and that they wax fruitfull, it is the dutie of all that loue Sion, to bestirre themselues, and cry mightily to God, with vncessant prayers for them. If it be asked what we should pray for, or wish vnto them. I answere, wee should pray; first that God would restraine the Diuell and all wicked men, that profession bee not dishonoured in the birth of it, by scandalous persons: for it is one of the first practises of the Diuell, to thrust up wicked men into profession,What thou shouldest pray for. that so the glory of sinceritie might be darkened. Secondly, that the word might haue free passage without interruption or hurtfull opposition. Seldome doth powerfull preaching make a diuision in the heape, but the Diuell and diuellish men striue to wring the Fanne out of Christs hand, that the winnowing may cease. The Doctrine that separates the precious from the vile, and without respect of persons, yeelds comfort to the gracious, and terrours, as the onely present portion of the prophane, is exceedingly opposed of the world. Thirdly, that they may grow in grace. But, to omit other things, the Apostle here shewes by his owne example that we should pray; first, that they may truely know the will of God in Christ: secondly, that they be discreete and wise in carriage, as well as in vnderstanding: thirdly, th^t they may walke worthy of the Lord, etc. fourthly, that they may increase in knowledge: fiftly, that they might perseuer, being strengthened with Gods might: lastly, that they may lead a patient and ioyfull life. And wee should be thus carefull of the good of others, both because God requires it, and the Saints haue practised it; and besides, if thou haue any grace, thou standest or fallest with others, in respect of the credit of profession.
Since the day that wee heard of it, wee cease not to pray for you.] First, from the coherence of these words with the words following, wee may note the great efficacie of Prayer, how mightily it preuailes with God: it is a way by which a Christian may exceedingly helpe himselfe and pleasure his friends The prayer of the righteous auaileth much, both for helping of the body, and healing of the souleIames 5.16.. If two sound-hearted men agree in earth, in a suite to God the Father in heauen, they preuaile with incredible successe, they get what they would haueMat. 18.19..
And that wee may be incouraged to Prayer, there are diuers things that might vndoubtedly perswade vs to resolue of the efficacie of prayer.Incouragements to prayer. First, Gods Commandement; certainely God will not require prayer but that hee meanes to heare itPsal. 50.15.. Secondly, The Nature of God, he is a Father, and hath the compassions of a Father. Though Abraham would not know his seede, if they had suites to him, and Iacob be ignorant of his posteritie; yet God will heare and redeemeEsa. 63.16.: Though a mother should forget her motherly compassions, yet God will not forget hisEsa. 49.15.: and therefore if earthly fathers, that haue a great deale of ill nature in them, can giue good gifts to their children, and that because their children aske them, how much more shall God our Father, who is perfectly compassionate, giue good things; yea, the best things, yea, the very fountaine of all good, his holy Spirit, if wee aske himMath. 7.9.? Thirdly, the manner of Gods presence of grace; when wee haue any suites, hee is not farre off, or hard to come to, as earthly Princes are, and great men in world many times;
 but hee is neere to all that call vpon him in truthPsal. 145.18; yea, for more assurance of this, that hee is ready to receiue petitions, it is sayd, His eares are open to the cry of the righteous: he is so farre from being absent, that there is not so much as any little impediment in his eare. God is euer ready to heare, if our hearts were ready to pray. Fourthly, The property of Gods liberality; hee holdes it a great blemish and dishonour to his bounty, either to deny when hee is asked, or to reproach when hee hath giuen; either to except against the person, or to sticke at the greatnesse of the giftIames 1.5.. Fiftly, the assistance of the spirit of Adoption; The Spirit helpes our infirmities, though wee know not how to pray as wee ought, yet that shall not let audience; for The Spirit it selfe will make request for vs, euen in the sighes which cannot bee expressedRom. 8.26.. Sixtly, The merits of Christ and his intercession; hee hath prayed for vs, so as what we aske the Father in his Name, hee will grant itIoh. 14.13.14. Seuenthly, The hate God beares to the enemies of his people; Gods Seruants shall speede in their suites, euen because of them that rise vp against them. Lastly, our prayers are furthered by the very Faith and Holinesse of our godly and spirituall Ancestours, the posteritie speedes the better for their sakes: yea, without question we speede the better in England, because we are the seede or Successours of the Martyrs.
Obiect.Obiect. But I haue prayed for my selfe and others, and yet finde not successe. Sol. First, if thou speede not,Solut. it is either because thou art not a righteous personPsal. 34.16. and 109:7.: or thou art disordered in thy carriage in the family1 Pet. 3.7.: or thou didst not continue in prayerLuk. 18 1. to 8.: or thou dost aske amisse.
Quest.Quest. But how may I know whether I did aske amisse? Ans.Ans. Thou didst aske amisse: first, if thou didst pray and doubtIames 1.6. Job 21.15.. Secondly, if thou didst make prayers thy refuge, but not thy recompence, when thou camest to pray thou consideredst what thou didst want for thy selfe, not what thou shouldest render to God; thou vsedst prayer to serue thy turne, but when thou hadst sped, thou didst not returne by prayer to render vnto God his honourPsal. 116.12.. Thirdly, if thou didst not make conscience of the vse of other ordinances of God; for God will not giue all to any one ordinance. Fourthly, if thy prayers were ignorant, proud, hypocriticall prayersMat. 6.. Fiftly, if thou wast not in charitie but broughtest thy gift, and diddest not forgiue, or seeke reconciliation with thy brotherMat. 5.. Sixtly, if thou didst aske of God for wrong ends, or wrong things, as to spend on thy lustsIames 4.3.: or for temporall things onely or cheefelyHose 7.14.: besides, many times it comes to passe that men speede not, because they are not humble. Wee should so prize and esteeme holy things, as wee should exceedingly reioyce, if wee could get but the crummes that fall from the Fathers table. This Humilitie is euer ioyned with great Faith and wished successe in all suites to God. Againe, it is to bee noted, that men may bee deceiued about the successe of Prayer: for the decree for our succours may goe foorth at the very beginning of our supplications, though the knowledge of it bee not reuealed vnto vs till afterwards. Further, God heareth prayers diuersly; sometimes, hee heareth to grant the verie thing we desire; sometimes he heareth, and granteth, and giueth, not the verie things wee desire, but that which hee holds to bee best for vs, and for the distresse wee are in: so hee was sayd to heare CHRIST, Hebr. 5. Lastly, God doth heare and grant, and yet deferre to giue, and that for our great good many times: hee deferres that hee may prooue vs, that our faith may bee the more kindled, that his benefits may bee more sweet when they doe come, and that wee may know by the want, that it is his gift, when they are bestowed, and that wee may bee more carefull of the good vse of his grace^, gifts and benefits, when we haue them. Thus of the Coherence.
For you] Doct. We are bound to pray for others as well as our selues.Doctr. In this place I consider in this point only two things. First, the kinds of prayers
 for others: secondly, the sorts of persons for whom wee must pray.
The kindes of Prayers for others.For the first; I obserue heere in the originall, two words, (...) and (...), in the translation, Prayers and Desires: as I take it, all the sorts of prayers for others may be referred to these two heads: and these two differ not so much in the matter, as in the motiues to prayer; (...), Prayers, are such suits vnto God, as wee are vehemently mooued to, by the contemplation of God and his Attributes. The difference betweene (...) and (...) is somewhat shadowed out by Oration and Adoration. (...) heere rendered Desires, are all suites vnto God, arising from the deepe sence of mans estate,(...). either in dangers, wants, or blessings: and vnder this kinde may bee placed the three sorts of prayers in 1 Tim. 2.1. for our desires for others, are either Deprecations, in which wee desire God to turne away, or keepe from them some great euill; or Intercessions, which are either complaints of wrongs, or most importunate supplications vnto God for their conuersion and the pardon of their sins: or lastly, Thankesgiuings for Gods mercies and blessings.
The persons for whom we must pray.Secondly, to the Question, for whom wee must pray. It is shortly answered, 1 Tim. 2.1. for all men, excepting dead men, or such as sinne vnto death, or such, concerning whom the will of God is reuealed for their perdition, as the man of sinne: so as also by all men, wee vnderstand all sorts of men,2 Thess. 2. not all the particular men of euery sort: for wee may not desire saluation for all the men that God hath made (vniuersally considered,) seeing the counsell of God is vnchangeably past concerning reprobates: But that which in this Text is principall, is, that Ministers and People must pray one for another. Ministers must pray for their People: thus doe the Apostles in euery Epistle; yea, Samuel saith, God forbid I should cease praying for you; as if hee knew it to be a detestable thing for a Minister to bee so retchlesse or carelesse, as either not to pray, or not to continue to pray for his people. The people must also pray for their Ministers, and that especially for these things, that God may deliuer them from the rage of the disobedient, and the practises of their enemiesRom. 15.30.; that God would open their mouthes, and giue them vtteranceEphes. 6.19., with a fitnesse to discouer the secrets and mysteries of ChristCol. 4.3.; and that their Gospell may runne and grow, both in efficacie and credit2 Thes. 3:1:2; yea, in as much as they labour about sauing other mens soules, the people should by prayers labour to further the saluation of their Ministers.
Wee cease not.] Note. First, hee that loues the people of God truely, loues them constantly.
Secondly, that a heart truely sanctified is much in prayer, cannot giue it ouer. It is a wofull thing to neglect prayer, but how cursedly miserable is their case whose hearts rise against prayer, and cannot abide it, but persecute it in others?Not ceasing, what it implies.
Thirdly, the not ceasing in prayer, hath in it constancie and perseuerance in prayer; and teacheth, that as wee are bound to pray, so are wee bound to perseuer in prayer; yea, if wee must not cease to pray, it implies: first, that wee must pray in all places: secondly, that wee must watch to pray: thirdly, that wee must beleeue, and hope wee shall obtaine what wee pray for: fourthly, wee must not appoynt God either time or meanes: fiftly, that wee must pray with all manner of prayers; for all these fiue things are requisiteIohn 4:21. 1 Tim. 2.8. Mat. 26.41. Col: 4:2. Ephes. 6.18. 1 Pet: 4:8. Iames 1:6:7. Heb. 10:36: etc Heb: 2.3.: or if any of them bee wanting, there will not bee constant and faithfull prayer. Yea, not ceasing, notes that there is singular comfort in prayer, else men would neuer hold out.
Solut.Obiect.Obiect. But, not ceasing, implyes, multiloquie, vaine babbling. Sol. Not so: a man may pray earnestly and often, and yet not vse many wordsEccles: 5:1. Mat. 6..
Obiect.Obiect. But, to pray without ceasing, is to bee tyed to vse idle repetitions;
 for how can men bee furnished and finde matter to pray so often and so much?Solut. Sol. A Christian is furnished many wayes with needefull occasions of continuall prayer. First, hee is tyed to a dayly Sacrifice both morning and euening, by Prayer and Prayses. Secondly, hee findes continually new Mercies, and those require new songs of praise and prayerPsal. 40.4.. Thirdly, as his knowledge encreaseth by the vse of the meanes, hee findes an increase of matter, to driue him to prayer, and make him pray better. Fourthly, new infirmities breaking out in himselfe and others, and that dayly, giues an occasion to renue his suites to God. Fiftly, the Creatures, and his callings must bee sanctified by the Word and Prayer. Sixtly, varietie of crosses breaking in vpon him, giues him cause to runne to God for the sanctifying or remoouing of them.
Let such pray seldome as thinke they owe God no Sacrifice, or receiue no blessings from God, or care not for knowledge, or finde no infirmities in themselues, or haue no crosses, or neede no blessing vpon their callings and labours: but let all that feare God stirre vp themselues to pray without ceasing, because God ^equires it, and hath made gracious promises; because they finde daily necessities, and may heereby exercise their faith, and shew their loue to God and to others, after the example of the Saints, and by the motion of the Spirit of Adoption, which will not be idle in them.
Thus of the Affirmation. The Declaration followes.

That yee might be fulfilled with the knowledge of his will in all Wisdome and spirituall vnderstanding, that yee might walke, etc.]

In this Declaration hee describeth the knowledge hee prayes for, by fiue things:
1 By the Obiect of it; The will of God.2 By the Parts; Wisdome and vnderstanding.3 By the End; That yee might walke, etc. Vers. 10.4 By the Cause; His glorious power, Vers. 11.5 By the Effects; Patience, Long-suffering, Ioyfulnesse.
The Obiect is described in these words; fulfilled with knowledge of his Will. And here is, 1. the Obiect it selfe, Will of God: 2. the Meanes of apprehension (viz.) Knowledge: 3. the Measure, filled with it.
Of his will.]. Will is a propriety in God.Proprieties in God. Proprieties in God are either Personall or Essentiall: the Proprieties of the Person are such as these; in the Father, to beget and send foorth; of the Sonne, to be begotten and sent forth; and of the holy Ghost, to proceede: the Properties of the Essence, are of two sorts: some note the Essence, as they say, a priori; and these are such Proprieties as are incommunicable, that is, are so in God as they are in no Creature, as Infinitenesse and Simplicitie, free from all mixture, parts or composition: some note out the Essence a posteriori; and these are such as are first and principally in God, but in the second place communicable to the Creature; and of this sort are Power, Wisdome, amd Will in God.
The will of God is either, The Will of Gods good pleasure; or, The Will of his pleasure.
The Will of Gods good pleasure is in things where the effect is good.
The Will of his pleasure is in things where the effect is euill;Bene placiti. Placiti. and so hee wils in respect of the end, but not in respect of the meanes to the end, as Sinne, and some Miseries.
The Will of Gods good pleasure is heere meant: and this is secret or reuealed. The reuealed Will is heere meant.
The reuealed Will of God is of foure sorts. It is 1. His determining Will concerning vs, what shall become of vsEphes. 1.5.. 2. His prescribing Will, where hee requires either Obedience; and this is reuealed in the Law: or Faith and
 Repentance, and so it is reuealed in the GospellEphes. 1.9. Acts 22.9.. 3. His approouing Will, and that is that Will, by which hee graciously accepts, and tenderly regardeth those that come to him in Faith and RepentanceGal. 1.4. Mat. 18.14. John 1.23.. 4. His disposing Will, and this is the will of his prouidence1 Cor. 1.1. Rom. 1.10. (...).. The prescribing Will of God is wholly reuealed, the other three but in part, and by consequent.
Thus of the Will of God.
Knowledge.] This is the Grace by which the Will of God is apprehended. The originall word is three waies accepted: Sometimes, for Knowledge; so ordinarily: Sometimes, for Acknowledgement; as it is translated in these places; Luke 1.4. 1 Cor. 16.18. 2 Cor. 6.9. Sometimes, for Knowing againe. All three sences may be heere well considered off.
First, of knowing Gods Will. Heere I consider three things: first, what we must know: secondly, why: or, the motiues to perswade to seeke for knowledge: thirdly the meanes to be vsed thereunto.
What wee should seeke to know.For the first: wee must know that God doth approoue of vs in Christ: the approouing will. And this is so necessary, that our hearts can neuer bee rid of the occasion of feare of our Reprobation, till wee doe know it2 Cor. 13.5.. Secondly, we must know what God hath determined of vs: his determining will. To this end hath God giuen vs his Word and Spirit, that wee might know what hee hath prepared for vs, if wee loue him1 Cor. 2.9.. Thirdly, wee must labour to know what hee requireth of vs: his prescribing will. It is sayd of Dauid, Acts 13.22. that hee did all the wils of God; and so should wee also labour to know, and by practise expresse the power of all Gods wils: and the rather, seeing we haue fulfilled, not the will, but the wils of the flesh from time to timeEphes. 2.3. Motiues to knowledge..
For the second: there are many things might enflame vs to the desire of knowledge. For this is the glory of Gods Elect, not riches, not strength, not carnall witIer. 9.24.. It is the singular gift of Gods grace, and speciall portion of his ChosenMarke 4.11.. It is a great sinne, and greeuous curse to want itHos. 4.11.: but a damned plague to contemne itIob 21 14.. Knowledge? Why? it is more excellent then all things: all but losse and dung in comparison of itPhil. 3.9.. Without it, Zeale is little worthRom. 10.2., and Sacrifice is in vaineHos. 6.6.. What shall I say; This is eternall life to know God, and whom he hath sent Iesus ChristIohn 17.3. Rules for attaining knowledge..
Thirdly, what must wee doe that wee may attaine to the knowledge of Gods will? I answer: First, wee must get to bee true members of Christ: for No man knoweth the Father but the Sonne, and they to whom the Sonne reuealeth himMat. 11.27.. Secondly, we must conscionably practise what we doe already know by the light of Nature, or generall light of Religion, and then Christs gracious promise lyeth for the further reuelation euen of sauing knowledgeIohn 7.17.. Thirdly, men neuer soundly prosper in the attainment of sauing knowledge: till they haue beene in the furnace of affliction of Conscience: after men haue beene wounded in spirit and their hearts smitten within them, they will then know, and endeauour themselues to knowHos. 6.1.3..
But this Question may be excellently answered out of two places of the Apostle Paul.
First, in the 12. of the Rom. 1.2.3. The Apostle shewes that a man must doe fiue things, if hee would know what the good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God is. First, hee must deuote himselfe to a religious course of life: this hee calles sacrificing of our selues to God, Vers. 1. Secondly, hee must no more follow the fashions of the world. Thirdly, hee must by prayer, and the vse of all the meanes, repent for the sinnes of his minde, and get a new minde to put his knowledge in. Ver. 2. Fourthly, hee must be prouing and trying, often examining himselfe, and trying his euidence concerning the faith of Gods good will to him, as the hope of his glory. Verse 2.
 Fiftly, hee must not bee ouer-curious to prie into such knowledges as concerne him not; but be wise to sobriety, labouring especially by hearing and practise, to get within compasse of the knowledge of his owne Iustification, Sanctification, and Saluation, Vers. 3.
Againe, in the 5. of the Ephesians, Vers. 14. to 22. to gaine the true light of Christ, and vnderstand Gods will, the Apostle shewes that wee must doe nine things. First, wee should awaken our selues out of the spirituall slumber of our hearts; labouring, by prayer and meditation of our danger, to force open the eyes of our mindes; Awake thou that sleepest, Ver. 14. Secondly, wee must forsake the company of wicked and carnall men, that haue no taste nor feeling of things that belong to the kingdom of God; Stand vp from the dead, Verse 14. Thirdly, wee must walke circumspectly (precisely, the originall word is) being resolued to make a conscience of all our wayes:(...). or else in vaine to goe about to digge for knowledge, Verse 15. Fourthly, wee must allow much time for hearing, and reading, and conference; euen as men that meane to redeeme all the time past they haue vnprofitably spent, Verse 16. Fiftly, wee must bring a minde willing and desirous in all humility, to vnderstand Gods will: a froward spirit cannot prosper; or a man wise in his owne conceit, Verse 17. Sixtly, wee should in speciall take heede of drunkennesse, or any kinde of tipling, wherein is excesse, Verse 18. Seuenthly, wee must labour for a cheerefull spirit, and a glad heart, and shew it by singing of Psalmes, making melody in our hearts to God: a heauy spirit is dull of apprehension, Verse 19. Eightly, wee must giue thankes for all things, readily acknowledging euery mercy, and reioycing for any successe in the meanes, Vers. 10. Lastly, wee must submit our selues one to another, euer willing to learne in any thing of any body, Ephes. 5.21. Hee that scorneth enformation is a foole.
Thus of Knowledge.
Secondly, it is not enough to know, but wee must acknowledge the will of God, that is, by a constant and open diligence in the vse of the meanes,Of acknowledgement, or profession. and conscionable heedefulnesse euen in all things in practise, wee must hold foorth the light of the truth, in a religious profession of it, in communion with the Saints, and separate from sinners: this is required in Gods Elect as well as Faith, Tit. 1.1. Neither is it a precise humour in some few, but God would haue all come to the acknowledgement of the truth1 Tim: 2.4.; not to heare it, or to know it onely. Without this, I will not say absolutely, a man cannot bee in Christ; but this I say, with the Apostle, A man cannot bee perfect in Christ, and of ripe ageEphes. 4.13.. By this acknowledgement wee escape an exceeding great deale of filthinesse that is in the world2 Pet. 2.20.: and because that many men will by no meanes drawen to acknowledge the way of God, therefore by a iust iudgement of God they are deliuered vp to a reprobate senceRom. 1.18.. Only two things are to be vrged vpon professours heerein: first, that they doe soundly repent of their sinnes before they make profession, and enter vpon acknowledgement1 Tim. 2.4.; or else acknowledgement will bee a vaile for filthy Hypocrisie: secondly, that they take heede of sinning presumptuously after acknowledgement. Feare the curse, Heb. 10.26.
Thirdly, wee must know againe: this hath three things in it. First,Of knowing againe. we must bee often viewing and looking ouer our euidence, to bee sure of the whole and euery part of it, as wee would doe if wee had assurances for matters of the world. Secondly, because sinnes after calling doe greatly darken knowledge, therefore wee must not onely renew our repentance, but our knowledge also. Thridly, wee must know the truth of God, not onely in our mindes, by vnderstanding and thinking of it; but wee must know it againe, in the affections of our hearts in respect of sence and feeling, and againe
 after that, in the practise of our life; for that is experimentall knowledge, and the very power of godlinesse.
Vse.This Doctrine of the knowledge of the will of God, reprooues many sorts of men. First, such as desire not knowledge at allIob 21.14.: and so perish for want of itHos. 4.6. 2 Thess. 1.8.. Secondly, such as sometimes desire knowledge, but they will not vse the meanes, or not constantly, or not all the meanes. Thirdly, such as will know something of the prescribing Will of God, but neuer heede his approouing or determining Will. Fourthly, such as, though they vse the meanes for Knowledge, yet will at no hand abide Acknowledgement. Lastly, it reprooues the carelesnesse euen of Gods people many times, neglecting to make their Calling and Election sure, by looking often ouer their euidence, and renuing their knowledge, and labouring the cure of their natures from slumber and relapses. Thus of Knowledge.
Filled, or fulfilled.] From the obseruation of the measure I note foure things. First, that wee must not rest in beginnings; wee must bee filled with all knowledgeRom. 15.14.: not onely get Grace and Truth, but bee filled with itIohn 2.14.: so full of WisdomeActs 6.3.5., of Faith and PowerActs 6.8., of Good-workesActs 9.36., of Ioy in Gods fauourActs 2.28., of all HopeRom. 15.13., full, euen with the fulnesse of him that filleth all thingsEphes. 1. vlt.. But it is contrary with the most men: for wee may complaine out of diuers Scriptures, euen of them that they are filled, not with Grace, Knowledge, Faith, Workes, etc. but with the Leprosie of all spirituall InfectionsLuke 5.12., with all DeceitActs 13.10., with Wrath, euen when they heare Gods wordActs 19.28., with worldly Greefe and PassionsIohn 16.16., with all kindes of VnrighteousnesseRom. 1.19., with DrinkeEphes. 5.18., with the measure of their Fathers SinnesMatt. 23.32.; yea, so wretchedly vile are the liues of many, that they shew themselues to bee filled with the Diuell himselfeActs 5.3.: but the workes almost of none are perfect, or filled before GodReu. 3.2..
Secondly, that there is something in Grace or Knowledge still wanting:  wee know but in part. Mans heart may be compared to a Vessell, the meanes to a Pipe, the Spirit of God to the Wheele that beates the water into the Pipe, the Minister is the Seruant that opens the Cocke; and then the reason why we know but in part, is, either the Cocke alwayes runnes not, or not alwayes in the same measure: and sometimes our Vessels are filled with other things, as the cares and lusts of the World, and so they runne ouer; and vsually our Vessels runne out, and lose what we receiue by the meanes.
 Thirdly, the knowledge of the will of God, and spirituall things, onely can fill and satisfie the heart of man, all else is meere vanity and vexation of spiritEccles. 1.2. Nothing can fill but knowledge and spirituall things.. Earthly things cannot fill, neither the knowledge of them, nor the vse or possession of them, because they are not infinite nor eternall: besides, there is nothing new, nor are they of a like nature with the Soule: they are enioyed with vexation and much sacietie, for our affections will not loue them still; yea, most an end the vanity of mens mindes so turneth deuises, concerning their knowledge or vse, that death or losse takes them or vs away, before they can finde out that way of vsing of them, that could satisfie and fill the heart.
 Lastly, nothing but the will of God bindes conscience: the Apostle of purpose layeth the foundation in the Preface, concerning the knowledge of, and resting vpon Gods will, that so be might the more easily beat downe their Traditions and Philosophicall Speculations, of which he meant to entreat in the next Chapter. Now, if this Doctrine bee true, as it is most true, then Apocryphe Scripture, Councels, Fathers, and Princes Lawes, doe not binde further then they are agreeable to Gods will; and therefore much lesse Popes Decrees, Traditions, and humane Inuentions.
Thus of the Obiect of Knowledge.

In the next place it is described by the parts of it,The differences betweene Wisedome and Vnderstanding. in the next words [In all wisedome and spirituall Vnderstanding.] Where the Apostle shewes that sauing Knowledge hath two parts, (viz.) Vnderstanding and Wisedome. Concerning the difference betweene the two originall words, in this place rendered Wisedome and Vnderstanding, there is a great stirre amongst Interpreters. Some say that the one proceedeth out of the principles of the Law of Nature, and the other out of the principles of Faith. Some take the one to be a knowledge concerning the end; the other, of things that are for the end. Some thinke by Vnderstanding is meant apprehension; and by Wisedome is meant Iudgement, or dijudication. Some thinke, that Synesis, rendered Vnderstanding, receiueth the will of God in the whole; and that Sophia, Wisedome, conceiueth it in the parts, and with weighing of all circumstances: by the first they consider what is lawfull, and by the second what is expedient. Some say that the one of them conceiueth the obiect of felicitie; the other, the meanes by which men attaine it. Some thinke they differ thus, that the one vnderstands of God absolutely, by Scripture, as he is; and the other considers of God by relation, or comparison with the creatures, by experience, as hee is tasted to be good: but the plainest and soundest difference is this, that Vnderstanding is contemplatiue knowledge; but Wisedome is actiue knowledge: the one giues rules for practise, the other for Iudgement and Contemplation. But before I consider of them apart, I obserue two generall Doctrines.
First, that sauing Knowledge and Wisedome is not naturall,Two generall Doctrines. but from aboue, and had onely by CHRIST, here it followes Faith and Loue: it is wrought by the power of the Gospell, it is prayed for; and lastly, it is plainely said to be spirituall: See more, Iames 3.17. 1 Cor. 2.14. 2 Cor. 1.30. Tit. 3.3. and it may serue for many vses.
First, it should inforce vs to labour to become spirituall men, as wee would desire to haue any thing to doe with the knowledge of Gods will:Vses. for if wee be not more then naturall men, it is certaine wee know not the things of God. Be sure therefore thou be no naturall man.
Quest. How may a naturall man bee knowne.How a natural man may be knowne. Ans. Hee is a naturall man: First, that hath in him onely the spirit of the world, 1 Cor. 2.12. Secondly, that knowes not that wisedome of God that is in a mysterie, that is, his Reconciliation and Saluation by Christ, 1 Cor: 2.7.10.14. Thirdly that loues not God, Vers. 9. as they doe not that loue not the word, people, and way of God. Fourthly, that knowes not the things giuen of God by the Spirit, Vers. 12. Fiftly, that accounts spirituall things foolish things, and religious courses foolish courses. Vers. 14. Sixtly, that hates sinceritie, and walkes after his owne lusts, Iud. 19.18.
And it is worthy to be noted, that the Apostle,Who make the Schisme in the Church when he fore-tels of these wicked loose persons and prophane men, liuing in the Church, he saith, they make Sects; and it is most sure, that not onely Heretikes and false-Teachers, that draw men out of the bosome of the Church, to diuide them from our Assemblies, but euen wicked men, that wallow in sinne, make Sects and Schisme, and diuision in the Church, though they otherwise come to the Word and Sacraments as the people of God doe: for the Word is seldome effectuall in the working of it in any place, but wee may finde the Diuell stirring vp carnall and naturall men, that striue by all meanes to pursue such as desire to feare God, lading them with reproaches, and blowing abroad slanders, and wilfully both disgracing them, and shunning their presence; and when they haue done, call them Sectaries, and other Hereticall names: them, I say, that excepting their care and conscience to walke vprightly with God and vnrebukeable amongst men, liue in peace by them:
 but though men are deceiued, God will not be mocked; these are the men that God meanes to indite for making of Sects in the Church, as well as Heretikes.
Secondly, seeing true Wisedome is from aboue, it should worke in vs a dislike both of hellish wisedome and earthly wisedome:Diuelish wisedome. 1 Cor: 2:8. Exod: 1.10. by hellish wisedome I meane such wisedome as was in the Priests when they killed Christ, or that that was in Pharaoh, who counts it to deale wisely, to oppresse Gods people: It is diuellish wisedome to bee cunning or artificiall in hiding the practise of sinne: it is diuellish wisedome to haue skill in defending sinne: It is diuellish wisedome that is vsed in the refining of sinne; as for example, drinking of healths began to grow to that detested head, and was accompanied with that filthy villany and abhomination, in respect of the excesse of it, that certainely the Diuell should neuer haue gotten the most men in a short time to haue had any thing to doe with such a damned beastlinesse; now the Diuell not willing to loose his homage and sacrifice, inspires some men to bring in a libertie to drinke in lesse glasses, and with allowance of choyse of drinkes or Wines, and now the sinne is refined, it goes currant.
Earthly wisedome.Earthly wisedome is of two kindes: for either it is a skill to get goods, or else it is humane learning and policie, both allowable in themselues, but neither to be too much liked or trusted to: for as for the skill to get riches, What would it profit a man to winne the whole world and loose his owne soule? and the praise of humane wit, learning, policie, etc. is much curbed by certaine terrible places of Scripture. The conceit of this wisdome makes the Crosse of Christ of none effect1 Cor: 1:18.; and a man may haue a great measure of it, and be famous, and yet be without God, without Christ, and without the couenants of promise, and without hope in the worldEphes: 1.12.: for, not many noble, nor many wise hath God chosen1 Cor: 1.26.27. Yea, God many times hides the mysteries of the Kingdome of Grace from these great Wise-menMath: 11.27, and sets himselfe of purpose to stayne their pride, to destroy their wisedome, and to infatuate their counsels. Where is the Scribe (learned in the Scripture?) where is the Disputer of this world (skilfull in humane learning and policie1 Cor: 1.19. and 2.6.?) Hath not God (to vexe the very hearts of these men) tyed conuersion of soules, ordinarily, to the foolishnesse of preaching?
Doct. 2. It is not enough to get Pietie, vnlesse wee get Wisedome also, 1 Cor. 1.24.30. Acts 6.3. Ephes. 1.8.17.
Vse is, first, for confutation of those that hold all labour for the attaining of spirituall things to be folly; of most men those to be fooles that make such adoe about the vse of the meanes of Saluation. But it is certaine that Christ, that giues godlie men righteousnesse, giues them Wisedome. Religion doth not make men foolish, but giues wisedome to the simplePsal: 29.7.. Secondly, Professors should be aduised to make conscience of discretion in their carriage, as well as holinesse: and to this end they should take heed, 1. Of pettishnes and peeuishnesse; a vice, should be onely found in the bosome of foolesIob 5.3.. 2. Of conceitednesse; a foule vice, to be so wise in their owne conceit, that their owne wayes should alwaies so please them, that they thinke better of themselues then of seauen men that can giue a reasonProu: 12.15. and 26.12.16.. 3. Of rash medling with other mens businesse, or prying into their estatesProu: 17.27.: mens eyes should not be in euery corner of the world. Lastly of vnaduised opennesse; in all companies; without respect or heedfulnesse, to poure out all their mindesPro: 29.11..
Thus of the generall Doctrines.
The first part of sauing Knowledge is here rendred Vnderstanding, and is Contemplatiue Knowledge.
Contemplatiue Knowledge hath in it two things, Apprehension and Meditation; that is, the power to discerne Doctrine, and the power to meditate
 of it; both are needfull, and in both men are exceeding wanting; especially in the power of Meditation. If you aske mee what the obiect is about which wee should meditate, it is answered before; it is the Will of God, determining, approuing, prescribing and disposing. And it is no wonder, that men get so little knowledge, or are so vnable for contemplation, because euery one is not capable of it; the Scorner may, in a passion, seeke wisedome, but hee cannot finde itPro: 14.6.. Besides, the meanes must be vsed: especially in Contemplation, it is exceeding hard to hold any course constantly, but the ground must be from matter of praier, or hearing, or reading. Further,Rules for contemplation. many things are required to fit a man to capablenesse, and power of holy Contemplation: First, Chastitie of heart, and affections; for such as are caryed about with lusts are euer learning, but neuer come to the knowledge of the truth2 Tim: 3.6.. Secondly, Meekenesse, or rest of heart from the hurry of disordered affections and troubled passions; hasty affections and a foolish minde are inseparable; hee that is passionate can lift vp no holy thoughts, but hee can easily exalt follyPro: 14.29. Thirdly, A good minde, that is, an vnderstanding, not exercised in imagining and plodding of euill: men of wicked imaginations are vtterly disabled for contemplation. Fourthly, Humilitie, or a tender sense of ones owne wants and vnworthinesse: the proud-conceited man, for matter of Meditation, is of an emptie minde, vnlesse it be that they dote about questions, or strife of words, or vaine disputations, that tend to nothing but strife or vaine ostentation1 Tim: 6.4.5.. Besides, a heart fatted and fleshed with presumptuous hopes, or profits and pleasures, and hardened through long custome and practise of sinne, is almost wholy blinded in the things that belong to the Kingdome of CHRIST; These men haue eyes, and see not; and eares and are as if they heard notMath: 13.14.
To passe from this point of Knowledge Contemplatiue, I conclude onely with the consideration of the 8. of the Prouerbes, where it is the drift of the holy Ghost to perswade men to seeke to store their hearts with knowledge, both for sense and Vse. Wisedome cries to be heard. God would faine fasten knowledge vpon all sorts of men. Now if any should aske why Wisedome is so importunate, or wherefore they must set all aside to get her; there are three Reasons giuen. First, because wee are naturally foolish, and not wise in heart: there is no inward substance of sound knowledge in vs, Verse 5. Secondly, the things to bee imparted are the most excellent in heauen and earth, Verse 6. Thirdly, no knowledge but this,Diuers obiections against Knowledge answered. but it is stained with errour or lewdnesse: now in the Scripture wee are sure of two things, Truth and Puritie.
Obiect. But the Doctrine of Religion, as it is reuealed in Scripture, is exceeding crosse and contrary to our natures. Sol. It is answered, that there  is no frowardnesse in it; it is in vs, not in the Doctrine it selfe, Verse 8.Solut.
Obiect. But the study of sauing knowledge is exceeding difficult. Sol. That  is answered, Vers. 9. My words are all plaine to him that will vnderstand,Solut. and straight to him that would finde knowledge: If there were a constant desire and endeauour in men, they would finde great successe.
Obiect. But it is not a profitable course nor gainefull. Sol. That is denied,  Vers. 10.11. Knowledge is better then Siluer, or Gold, or precious Stones;Solut. and it is more thrift to get it then to get riches.
Obiect. But I see that many that follow Sermons, and study the Scriptures, are very indiscreete, and men of no reach nor parts. Sol. It is answered,  Vers. 12. that Wisedome dwels with Prudence or Discretion,Solut. and finds forth Knowledge and Counsels: and if men were compared, in their present knowledge, with what they were before, it would appeare that they haue gotten more discretion, etc. then euer they had, and therefore it is a meere imputation.

Obiect. Many great professors are men of wicked liues. Sol. Vers. 13. The feare of the Lord is to hate euill,Solut. as Pride and Arrogancie, and the euill way, and a mouth that speaketh lewd things: and therefore if any such bee of wicked liues, they are hypocrites, thrust vnto profession by the Diuell, of purpose to shame the study and endeuour after sauing knowledge.
Obiect. But the most that follow Sermons, and read the Bible so much, are base persons,Solut. and men of no fashion in the world. Sol. That is denied, Vers. 15.16. For, the holy wisedome of the Word hath beene the fairest ornament, and help, and support to Kings, Princes, Nobles and Iudges; By mee Kings raigne, and Princes decree Iustice.
Obiect. But this knowledge fills men with terrours and Melancholy. Sol. That is denied:Solut. for it is a most louely study; I loue them that loue me. It is only terrible to such as so loue their sinnes, as they will not part with them.
Obiect. It is a knowledge neuer attained in any perfection. Sol. That is denied too,Solut. Vers. 17. They that seeke me earely shall finde me: men get no ripenesse in knowledge, because when they vse the meanes, their heads are full of cares or lusts, etc. or they waite not vpon the opportunities and aduantages of the meanes: they seeke not earely.
Obiect. But, at the least, it is an enemy to Thrift, and a hinderance to mens outward estates.Solut. Sol. That is false too, and hee giues two Reasons for it, Vers. 18.19.20. For first, the most durable riches (that is better then all gold or pleasure) is righteousnesse, and this is gotten by the knowledge of the word. Secondly, that that most an end impouerisheth men, is the hand of God, or of men; and sinne vsually and disorder is the originall cause of all losses or pouertie. Now Wisedome causeth a man to walke in the wayes of righteousnesse, and so to inherit substance; and as God sees it meete for them, to fill their treasures.
Obiect. But a man can neuer obserue the rules of holinesse required in the word,Solut. and vrged vpon men by preaching. Sol. The word doth not only shew men what they should doe, but it giues power to doe it: It causeth men to walke in the way of righteousnesse, Vers. 21. Lastly, to put all out of doubt. Knowledge: Why? It is the very glory of Christ, and dwelt with God in the very beginning of the world; yea, it was begotten from euerlasting, when there was no depths, nor the mountaines setled, nor the earth framed, etc. from Vers. 22. to 32. The exhortation is in the end of the Chapter, that as men would assure themselues to be Gods Children, or to be blessed in their wayes they should heare instruction in this point and bee wise, and daily watch at the gates of Knowledge: so should they get the life of grace and obtaine the fauour of God, when others that despise knowledge, and the meanes of it, shall be so wounded in soule, that they shall certainely die eternally, Vers. 32.33.34.35.
Thus of Contemplatiue Knowledge.
Wherin wisedome or discretion consists. 1 Wisedomes order in seauen rules.Wisedome, or Actiue Knowledge followes: the consideration hereof is exceeding difficult: for it lyeth in the prescribing of the discretion in practise. Wisedome in practise stands principally in two things: first, in Order of practise: secondly, in the Specialties of good behauiour.
Wisedomes Order lieth in the prescribing of Rules concerning the priority and precedencie of things in practise: she tels what must be first done, and chiefly; and thus she giues seauen Rules.
1 That Heauen be sought for before the earth, and remission of sinnes in Christ, before any other thingMath. 6.32..
2 That men choose present affliction rather then future; rather suffer now with hope of reward in another world, then take pleasure now, to endure the paines to come2 Tim: 2.3. to 8..
3 That God be serued before man, whether it be other men or thy selfe: thus it is wisedome to let God haue the first place in the morning, before thou serue thy selfe in thy calling: thus it is wisedome to obey God rather then man, when the Commandement of God and the commandement of man lieth before thee, and are contrary one to anotherActs 5.: thus also the duties of the first Table are to be done before the duties of the second Table, in equall comparisonMat: 22.38.39..
4 That death be prouided for before life; first learne to dye, and then it is easie to learne to liueDeut: 32.29..
5 That opportunitie be preferred before time: Worke in haruest: walke while ye haue the light: delay not whilst thou hast the meanes, seeke God whilst hee may be found.
6 That the first place in dignitie ouer any, be accounted the greatest place of seruice vnto allMath: 9.34..
7 That in duties to men, wee first regard to practise the duties of the fift CommandementEphes: 6.3..
Secondly, concerning behauiour; Wisedome bindes the Heart, the Tongue,Wisedomes specialties in the behauiour. 1 Of the heart, in fiue things. the Conuersation.
First, in binding the heart to good behauiour, she chargeth fiue things.
1 That in the dearenesse of affections, and clearenesse of knowledge, in the puritie of our thoughts, God be loued aboue allMarke 12.33.
2 That wee draw weapon vpon euery imagination, or what else exalts it selfe against Contemplation, and the obedience of Christ, neuer ceasing till those inward sinnes be led away captiue2 Cor: 10.4..
3 That wee grow in Meekenesse, as wee grow in knowledgeIames 3.13.: and that we be wise to sobrietie, desiring the knowledge onely that can profit vsRom: 12.13..
4 That wee rest not till wee be dearely resolued, in Religion, Gods Loue, and our owne SaluationPro: 24.15..
5 That the feare of God, throughout all our whole life, bee our chiefe treasureEsay 33.6. 2 Of the tongue, in seauen things..
Secondly, in binding the Tongue to the good behauiour, she chargeth:
1 That our words be few, when we speake either to God or menEccles: 5.1. Iames 1.19. Eccles: 10. vlt.:
2 That wee doe not so much as whisper against the Lords AnnointedDeut: 28.58. Command. 3..
3 That we presume not to come neere the sacred Name of God to take it vp in vainePro: 17.15..
4 That we censure not the iust, nor iustifie and defend the wickedPro: 17.15.. It is not safe for the Prince to smite with the tongue the meanest seruant of GodPro: 17.26..
5. That wee answere not a matter before wee heare itPro: 18.13..
6. That we iudge nothing before the time1 Cor: 4.5.: and speake euill of no man, but be soft, shewing all meekenesse to all menTit: 3.2.3..
7 That wee seeke a due season for good wordsPro. 15.23..
Thirdly, in binding the conuersation to the good behauiour, she chargeth:3 Of the conuersation in eight things
1 That men walke exactly, accurately, precisely: it is translated circumspectlyEphes: 5.15..
2 That with all delight men set their hearts to keepe Gods Commandements and doe themDeut: 4.5.6.: and by good conuersation men shew their workesIames 3.13..
3 That men meddle with their owne businesse1 Thes: 4.11..
4 That profit and pleasure giue place to godlinessePsal: 4.6. 1 Tim. 6.6..
5 That men trust not faire pretences, but haue some sure triall before wee commit our selues to anyIohn 2.24..
6 That wee feare and depart from euill before the crosse comeProu: 16.6. Esay 27.11.: it is euery bodies course to talke of repenting when misery is vpon them: but a wise man will redeeme his owne sorrowes, and feare GOD whiles the
 curse hangs in the threatning though it come not yet into execution.
7 There is a speciall wisedome in knowing how to giue place to the time, so farre as may stand with keeping of Faith and a good Conscience: Thus Paul forbeares to speake directly against Diana of the Ephesians for three yeeresAct: 19.10.26..
8 That temporall things be ordered to conformitie with God.
Hitherto of the Parts of sauing Knowledge.



Verse 10. That yee might walke worthy of the Lord in all pleasing, being fruitfull in all good workes, and increasing in the knowledge of God.

IN these words the end of Knowledge is at large set downe: to this end we should fill our selues with the knowledge of Gods will, that our conuersations might be rightly ordered, to the glory of God, the profitable pleasing of others, and the storing vp of good fruits vnto eternall life, in the saluation of our owne soules. Neither doth hee thinke it enough (for those that haue by the Gospell gained much Knowledge) to do good, or liue well, but they must raise their endeauours to an eminencie, and this he expresseth in three formes of speech.
First, they must walke worthy of the Lord.
Secondly, they must walke in all pleasing.
Thirdly, they must be fruitfull in all good workes.
And if any should aske how all this can be attained, hee answeres in the end of the Verse, when he saith, increasing in the knowledge of God.
The generall Doctrine.The Doctrine out of the whole Verse is, that the life of Christians ought to answere their profession, knowledge, and the meanes they enioy. In the inlarging hereof I consider foure things. 1. The Motiues to excite vs to an holy endeauour after innocency. 2. The Causes why so many men in the visible Church, inioying the meanes, haue attained to so little innocencie. 3. What we must doe that wee may thus walke. 4. The Benefits would be gotten by a holy care of Christian Innocencie.
Motiues to holy life.The Motiues are such as these:
1 We are not in our owne power, to liue to our selues, but are tied to liue to him that died for vs2 Cor. 5.15..
2 Our soules and bodies are destinate to incorruption in the Heauens: and therefore wee should set our selues so to liue, for this short space in this world, as we might deliuer them vp vndefiled in the day of the Lord.
3 Haue wee euer found vnrighteousnesse in GodJer: 2.8.? shall wee then serue Sathan, that neuer did vs good, and forsake the Lord our God? When our hearts are tempted to sinne, wee should say: Shall I thus requite the Lord for the innumerable benefits he hath bestowed vpon me?
4 The long night of sinne and ignorance and hellish darkenes and danger (by the light of the Gospell, by the meanes of Christ our Sauiour) is past, and a short season remaines vnto vs, to glorifie God, and worke out the assurance and fruition of our owne saluation. Shall wee not then arise from the sleepe of sinne, and now cast away the workes of darkenesse? Is it not now time to arme our selues against the sluggishnesse of our owne Natures, and the corruptions that are in the World; to walke honestly, as becomes this day of grace and fauourRom: 13.11.12.?
5 The miserable euents of seruing the flesh might moue vs. If wee haue the meanes, and make a shew, and yet liue carnally and scandalously, wee may deceiue our selues, but God will not be mocked: wee shall reape as we sow; if wee sow to the flesh, wee shall of the flesh reape corruptionGal: 6.7.8.. And for these things the wrath of God commeth vpon the Children of disobedienceEphes: 5.6.. And therefore
 let no man deceiue vs with vaine words: and if Ierusalem will not be instructed, my soule (saith the Lord) shall depart from her, and shee shall be desolate, as a Land that no man inhabitethIer. 6.8.. And contrariwise, if wee would sow to the spirit, and neuer be weary of well doing, nor faint or faile, in due season wee should reape: reape I say of the Spirit, euen life euerlastingGal. 6.7.8..
6 We should be much moued by the dreadfull relation wee stand in, to God, to Christ, to the holy Ghost, and to the Church: to God; for wee are his Seruants, and therefore ought to be holy as hee is holy1 Pet. 1.: wee are his Children and therefore ought to proue it by our obedienceMal. 1.. To Christ; for hee hath washed vs in his bloud, and shall wee pollute our selues againe? hee was in his owne practise a perfect patterne of innocencie, and shall wee not learne of himMat. 11.28.? wee are his Members, shall wee shame and dishonour our Head? our Sauiour is in Heauen, and shall we be buried, like Moles, in the loue of sensuall and earthly things? or rather, ought not our affections and conuersations to be where Christ is, euen in heauen, at the right hand of the FatherCol. 3.1. Phil. 3.21.? To the holy Ghost; we are his Temple, and shall we defile Gods holy place? To the Church; which is the Citie of the holy God, which hee hath consecrated to himselfe: and therefore were it not wickednesse to prophane it with impuritie? Let vs liue as the Citizens of GodEphes. 2.20..
Lastly, in the 1 Thes. 4. I finde an Exhortation to holinesse, and it is inforced by fiue reasons: first, it is the will of God, Vers. 3. Secondly, a holy life is an honorable life, Vers. 4. Thirdly they are Gentiles, not Christians, that liue prophanely, Vers. 5. Fourthly God is a certaine auenger of all vnrighteousnesse, Vers. 6. And finally, we are called vnto holinesse, Vers. 7.
Secondly, if it bee asked,How it comes to passe, that such multitudes liue without holinesse. how it comes to passe that such multitudes of people, liuing in the bosome of the Church, are touched with so little care of holinesse of life? I may answere, diuers things.
1 The Vaile of Ignorance lyeth vpon their heartsEsay 25.8., and grosse darkenesse still couers those peopleEsay 60.2.3. Though the light be come, and the glory of the Lord; Yet for the most part these men abhorre the lightIob 24.13., and therefore are their waies darke and slipperyPsal. 36.6..
2 Mens hearts goe after their eyes, and mens senses are made Maisters of their liuesIob 31.7., and therefore are their affections onely stirred with carnall things, they take their directions from their owne flesh, and walke in the way of their owne lustsEccles. 11.9..
3 Many times their brethren deceiue themIob. 6.13.: I meane, they are misled sometimes by their owne mistaking and misapplying of Gods promises, and sometimes by the sinfull dawbing of wicked Teachers that set themselues to strengthen the hands of the wicked, and discourage the hearts of the righteous; crying Peace, and safety, where there is no peace. Vngodly men these are, that gainesay the doctrine of those faithfull men, that would cure this sinfull generation, by a meete seuerity of doctrine.
4 The most men see no necessity of the restoring of their soules: they cannot bee perswaded of the necessity of Regeneration and conuersion by the Word, and when they come to the meanes they seeke not to God to lead themPsal: 23.3..
5 Men are double-hearted, and diuide one part to the flesh and the world, and another to God; the more open part of their liues, some pretend to direct, with some respect of holinesse, but the secret and inward part is full of all rottennesse: and yet men will not see, that God and Sinne, God and Riches, God and the Flesh, cannot be serued both of one man, at one time.
6 They are incorrigible, will neyther be heal'd by the word, nor bee forced by the workes of God, They will not vnderstand, though all the foundations of the earth be mouedPsal: 82:5..

What we must doe that wee might be holyThirdly, that we might attaine vnto this holinesse of Conuersation:
1 Wee must grow out of liking with our owne waies, and our present carnall course, and forsake that way, and returne from itProu: 9.6. Ezech: 18..
2 We must get out of the way of sinners, for he that walketh with the vngodly will be like themPsal: 1.1..
3 Wee must mightily labour for knowledge, and bee much in contemplation: and to this ende exercise our selues in Gods word day and night, and dwell in Gods house. Coherence with Verse before, and Psal. 1.2. Prou. 8.20. and 2.11.12. Psalm. 84, 4.5. Esay 2.3. yea, wee should by conference aske the way one of anotherIer: 51.4..
4 Wee must get into Christ; for hee is the way, and till wee labour our ingrafting into Christ, and settle our selues to seeke a Sauiour, euen vnto vs by faith, all our workes are in vaine.
5 That our conuersations might be more holy, and vnrebukeable, wee should first labour to get holinesse into our hearts; for if grace be within, duties will be without; if corruption be mortified in the Soule, which is the fountaine, it will haue no great sinne in the life, which is the streame which flowes from the heart: first, we should guide our hearts into the wayProu. 23.19, for thereout commeth lifeProu. 4.23..
6 Wee must submit our selues to Gods corrections: learne obedience by the things we sufferHeb. 5.8., obey the checkes of our conscience, and be contented to eate the bread of afflictionEsa: 30.20.: beare the words of rebuke and admonition1 Thes: 5.13.: for hee that refuseth correction will certainely goe out of the way of lifeProu. 10.17..
Lastly, we should commit our way to God, and by constant and daily prayer beseech him that hee would shew vs the way, and lead vs forthPsal: 25.4.; and then, that he would stay our steps in his paths, that our feet doe not slidePsal: 17.5.: and to this end, that he would remoue out of our way, all impediments, and euery lying wayPsal. 119.29.: and that he would daily quicken vs in the way, against the sluggishnesse of our owne NaturesPsal. 119.37.: and bend our hearts to his holy feare, but especially euery morning wee should beseech God so to assist vs, and guide, and strengthen vs, to doe the duties of the day, and that hee would see to and defend the thing of the day in his day1 Kin: 8.58.59, by the vertue of Christs intercession, and his words, which are neere vnto God day and night.
The gaine of godlinesse.Fourthly, thus doing, and endeauouring our selues to know and doe Gods will.
1 The Lord would know vs by name, and take notice of our wayes, euen with the knowledge of approbationPsal: 1. vlt..
2 Our liues would be full of ioy and chearfulnessePsal. 138.5.: yea, they that haue tasted of the ioyes of a Crowne, shall leaue the Throne and Pallace, to seeke the sweet delights of the faithfull, and to sing their songs.
3 God would walke in the middest of vsLeu: 26.11..
4 Yea, hee would keepe his Couenant and Mercy with vs1 King: 8.23..
5 We should be protected against all hurtfull troubles, being eyther preserued from them, or in them: if we walke in the day we shall not stumbleIoh: 11.8.9.: yea though we went through fire and water, yet Gods holy presence and strong arme would be with vsEsay 43.3. Psal: 23.3.: yea, we might dwell with euerlasting burnings, that is, within the knowledge of Gods terrible presence, and sight of his great iudgments, when the hypocrites of the world would be afraidEsay 33.14.16..
6 Or if there were sorrowes and griefes vpon vs in this world, yet heauen shall come, and we shall rest in the beds of eternall ease, whatsoeuer betides vs, we shall not lye downe in sorrowEsay 57:2: and 50: vlt..
7 Thus to liue, is, to rule with God, and to be faithfull with his SaintsHos: 11.12..
8 Thus shall we scape the vigor of the LawGal: 5:18., and the flames of HellRom: 8.1..
Lastly, if we co^tinue faithfull to the death, there is laid vp for vs a crown of lifeReuel: 2.10.

Thus of walking, or holy conuersation in the generall: now in particular, that we might walke in an holy eminency, three things (as is before noted) are heere vrged.
First, that wee should walke worthy of the Lord.] That is, so to know and consider the singular mercies of God in Christ, as to endeauour to expresse our thankefulnesse in the obedience of our liues, in such a measure as might become the mercies of God. Before I open the words further, I consider in the generall, two things.
1 That the obedience of the faithfull is raysed by the contemplation of the mercies of God: which should teach vs,2 Generall obseruations. as wee desire more to abound in good fruites, so to be more in the assurance, and often meditation of Gods loue to vs: more knowledge of this kinde would worke more obedience; and a confused knowledge of Gods mercy is vsually accompanied with an vnconstant obedience. Besides, this reprooues the dangerous and sinfull abuse of Gods mercies in the common people, that vse to plead their safetie (notwithstanding their sinnes) by the alledging of the mercy of God to sinners: whereas it is most certaine, that the right knowledge of Gods mercy would make men afraid to sinne; There is mercy with thee that thou maist be feared, saith the PsalmistPsal. 130.4.: and it is the infallible signe of a true conuert, that hee doth feare God and his goodnesseHos. 3.5.: euery man can feare God and his Iustice, especially in some kindes of iudgements; but a childe of God doth neuer more tenderly feare God, then when hee hath greatest taste of Gods mercies.
2 The Papists would finde merit of workes in this Verse: both because holinesse of life is so much vrged, as also because heere is the word [worthy] vsed as if the Apostle should grant, that they might be worthy of, and merit the blessings of God.
My answere is, First, that merit cannot be founded vpon Scripture;Against merit of workes. and secondly, it cannot bee founded vpon this Scripture. For the first, we cannot merit for many reasons in Scripture: first, wee are not our owne men, wee are so tyed vnto God that gaue vs beeing in Nature and Grace, that when wee haue done all wee can doe, our owne mouthes must say wee are but vnprofitable SeruantsLuke 17.. Secondly, all our sufficiencie to doe any good is of God, not from our selues2 Cor. 3.5. Phil. 2.13.. Thirdly, God gaines nothing by vs. If thou be righteous, what giuest thou to him? or, what receiueth hee at thy handsIob 35.7.? Fourthly, men talke of their well-doing, but what shall become of their sinnes? If the Papists will first goe to hell for their sinnes, and stay all that eternity there, then afterwards if God create another eternity, they may haue hearing to relate what good they haue done: the curse of the Law will be first serued; the punishment of Adams one sinne barred the plea for any reward for former righteousnesse. Fiftly, what comparison can there be betweene the glory of Heauen, and our workes on earthRom. 8.18.? Sixtly, it is worthy to bee obserued, that it is mercy in God to set his loue vpon them that keepe his Commandements, Exod. 20. Command. 2. Seauenthly, wee are so farre from meriting, that we are taught to pray God to giue vs our daily bread, wee haue not a bit of bread of our owne earning. Eightly, the Sanctification of the most righteous is but begunne in this life. Lastly, vnto all these Reasons adde the further Testimony of these Scriptures, Dan. 9.9. Rom. 4.5. and 11.9. 1. Cor. 4.4. Phil. 3.8.9.
Secondly, This place hath no colour for merit: for (to passe ouer that reason, that the Scripture requireth good workes, therefore our workes merit, as a most false and absurd argument:) the wordes [worthy of the Lord] cannot be applied to merit by any meanes: for in as much as the Lord had bestowed many of his fauours already vppon them, and giuing his hand
 and writing, and seale for the rest, they cannot by any workes afterwards be said in any colour to merit what is past. They are vrged, Matth. 3. to bring foorth fruites woorthy repentance: now it were absurd to thinke that the fruits afterwards borne, should merit repentance, which God gaue before; for that is to affirme that not onely a wicked man might merit his own conuersion, but that hee might merit it by the workes hee would doe after his conuersion, which I know not that any Papist will affirme: and the like reason is there of the phrase here vsed.
Quest.Quest. But, letting the Papist goe, what is it to walke worthy of the Lord?]
Ans.Answ. It is so to cleaue vnto God, that we refuse not (out of the holy estimation of Gods free mercies) to forsake our selues and the world, and to testifie our obedience to the Law and Spirit of God, in vprightnesse with all thankefulnesse. But that this may appeare more plainely, if we would walke worthy of the Lord;
1 In generall, our righteousnesse must exceede the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees; we must be so farre from resting in the custome and practise of the vile sinnes that abound in the world, that wee must not be satisfied, with this, that we be ciuill honest men, and well thought of in the world: for Gods mercies challenge more at our hands then ciuill honestyMat. 5.20..
If we would walke worthy of the Lord we must doe sixe things.2 In particular, if we would walke worthy of God:
1 Wee must walke with God in the sence of Gods presence, and in the light of his countenance, so knowing his Loue as wee forget not his presenceGen. 17.1.. And because the wandring and vnmortified heart of man is not easily brought to this, therefore we must humble our selues to gaine a better ability to walke with our GodMich. 6.8..
2 Wee must set the Law of God (as the onely rule of our actions) alwaies before vsPsal. 119.1.; and by all meanes be carefull to obey the motions of Gods Spirit, euen the Law in our mindes, that is, to walke after the SpiritGal. 5.21., and according to the SpiritRom. 8.1..
3 We must labour to glorifie God, by endeauouring by an open light, to approue our selues to the world, in shewing the power of Gods grace in our workes, and the newnes of our liuesIames 3.15. Math. 5. Rom. 6..
4 We must be contented to deny our owne reason, wit, desires, delights, and profits, and to take vp any crosse God shall lay vpon vsLuke 9.24..
5 Wee should go beyond all ciuill honest men in this, that wee would respect all Gods Commandements, and make conscience of euery sinne, by Prayer and endeauour to auoid it, and to obey God both in our soules and bodies; and in euery part of both.
Lastly, we should so admire Gods loue, in deliuering our soules from death, and our feet from falling, etc. that wee should seeke Gods face in the light of the liuing, and neuer to come empty handed, but Gods vowes should be vpon vs, and we should euer be rendring praise. Thankefulnesse is all wee can giue to GodPsal. 56.12.13..
In all pleasing.] This is the second thing required in our conuersation: we should not thinke it enough to liue iustly and religiously, but wee must liue pleasingly also, and this is true: 1. In respect of God: Let vs haue grace that wee may so serue God, that wee may please himHebr. 12.28. 1 Cor. 7.31.. 2. In respect of our owne Conscience, preseruing the rest and goodnesse of the conscience. 3. In respect of men: thus the wife careth to please her husband, and the husband to please his wife1 Cor. 7.34. What we should do that we might not onely serue God but please him too. It is not enough to be perswaded that that we doe, be good; but we ought to looke to it, that it be pleasing. So, in all dueties to God, and in our carriage to men.
Quest. But what should wee doe, that wee might so serue God, as please him too? Ans. This is answered in diuers Scripture.
1 Be sure thou be not in the flesh; for no such can please GodRom. 8.8.: and they are in the flesh that can relish nothing but fleshly things; that take no care to prouide for the life of Grace and peace of Conscience; vers. ^. that will not bee subiect to the Law of God; vers. 7. that haue not the Spirit of Christ, vers. 9. and that dye not to sinne, vers. 10.
Obiect.Obiect. But there are many wise men, to whom these signes agree, and may not they for their good parts otherwayes be pleasing to God? Sol. No;Solution. so long as they are fleshly persons, their wisedome, bred in the flesh, is so farre from pleasing God, that it is enmity to God.
2 Thou must let the will of God reuealed in this word, be the rule of all thy actions, a light to thy feete, and a lanthorne to thy paths; for in the Word is contayned both what he requires, and what will please him.
3 Thou must make conscience of little sinnes as well as great sinnes: if a man breake the least Commaundement, and then by doctrine or defence maintaine it to be a small matter, our Sauiour Christ shewes that this is not onely displeasing to God, but it will cause God to cast men out of heauen with indignation: on the other side, whosoeuer shall make conscience to obserue Gods Commandements in the things the world counts lesse matters, and shall constantly by doctrine or profession declare his sinceritie heerein, hee shall be exceeding pleasing to God, and God will shew it, by making him great in the Kingdome of HeauenMat. 5.19.. What commandement could bee lesse then the commandement about the not eating of bloud, and yet with many words, their obedience herein was vrged, and that with this reason; as they would haue all things goe well with them and theirs, and doe that which is pleasing or right in Gods sightDeut. 14.24.26..
4 Thou must desire and pray for the best things; thou must so thinke of profits and pleasures of this world, as especially thy heart must desire, and thy lips request of God the wisedome and grace that is from aboue. It did exceedingly please God that Salomon asked wisedome and not riches, or long life1 King. 10.3..
5 Thou must get an humble and contrite spirit; a hart able to see and hate sinne, and mourne ouer it; and with a tender sence of thine owne wants and vnworthinesse, to implore Gods fauour, and the renuing of his mercies.
6 Thou must so professe respect of Piety, as thou be carefull in all things to deale iustly and truely with men, delighting in all the occasions and meanes to shew mercy: hee cannot please God that doth not endeauour to please men; Sacrifice is an abhomination, when men doe not iudgement and iusticeProu. 21.3.: and God delights in men that will deale truelyProu. 12.22.. If a man will deale iustly, and loue mercy (not be mercifull onely,) and when hee hath occasion to come to God in the dueties of Piety and Worship, will come in all humilitie and contrition of heart, this is that (saith the Prophet Micah) that is required; yea, that is good, that is exceeding pleasing and acceptable to GodMich. 6.5.6 7.
Thou must bee tender-hearted and mercifull, to supply the necessities of the Saints: for workes of mercy are Odours of sweet smell, sacrifices acceptable, well pleasing to GodPhil. 4.18..
7 Thou must take heede of such sinnes as Gods hates with a speciall hatred; for there are some euils, which a man beeing guilty of, God will at no hand be pleased with him: as first, the sinnes of the third Commandement, swearing and cursing, and the like; for God hath told vs before, that what sinnes soeuer hee will beare with, yet hee will not hold vs guiltlesse if we take his Name in vaineCommand. 3. Deui. 28.58.. Secondly, lukewarmnesse in Religion, when men are neyther hot nor cold; this is so exceeding loathsome vpon Gods stomacke, hee cannot be at rest till hee haue spued such persons out. Thirdly, for a
 man to blesse his heart when God curseth, and to pleade his hopes, when God threatnethDeut: 29.19.. Fourthly, to feare God by mens traditionsEsay 29.13.. Fiftly, presumptuously to breake Gods SabaothJer. 17. vlt.. Sixtly, through impatience or vnbeliefe in aduersity, to with-draw our seluesHeb: 10.35.36. etc. etc. and without faith it is vnpossible to please God. Seauenthly, to offer vnto God the blinde, the lame, and the sicke, the torne and the corrupt thingMal. 1.8.9.10.13.14.. Eightly, to bee found in the fashions of the world, either in life or attireRom: 12.2.. Ninthly, out of frowardnesse and malice, to crosse and persecute such as feare God; God these please not1 Thes: 2.15.16..
Thus of walking in all pleasing, in respect of God.
What we must doe that wee may please men.Quest. 2. What must we doe that we may walke pleasingly amongst men?
Ans. I consider of this first generally, then more particularly. That wee may please men we must obserue these Rules: 1. We^ must be carefull to please God, else it is iust with God, that though we striue to please men, yet we should not attaine to it, because wee are not in the first place carefull to please God. 2. We must get that Philanthropian, loue of men into our hearts, but especially Philadelphian, the loue of the Brethren, for this ingenders care and diligence to please, and makes the labour thereunto seeme no basenesse or burthen. 3. In the generall corruption of our callings wee must liue innocently. Samuel is much set by, and pleaseth the people, when hee stands by Hophni and Phinehas, men so egregiously corrupt. 4. If wee would please in conuersing, wee must learne to beare infirmitiesRom: 15.2.. 5. Wee must practise those vertues that especially winne fauour: as curtesie, meekenesse, candor, faithfull dealing, (though it be to our hinderance) wee must giue soft answeres, ouercome euill with goodnesse, bee slow to wrath, and forgiue, and not reuenge. 6. Wee must hate those vices, and auoid them, which in conuersation appeare hatefull amongst men; as back-bitingRom: 1.29. 1 Tim: 5.13. Pro: 26.20., discouery of secretsPro: 11.13. bitter wordsEphes. 5.3.4., boastingPro: 27.1.2., suspiciousnesse1 Cor: 13., rashnesse in reproofes and admonition, offensiue carriage1 Cor: 10.32., and the stirring of the infirmities of othersGen: 13:8..
In particular, we must be carefull to please, in the Familie, in the Church, in the Common-wealth. In the Familie: 1. The Gouernours must labour to walke in all pleasing; and to this end, they must gouerne in the Lord, and cast the impression of Religion vpon the soules of their people, that the reason of their obedience may be the will of God;How gouernours in families may walk pleasingly. they must retayne wisely their authoritie: it is not the way to please, to loose the reynes, and lose their authoritie: they must take notice of vertues as well as vices, and reproue in loue, not in passion, and auoide that behauiour that irritates and prouokes to wrath.
How Inferiours in the familie may please their Superiours.2 Inferiours, if euer they would please GOD, must bee carefull to please their Masters, Parents, and Husbands, as bearing the Image of God: and to this end, they must pray God to make them able, both to obey and please, they must be teachable, and not such as must bee continually told of the same fault: they must auoyd answering againe; for, as a sullen silence is hatefull, so prating, and hast to answere doth prouokeTit: 2.9.10.. Lastly, they must auoyd such sinnes as proue in their places specially hatefull; as pride, lying, vnfaithfulnesse, (viz.) to be such as cannot be trusted in any thing; stubbornnesse, slownesse, especially when they are sent vpon busines.
How Ministers may walke in all pleasing.As in the Familie, so in the Church, Ministers must walke in all pleasing: and to this end they must practise what they preach, and auoyd enuy, passion, contention, and partialitie; they must be wise and gentle, apt to teach and instruct in meekenesse, though they be opposed2 Tim: 2.24.25.; they must be vigilant, sober, of good behauiour, giuen to hospitality; they must not be pot companions, or quarrelsome, or couetous, more desiring and delighting in the
 the gaine of the Benefice, then the profit of the peoples soules: they must order their families as well as themselues, and keepe their children in su^iection and grauitie1 Tim: 3.2.3.4.. Peace, peace, and dawbing with vntempered morter, will not make them pleasing, though many striue to winne applause by such daubing: for the conscience of the men that are so soothed doth secretly contemne these plausible seers.
The Hearers also must striue to please their Teachers,How the hearers may please their Teachers. and that they may doe so, they must yeeld them meete honour, and sufficient maintenance, but especially they must labour, from the heart, to yeelde obedience to the doctrine of their Teachers: for that pleaseth a faithfull Minister more then all dignities or riches.
3 The Magistrate must striue to bee pleasing to the people,How the Magistrate may please the people. and for that purpose, they must be men fearing GodExod: 18., studious of the ScripturesI^sh. 1.9., louers of the goodMich: 2:3., iust, hating couetousnesseExod: 18.^, louers of the Commonwealth, industrious to acquaint themselues with the estate of their flockes, walking in and out before the people, with all wisedome, courage, and grauitie, carefull to purge out those vices, which as euill humours, disease the publike body, for this easeth and pleaseth the body afterwards: such as will charge and remunerate, as well as punish; countenance the good as well as restraine the euill: such as in factions and emulations will cleaue to neyther side: men that conceiue a generall care for the persons, goods, and good name of the Subiect: guiding them to holinesse as well as happinesse, to sanctitie as well as safetie.
The people againe must striue to please their Rulers,How the people may please their Rulers. by reuerencing them, and obeying them, though against their profit, with constancie and for conscience sake: they must pray for them, and speake well of them. It was without doubt a great contentment to Dauid that whatsoeuer hee did pleased the people2 Sam: 3.36.
Thus of walking in all pleasing in respect of others.
Thirdly, wee must walke in all pleasing towards our owne Consciences,How we may walke in all pleasing towards our owne consciences. prouiding by all meanes for the rest, peace and contentment of our owne hearts within, and that this inward peace and pleasing may bee had, many things are profitable and auaileable: 1. Sorrow for our sinnes; for this sorrow will be turned into ioyIohn 16.20.; whereas the end of all carnall laughter will bee sorrow and vnquietnesse of heartLuke 6.25.: and there is no peace to the wicked, and he is wicked that is not contrite in heartEsay 57. vlt.. 2. The Faith or beliefe of our Iustification in Christ; for being iustified by faith, our soules haue peaceRom: 5.1.: wee must seeke the rest of our hearts in Gods fauour in Christ, for hee is the Prince of PeaceEsay 9.6.. 3. The loue of Gods Law; for great peace and rest haue they that loue Gods LawPsalm: 119.165.; yea, it is added, and nothing shall offend them. 4. Diligence and constancy in the vse of Gods ordinances: it is a secret ioy to the heart of euery one that is a friend to the Bridegroome, to heare the Bridegroomes voyceIohn 3.29.; and to be much in prayers is a way to bee much in ioyIohn 16.24.. 5. Meekenesse; while angry and wrathfull persons fret themselues, to their owne singular euill, meeke men shall delight themselues in abundance of peacePsa: 37.8.11.. 6. Iust dealing in all businesses with all men: for, the worke of righteousnesse is peace, and the effect of righteousnesse is quietnesse and assurance for euerEsay 32.17.. Lastly, would wee attaine that peace and pleasing contentment that passeth all the vnderstanding of the carnall man, we must take heede of worldly care. In nothing bee carefull.
Obiect. But wee haue so many crosses, how can wee but care? Sol. Let  your request be knowne to God.Solut.
Obiect. We haue prayed, and are not rid out of them. Sol. Adde supplication  to your prayers.Solut.

Obiect. Solution.Obiect. We haue prayed, and that earnestly, and daily, and with much importunitie, and yet are disquieted still. Sol. Be thankefull for the mercies thou hast; vnthankfulnesse hinders the restfull successe of prayerPhil. 4.6, 7..
Fruitfull in all goodworkes.] The Sonne of man is ascended, and hath giuen authoritie and gifts vnto men, and vnto euery seruant his worke: hee calls for obedience, and detests sleeping, and requires all watchfulnesse to the speeding of all his workes, and what he saith to one, he saith to all, WatchMat. 13.34.36.: This is shewed vnto all that turne vnto God, that they must doe workes meete for repentanceActs 26.20.; considering the season, that it is now high time to awake out of sleep: the might is farre spent, and the day at hand, and therefore we should arme and addresse our selues, to cast away the workes of darknes, and to labour in the lightRom. 13.12, 13.. Good workes are the best apparell of Christians, professing godlinesse1 Tim 2.10., and their most durable riches and treasures1 Tim. 6.18, 19.. To this end hath the light of the gracious and sauing Doctrine of God shined, that men might be familiarly instructed to conceiue the necessitie of doing all the workes, both of pietie, righteousnesse, and sobrietieTit. 2.12.. Yea, to this end did Christ giue himselfe for vs, and redeeme vs at so high a rate, that he might purifie a peculiar people to himselfe, zealous of good workesTit. 2.14.. We are the workemanship of God, created in Christ Iesus vnto good workes, which God hath ordained that we should walke in themEphes. 2.10.: and it shall be to vs according to our worksRom. 2.6.: and therefore it should be our Wisdome, to shew by good conversation our workesIames 3.13.: and our Loue, to prouoke others vnto good workesHeb. 10.24..
Concerning good Workes, I propound three things:
1 What workes are not good workes.2 What rules must be obserued to make our workes good workes.3 What workes are good in particular.
 For the first: the works that are done to be seene of men are not good worksMat. 23.5.. The workes of persecutors are all noughtIoh. 8.39, 40.:What workes are good workes. all works are nought that haue not repentance going before; for good workes are the workes of the penitentActs 26.20.: all the workes that are done too late are thrust out of the Catalogue of good workes; as to cry to God after a man hath stood out all the opportunities and seasons of graceProu. 1.28.. It is a signe mens workes are not good, when they hate the light, and cannot abide to be reprouedIoh. 3.19, 20.. And of the like nature are those workes that are guided after the example of the multitude, of which men say, they doe as the most doeExod. 22.. Lastly, doth not the world hate thee?Ioh. 7.7. then suspect thy workes.
 For the second: that we may haue comfort, that God will account our workes good works:What rules must be obserued to make our workes good works. 1. They must be warranted by the word of God: if wee doe truth, we must goe to the light that our deeds may be manifest, that they are wrought in GodIohn 3.21.. 2. Our persons must be made good by iustification, we must be created in Christ IesusEphes. 2.10.. Would we worke the workes of God, we must beleeue in him that God hath sentIoh. 6.28, 29.. 3. Our workes must be finishedIohn 4.34.. 4. By mortification, we must purge our selues, that we may be meete for the Masters vse, and prepared for euery worke we would haue accepted as good2 Tim. 2.21.. Lastly, the ends must bee good: and the ends of all good workes are, 1. The glory of God: 2. The discharge of our obedience: 3. The edification of our neighbours: 4. The testification of our Faith and Thankfulnesse: 5. The escaping of the punishment of sinne, and the destruction of the wicked: 6 The answering of our high calling in Iesus Christ: 7. The obtayning of the glory of Heauen.
 For the third: in our conversation with men there are diuers kindes of good works;What vvorkes are good vvorks in particular. some spirituall, some corporall: they are good workes to instruct, admonish, incourage, reproue, and pray for others; to pull an infant, or weake man out of a flaming fire, is a good worke, and such it is to recouer
 a sinner, by admonition, counsell, etc. It is a good worke to couer infirmities; yea, a multitude of them: and to forgiue trespasses, and to ouercome euill with goodnesse: so also they are good workes to grieue with them that grieue, in giuing honour to goe one before another, to lift vp the iust praises of others, to lend to the needy, and to giue liberally and cheerefully towards the relieuing of the necessities of the poore, especially them of the houshold of Faith.
To conclude, from the manner of phrase, [bearing fruit in euery good worke] these things may be obserued: First, that good workes are fruites: for they are such things as shew our Faith, proue our planting, and yeeld vs comfort in Gods acceptation of them. Secondly, that a religious minde will labour to get fruit of euery sort; hee will not know a good worke, but he will desire to carry some fruit of it. Thirdly, a Christian man carries his fruit, both because hee carries the blessing of his well-doing, and because hee is neuer without some fruit, as also he shall be sure his workes will go with him, when all things else shall leaue him.
Thus farre of the eminency of Christians in holy conuersation.
Increasing in the knowledge of God.] Whereas a Question might bee asked what should wee doe that we might attaine to the holinesse of life before described? These words containe an answere to it, that they must increase in the knowledge of God.
The words in themselues stand of three parts: First, the Grace, Knowledge: Secondly, the Measure of it, increase: Thirdly, the Obiect, of God. Of the Grace it selfe I haue intreated before, onely from the repetition two things may be obserued.
First, we had need to be often vrged, and put in minde,2 Obseruation from the repetition. Wee need to be often stirred vp to seek knowledge. and stirred vp to seeke knowledge, we are naturally so vnapt to spirituall things, that line must be vpon line, and precept vpon preceptEsay 29.. Of our selues there is none of vs haue any great mind to vnderstand or seeke after GodPsal. 14.2.: or if we begin, we soone leaue off to vnderstand to doe goodPsal. 36.3.; and some of vs are so wayward and wilfull, that we know not, nor will not know, but walke on in darkenesse, though all the foundations of the earth be mouedPsal. 82.7..
Secondly, men are not onely to seeke knowledge, that they may be conuerted and sanctified, and liue a righteous life; but euen after all these are attayned, we must still be industrious to get more knowledge:We must still seeke to get more knowledge. because knowledge inlarged giues the comfort and sence of grace receiued: else a man may haue Faith, and yet for want of knowledge liue without the comforts of it. Besides, it furthers the sanctification of our callings, and the Creatures wee vse1 Tim. 4.3.. Further, it makes vs able to discerne things that differ, and in matters of saluation to trust our owne FaithPhil. 1.10. 1 Iohn 4.1.; and it keepes downe corrupt affectionsEsay 11.7.9. and in what measure we retain our ignorance, we retaine feare, and the spirit of bondage.
Increasing.] The adiunct increase followes. Here are two Doctrines.  
First, that wee must increase in knowledge; else that we haue, will decay, and knowledge is giuen but in part, and not all at once. Besides, it is a speciall part of GODS Image; and therefore of great both necessitie and honour. If men bee neuer weary of seeking for wealth and riches, why should a Christian be weary of seeking Wisedome, which is better then all treasures?
Secondly, that increase of knowledge is a great furtherance of holy life:  the preuailing of sinne in the life of the Iewes was caused by the preuayling of ignoranceEsay 1.3.. Therefore there is no mercy, nor pietie in the Land, because there is no knowledge of God in the LandHos. 4.1.2.. God shewes his righteousnesse to them that know himPsal. 36:10.. And therefore neyther the Papists must tell
 men that Ignorance is the Mother of Deuotion: nor the common Protestant so idly aske, what needes all this knowledge?
More particularly, three questions may be here resolued.
What are the lets of increasing.Quest. 1. What are the lets of increase? Ans. There are many lets. 1. Ill opinions about knowledge: as that it is vnprofitable, vnnecessary, etc. 2. Abuse of our Callings. 3. The loue of other thingsIer. 9.23.24.. 4. The smothering of doubts, difficulties, and preiudice in the vse of the meanes. 5. Securitie; when a man growes proud of what hee doth know, and presumes of Gods mercy for what he wants. 6 Presumptuous sinne, as it hinders other graces, so it casts men behinde hand in knowledge. 7. Resisting of Gods Spirit, pricking the conscience to get it awake, and smothering of terrorsHos. 6.1.2.3.. 8. Internall euils nourished, as lustTim: 3.7., euill thoughtsPro. 14.22., passionProu. 14.29. How we may know when we increase with knowledge. What we must doe that wee may increase in knowledge, etc.
Quest. 2. How may we know when we increase in knowledge. Ans. We increase in knowledge. 1. If we increase in affection to the meanes: for God is neuer wanting in the successe. 2. If we increase in the power of godlinesse: it is certaine, wee grow in knowledge if wee grow in grace. 3. If wee grow stayed, and setled, and more resolued in the doctrine of Gods grace, and practise of holy life.
Quest 3. What must we doe that wee may increase? Ans. We must obserue these Rules. 1. We must practise what we doe already knowIohn 7.17. 2. Wee must not be ouer-curious, or suffer our selues to be drawne aside, with fond questions, controuersies and speculations, but be wise to sobrietyRom. 12.13.. 3. Wee must redeeme the time, and watch to all the opportunities, for the vse of the meanesEphes. 5.16.. 4. Wee must vse the world as if wee vsed it not. 5 We must acknowledge, that is, confesse and professe what we know, least God by our vnthankefulnesse and fearefulnesse, be prouoked to scourge our spirits with a slumber or reprobate senceRom: 1.28.. 6. Wee must minde our owne wayProu: 14.8.. Lastly, we must vse Gods ordinances, and all of them, and without interruption, constantly and cheerefully.
Thus of the Grace it selfe, and the Measure of it: the Obiect followes.
Of God.] Our knowledge must be of God foure wayes:Our knowledge must be of God foure waies. for first, it must be spirituall and diuine knowledge, not humane, naturall, and earthly. 2. It must be of God; as hee is the author of it, we must seeke it from aboue, by prayer. 3. It must be of God, as he is the end of it, it must draw vs nearer to God. Lastly, God must be the obiect of it, we must know Gods Name. In this last sence here are two things imported.
First, that euen after regeneration there may be sometimes some working of the seedes of Atheisme. So wretched is the euill nature of man, that in this respect there is cause many times to hang downe the head with horror, shame and bitter mourning of heart, and confusion of face.
Secondly, that increase in holy conuersation doth abate the mouings of Atheisme: as any be more holy, so they are more freed from the trouble of them. Be first holy, and then be an Atheist, (professed or resolued,) if thou canst.
Concerning the knowledge of God foure things are to be considered: 1. How he is made knowne: 2. Who they are that God chargeth with this, that they know him not: 3. How it comes to passe that man knowes not his God: 4. What we must doe, that we may know God.
How God is made knowneGod is made knowne, 1. in his Sonne: in Christ, God is as it were visibleIohn 14.9.. 2. By his Spirit1 Cor. 2.10.11. 3. By his worde; both by the testimony it giues of God, and by the relation of Prophesies accomplished, and Miracles wonderfully wrought; it shewes a God, as it is a sacred treasury preseruing the memory of wonderfull things. 4. By his workes; and that either in generall, as God hath stamped vpon them some markes of his invisible thingsRom. 1.; or in his
 particular workes, as the founding of the Earth, the hanging of the Cloudes, the spreading out of the Heauens, the recoyling of the Waters, leauing an habitation for man; terrours of Conscience, Plagues vpon wicked men at their wish, answering of Prayers, Miracles, the Soule of Man, and state of Diuels.
2 There are many sorts of men; yea, euen in the Church,Who they are that know not God. besides professed Atheists, that are hated of God, and charged with this, that they know not God: as, 1. All that keepe not his CommandementsEsay 1.5. 1 Iohn 2.4.: 2. All that heare not vs1 Iohn 4.6.: 3. All PersecutorsJohn 16.3.: 4. All that honour not such as feare God1 Iohn 3.1.: 5. All that deny the Natures or Offices of the Sonne of God1 Iohn 2.23. The causes of this ignorance of God..
3 This wretched Atheisme and Ignorance of God, and euill thoughts of his Nature, Presence, Attributes, etc. is caused: first, by corruption of our natures in the Fall: 2. It is increased by the custome of all sorts of sinnes: 3. If it preuaile, it may come by some speciall iudgement of God, who being prouoked by other sinnes, doth leaue men to a spirit of slumber, or eternally reiecting them, doth leaue them to a reprobate sence, or in the power of the sinne against the holy Ghost.
4 That we may know God and increase in it, wee must view his workes,What wee must do that we may know God. search his Booke, obey the motions of his Spirit, humble our selues to seeke the signes of his presence, and for the better successe in all, labour for a pure heartMath. 5.6..
Hitherto of the Obiect, Parts, and End of Knowledge: the Cause followeth in these words.



Verse 11. Strengthened in all might, according to the power of his glory.

IN the words I note, 1. The thing it selfe, Strengthened. 2. The manner of it, in all might: 2. The ground of it, according to the power of his glory, or glorious power.
From the Coherence I obserue that wee must bee strengthened in Grace, before wee can be filled with Knowledge: till Grace preuaile, euill motions  and temptations grow many times too hard for the seedes of Knowledge: and the Diuell steales away much of the seede.
Strengthened.] There are two sorts of Christians fearing God: some are  strengthened with all might;Two sorts of Christians. some are feeble in the Knowledge and Grace of God. There are strong Christians and weake; infants, and men of riper age. It is profitable more exactly to consider of both: and in the weake Christian I consider, 1. Who are weake: 2. What helpes to make them strong in the might of God.
For the better vnderstanding of the first, I propound three things. 1. What the Infant or weake Christian wanteth, by which hee discouers his weakenesse. 2. What he hath, notwithstanding his wants. 3. The happinesse of his estate, though he be weake.
They are but Babes and infants in Grace: 1.Who are Infants in grace. That know not the loue of Christ, with particular, distinct, and full assuranceEphes. 3 19.20.17.. 2. That are not able to practise the more strong and purging duties of mortificationMath: 9.15. etc.. 3. That serue any passion and vnruly affection1 Cor: 3.1.2.3. 4. That are vnsetled in the way of lifeIohn 14.5., and tost with the winde of contrarie doctrineEphes: 14.. 5. That sticke at acknowledgement, and dare not stand out to the profession of the truthEphes: 4.13.. 6. That cannot digest some truths of God, as being strong meate, and in their account hard sayings. 7. That are inexpert and vnskilfull in the word of righteousnesseHeb: 5.12.13. (especially, if they be ignorant in the principles,Iohn 6.60. and 16.22.) other signes may bee gathered from the contrarie estate of the strong Christian afterwards.
What the weake Christian hath.2 Yet the weakest Christian (whatsoeuer hee wants) hath these things: 1. Hee discernes the season of Grace, and the day of his peace and redemption, which the wise-men of the world doe notMath. 16.3.. 2. Though in his owne account hee can doe but little for the truth, yet hee will bee sure to doe nothing against the truth, if hee may know it2 Cor: 13.8.. 3. Hee is not in the flesh, hee is more then a naturall man, hee is borne againe1 Cor: 15.50. Iohn 3.5. Rom: 8.8.. 4. Hee hath an earnest appetite and constant desire after the sincere milke of the Word1 Pet. 2.2.. 5. Hee beleeues whiles hee struggles with vnbeliefe. 6. The strong man armed, which is the Diuell, is so cast out by Christ, that hee preuailes not as hee was wont. 7. He can deny his reason, pleasures, profits, and beloued sinnes, and take vp his Crosse in some measureLuke 14.26.27.33.. Lastly, such a dore may bee opened to them that haue little strength, as no man can shut, and such courage they may haue, that they will sticke to the word, and keepe it as their best treasure, whatsoeuer they lose, and by no meanes be induced to deny Christ and his NameReuel. 2.8.9.
His happines though he be weake.3. His case is happy though weake, for hee hath such a High Priest, and Sauiour, as knowes how to haue compassion on the ignorantHeb. 5.2., and is touched with a feeling of his infirmitiesHeb. 2.18., and hath wrought the reconciliation of all his brethren, and was tempted himselfe: and therefore will succour the weake when hee is temptedHeb. 2.18.: and will see to it, that more shall not bee laide vpon him then hee is able to beare1 Cor: 10.; it being his charge and office to prouide, that the bruised Reede be not broken, or the smoaking Flaxe quenched, till iudgement be brought foorth vnto victory. And at all times the weakest Christian may goe boldly to the throne of Grace, and obtaine mercy to helpe in time of needeHeb. 4. vlt. Helpes for the weake Christian..
The helpes for strengthening of the weake, are of two sorts: some without vs, some to be vsed by vs.
Without vs, there are many things that may strengthen, and incourage, and animate the weake: 1. There is proposed a glorious inheritance to them that ouercome. 2. We haue the example of all the Saints. 3. We haue a strong and sure foundation2 Tim. 2.19.. 4. We haue a strong God, and his power is engaged to exercise it selfe in our weakenesse, and to keepe vs vnto saluation, without falling, till hee present vs faultlesse before the presence of his gloryIud: 24. 1 Pet: 1 5. 2 Cor: 12.9. 5. Wee haue a strong word of God, able to builde vs vp, and make vs wise, and saue our soulesActs 20.32. 2 T^m. 3.16. Iames 1.21., as being Gods Arme, and mightie instrument, of his power1 Cor. 1.18. Rom. 1.10.. 6. The spirit of God is a Spirit as of Grace, so of Power2 Tim 1.7., and helpeth the weake, as in PrayerRom. 8.26., so in euery Dutie and grace. 7. Wee haue a strong Sauiour: Christ doth strengthen and incourage the Christian three waies: first, by his owne example, becomming a patterne to vs to follow: secondly, by application; for vnto all that lay hold on him by Faith, hee is a Priest after the power of endlesse lifeHeb: 7.16.; the Wisedome of God, and the Power of God1 Cor: 1.24.: thirdly, by operation, for hee hath borne our infirmities, by his one offering hee hath and doth consecrate and make perfect our persons and workes, in Gods sightHeb: 2.10.; he doth vnite vs to the FatherIoh. 17.21.23; hee giues vs his Fathers glory, both in that he giues vs such Graces as will bring to glory, and in that hee giues vs credit where himselfe and the Father are in credit. Thus of the helpes without vs.
If any aske in the second place, what wee must doe, that wee may bee strengthened. I answere: 1. Wee must pray for Knowledge and Faith, to discerne and beleeue Gods power and promise: Ephes. 1.8. etc. And in the fourth of that Epistle there are fiue things more to be done, that wee may attaine to a ripe age in Christ, first, wee must subiect our selues to bee taught, and wrought vpon, by such Teachers as are set ouer vs by Christ. 2. Wee must resolue and settle our selues in the doctrine of the foundation and the Principles of truth, that wee bee not tossed to and fro with euery winde. 3. Wee must so be satisfied with the voyce of Christ in our Teachers, that
 we cast aside all respects of the voice of strangers, not opening our ^^res willingly to the sleights of cunning men, that will lie in waite to deceiue vs. 4. We must take heede of personall discords with any that feare God, following the truth in loue. 5. Wee must mutually striue to yeeld and seeke helpe to and of one another, that euery ioynt in this mysticall body, according to the measure of the part may supply and make vp the increase of the body by vertue of vnion with the Head, and communion with the MembersEphes. 4.11. to 17.. Besides, if we would increase in strength, wee must let Patience haue his perfect worke, making conscience to mortifie corrupt passions, as worldly griefe, anger, frettingIames 1.4., etc. And lastly, wee must bee carefull to keepe what God hath giuen vs, that no man take away our crowne. Neglect of grace receiued is a great hinderance of strength and increase.
Thus of the weake Christian.
A strong Christian discouers himselfe by diuers things. First,Of the strong Christian: and how he may be knowne. hee is spirituall, that is, such a one as not onely hath a taste and desire after spirituall things, but is also ruled by the Word and Spirit of God, that hee restraines the euils of the flesh both in heart and life, so as hee giues not occasion eyther of scandall to the weake, or of scorne to them that are without1 Cor: 3.1.. Secondly, hee is able to be baptised with the baptisme that Christ was baptised with, and to drinke of the cup that Christ dranke of: he is not onely willing to beare ordinary wrongs and crosses, but is prepared for the worst the world or Sathan may doe to himMat: 20.22.23.. 3. Hee can beare the infirmities of the weake, and in conuersing, deny himselfe, and please his Brother in that that is good to edificationRom: 15.1.2.. 4. Hee is full of goodnesse and knowledge, and is able to admonishRom: 15.14., and comfort others, with the comforts hee hath found himselfe2 Cor: 1.4. 5. Hee sinnes not in wordIames 3.1., that is, hee is able to gouerne his tongue with Wisedome, Meekenesse, Grace and Truth. The ordinary faults of speech are not found in his Tongue. 6. He is not carefull for his life, to take thought for what he shall eate, or what he shall drinke; nor doth he disquiet his heart about his body, what he shall put on: for these outward things hee can easily trust his heauenly FatherMath: 6.25.30. 7. He can loue his enemies, endure wrongs without resistance or reuenge; or if hee vse the helpe of the Magistrate, hee can seeke it without malice or crueltie: hee can blesse them that curse him, and pray for them that despight him, and doe good to them that hate himMath: 5:38. to the end.. Lastly, in Faith hee is strong, like Abraham, Rom. 4.16. to the end. Hee can beleeue things to come as well as if they were present, Vers. 17. hee can beleeue aboue hope and vnder hope: Vers: 18. hee looketh, not to the meanes, but to the promise: Vers. 19. hee vanquisheth doubts: Vers. 20. hee is as thankefull for promises, as others would bee for performances: Vers. 20.21. for these things were not onely true of Abraham but may be true in vs also, Vers. 23.24. who may haue as great helpe from Christ as euer he had, Vers. 25.
Thus of the strong Christian.
In all might.] Note how the Apostle presseth to perfection: before,Why all might in all knowledge, all pleasing, all good workes; now, in all might. And wee had neede to be strengthened with all might, because not one part of the soule onely is to be looked to, but the whole soule, spirit and life throughout: nor haue wee one Grace to tend, but all sorts of Graces from God: nor doth there abide vs one trouble, but calamities, indignities, and temptations of all sorts. Wee haue not one aduersary to encounter, but many, and of many sorts; inward, outward, visible, inuisible, publike, priuate, at home and abroad. Neyther doe wee stand vpon our guard at one time, but must looke to our selues in all these respects at all times.
It must be all might that we should labour after in foure respects:All might in foure respects.
First, it must bee a Might that extends to the strengthening of all the
 faculties of the soule, powers of the body, and duties of the life: our Mindes must bee strengthened in the approuing of truth and goodnesse, and in reprobating of euill and falshood1 Cor: 14.20.: our Memories must bee strengthened in retayning and recording the secrets and hid things of God, which are committed to it: the Will must be strengthened in the Election of good, and reiection of euill: and our Affections neede strength also: thus wee were to be strengthened in PatienceIam: 1.4., Ioy1 Thes: 5.16., Loue1 John 4.18., MercyCol: 3.12., Hope and Confidence1 Pet: 1.13., DesiresPsal: 27.4., in ReuerenceHeb. 12.28., in Hatred of sinnePsal. 139.21.22., Contempt of the WorldPhil: 3.8. Esay 30.22.. So doe wee neede strength to euery dutie of holy life.
Secondly, it must be a Might that is gotten from the vse of all the meanes, wee must be strengthened in the power of euery ordinance of God, and supported with the vse of euery helpe to make vs strong.
Thirdly, it must be a Might shewed in the vse of all the Armour of God. Wee must strengthen our selues with euery piece of Armour, whether it bee Armour of Defence, as the Girdle of Truth, the Brest-plate of Righteousnes, the Shooes of the Gospell of Peace, the Shield of Faith, the Helmet of Hope: or Armor of Offence, as the Sword of the Spirit, Gods Word, and the Darts of PrayersEphes: 6.12..
Fourthly, it should be a Might extended to all possible degrees and power of euery Grace and dutie: thus in mercy wee should communicate in all good thingsGal: 6.6. our seruice should be an heartie SeruiceEphes. 6.6., wee must loue the Lord with all our hearts, with all our soules, with all our mightDeut. 6.5..
According to the power of his glory.] In the handling of these words, I consider them, first, apart: secondly, as they are ioyned together: and thirdly, the Doctrines out of them.
Here are two things laid to pawne for the strengthening of the weake Christian, Gods Power, and Gods Glory.
The extent of Gods power.Power is one of the Attributes they call in Schooles relata: the Power of God is infinite, both in respect of Essence (for it is as large as the Essence; yea, it is the Essence it selfe) and in respect of Obiects, hee hath not done so much, but farre beyond our capacities, hee could doe infinitely more: and so is it infinite in respect of continuance. Yet to speake of it according to our capacities;What God cannot doe. it is restrayned, 1. By his Will; hee cannot doe what his Will is against: 2. By his glory; hee can doe nothing against his owne Glory: 3. By his Nature, hee cannot lye etc. because it is against his Nature: 4. In some respects by the nature of the Creature; so as whatsoeuer destroyes the essentiall definition of the Creature, God cannot doe: as God cannot make a man vnreasonable, and yet hee remaine a man; hee cannot make a body infinite, and it remaine a body still: 5. Sometimes by the condition and qualities of the Creature; as, Be it vnto thee according to thy Faith: 6. By impossibilitie; I say, by that which is simply impossible, for there are many things vnpossible in respect of vs, which are not onely possible but easie to God. And therefore the common-people reason foolishly; God can saue mee, therefore hee will doe it: and the Papists as wilfully; Christ can be present in the Sacrament, therefore hee will. For besides that they will neuer prooue his body can be in all places, at one time, truely and locally present, remayning a true body; they also reason but absurdly, till they finde his will to be there in their manner.
What the glory of God is.The Glory of God is taken somtimes for the signe of his presence, Exod. 16.10 for the meanes of his worship: 1 Sam. 4.22. for praise and honour: 2 Chron. 29.11. But here it is taken for the excellencie of God aboue all creatures, as it may be reuealed.Wherin God excels the creature. God is more excellent then all Creatures, in Trinitie of Persons in one essence, in perfection of Nature, in infinitenesse of being, in eternitie, in puritie and singlenesse, in immutabilitie of Nature, Will, and Qualities; in vnderstanding, in prescience (which absolutely falleth to no creature)
 in the Idea of Vertue, and in omnipotencie. By reason of mans fall and custome in sinne, Gods glory is much darkned: so as now man of himselfe cannot so conceiue of the wonderfull excellencie of his Creator.
Gods Glory is reuealed vnto man, 1. By his WorkesPsal. 104.31.:How many wayes Gods glory is reuealed. especially his dreadfull and great workesEsay 24 16.. 2. By the Signes of his presenceExod. 16.10.. 3. By the meanes of his worship1 Sam. 4.22. Psal. 89.7.. 4. By the Confession of guilty personsIosh 7. 1 Sam. 6.5. Mal. 2.2.. 5. By the Prayses of his seruants: and therefore to giue glory, is translated, to giue thankesLuk. 17.18.. 6. By Christ, who is the Lord of glory2 Cor. 2.8., the King of gloryPsal. 24., he maketh the Glory of God, as it were visible in his flesh. 7. By Man1 Cor. 11.7.. 8. By the Spirit of ReuelationEphes. 1.17.. 9. By the Gospell1 Tim. 1.11. Who see Gods glory..
But if you aske who of all men see Gods glory; I answer, onely the Saints, in the brightnes of itPsal. 89.7. Esay 26.10.11; to wit, such as haue the Gospell shining in their hearts2 Cor. 4.3. etc. Esay 61.1, 2, 3., etc. such as acknowledging Gods threatnings, turne vnto him by true repentanceIer. 13.16.: such as lead an holy and innocent lifePsal. 138.5. etc. Esay 58.7.8, 9.: such as haue a true and liuely FaithIohn 11 40. Esay 46.12.13 Foure reasons why the power of God is said to be the power of his glory. About falling from grace and perseuerance. Proofes that Gods elect cannot fall away. This doctrine doth not tend to securitie..
Thus of the words apart.Iohn 1.14.
Power of his Glory.] There are foure Reasons why the Power of God should bee said to bee the Power of his Glory, or glorious. 1. Because it will neuer leaue strengthening, till it bring to Glory. 2. Because the power of all the meanes of saluation is from heauen, and therefore a glorious power. 3. Because Gods Glory sets his Power aworke, in as much as by promise it lyes ingaged to his people. 4. It is a glorious Power, because of the persons and things that are vsed in Gods worke, as God himselfe, the Sonne of God, the Spirit of God, ordinances that are of God, and men specially consecrated by God.
Doctrines. First, the perseuerance of Gods children is most certaine: so long as there is Power in God or Glory, they cannot fall away by losing their happinesse.
This point hath abundant and apparant confirmation out of the old Testament in these places, Psalm. 145.10.13.14. Esay 42.3. Ezech. 36.24, 25, 26, 27. Ierem. 32, 40. Hos. 2.19. Out of the Gospels, Matth. 16.18. and 24.25. Iohn 4.14. and 5.24. and 6.39. and 10.28, 29. and 13.1. Out of the Epistles also, Rom. 6.8, 9, 10, 11. and 8.30. and 11.29. Ephes. 4.12.17. Phil. 1.6. 2 Tim. 2.19. Hebr. 7.16. 1 Ioh. 2.19. and 3.9. 1 Pet. 1.5.13.18.20.23.
Secondly, there is little reason of presumption in this Doctrine: for, as Power will preserue, so Glory will reuenge: if such as are in couenant with God returne to sinne, woe vnto them, Gods Glory will not beare it; and he hath many wayes to scourge them: for by their sinnes they may bring vpon themselues crosses of all sortsPsal. 89.22. Esay 30.20. Zach. 13.7, 8, 9. Mich. 7.9.18., terrors of ConsciencePsal. 51., losse of many gifts, and want of sense of all grace, Gods presence, and the ioyes of his promises, and SaluationPsal. 51. Cant. 3., Church censures1 Cor. 5., the want of many blessingsIer. 5.24, 25., sore trauell and terrours vpon their returne againePsal: 51. Motiues to Patience., terrible buffets, both of the Word and Spirit, etc. And therefore we should worke out our saluation with feare and trembling. It is a fearefull thing to fall into Gods angry and scourging hand.
Hitherto of the Obiect, Parts, Ends, and Causes of Knowledge: the Effects follow, which in the end of the Verse are noted to be three, viz. Patience, Long-suffering, and Ioyfulnesse.
Patience.] This is a vertue that well becomes a Christian, and a blessed fruit of the tree of life, much to be desired of man: though it may seeme troublesome to the flesh to endure crosses and afflictions, yet if all things be considered, it is a vertue of great praise. God himselfe is magnified of Men and Angels for his patience and forbearanceRom. 2.4.. It is the admirable
 glory of the Sonne of God, that in the great worke of his Father, about the gathering of the Churches, in the middest of the oppositions of the world and euill Angels, hee should not cry, nor lift vp, nor cause his voyce to be heard, and yet hold out without failing or discouragementEsay 42.2.4.: yea, as the Captaine of our saluation, hee was made perfect by sufferingHeb: 2.10.. This is the praise of the Saints, (which they may remember with comfort) that they haue endured many and great fights of afflictionsHeb: 10.32.. The Souldier cannot please his Captaine, vnlesse hee endure hardnesse; nor hee that striueth for Masteries be crowned, vnlesse hee toyle in the Combat; nor the Husbandman reape, vnlesse hee patiently endure the labour of sowing, and waite till haruest2 Tim: 2.3.5.6.. All that will liue godly must suffer2 Tim: 3.12.: the holy exercise of Christian Patience is a good signe that men are good hearers of the Word, and that they practise what they heareLuke 8.15.. Men are not therefore miserable because they suffer muchMatt: 5.10.: Christians neede not to be ashamed to suffer2 Tim: 1.22.: they may bee troubled on euery side, yet not distressed: they may be perplexed, and yet not despaire: they may be persecuted, and yet not forsaken: they may be cast downe, and yet not destroyed2 Cor: 4.8.9.. Patience is a vertue full of good fruites: it appeaseth strifeProu: 15.18. and 25.: it helps away the Crosse, (it is impatiencie and stubbornnesse that makes the Father continue to beate his childe) it fits vs for perseuerance with comfort, as the Coherence shewes, The patient abiding of the poore shall not perish for euerPsal: 9.: but they shall receiue, at the length, a crowne of lifeIames 1.12.. The worth of this grace appeares by the hurt of impatiencie: for Impatiencie exalts follyPro: 14.17., depriues a man of the possession of his owne souleLuke 22.19., dishonours all a mans gifts and graces, and all the good things hee hath before doneIob 4.6. etc., etc. Let vs therefore runne with patience the race that is set before vs. Thus did Christ endure the Crosse, and now weares the CrowneHeb: 12.1.2.3. The things we commonly beare are nothing to that Christ and the Martyrs haue borne: wee haue not yet resisted vnto bloudVers. 4.: by suffering wee may reape the comfort that wee are Sonnes and not BastardsVers. 5.6.7.8.; besides the profit of our sufferings, which God euer intends to the patient, viz. the holinesse of the heart, and fruitfulnesse of the lifeVer. 9.10.11. What wee must doe that wee may be patient..
That wee may be patient, first, wee must get Wisedome, and if we want it, aske it of God. It is Ignorance makes men passionate: a great vnderstanding is slow to wrathPro: 14.29. Iames 1.3.4.6.. Secondly, wee must get Faith to beleeue our owne reconciliation with God: our hearts neede not to be troubled, if we beleeue in God the Father, in Iesus ChristIohn 14.1.. When the heart is possessed with peace in the assurance of Iustification by Faith, then it is easie to be patient in tribulation; yea, to reioyce in afflictionRom: 5.1.2.4 John 14.27.. Thirdly, we must be much in the meditation of the comforts of another life. Fourthly, we must be often and constant in prayerRom. 12.12.. Fifthly, the hearing of the word faithfully and conscionably breedes a patient minde: and therefore is the Word called a Word of Patience;Reuel. 3.9. the Comforts of the Scripture beget both Patience and HopeRom. 15.4.. Sixthly, wee must be temperate in the desires after, and vse of outward things; therefore are men vnquiet vnder the losse, absence, want, or desire of earthly things about their bodies or estates, because they haue not sobriety and temperance in their hearts and carriage2 Pet. 1.6.. Seauenthly, if we would haue patience, wee must be carefull by godly Sorrow and Confession to cast off the sinne that hangeth on so fast: it is our wretched corruption of Nature that makes vs so vnquiet, it is nothing without vsHeb. 12.1.. Lastly, we must be diligent in our callings, and trust vpon God, and cast all our care on him. Idlenesse and vnbeleefe are the great nurses of impaciencie.
We must shew Patience in seuen things.Thirdly, wee must exercise Patience in seauen things. 1. In bearing the common crosses that accompany our mortall estate of life, and therein to put on, as neare as wee can, Iobs minde, and in all losses or wants to giue
 glory to God, acknowledging that he hath as much right to take away, as reason to giue. 2. In bearing with the infirmities of such as are about vs, with whom wee converse, that shew themselues to be so, out of weaknesse, Rom. 15.1.3.4. 3. In enduring persecution of all kindes for the truths sake, 2 Tim. 3.12. 2 Thes. 1.5. Reu. 2.8. 1 Pet. 4:12. etc. 4. In tentations there is vse of Patience, both in waiting vpon God for succour, and issue, and in keeping the soule at as much rest and quietnesse as may be: it is the Diuels desire to set vs on a hurry, hee knowes his tentations will then worke best, Iames 1.4. 5. In the expectation of the performance of Gods promises, and our spirituall happinesse in Christ, Hebr. 6.12. and ^0.35, 36, 37, 38. 6. In the troubles of the minde and conscience, beleeuing Gods truth, and wayting for the appearing of his face, and the healing of the soule. 7. In perseuerance in well doing vnto the end, Mat. 24.13. Rom. 2.7. Reuel. 2.2. Gal. 5.9. 1 Iohn 3.2.
Long-suffering.] This vertue, in case of wrongs,Motiues to Long-suffering. must order vs aright in our selues and toward other: in our selues it must restraine Anger and desire of reuenge; and great reason, for God himselfe suffers wrong, and that long too, and it is Gods commandment we should suffer longMat. 5.21.22.45. Rom. 12.21.: besides,Exod. 34.6. 1 Pet. 2.22. iniuries befalls vs by Gods prouidence2 Sam. 16.10.; and reuenge is Gods rightRom. 12.19.. Moreouer, these raging and reuengefull affections are great hinderances both to Prayer1 Tim. 2.8., and to the profit of the WordIames 1.21.. And lastly, anger lets the Diuell into a mans heartEphes. 4.21..
Quest. 1. But how should I preuent it being wronged? Ans. First, carry some of thine owne sinnes alwayes in thy minde, that being prouoked thou maist turne the course of thine anger thither. Secondly, auoyd the occasions, which are both contentionsPhil. 2.3. and contentious personsProu. 22.26.. Thirdly,Quest. bee daily iealous ouer thine affection, and keepe them downe by prayer.
Quest. 2. What if passion do sodainely surprize me? Ans. 1.Ans. How to preuent anger and desire of reuenge being wronged. Conceale itProu. 12.16.. 2. Depart from them with whom thou art angry1 Sam. 20.34 Gen. 27.43.44.. 3. Appoint at the least that bound vnto thine anger, that the Sunne goe not downe vpon thy wrathEphes. 4.26..
Towards others we must shew the practise of this vertue thus.
In things that might displease vs; but not hurt vs, endure them without any notice at all: and in things that doe hurt, if they be lesser iniuries,Quest. see them and forgiue them; and in the greater wrongs,Ans. thou must seeke the help of the Magistrate, and the Law, after thou hast sought all priuate meanes, by intreaty, offers of peace, desire of Arbitration, etc. follow the Law with loue to thy aduersarie, without passion or rage, and in the issues bee moderate, without shewing extremitieMath. 5.25. and 18.15. Rom. 12.18. 1 Cor. 6.5. Gods people haue cause to be ioyfull..
Ioyfulnesse.] A Christian estate is a ioyfull and comfortable estate. Sauing knowledge makes a man liue ioyfully and comfortably. True ioy is one of the fruits Gods Spirit beareth in the heart of a Christian; yea, it is a chiefe part of that kingdome that God bestoweth on his people on earth. None haue cause of ioy but the children of Sion, and none of them but haue great reason to shout for ioy, to reioyce and be glad with all their heartsZeph. 3.14., Zeph. 3.14. Is it not a great Mercy to haue all the iudgments due vnto vs for sinne, taken away? and the great enemy of our soules cast out? Is it not a great honour that Iehouah, the King of Israel, should be in the middest of vs? and that our eyes should not see euill any more? What sweeter encouragement then that the Lord should cause it to be said vnto vs, feare not? and againe, Let not your hands be slacke? If we haue great crosses, enemies, dangers, wants, temptations, etc. wee haue a mighty God; if there be none to helpe vs, he will saue; yea, he will reioyce to doe vs good; yea, he will reioyce ouer vs with ioy; yea, he so loues vs, that he will rest in his loue and seeke no
 further. Shall man be sorrowfull when God reioyceth? Shall the Lord reioyce in vs, and shall not we reioyce in GodZeph. 2.14. etc., etc. And if these reasons of ioy be contayned in one place of Scripture, how great would the number of reasons grow, if all the Booke of God were searched? such a ioy and contentment is the ioy of Christians that crosses cannot hinder it. Life is not deare to a childe of God, so that he may finish his course with ioyActs 20.24.. They suffer the spoyling of their goods with ioy, knowing that in heauen they haue a more enduring substanceHeb. 10.34.. Yea, in many crosses they account it all ioy to fall into tentationJames 1.2.. They seeme as sorrowfull, when indeed they are alwayes reioycing2 Cor. 6.10..
Quest. What might we doe to get this constant ioyfulnesse and vnmoueable firmenesse and contentment of heart?Quest. Ans. In generall thou must bee sure to be Gods seruantEsay 65.13, 14.,Ans. a man iustified and sanctifiedJer. 33.8. Esay 61.10. and 12.5.: thou must know that thy name is written in the Booke of lifeLuk. 10.20.,What wee must doe that we might get constant ioyfulnesse of heart. which cannot be without Faith1 Pet. 1.8. Phil. 1.25. Rom. 15.13. and 12..
In particular, there are many things which haue a sure promise of ioy and comfort annexed to them.
First, thou must lay the foundation of all eternall ioyes, in godly sorrow for thy sinnes, Iohn 16.20. Mat. 5.4. Psal. 126 5.6.
Secondly, thou must hang vpon the breasts of the Church (viz. the Word and Sacraments) continually, with trembling and tender affection, wayting vpon the word of God: the Law must be in thy heart, thou must buy thy libertie herein at the highest value, Esay 66.2.5.11. and 51.7. Mat. 13.44.
Thirdly, in thy carriage thou must be a counsellor of peace, Prou. 12.20. and liue in peace, as neere as may be, 2 Cor. 13.11.
Fourthly, take heede thou be not insnared with grosse sinne, Prou. 29.6.
Fiftly, wouldest thou reape ioy? sow good seede: to bee much in well-doing, procures (as a blessing) a secret and sweet gladnesse vpon the heart of man: a barren life is an vncomfortable life. Many would reape, that will not be at the paine to sow, Iohn 4.36. Gal. 6.7, 8. He that vseth his Talents to aduantage, enters into his Masters ioy (a ioy liker the ioy of God then man, meeter for the Master then for the Seruant, yet such a Master wee serue, as will crowne vs with this ioy) Mat. 15.21.
Sixtly, be constant, beare fruit, and get the knowledge of the loue of Christ, and abide in it, Iohn 15.10.
Lastly, in the 2 Thes. 5.16. to 24. there are seauen things required in our practise, if wee would alwayes reioyce. 1. We must pray alwayes: if we be much in prayer wee shall be much in ioy. 2. Wee must in all things giue thankes: a heart kept tender with the sense of Gods mercies, is easily inflamed with ioyes in the Holy Ghost. 3. We must take heed of quenching the Spirit: when a man puts out the holy motions of the Spirit, hee quencheth his owne ioyes. 4. We must, by all meanes, preserue an honourable respect of the word publikely preached: despise not prophecying. 5. And whereas there be some things we heare, doe specially affect vs, and concerne vs, wee must be carefull with all heedfulnesse to keepe those things whatsoeuer wee forget: try all things, but keepe that which is good. 6. In our practise wee must not onely auoyd euill, but all appearance of euill, else if wee disquiet others with griefe or offence of our carriage, it will be iust with God we should finde little rest, or contentment in our selues. Lastly, wee must endeauour to bee sanctified throughout, inwardly and outwardly, in soule, body and spirit, hauing respect to all Gods Commandments, and retayning the loue of no sinne, so shall wee reape the blessing of all righteousnesse, and procure to our hearts the ioyes that are euerlasting.
Hitherto of the Preface.




Verse 12 Giuing thankes vnto the Father, which hath made vs meete to bee partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.

HItherto of the Exordium of this Epistle, as it contained both the Salutation and Preface.
The second part both of the Chapter and Epistle followeth,The order of this second part of the Epistle. and is contained in the 12. Verse, and the rest to the 23. And it hath in it the proposition of Doctrine. This Doctrine propounded stands of two parts: for it concerneth eyther the worke of Redemption, or the person of the Redeemer. The worke of Redemption is considered of in the 12.13. and 14. Verses: the person of the Redeemer is entreated of from Verse 15. to the 23. The worke of Redemption is two waies considered of: first, more generally, in the 12. Verse: secondly, m^re particularly, Verse 13.14.
In the worke of our Redemption, as it is propounded in this Verse, three things are to be obserued: 1. The efficient cause [God the Father] 2. The subiect persons redeemed [vs.] 3. The Redemption it selfe, as it is either in the inchoation and first application of it on earth, and so it lyeth [in making vs fit;] or in the consummation of it, what it shall be in the end: and so it is praised, first by the manner of tenure [inherit;] secondly, by the adiunct companie [Saints;] thirdly, by the perfection of it [in light.]
Giuing thankes] The blessings of God vpon euery true Christian are such, as they require continuall thankefulnesse to God for them: such I say, for the worth of them, for number, for freenesse of gift, for continuance, and as they are compared with what God bestowes vpon others in the world.
To the Father.] A sanctified heart that hath sense of grace, so sees God, the first cause of all blessings, through the second and next causes, that it maketh God the principall obiect both of praier and praises: it is a great sin not to acknowledge the instrument by which wee receiue any good; but it is a great impietie not to giue that which is due, to the principall Efficient.
The Father.] Father is a tearme of relation, and is giuen sometimes to the whole TrinitieMath. 23.9. Luke 3.38.: sometimes to ChristEsay 9.6.: sometimes to the first Person in Trinitie; so commonly, and so here.
God may be said to be a Father in this place two waies: first, in respect of Christ; secondly, in respect of the Christian.
1. In respect of Christ, God is a Father both by Nature, and by personall Vnion: and in this sense two questions may be moued.
Quest.Quest. 1. Whether prayer is to be made to the whole Trinitie, or but to one person. Ans.Ans. It is to bee made to the whole Trinitie, Acts 7.59. 1 Thes. 3.2. 2 Cor. 13.13.
Obiect.Obiect. But praier is here made to one person. Sol.Solut. Though but one person be named, yet the rest are included: for the Persons may be distinguished, but seuered or diuided they may not be.
Quest.Quest. 2 Is the Father a Redeemer, in that Redemption is here giuen to him? Ans.Ans. The actions of God are two-fold: some are inward, as to beget, to proceede, etc. Some are outward; as to create, redeeme, etc. Now the outward actions are common to all the three Persons; they are distinguished onely in the manner of doing: the Father beginnes, the Sonne executes, the holy Ghost finisheth: as in the workes of Redemption, the Father redeemes vs, in that hee beginnes it, by deuising this course, and willing it from eternitie, by calling, sanctifying, sending and accepting of CHRIST in time: the Sonnes redeemes vs, by taking our nature and in obeying the Lawe, and suffering death, euen the death of the Crosse for vs: the holy Ghost
 redeemes vs, by applying the merits and benefits of CHRIST to euery Beleeuer.
Vses.2. In respect of the Christian: God is a Father, and the meditation hereof should serue for a three-fold Vse. 1. For tryall: 2. For instruction: 3. For Consolation. For tryall: for it stands vs much vpon to bee assured of this, that God is our Father in Christ by Adoption: for this is the foundation of true hope for what we want, and of true thankefulnesse for what wee haue. Now such men as are borne of God by regeneration,Markes of a childe of God as well as of man by generation, are wont to be described in Scripture by such markes as these. They haue in them the Spirit of Adoption both in the working and witnesse of itRom: 8.15.16.. Rom. 8.15.16. Gal. 4.6.7.Gal: 4.6.7. They are separate from sinners, they cannot delight in the workes of darkenesse, or in the wicked fellowship with workers of iniquitie, they hate vngodly company2 Cor: 6.17. etc. 1 Iohn. 2.15. etc., etc. They haue consolation and good hope through grace2 Thes: 2.16.. Christ is to them their way, the truth, and their life: and they loue their Sauiour more then any Creature, and shew it in this, that they will rather obey his words, then the commandement of any man or AngellIoh: 14.6.21.. They are a people that in respect of Mortification, purge themselues by voluntary sorrowes for their sinnes; and in respect of new obedience, Come to the light, that their workes may be manifest that they are wrought in God1 Ioh: 3.1.2.3 and 1.6.7. 1 Pet: 1.17. etc.. They honour God with great honour, and tender his Name more then their owne creditsMal: 1.6.: they worship God, not for shew, or with the adoration of the lips and knees only, but in spirit and TruthJohn 4.23.. They labour for the meate that perisheth not, and esteeme it aboue their appointed foodIohn 6.27.. Lastly, they loue their enemies, and pray for them that persecute them, and are willing to doe good to them that hate them and hurt themMath: 5.45. etc..
Secondly, if God be our Father, it should teach vs; First, to care lesse for the world, and the things thereof: wee haue a Father, that both knowes our wants, and hath all power and will to helpe vs and care for vsMath: 6.32.. Secondly, to come to him in all crosses, and make our moane to him that seeth in secret: for if euill fathers on earth, know how to giue good things to their children when they aske them, how shall not our heauenly Father giue vs whatsoeuer wee aske in the Name of ChristMat: 7.11.. Yea, it should teach vs patience vnder, and a good vse of all crossesHos: 12.9.. Thirdly, to be willing to die and commend our spirits to God that gaue them; seeing in so dying, we commit them into the hands of a Father. This made Christ willing to die, and this should perswade with vs alsoLuke 13.46.. Lastly, it should teach vs to glorifie God as a Father: wee call God Father (many of vs) and thus wee speake, but wee doe euill more and more, and dishonour him, not liuing like the children of the most HighJer: 3.4.5.. If hee be our Father, let the light of our good workes shine before men, that they may glorifie our FatherMath: 5.6.. Herein is God the Father glorified, that wee beare much fruitIohn 15.8..
Thirdly, this point serues for Consolation, and that many wayes: First, against the feare of our owne weakenesse; It is not our Fathers will that one of the little ones should perishMat. 18.14.: None is able to take them out of his handIohn 10.29.. Secondly, against our doubts about prayer: Whatsoeuer you aske the Father in Christs name it shall be giuen youIohn 16.23.. Thirdly, against all the troubles of this world: if hee haue beene a Father of Mercy, to forgiue thy sinnes, and giue thee grace, hee will be a Father of Glory, to crowne thee in a better world in the inheritance of his SonnesEphes: 1.17..
Who hath made vs fit.] Doct. Wee are neither naturally happy, nor vniuersally so: not naturally; for wee are made fit, not borne so: not vniuersally; for hee hath made [vs] fit, not all men. Christ died for his sheepe onelyIohn 10.; for his Church onelyEph^s: 1., not for the WorldIohn 17. How Christ died for all.. And therefore when the Scripture saith, Christ died for all men, wee must vnderstand it; first, in respect of
 the sufficiencie of his death, not in respect of the efficiencie of it. Secondly, in respect of the common oblation of the benefits of his death externally in the Gospell vnto all. Thirdly, as his death extendeth vnto all the Elect: for all; that is, for the Elect. Fourthly, for all, that is, for all that are saued, so that none that are iustified and saued, are so, but by the vertue of his death. Fiftly, for all, that is for all indefinitely; for all sorts of men, not for euery man of euery sort. Lastly, hee dyed for all, that is, not for the Iewes onely, but for the Gentiles also.
Qu.Quest. Are not all in the visible Church that are sealed with the Sacrament of Initiation made fit? An.Ans. No: for Nicodemus was circumcised, yet not as then fit for heauen; and Simon Magus was baptised, and yet perished in the gall of bitternesse; and many of the Israelites were signed with the same Sacraments of righteousnesse, and yet were destroyed with fearefull plagues1 Cor: 10.; the Pharisees were baptised with Iohns Baptisme, and yet in great danger of wrath to comeMath: 3. Fiue sorts of men not made fit..
There are fiue sorts of men that liue in the Church, that are not made fit: First, such as are in heart disioyned, so as indeede they care for the doctrine of no Church: and thus Atheist and Epicures are vnfit. Secondly, such as are in heart fastned to a false Church, though in shew they bee members of the true: thus Church-Papists are not fit. Thirdly, such as receiue Religion and care for it, but onely as it may fit the humours of such as are in authoritie, and may serue the currant of the present times: and thus temporising Polititians are not made fit. Fourthly, such as admit some parts of Gods worship, and stand in professed enmitie, and dislikes of the rest: and thus the common Protestant of all estates and degrees; they thinke if they come to the Church to seruice, and be no Papists, it will serue turne, though they neglect, yea, contemne, yea, commonly despight Preaching, priuate Prayer, true Fasting, religious Conference, and Fellowship in the Gospell.
Fiftly, and lastly, among the better sorts that are hearers, and constant hearers, there are many not made fit for the Kingdome of God: for many hearers rest in an Historicall Faith and externall righteousnesse, eyther betraying the seede, by suffering the Fiends of hell, those inuisible fowles of the Ayre, to take it away, or choking the seede by worldly cares, or if they get a taste of the good word of God, and of the powers of the life to come, by their wicked reuoults and backe-slidings, they shew themselues not fit, nor worthy the Kingdome of God.
Who] Doct. God onely can make men fit for his Kingdome: he onely can rescue vs from the power of darkenesse and Sathan: it is hee onely is the Lord of righteousnesse: it is hee onely that can pardon our sinnes: it is hee onely can heale our rebellions, and take away our iniquities: hee onely is the fountaine of all inherent holinesse: he onely is stronger then all, to preserue vs to the end, and crowne vs with glory.
Made fit.] The word may be rendred eyther made fit, or worthy, so it bee vnderstood of the merit of Christ imputed to vs, in whom onely wee are worthy of heauen.
Wee are made fit by Redemption, by vocation, by Adoption, by Iustification, by Sanctification, and by Glorification: for each of these addes something to our sufficiencie. The Vse is, to teach vs to magnifie Gods exceeding mercy, that doth not onely giue vs heauen, but make vs fit for Heauen. The greatest King in the world,Note. if hee set his loue vpon a base slaue or vassall, well hee may giue him an Earledome or great Office, but he cannot giue him fitnesse for his place, and gifts to execute it: hee may change his estate, but he cannot change his nature. But God doth not onely giue a Kingdome to his Seruants, but hee endues them with royall inclinations, desires, and behauiour.

The Rhemists vpon this place note, that wee deserue saluation condignely; but wee neede not answere them: for Thomas Aquinas, the ordinary Glosse, and Cardinall Caietan vpon this place, crosse them. Aquinas saith thus; Dixerunt aliqui Deus d^t dignis gratiam, etc. Some haue said God giues grace to the worthy, but not to the vnworthy: but the Apostle excludes this, because whatsoeuer worthinesse thou hast, God hath wrought it in thee: and to this end alledgeth, 2 Cor: 3. We are not sufficient of our selues to thinke a good thought. The Glosse thus: Hee makes vs worthy, not in the Law, but in Light: that is, through God, who is light of light, by whose grace we are inlightened. Caietan thus: worthy, that is, fit; by lot, that is, onely by Gods gift. Note, onely by Gods gift, the Papist saith.
To be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light: or, as it is in the originall, verbatim, Vnto the part of the lot of the Saints in light.]
The lot of the Saints, is by some taken for the sufferings of the Saints; by others, for their happinesse, as it is had in this life, in the right or inchoation of it; by others, for heauen, and that as it is held by true title here in this world: so I take it here.
How the lottery of Canaan shadowes out our inheritance in heauen.The word lot leadeth vs by allusion to Canaan, and the diuision thereof; and the comparison holdeth in many things. As none had right to the Land of Canaan, but Israelites; so none haue right to heauen, but the Saints: and as Canaan was furnished with buildings and all commodities, but not by the IsraelitesDeut: 8.7. etc., etc. so Heauen was prepared of old, before the Saints entred itMath: 25.: The builder and maker of it, was not the Saints, but God2 Cor: 5.. And as the Canaanites were throwne out, that Israell might enter; so the Diuels were throwne out of Heauen, that the Saints might enter. And as without a Ioshua, though there were a Land, there would be no lot; so without a Iesus, though there were a heauen, there would be no inheritance: and though the Land were giuen by lot, yet it must not bee possessed without a Combat; they must first fight, and then inherit: so must Heauen suffer violence, and before it be had, wee must wrestle with Principalities and Powers: and as all their lots were knowne to Ioshua; so euery Christian, in his standing, is knowne to Christ: as Ioshua had what hee askedIosh: 19.50.; so our Ioshua obtaines what hee askes, though hee aske the ends of the earthPsal: 2.. And as the comparison hath those things for information, so may diuers instructions be gathered from hence also: and first, if wee would haue any lot in Heauen, wee must be sure wee be true Israelites. Balaam seemes a friend to Israell, but hee is so farre from inheriting with them, that hee is destroyed by them; the sword of the Lord rootes him out: this will bee the portion of all HypocritesIosh: 13.12.. And wee should labour for a particular warrant in the knowledge of our owne portion: this would incourage vs against all difficulties. Caleb dares fight with the Anakins if Ioshua giue him HebronIosh: 14.6.11. etc., and feeble and complayning Ephraim shall ouercome and inlarge himselfe, if Ioshua particularly incourage himIosh: 17.. And as no Cananites ought to bee left in the Lot of Israell; so no wicked workers should be suffered to remaine in the assembly of the Saints, to be prickes and goades in the sides of the righteous. And as they that haue their inheritance allowed them already, must not rest, but fight till their brethren haue restJosh: 1.12.; so they that haue comfort in their owne conuersion, must strengthen their brethren. And if any haue too little roome, the way is not to murmure and doubt, but to fight it out for more; so must DanIosh: 19.14.: so should weake Christians not giue way to discontentment, but striue in the spirituall Combat, till more grace, and roome for the inlarging of the heart be gotten. Lastly, as seauen Tribes are iustly taxed and censured by Ioshua, for their negligence and sloath, in not seeking speedily to possesse the Land God had offered themIosh. 18.2.; so may the most of vs bee iustly
 rebuked for grieuous securitie about the heauenly Canaan. Many rest in the probabilities and hope of a title: nay, the most rest satisfied in such a condition as is without title and without hope, vnlesse they amend: yea, the better sort diuers of them, haue but a title: and therefore it iustly falleth out, that these are buffetted by Christ, as they were disgraced by Ioshua: and as they must stand to the curtesie of the viewers of the Land, for the report of the goodnesse of their part; so must these secure Christians stand to the curtesie of their Teachers for how much knowledge and comfort they shall thinke meete to impart vnto them, concerning their inheritance in heauen and heauenly things.
Partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.] The happinesse of the faithfull is an inheritance, illustrated here, first, by the persons that must enioy it: it is not common to all, but appropriated to Saints: secondly, by the qualitie of it, it is in light.
Christ is the great heyre of all thingsHeb: 1.1. Psal: 2., the Christian is coheyre with Christ. It is a doctrine that hath much comfort in it: a Christian holds by the fayrest tenure, and firmest, and surest too: for though his life be changeable, and his dayes on earth must haue an end, yet his inheritance endures for euer, and whiles hee liues God will know him all his dayes for no worse a man then his owne heyrePsal: 37.17.18.. And the consideration of the inheritance of the Saints, should teach vs diuers things: first, to pray, that God would remember vs with the fauour of his people, and visite vs with his saluation: and that then hee would open our eyes to see the glory of such an inheritancePsal: 106.3.4 Ephes: 1.18.: Secondly, to honour the righteous, and not despise poore Christians, seeing God hath made them his heyres, and rich in faithIames 2.5.. Thirdly, to endeauour with all care to walke worthy of such honour, as to be made Gods heyres. And lastly, to be willing to suffer any thing in this world for Christ, seeing in the world to come wee must raigne with him as coheyresRom: 8.17.18.
Of the Saints.] Onely Saints inherit, and therefore be sure thou be a Saint, be sure thou be more then flesh and bloud1 Cor: 15.50.; be sure thou lye in none of the sinnes God hath threatned with the losse of this inheritanceEphes: 5.5. 1 Cor: 6.9. Gal: 5.21.; bee sure of the imputation of the righteousnesse of ChristRom: 4.13.14 Tit. 3.7.; bee sure thou haue in thee the spirit of the SonneGal. 4.7. Ephes: 1.14.; bee sure to commit thy selfe to the word of graceActs 20.32..
In light.] The Christians inheritance is said to be held in light in sixe respects*
First, because hee now obtaines it in the times of the Gospell, which times in comparison with the times of the old Testament, are called times of light: the light of the Iewes being spread abroad among the Gentiles, and exceedingly enlarged by the rising of the Sunne of righteousnesse.
Secondly,A three-fold light in man. because this inheritance can neuer be assured without the light of knowledge. In the vnderstanding of man there is a three-folde light of knowledge; Naturall, Euangelicall, and Celestiall: the Naturall light is the light of Reason: the Euangelicall light is the light of Faith: and the Celestiall light is the light of Heauen. Before we can see our inheritance in the light of Heauen, wee must first see it in the light of Faith: and as for the light of Reason it will do no good for any euidence in this tenure.
Thirdly, because this inheritance is held with true ioy on earth, and perfect ioy in heauen: and Ioy is expressed by the word light, in many places in Scripture.
Fourthly, in respect of the admirable communion that a Christian hath with God and Christ, who is light of light; that true light, Iohn 8.12.
Fiftly, because of the certainety of this inheritance, it is said to bee held in light. It is worthy the noting, that Catharinus, a Papist, writing vpon this place, thus vnderstands the meaning of Light: and is much
 offended with those that pleade for vncertaintie of assurance.
Sixtly, in light, that is, in Heauen: and the light of Heauen in an excellent light, both for the perfection of it, and the continuance of it. It is a perfect light: for there shall be on Gods part a cleare reuelation, and on mans part a cleare vision: and for continuance; that light shall neuer be ouercome of darkenesse; nay, it shall neuer admit any mixture of obscuritie, in as much as Heauen is a Citie that needes not the Sunne nor Moone to shine in it, for the glory of God doth lighten it, and the Lambe is the light thereof, Reuel. 21.23. In the meane while till God translate vs to this light of heauen, let vs labour to settle our heartes in the light of Faith and certaintie, and glad our hearts with the light of the Spirit and ioy, choosing rather to die then to forsake the face and presence of God, the fountaine of all true light both in earth and heauen.



Verse 13. Who hath deliuered vs from the power of Darkenesse, and translated vs into the Kingdome of his deare Sonne.

IN this Verse our redemption is considered more particularly: for as it is by inchoation in this life, it stands of two parts: the first is our deliuerance from the power of Darkenesse, and the second is, our translating into the kingdome of CHRIST.
A sixe-folde darkenesse in euery vnregenerate man.Darkenesse.] This Darkenesse imports the miserie of vnregenerate men, from which the Children of God, in the daies of Redemption are deliuered: and it notes not onely the darkenesse of Gentilisme, proper to the Pagans of that time, but also the darkenesse of Sinne, of Ignorance, of Infidelitie, of Aduersitie, of Death, and of Hell: for euery vnregenerate man is couered with a sixe-fold darkenesse. First, the darkenesse of SinneRom: 13.13.. Secondly, the darkenesse of Ignorance, which as a vaile, couers all fleshIohn 8.12. Esay 25.8. 2 Cor: 3.17., Thirdly, the darkenesse of Infidelitie; for as there is the light of Faith in the regenerate; so there is a darkenesse of vnbeliefe, that possesseth euery vnregenerate man. All men haue not Faith; it is the gift of God: both the Prophets and Apostles haue complained, Who hath beleeued our reportEsay 13.1. Rom: 10.16.? Fourthly, the darkenesse of AduersitieEsay 8.22.: miseries of all sorts breaking in vpon the soule, body, state, and names of men. Fiftly, the darkenesse of Death: for Death is the house of Darkenesse, and this is the wages of SinnePsal: 88.12.. Lastly, the wicked man is in danger of vtter darkenesse, euen of the darkenesse of hell. Out of all this we may see the extreame miserie of all carnall persons, vpon whom the Kingdome of darkenesse breakes in, and preuailes so many waies: and therefore accursed is their misery that can liue in this estate without sense, or remorse, or feare. If Securitie as a wretched Lethargy, had not ouergrowne mens hearts, how could they eate, drinke, sleepe, marry, giue in marriage, etc. when they finde themselues in the power of such fearefull and horrible darkenesse?
Power.] This darkenesse gets power, and preuailes ouer the world, by the vnwearied labour of the Prince of darkenesse: who as hee seduced our first Parents, to extinguish the faire light in which they were created, (whence flowed an vniuersall darkenesse vpon all mankinde) so doth hee still, as God of the vnregenerate world, worke effectually, in blinding mens mindes more and more, that the light of the Gospell might not shine in their hearts, both by hindering by all the waies hee can, the meanes of light, and by leading man on from sinne to sinne, till custome haue worne out sense, and bred a very liking of darkenesse more then the light. And thus poore man runnes from darkenesse to darkenesse, and from dungeon to dungeon, till hee fall vnto the euerlasting dungeon of vtter darkenesse,
 and this would be the end of all flesh, were it not that God of his infinite mercie hath prouided a meanes in Iesus Christ to deliuer the Elect from the power of this Darknesse.
Deliuered.] Euery man hath great reason to thinke of this deliuerance out of the Kingdome of darkenesse, wherein naturally hee is: for while he so continueth, he knoweth not whither he goethIohn 12.35. 1 Iohn 2.11.: he hath no fellowship with God1 Iohn 1.5.: his deedes are all euillIoh: 3.19.20: his ignorance will not excuse himIohn 1.5.: yea, it will bee his condemnationIohn 3.19.: his feete treade not in the way of peaceLuke 4.79. (...)..
Who hath deliuered vs.] Here are foure things: 1. What, [deliuered;] 2. Whom, [vs;] 3. When, [hath;] 4. Who, viz. God the Father.
Deliuered.] The originall word doth not signifie, onely, to let out, or lead out, or buy out; but it noteth forcibly to snatch out. Man is not gotten so easily out of Sathans hands: nor will the World and Flesh let him goe without force, or without blowes.
Quest.Quest. What must wee doe that wee may be deliuered from this power of darkenesse. Ans.Ans. Beleeue in Iesus Christ, who is the true lightIohn 8.12.. Know that all true light is begunne in the assurance of Gods loue to thee in Iesus Christ: seeke this knowledge. To this end, attend vpon the preaching of the Gospell, by which, life and immortalitie are brought to lightIohn 8.12.. And because this Sonne doth not alwaies shine, Walke in the light while you haue the lightIohn 12.35.. and because a man can neuer sincerely seeke the comforts of God in Iesus Christ, or constantly loue the word of the Kingdome (the fountaine of light) but that there will be great opposition from Sathan and the World. Therefore euery one (that is a weary of this darkenesse, of Ignorance and Vnbeliefe, and feeles what darkenesse of Aduersitie his sinnes haue brought vpon him, and feares the darkenesse of Death and Hell) must arme himselfe, resolue and prepare and fight for his owne deliuerance, putting on the whole Armour of light, vsing all the meanes with Faith and diligence, and then shall Gods power be made knowne in his weakenesse; and the strong man armed, which is the Diuell, shall be cast out by him that is stronger then hee, euen by Iesus Christ.
At the time when this deliuerance from the power of darknes is wrought there are at the least these nine things in euery one that is truely deliuered.Nine things in euery one that is deliuered from darkenesse. First, hee seekes knowledge with great estimation of it. Secondly, hee is carefull to amend his waies and to auoide sinne. Thirdly, hee feeles and resists temptations. Fourthly, hee renounceth the world, as being neither besotted with vanitie, nor swayed with example. Fiftly, hee fights against his owne flesh. Sixtly, hee loues the word of God. Seauenthly, he forsakes euill company. Eightly, hee mournes ouer, and praies against some speciall sinnes. Ninthly, hee loues all the children of the light. These are not all things that are wrought in man in the day his heart is changed and hee deliuered: but lesse than this can bee in no man nor woman that is truely deliuered from the power of darkenesse.
Who.] Doct. It is God onely that deliuers vs from darkenesse. This is needfull to be considered of, both that carnall men may know they can neuer see the light, if they vse not the meanes God hath appointed: and that godly men might not despaire vnder the sense of their wants; for as God hath called them to the light, and giuen them meanes, so he is able to create light at his owne pleasure.
Vs.] Doct. The Saints, euen the dearest of all Gods Children, haue beene ignorant, sinfull, and miserable, as well as any other.
Hath.] A Question may here be asked:Quest. how it can be said that Gods children haue beene deliuered, seeing they are ignorant, sinfull, fleshly, full of afflictions, and subiect to dye still? Ans.Ans. They are deliuered in respect of
 Inchoation, though not in respect of Consummation; though they bee ignorant, yet the vayle is not whole, but many pieces are torne off; though they be in a dungeon in this world, yet a great window is broken downe, and much light appeares; though there be sinne in them, yet it raignes not; though they must die, yet the sting of death is pulled out; though they endure the same afflictions that wicked men doe for the matter, yet they are not the same for nature and vse: they are not curses or punishments, but onely chastisements, and tryals, or preuentions.
The consideration of this, that wee are not all at once deliuered from the power of darkenesse, may defend often preaching, and the frequent vse of all good meanes, publike or priuate. This darkenesse will not away with one dayes shining; these clouds will not bee dispelled with one blast; what's the light of one candle, when the night hath inclosed the whole ayre?
And translated vs into the kingdome of his deare Sonne.] Or, as it is in the Originall, of the Sonne of his loue.
These words containe the second part of our Redemption on earth in this world: the redeeming of vs is the translating of vs: and this translation is amplified by the condition of life into which wee are translated, which for the excellencie of it, is into a Kingdome; and for the author of it, is into the kingdome of Iesus Christ, the Sonne of Gods loue.
Translated.] The word, is a Metaphor and the comparison is taken from Plants in nature, and there are diuers things signified vnto vs, concerning our Redemption, in the similitude of translating Plants. As trees are translated in Winter, not in the Spring; so commonly our Redemption is applied in the dayes of speciall affliction and sorrowJob 33.14. vers. 31.: and as the Plant is not first fruitfull and then translated; but therefore translated, that it may beare fruit: so wee are not therefore redeemed because God was in loue with our fruits; but therefore translated out of the kingdome of darkenesse, that we might bring foorth fruit vnto God. And as a tree may be truely remoued, and new planted, and yet not presently beare fruite: so may a Christian bee truely translated, and yet in the first instant of his conuersion hee may not shew foorth all that fruit he doth desire, etc.
What translating hath in it.In particular, translating hath two things in it: first, pulling vp: secondly, setting againe. The pulling vp of the tree, shadowes out three things in the conuersion of a Sinner. First, separation from the world: hee cannot be in Christ that hath his heart rooted in the earth, and keepes his olde standing amongst these trees, the wicked of the world. Secondly, deliuerance both from originall sinne in the raigne of it (which is the moysture of the olde earth) and also from hardnesse of heart, (for translating hath remoouing of the mould and stones that were about the roote.) Thirdly, godly sorrow raised by the sense of the stroakes of the Axe of Gods threatnings, and by the losse of many sprowts and branches that were hidden in the earth: A Christian cannot scape without sorrow; for hee hath many an vnprofitable sprowt of vanitie, and sinfull profit and pleasure hee must part with. The setting of the tree notes both our ingrafting into Christ by the Spirit of God through Faith, and our communion with the Saints, (the fruitfull trees in Gods Orchard) as also it notes our preseruation by the infusion of the sappe of holy graces.
Our natures are translated, not destroied.And it is worthy to be noted that he saith (translated vs) to teach vs that there remaines in man the same nature after Calling that was before: for, our natures are not destroyed in conuersion, but translated: there remaines the same faculties in the soule, and the same powers in the body; yea, the constitution and complexion of man is not destroyed: as the melancholy man doth not cease to be so after conuersion, onely the humour is
 sanctified vnto a fitnesse for godly sorrow, and holy meditation, and the easie renouncing of the world etc. and the like may bee said of other humours in mans nature.
Into the Kingdome.] The kingdome of God is either vniuersall ouer the whole world, or spirituall ouer the faithfull Soules on earth, or blessed soules in heauen, till the day of Iudgement: or it is both spirituall and corporall, ouer all the Saints, after the day of iudgement for euer. It is the Kingdome of Grace by inchoation, in the way, present, here below, that is here meant, not the Kingdome of Glory by Consummation in our Countrey aboue.
The Kingdome of Christ here on earth,Christs Kingdome better then all other Kingdomes. though it be not so visible and pompous as other kingdomes are, yet it excels all the kingdomes on earth: for when all other kingdomes are not onely shaken, but translated or remoued, or dissolued, the kingdome of Christ will endure to the end: and in Christs kingdome the number of possessors doth not diminish the largenesse of the possession of each: whereas in other states many Kings make little Kingdomes. Besides, wicked men may not onely be Subiects but Kings in other kingdomes; but this Kingdome though it be euery where, yet it is wanting to the ignorant and sinners Christ raignes in this Kingdome by his Word and Spirit: and his gouernment is taken vp especially in two things; first, the collection of his Church; and secondly, the maintenance of it.
Great are the priuiledges of the Saints vnder the gouernement of Iesus Christ; they are qualified with eternall graces;The priuiledges of the Subiects of this Kingdome. they are comforted with the daily refreshings that flow from the sense of Gods fauour; they are confirmed in the assured peace with Angels and good men; they are estated into an euerlasting inheritance; they daily reape the benefits of Christs Intercession; they often suppe with Christ, and are feasted by the great King; they liue alwaies in the Kings Court, in as much as they are alwaies in Gods speciall presence; they partake of the priuiledges, Prayers, and blessings of all the righteous; and they haue the Spirit of God in them, to vnite them to God and Christ, to leade them in the pathes of holy life, to comfort them in all distresses, to warne them if they goe out eyther on the left hand or the right, and to helpe them in their prayers, making request for them, when they know not what to pray as they ought.
Obiect.Obiect. The World sees no such glory in the estate of Christians in this Kingdome. Sol. There lyes a vayle ouer the eyes of all worldly men:Solut. and besides, this Kingdome though it be in the world, is not of it: though it be here, yet it is not from hence: and the afflictions that commonly couer the face of the Church, doe hide from carnall men the beautie of it; and by reason of the opposition that is betweene the Kingdome of Christ and the Kingdome of Darkenesse, though the world know the glory of Christians, yet they will not acknowledge it.
Obiect.Obiect. The faithfull themselues discerne not any such excellencie in their earthly condition. Sol. Wee must distinguish of Christians:Solut. some are but infants in grace and babes: these may be entituled to great things, and yet haue no great sense of it; as the Childe in Nature hath no great discerning of the inheritance hee is borne to; or his owne present condition wherein hee excels others. A kingdome is neuer the worse because the infant Prince cannot discourse of the glory of it. Some Christians fall away, for the time, into grosse sinne or error: and these are in matters of grace like the drunken man, or Paraliticke in nature, their discerning is lost with their vprightnesse: other Christians either want the meanes in the power of it, or are tossed with great afflictions, or are in the fit of temptation; and then they haue but a darke glimpse of their felicity in Christ: but the strong Christian
 that hath digested the assurance of Gods loue in Christ, and is exercised in the word of righteousnesse, sees such a glory in the Kingdome of Grace, and doth acknowledge it with such vnmoueable firmenesse of heart, that all the powers of either earth, or hell, cannot alter his iudgement, in the high estimation of such a condition.
Vses.The Vse of this Doctrine concerning Christs Kingdome, is:
First, for Consolation: Gods Children should much exult and reioyce in their estates; and in as much as Christ sitteth as king for euer, all that are in his Temple should speake of his gloryPsal: 29.10.18.: and if there were nothing else for a Christian to ioy in, yet let all the children of Sion reioyce in their KingPsal: 149.2.. Yea, the thought of this, that God is our King, should vphold vs, and fence vs against all crossesPsal: 74.12.: for Christ is a hiding place for the winde, and a couer for the tempest, as riuers of waters in a dry place, and as the shadow of a great rocke in a weary LandEsay 32.2.. And therefore let our eyes neuer grow dimme in viewing this glory, or our eares grow dull in harkening to the word of this Kingdome.
Secondly, for Reproofe and terrour vnto all wicked men that harden their hearts, and refuse to returne. What greater losse then to lose Christs Kingdome? and what fairer seruice then to serue the Sonne of God? Who would not feare thee, O King of NationsJer: 10.7.: accursed is the estate of all such as subiect not their neckes to Christs yoake: that refuse to let him raigne ouer them by his Word and Spirit: that come not vp to doe their homage in Ierusalem, euen to worshippe this King, the Lord of HoastsZach. 14.17.. If Iesus Christ be a great King, then where shall they appeare, that say to the King ApostataIob 34.18.? Euen all such I meane that dare reproach the way of Christ, and deride the sinceritie of such as desire to imploy themselues in the businesse of the Kingdome, etc. Is hee a great King, how dare wee then offer that vnto him which they durst not offer to a meane King on earth? What meane the blinde and the lame in Gods houseMal: 1.13.14? how dare men so securely offer vp their blinde lip-seruice, and lame deuotions? It is a Kingdome that is offered, why doe wee then trifle? why doe they excuse? What meanes these fond excuses; I haue married a wife, and cannot come: I haue bought fiue yoake of Oxen, and must goe proue them: I haue bought a Farme, and must goe see it? I haue this pleasure and that profit, and therefore cannot come? Will they lose a Kingdome vpon so silly a pretence? when thou needest not to lose either Wife, Farme, or Oxen. God doth not bid thee leaue thy Wife, thy Labour, thy Calling, thy Liuing, but onely wils thee to attend thine owne further aduancement in the season of it: seeke lawfull profit, but seeke Grace first, Vse thy lawfull pleasures, but chiefly seeke the pleasures of God, euen these spirituall ioyes that are more worth then a Kingdome.
Thirdly, for Instruction: it should teach vs aboue all things to seeke our happinesse in this excellent estate vnder the gouernement of Iesus Christ. Wee should, in respect of the worth of it, forsake our Fathers house, and the immoderate desire of any earthly thing: so that the King will please to delight in vsPsal: 4.5.. Wee should open our hearts wider, that the King of Glorie, by his Word and Spirit, may come inPsal: 24.10.. Wee should labour for all those Graces, by which an entrance is ministred into this Kingdome2 Pet: 1.8.11: and whatsoeuer we are vncertaine of, wee should make our Calling and Election sure: and though we bee neuer so many waies opposed, yet seeing wee fight for a Kingdome (nay, in a Kingdome) wee should hold it alwaies a good fight1 Tim: 6., and continue constant and vnmoueable: and if Christ lead vs into his ChambersCant: 1.3. of presence, and delight vs with the sweete ioyes of his presence, wee should remember such princely loue and ioy in him alwaies: Let the Christian sing and make a ioyfull noyse to the rocke of his saluation, and let him worshippe and bow downe, let him serue with all reuerence, and heare without all hardnes of heartPsal: 95.1.3.:
 let no discontentment possesse the heart of the true Christian: for to serue Christ is to raigne, and all his Subiects are Kings, and the worst estate of the meanest Christian is a rich Kingdome.
Of his Sonne] Quest.Quest. Why is it called the Kingdome of the Sonne, rather then of the Father.Ans. Answ. Because God hath giuen all the power to the Sonne, and this Kingdome is assigned ouer to him. The merit of this happinesse is onely in Christ, and the vertue that gathers vs into this kingdome is onely from CHRIST, and no man commeth to the Father but by Christ.
Sonne of his loue.] Christ is the Sonne of Gods loue: first, because hee is most worthy of all others to be beloued. As Iudas is the Sonne of perdition, that is, most worthy to be damned. Secondly, because hee was from euerlasting begotten of the loue of his Father: hee is Gods naturall Sonne. Thirdly, because he is infinitely filled with the sense of his loue: so they are said to be the Children of the marriage, that are full of ioy, in respect of the marriage. Fourthly, because it is hee by whom loue is deriued into others: It is hee that makes all other Sonnes, beloued. Lastly, in respect of his humane nature: he is that Sonne vpon whom God hath shewed his principall loue, in respect of the gifts, with which that nature is admirably qualified. The meditation of this, that CHRIST our Sauiour is the Sonne of Gods loue, is very comfortable; for hee is like to speede in any thing hee requests the Father for vs, and hee will be sure to preserue vs, that himselfe is a Kings Sonne, yea, Gods Sonne, yea, a King, and God himselfe, and so infinitely beloued of the Father: it is an excellent thing to be Christs member, seeing hee inherits so great loue: and if God gaue vs this Sonne so deare to him, how shall hee denie any thing, seeing neuer can ought bee so precious, but that with Christ hee will willingly giue it?



Verse 14. In whom wee haue redemption, through his bloud, euen the forgiuenesse of sinnes.

IN the former Verses our Redemption is considered, as God the Father is the efficient cause of it. In this Verse it is considered as CHRIST is the Instrumentall cause of it: in the Verse foure things are to be noted. 1. By whom wee are redeemed (viz.) by the Sonne of Gods loue, implyed in the first words. 2. Who are redeemed [wee,] that is, the faithfull. 3. How wee are redeemed, (viz.) by his bloud. 4. With what kinde of redemption, not by redemption from losse in estate, or seruitude in body, but from sinne in the soule.
In whom.] Doct. The Sonne of God is the redeemer of the sonnes of men: hee that had no sinnes of his owne, did worthily cancell other mens: hee that was in no debt, paid our debts. In this worke of Redemption wee may see Pietie it selfe beaten for the impious man: and Wisedome it selfe derided for the foolish man: and Truth it selfe slaine for the lying man: and Iustice it selfe condemned for the vniust man: and Mercy it selfe afflicted for the cruell man: and Life it selfe dying for the dead man. None can redeeme vs but Iesus Christ: hee onely is God and man, he only was deputed hereunto, he onely it is that is the first borne, the brother, and the kinsmanLeuit: 25. Two things required in a Redeemer.. Two things are required in a Sauiour or Redeemer, viz. Right and Power: and the title or right must be either by propriety or by propinquitie. In power and propriety the Father or holy Ghost might redeeme, but in propinquitie Christ onely is the next kinsman.
Secondly, it is to be noted, that hee saith (in whom) not (by whom) to teach vs, that the comfort of our Redemption is not then had when Christ,
 as Mediator, doth pay the price: but when, as our Head, hee receiueth vs to himselfe: we must be in Christ before wee can bee pardoned: it is a vaine thing to alledge that Christ died for vs, vnlesse wee can cleare it, that wee are the members of Christ by conuersion and regeneration: wee must be in Christ before the Diuell will let go his hold: wee must bee in Christ before wee can receiue of the influence of his grace; for that descends onely from the Head to the Members: wee must be in Christ before we can be couered with his garment: and if wee be not in the Vine we cannot perseuer.
Wee.] Quest.Quest. How could the obedience and sufferings of one man serue to redeeme so many men? Ans.Ans. It is sufficient because he did all willingly; because also hee was himselfe innocent and without fault: but especially because this obedience and suffering was the obedience of him that was more then man.
Againe, it is to be noted that hee saith (wee,) not all men, haue redemption, as the Vniuersalistes dreame.
Haue.] Quest.Quest. Had not the Fathers before Christ, redemption in him as well as wee? Ans.Ans. They had: first, in Predestination, because they were herevnto elect: secondly, in efficacie, in as much as they that did beleeue in Christ, had the vertue of the redemption to come. Hence, that Christ is said to bee the Lambe slaine from the beginning of the world.
By his bloud.] Christ shed his bloud many waies: as when hee was circumcised, in his Agonie in the Garden, when hee was crowned and whipped, when hee was crucified, and when with a Speare his side was pierced; but here it is by a Synecdoche taken for all his sufferings.
Foure waies of redemption.There haue beene in former times foure waies of redemption. First, by Manumission, when the Lord let his Vassaile voluntarily goe out free: but thus could not wee be redeemed; for the Diuell neuer meant to manumit vs. Secondly, by Permutation, as when in the warres one is exchanged for another: and thus could not wee be redeemed; for who should bee changed for vs? Thirdly, by violent ablation, as Abraham redeemed Lot, by force rescuing him: but this way did not stand with Gods Iustice. Fourthly, by giuing a Price, and thus wee are redeemed: but what price was giuen? not Gold and Siluer, nor the bloud of Goates; not thousands of Rammes, or riuers of Oyle; not the Sonnes of our bodies, for the sinnes of our soulesMich: 6.4.5.: nay, if a whole thousand of vs had beene burned in one heape, it would not haue expiated for one mans sinne: but the price was the bloud of Iesus Christ1 Pet: 1.19., and by this price wee may see how hatefull a thing sinne is in Gods sight;Vses. and wee may resolue that wee are not our owne men, any more to doe what we list. Neither ought wee to be seruants of men2 Cor: 5. The comforts in the doctrin of forgiuenes of sinnes.. Besides, if there had beene merit in the workes of the Law, the Sonne of God needed not to haue shed his bloud: and seeing it is shed, wee neede no other Mediator, nor workes of satisfaction, or supererogation.
Forgiuenesse of sinnes.] The doctrine of remission of sinnes is many waies comfortable: it is a comfort, 1. That sinnes may be remitted1 Iohn 2.1.: 2. That this remission may be applyed particularly;Esay 43.25. Ier. 35.34. Micha 7.19. Psal: 32.1. thou maist haue it, and keepe it for thy selfe1 Iohn 1.9.: 3. That if our sinnes be once forgiuen, they can neuer bee laid to our charge more; they returne not: 4. That where God forgiues one sinne, hee forgiues all sinnes1 Iohn 2.6.: 5. That where God forgiues sinne, hee heales the nature; where hee iustifies bee sanctifies. An earthly Prince may forgiue the Felon, but hee cannot giue him a better disposition; but God neuer forgiues any man, but hee giues him a new heart alsoEzech. 36.26.27. 1 Iohn 1.9. and 21.4. Acts 5.31.. 6. That where God forgiues the sinne, hee forgiues the punishment alsoPsal. 32 4. Math 9.2.5.. Lastly, that by remission of sinnes we may know our saluationLuke 1.77..
Secondly, as it is a comfortable Doctrine to faithfull men, so it is a terrible
 Doctrine to wicked men, and that many waies: first,The terror of the doctrine of forgiuenes of sinnes. all mens sinnes are not forgiuen: secondly, all neede remission of sinnes: thirdly, if sinne be not forgiuen, it makes men loathsome to GodPsal: 32.1.; which the word (couer) importeth: it sets the Soule in debt: it separates betweene God and vs, and hinders good things from vsEsay 59.2.: it defiles: it remaines vpon Record, written with a penne of Iron, and with the point of a DiamondIer: 17.1.:Psal: 51.1. it causeth all the disquietnesse of the heartPsal: 38.3.: it is the cause of all Iudgements: It brings deathRom: 6. vlt. What a man should do to get his sinnes forgiuen him..
Thirdly, a Question is here to be considered of, viz. What should a man doe that hee may get a comfortable assurance that his sinnes are forgiuen him? Ans. He that would be assured of remission of sinnes must doe these things. First, hee must forgiue other men their trespasses against him, else hee cannot be forgiuenLuke 4.18. 1 Iohn 1.9. Hos: 14.3. Zach: 12.12. Chap: 13.1.. Secondly, hee must search out his sinnes by the Law,Math: 6.14. and mourne ouer them in Gods presence, striuing to breake and bruise his owne heart with griefe in secret, in the confession of them to God, Luk. 4.18. 1 Iohn 1.9. Hos. 14.3. Zach. 12.12. to the end, and 13.1. Thirdly, wee must take heede of the sinne against the holy Ghost: which beginning in Apostacie, is continued in Persecution of the knowne Truth, and ends in Blasphemie; and is therefore a sinne vnpardonable, because the sinner is vtterly disabled of the power to repent. And howsoeuer all sinnes against the holy Ghost are not vnpardonable, but onely that sinne that hath the former three things in it; yet the man that would haue euidence of pardon, must take heede of all wayes of offending against Gods Spirit: and therefore must take heede of speaking euill of the way of godlinesse, of contemning the meanes of Grace, by which the Spirit workes, and of tempting, grieuing or vexing of the holy Ghost within his owne heart or others. Fourthly, he must daily attend vpon the preaching of the Gospell, till the Lord be pleased to quicken his owne Promises, and his heart to the ioyfull application of the Comforts of Gods Loue, conteined in his Word. And when men come to Gods presence to seeke so great a mercy as the pardon of sinne, they must aboue all things, take heede of wilfull hardnesse of heart, least their vnwillingnesse to be directed by Gods Word, be requited with that curse that God should grow vnwilling that they should repent, and hee should forgiue themMarke 4.11.12. Acts 26.18.. Fiftly, the Prayers of the faithfull are very auaileable to procure the pardon of sinIam. 5.16.. Sixtly, he must with due preparation be often in receiuing the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which is to the worthy Receiuer, a worthy Seale of RemissionMath 26.28.. Seauenthly, he must amend his life and belieue in Iesus ChristMark: 1.4. Acts 5.31. and 10.43..



Verse 15. Who is the Image of the inuisible God, and the first begotten of euery Creature.

HItherto of the worke of Redemption: now followeth the person of the Redeemer, who is described as hee standeth in relation.

1 To God. Vers. 15.
2 To the vniuerse or whole World, Vers. 15.16.17.
3 To the Church, Vers. 18.19. etc.

In all the Verses in generall,That Christ is GOD. may be obserued the euident proofe of his diuine Nature. For, as the Verses before, when they mention Redemption in his bloud, proue him to be man; so these Verses, ascribing to him, Eternitie, Omnipotence, etc. prooue him to be God. That our Sauiour is God, may be further confirmed, by these places of Scripture: Gen. 19.24. Iudg 2.1.4.14. Psal. 45. Prou. 8.22. Iob. 19.25. Isay 7.14. and 9.6. and 35.2.4. and 40 3.10.12. and 43.10.11.23. and 45.22. Ier. 23.5.6. Hos. 1.7. and 12.4. Mich. 2.12. and 4.1. Iohn 1.1. etc. 1 Iohn 5.20. Reuel. 1.6.

Christ more excellent then al Monarches in diuers respects.Besides, the Apostles drift is to extoll the excellencie of Christ, by whose bloud we are redeemed. Howsoeuer hee appeared in forme of a seruant, yet hee exceeded all Monarches, that euer were on earth: for Christ is the essentiall Image of God, whereas the greatest Monarchs are Gods Image, but by a small participation. Hee is the Sonne of God by generation, they are so onely by creation or regeneration. Hee is the first borne, they are but yonger brothers at the best: Hee is the Creator, they are but Creatures: All things are for him, whereas they haue right and power ouer but few things: hee is eternall, they are mortall. Things cannot consist without a Redeemer in Heauen; but so they may without a Monarch on earth: hee is a mysticall Head, and by his Spirit vniteth all his Subiects to him, and by influence preserueth them: but so can no politicall heads doe their Subiects. Other things I might instance in the Verses following, but these shall suffice.
The first thing in particular by which the Redeemer is described is his relation to God in these words: Who is the Image of the inuisible God.]
Here three things are to be considered: First, the Person resembling, Who: Secondly the manner how he resembleth, viz. by the way of Image: thirdly, the person resembled, in his Nature, God: in the Attribute of his Nature, Inuisible. For the first, if wee be asked of whom hee here speaketh, it is easily answered out of the former Verses: It is the Sonne of GOD, the Sonne of his Loue, Verse 13. And thither I referre the consideration of the first poynt.
Difference betweene Image and Similitude.Image.] Our Redeemer resembles God by way of Image.
There is difference betweene the Image of a thing, and the Similitude of it. The Sunne in the Firmament expresseth God by Similitude; for as there is but one Sunne, so there is but one God: And as no man can looke vpon the Sunne in his brightnesse; so no man can see God with mortall eyes, etc. But yet the Sunne is not therefore Gods Image. Gods Image is in Man, and in Christ.
Gods Image is in man three waies.Gods Image is in man three wayes: First, by Creation; and so it is in all men, euen worst men, in as much as there is in them, an aptitude to know and conceiue of God, etc. Secondly, by Recreation; and so it is in holy men, that doe actually and habitually know and conceiue of God, etc. but this is vnperfectly. Thirdly, by similitude of glory; and so the blessed in heauen conceiue of, and resemble God, and that (in comparison with the two former) perfectly.
The difference betweene the Image of God in Man and in Christ.But there is great difference betweene the Image of God in man, and the Image of God, in Christ. In Christ, it is as Caesars Image in his Sonne; in Man, it is as Caesars Image in his Coyne. Christ is the naturall Image of God, and of the same substance with God, whom he doth resemble: but the Christian is Gods Image only in some respects, neither is he of the same nature with God. Man is both the Image of God, and after the Image of God; The Image of God because he truly resembles God;Imago, and ad Jmaginem. and after the Image of God, because hee resembles him, but vnperfectly. But Christ is the perfect Image of God, and not after his Image. Some expresse the difference thus: Christ is the Image of the inuisible God, but Man is the Image of the visible God, that is, of Christ.
Christ, is the Image of God three wayes: 1. in Operation, because it is he that worketh Gods Image in vs: 2. in Apparition, because hee appeared for God, to the Fathers in the old Law: 3. in Person, and that in both natures, both as God and Man; for the most perfect Image of God, is Christ, God: the perfect image of God is Christ, Man: the vnperfect Image of God, is Man.

That Christ is the Image of God, as he is God, is apparant by that place, Phil. 2.6. and Heb. 1.4. And here, two things are admirable: first, that this Image is an infinite Image, like the thing resembled: secondly, that the Image is the same in Number, not in Specie onely, with the thing resembled.
Christ as man, is the Image of God, 1 Tim. 3.16. And that three waies: First, as the God-head dwels in Christ bodily: in respect of the vnutterable presence of the diuine Nature. Secondly, as by his Miracles and great works, he manifested the Diuine Nature, and shewed God in the world. Thirldly, as his Humane Nature is qualified with Knowledge, Righteousnesse, Purity, and other gifts: for if man be Gods Image in respect of this, Christ is so much more. To conclude, Christ as he is God, is not onely the Image of the inuisible God, but the inuisible Image of God: but as man, he is the visible Image, of the inuisible God.
The Considerations of this Doctrine,Vse. that Christ is the Image of the inuisible God, may serue for sixe Vses. First, to teach vs the admiration of that God, whose Image is of so admirable praises. Secondly, to shew the fearefulnesse of their estate, that turne the glory of the incorruptible GOD into the Image of corruptible Creatures.Rom: 1.23. And this is the sinne not onely of the Gentiles, but of the Papists also. Thirdly, it should wonderfully quicken vs to all the duties of humblenesse of minde, and meekenesse, and make vs readie in all things, to serue one another, without wrangling, or contention, in loue; seeing hee that was in forme of God, equall with GOD,Phil: 2.1.2.3.6 put vpon him the forme and Image of a Seruant. Fourthly, wee may hence learne, that if wee would know God, wee must get into Christ; for in him onely is the Father knowne: hee that hath seene Christ, hath seene the FatherIohn 14.9. 2 Cor: 4.4.. Labour then in the businesse of Mortification and Iustification, and then that knowledge of God, which is impossible to Nature, will bee possible to Grace. They haue the firmest apprehension of God, not that haue the most Wit or Learning, but that haue the most grace in Iesus Christ. One may bee a great Scholler, and yet a great Atheist. The surest way is to know the Creator in the Redeemer. Fiftly, seeing it is Christs honour to bee Gods Image, let it bee our honour to bee Christs Image, which wee can neuer bee, vnlesse wee put off the olde man, and his workesCol: 39.10.. And see to it, that the light of the Gospell be not hid from vs, by the God of this world, for the Gospell is the Gospell of glory2 Cor: 4.4. and 3.18. Gal: 4.19. (...)., 2 Cor. 4.4. and 3.18.9. etc. Gal. 4.19. Now, wee may bee framed like to the Image of Christ, in three things: 1. In KnowledgeCol: 3.10.: 2. in SufferingsRom: 8.29.: 3. in holinesse and righteousnesse of heart and lifeEphes: 4.21.24.: Lastly, shall the Diuell make men worshippe the Image of the beastReuel: 13.; and shall not we for euer honour this euerlasting Image of our God?
Inuisible God.] God is inuisibleIohn 1.18. 1 Tim: 6.16. Iohn 9.11. etc. and 23.9.10. Vse.; God cannot bee seene, because hee is a Spirit, not a body; and because of the exceeding thinnesse and puritie of his nature, and because of the transplendency of his glory; and lastly, because of the infinitenesse of his Essence.
The Vse is, first, to teach vs to walke alwaie in feare and trembling, seeing we serue such a God, as sees vs, when we see not himPsa. 65.5. etc.: secondly, this should checke the secret and beastly discontentment of our hearts, which are many times moued to vexation, because our God is not visible; whereas we should therefore the more admire him, that is so absolutely perfect: It were imperfection to be visible. And yet notwithstanding, though God be not visible to sense, hee is visible to vnderstanding: and though Nature cannot see him, yet Grace can. Now, if any aske what hee might doe that hee might see God, I answere, that he that would see God: first, hee must looke for him in the Land of the liuing k: seeke for him amongst true Christians: hee must
 first know and loue his brother: and then hee shall know and see God1 Iohn 4.12.. Hee that would know the Father, must bee acquainted with the Childe. Secondly, he must with feare, and reuerence, and constancie, waite vpon the manifestation of God in his house; in that light we shall see light. Wee must eate at Gods Table, and it must be our contentment to taste of the fatnesse of his house, and to drinke out of the riuer of those pleasures, if we would with cleare light see GodPsa. 36.8.9.. God is to be seene in SionPsalm: 84.5.7.8.: Gods goings are seene in the SanctuaryPsal: 68.24.. Thirdly, he must learne Gods Name; for he that knowes his Name, sees his Nature. When God would shew his glory to Moses, hee proclaimes his name to himExod. 33.19. and 34.6. etc.. Fourthly, hee must be sure to get into Christ by Faith, being borne of God by regenerationIoh: 6.46. and 14.7.. Lastly, hee must bee pure in heartr: hee must especially striue against the corruptions inward, in his thoughts and affections. Thus of the second vse.
Math: 6.7.Thirdly, the consideration of this, that Gods is inuisible, should incourage vs to well doing, euen in secret; seeing wee serue such a God, as can see in secretMath. 6.4..
Hitherto our Redeemer is described, as he stands in relation to God: now, in the second place, he is described as he stands in relation to the Creatures. And Christ is in relation to the Creatures fiue waies: 1. as the first begotten among them: 2. as their Creator: 3. as the end of them, all for him: 4. in respect of Eternitie, as he is before all things. 5. as all things in him consist: All things depend vpon Christ as their preseruer, as their auncient, as their end, as their Creator, and as the first borne.
The first begotten of euery Creature.] Two things are here to be considered of Christ: 1. that he is Gods Son, by generation: 2. that he is the first begotten.
For the first: God hath Sonnes by Nature and by Grace; Christ is borne as Man,(...). and begotten as God. Things are begotten three waies: 1. Metaphorically, onely by comparison, or in some respects: 2. Corporally: 3. Spiritually: some things doe beget without themselues, as bodies doe; but this is more ignobly and basely; some things beget within themselues, as doth the Spirit or soule, more perfectly. But the most perfect and vnutterable glorious generation, is the begetting of the Son of God, by God. The way of God in eternity, who can finde out? and his generation who can tell? His waies are not as our waies; yet a glimpse of this great work, we may reach to two waies:
1 By way of Negation, as they say in Schooles.2 By way of Comparison.
First, by denying that vnto God, which hath imperfection in it. In the generation of the Creatures we may see something into the generation of the Sonne of God. There are eight things in the generation of the Creatures, which are not in this begetting of the naturall Sonne of God. 1. The Creatures beget in time, because themselues are first begotten: but this is not in God, Christ is of the Father, but not after the Father: there is here a prioritie in order, but not in time. 2. The Creatures beget by affection (this is imperfection) but God begetteth by Nature. 3. The Creature begets without himselfe, so as Sons are diuers, and diuided from the Father, because they are finite:(...), not, (...). we are of like nature to our Fathers, but not the same nature: but it is not so in God; for Christ is not diuided from the Father, as he is the naturall Sonne of God. 4. The generation in the Creature is not without corruption, or diminution of the nature of the Begetter: but here, God the Father begetteth without corruption or diminution, by a way diuine, inenarrable, and incomprehensible. 5. Our Children are lesse then their Parents; but Christ is as well Coequall as Coeternall. 6. The Creature communicates but a part of his substance, but God communicates the whole. 7. The father and sonne, among the creatures, are two in number, one in Specie onely; but
 in God it is not so: for the Son of God is another, but not another thing; he is another, viz. in Person, but not another thing in Essence. Lastly,Alius, but not aliud. the creature begets mortal creatures, and propagates but a being for a time, but God begets a Sonne immortall by nature, such a one as can neuer die in the nature so begotten.
Secondly, this generation is shadowed out by some comparison with creatures: the riuer and the spring are two, yet not diuided; so is the Sun and the Beames of it, the Sauor and the Oyntment are together, and yet the Oyntment is not corrupted: but the principall comparison is in the minde and the word; the Minde begets the Word naturally, without passion or corruption, within it selfe; so as the Word begotten, remaines in the Minde, the Word afterwards, clothed with a voyce, goeth into the eares of men, and yet ceaseth not to be still in the Minde: This in many things, as you may see, is like to the generation of Christ, by the Father. But all these are but shadowes; the glory of the thing it selfe cannot be expressed by any words of man or angels.
The consideration of this Doctrine should inflame vs to the loue of such a Sonne, who being as hee was, coequall and coeternall with the Father, yet was pleased to delight himselfe in Gods earth, which is man.Prou. 8.22.31.32. And wee should for euer hearken and attend to the words of this wisedome of God, who teacheth vs the secrets of the very bosome of his Father. And seeing this is the Sonne, of whom GOD hath spoken to the dreadfull astonishment and wonder of Heauen and Earth, woe vnto them that sinne against the Sonne, and prouoke him to anger: How shall they bee broken to pieces like an earthen Vessell? But blessed are all they, that with all feare and trembling,Psal: 2.5.7.9.11.12. and with all reuerence and affection, subiect themselues to the Scepter of his Kingdome, and trust in the loue of the Father, through the merits of the Sonne. Thus of the consideration of Christ, as he is begotten of God: it is here added that he is first begotten.
First begotten.] Christ is the Sonne of GodIohn 1.14.: Hee is the onely begotten Son of GodIohn 1.18.: hee is the naturall Sonne of GodRom: 3.8. Primogenitus.; and here is tearmed the first begotten Sonne of God. Hee is first begotten, as God, two waies: 1. in Time, hee was before all other things. Of this afterwards: 2. in Dignitie, he is the foundation of all that respect, by which others are made Sonnes: hee is first begotten, as Man, not in time, but in dignitie and operation: first, in respect of the miraculousnesse and wonderfulnesse of his birth and conception; so are none other borne: secondly, in respect of his Resurrection, in which God did as it were beget him againe: thus he is afterwards said to be the first borne of the dead: thirdly, in respect of preheminence; as hee hath the right of the first borne, being made heyre of all things.
The Vse is diuers: First, let all the Angells of God worship him. Secondly,Heb: 1.6. it should kindle in our hearts godly sorrow for our sinnes. If we can mourne for the death of our first borne, how should we be pierced to remember,Zach: 12.12. that our sinnes haue pierced Gods first borne? Thirdly, we should neuer thinke it strange to suffer in this world,Rom: 8.29. seeing God spared not his owne first borne. Lastly, it may be a great comfort to Christians; and that two wayes: first, because they shall be accepted with God, in, and for, Christ, who is the first borne, and hath receiued a blessing for all the rest: secondly, because in Christ they themselues are accounted as Gods first borne, in comparison of other men: God will vse them as his first borne, Exod. 4.22. Heb. 12.23. Psal. 89.^7. By this Gods Children are made higher then the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89.27. and therefore woe shall bee to them that wrong Gods first borne, Exod. 4.22. And therefore also euery Christian should so esteeme his birth-right, as by no meanes, with prophane Esau, for any lust, profit, or pleasure to sell it, Heb. 12.16.




Verse 16. For in him were all things created, that are in Heauen, and that are in Earth, visible or inuisible; whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or Principalities or Powers. All things were created for him and by him.

IN this Verse foure things are to be considered: first concerning Creation it selfe, in the generall: secondly, who created: thirdly, what was created: fourthly, the distinctions of Creatures.
Created.] God workes not as the Creatures doe, God workes in an instant: Angels worke sodainely: Nature workes by little and little, and by degrees. There is a threefold effusion of the goodnesse of God: 1. by Generation: 2. by Spiration: 3. by Creation.
The Workes of God are either Internall and immanent, and are in the Essence of God, by an act internall and eternall; and thus Predestination is Gods worke; or externall and transient, passing to the Creatures, by an act externall and temporall. And these workes are either workes of Nature, or workes of Grace:Qua est in fieri. qua est in facto. the workes of Nature respect her, either as shee is in making, or as she is made: the latter workes are workes of Prouidence, the former, are workes of Creation.
A difference must be made betweene creating, generating, and making. A thing comes into being, of nothing, by Creation: of something, by making: and of a substance, by generation. Creation is of God, by himselfe: Generation is of Nature according to God.
Doctr.Doct. The World, euen this whole Frame of all things, was created, and had a beginning. This wee may know by Faith, out of ScriptureGen: 1. and 2. Psal: 33.6.9. Job 38. and 39.; and by Reason, from the state of Creatures: their alterations, subordinations, debellities, and expirations, proue a beginning; and that they are not eternall.
Obiect.Obiect. This drownes our thoughts, that wee cannot conceiue of Eternitie,Solut. what it was before the world was. Sol. It is not meete wee should account our selues able to iudge of Eternitie. What doe Plants iudge of Sense? what doe the Beasts iudge of Reason? how canst thou be fit to iudge of Eternitie, that, thy selfe, hast no certaine continuance in time?
Thus of Creation in generall: the second thing is, who is Creator.
Opera ad extra sunt indiuisa.In him, or by him.] The whole Trinitie did create the world; because it is a rule, that the workes of God that are without, are vndeuided; so as that which one Person doth, all the three Persons doe. Yet there is difference in the Order:Pater est causa. (...). Filius. (...). Spiritus sanctus (...). for the Father moues and wils it, the Sonne workes it, and the holy Ghost finisheth it. Creation is giuen to the Father, Acts 17.24. to the Sonne, Iohn 1.3. to the holy Ghost Gen. 1.2. Psal: 33.6.
But in this place, the honour of the worke is specially giuen to the Sonne; And it is to be noted, that the originall hath more then barely [by him,] for it is said, in him, etc. The Creation of the world, was in Christ, in two respects: First, it was in him, as in an examplar; the Frame of the world, to be made, was in him, as the Image of the Fathers vnderstanding: for, in the building of a House, there is a double frame; the one in the head of the Carpenter; the other, the Frame externall of the house, built after the patterne of that, that was in the Carpenters head: So is it, in the Creation of the World. Secondly, it was in him, as that decreed, and fore-appointed head and foundation, in which all the other things should be placed and consist: thus he is said to be the beginning of the Creatures of God.Reuel: 3.14.
This worke of Creation ascribed vnto Christ, proues his Deity, Eternitie, and Omnipotencie. Thus of the Creator.
Mundus Archetypicus.Thirdly, it followes, what was created, viz. All things,] The whole world. By the world I meane not the frame of all things, as it was in Gods Essence
 from Eternitie: nor man onely, which is called a little World:Mundus Microcosmus. Mundus Macrocosmus. but this whole Vniuerse, and great building, consisting of all sorts of Creatures. Concerning this creation of all things, I onely note two things: First, how they were created: secondly, the errours that sprung vp against this Doctrine.
Now, All things were created.] First, most freely, without any necessitie that compelled God thereuntoPsal. 33.9. and 115.3.. Secondly, without any labour, motion, or mutation of himselfe, with a becke onely; and by his omnipotent WordPsal. 33.9.. Thirdly, of nothing: of nothing I say, negatiuely, in the Creation of the first masse of all things; and of nothing priuatiuely, in the second Creation of things, out of the first masse or Chaos. For though in the order of nature, and by men, nothing is made of nothing, yet this extendeth not to God and the first Creation. Fourthly, most wisely, so as there flowed in the Creation, a goodnesse to euery Creature, so as they were all good, in Gods accountGen: 1.31.: This Goodnesse in Man and Angels, was Gods Image in them. Fiftly, in time, with time, in the very beginning of timeGen: 1.1.. Sixtly, in the space of sixe daies; not at one time onely, and this shewed the Creatures disabilitie, that could not forme it selfe when the first matter was created: Herein God also shewed his power, and that hee was not tied to second causes, as hee declared when hee gaue light to the world, while yet there was no Sunne.
Then herein hee teacheth men to dwell long vpon the meditation of the Creation, seeing God himselfe did prolong the Creation for so many daies, which yet hee could haue dispatched in an instant.
There were foure errors about the Creation:Foure words confute foure Errours. Some said the world was eternall: some said, though it were not eternall, yet it had a materiall beginning, it was made of something: Some said, God made the Superiour Creatures himselfe, and the Inferiour by Angels: some, made two beginners of things; they imagined that one Beginner made things incorruptible, and another, made things corruptible. The very first Verse of the Bible, confutes all foure Errours: the word, in the beginning, shewes the world was not eternall: the word Creation, notes, that it was made of nothing; when he saith, God created all, hee excludes Angels: and lastly, when hee saith, God created Heauen and Earth, hee shewes hee was the onely beginner of all sorts of Creatures.
Fourthly, the distinction of the Creatures followes:Sorts of Creatures. here they are distinguished three waies: 1. by Place, some are things in heauen, some things in earth: 2. by Qualitie, some are visible, some are inuisible: 3. by a subdiuision of the inuisible; some are Thrones, some are Dominions, etc.
Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers.Diuersitie of opinions about the meaning of Thrones, Dominions, etc.] These words are diuersly interpreted. Some thinke, there is no necessitie to vnderstand them of Angels; but in generall of all Empire, and of the order of oeconomie, among the Creatures, in Marriage, Lawes, or Gouernments, in heauen or Earth. Some restraine the words, to order amongst men onely. Some vnderstand by Thrones the Pallace of Gods Maiestie, and the seate of blessed immortality; and the rest of the words they interpret of Angels. But the commonest opinion, and most auncient, is to vnderstand all the words of Angels onely: But in this there is not agreement, for some thinke the Apostle speakes by way of Concession, as if hee should say: Be it so that Angels are Thrones and Dominions, etc. (as the Iewes and false Apostles affirme, when they go about to perswade you to Angel-worship) yet if that were granted, Christ onely were to be worshipped, because hee made all those; and what excellency they haue, they had it from him. Others thinke that the Apostle reckoneth vp the excellent'st things in humane gouernment, and giues them to Angels, to shadow out their glory; and consequently, the glory of Christ that made them.
 I thinke there is no hurt in their opinion, that giue all these words vnto Angels:Why Angels are called by these names. And they are called Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, and Powers, because God by them gouernes the Nations, and as some thinke, moues the Heauens; restraines the Deuils, workes Miracles, foretels things to come, protects the faithfull, and exerciseth his iudgements vpon the world: yet so as these names may be giuen to all Angels, in diuers respects, and vpon occasion of diuers employments: Or they may be giuen to some Angels for a time, and not for euer. Or if it bee yeelded that those names doe distinguish the diuers sorts of Angels,The Vses of the doctrine of Creation. and their order; yet it will not follow, that wee can tell their sorts, as the bold Dionysius, and the Papists haue aduentured to doe.
Thus of the doctrine of Creation; the Vses follow, and they are,
1 For Reproofe.2 For Consolation.3 For Instruction.
The doctrine of Creation cannot but bee a doctrine of great reproofe and terrour to wicked men; because those goodly Creatures, being Gods workemanship, will plead against them, and make them inexcusable in the day of CHRIST; in as much as they haue not learned to know and serue God with thankefulnesse and feare, that shewed his Wisedome and Power, and other the inuisible things of God,Rom: 1.19. in the making of all those Creaturesr. And besides, from the great power of God, in the Creation of themselues and other Creatures, they may see that they are in a wofull case, that by sinning striue with him that made them: for hee hath the same power to destroy themEsa: 45.19..
And further, if God made all, then he knowes all, and so all the sinnes of the sinner; and in that hee made all, hee hath at his command as Lord by creation all Armies, to raise them against the wicked for their subuersion.
Secondly, the Doctrine of the Creation may comfort Gods Children many waies: first, it may comfort them in the faith of the worlds dissolution: it is hee that created Heauen and Earth that will accomplish it, that time shall be no more, I meane, not times of mortalitie, sinne, labour, infirmitieReuel. 10.6., etc. Secondly, it may comfort them in the successe of Christs kingdom on earth. Though it be a great thing to gather men againe into couenant with God, and to open the eyes of men, blinde with ignorance, and to deliuer the soules of men that haue long lyne in the prisons of sinne and miserie; yet wee may be assured that God, by the ordinances of Christ, will accomplish all the great things of this spirituall kingdome; because hee was able to create the Heauens and Earth. And God himselfe doth remember his power in the Creation, to assure his performance in our regenerationEsa. 42.5.6.. Thirdly, it may comfort vs in our vnion with Christ; for what shall separate vs from his loue? in as much as hee is vnchangeable himselfe, nothing else can, for they are all his Creatures, and must not crosse his resolued willRom: 8.. Fourthly, it must needes bee a comfort to serue such a God, as hath shewed himselfe in the Creation to worke so wonderfully. Blessed is hee that can reioyce in God, and his seruice, and is refreshed with the light of his countenance, and assured of his louePsal: 89.11.15.. Fiftly, the wonders of the Creation serue to shew vs how wonderfull the workes of Grace are; in the working of which, the Lord vseth the very tearme of creating. To regenerate a man is as glorious a worke as to make a worldEphes. 2.10. and 4.24. 2 Cor: 5.17. Gal: 6.15.: the protection of a Christian hath in it also diuers of the wonders of the Creation. The peace that comes into the hearts of Christians, as the fruits of the lippes, is createdEsa: 57.18.: a cleane heart is a rare blessing, for it is created alsoPsal: 5.18.. Sixtly, it is a comfort against the force
 of wicked men, and their wrongs: the wickedst men are Gods Creatures; Hee created the destroyer to destroy, and the Smith that bloweth the Coales, and him that bringeth forth an instrument: and therefore all the weapons that are made against Gods Children cannot prosper. And it is a part of the Christians inheritance, to be protected against the malice of the wicked, that would destroy himEsay 54.16.17. and 43.1.2.3. Lastly, it may comfort Gods Children, in the expectation of their saluation; for God hath promised, as certainely as hee hath created the Heauens, he will saue Israell, though it should bee as hard a worke as was the spreading out of the HeauensEsa. 45.15.17.18.19..
Thirdly, the doctrine of the Creation should teach vs diuers duties.
First, the admirablenesse, and varietie of Gods workes should prouoke vs to contemplation: How deare are thy thoughts vnto me? Psal. 139 17.
Secondly, in affliction; wee should willingly commit our selues to God, and trust in him, though our meanes be little, or vnlikely; for he is a faithfull Creatour: his loue to vs affords him Will to doe vs good, and the creation proues his Power1 Pet: 4.19. Esa: 45.12.7.22..
Thirdly, the greatnesse of the workes in Creation, should imprint in vs Reuerence and Feare, and force vs to the duties of the adoration and worship of God, Reuel. 4.11. and 5.13. Psal. 104.31. and 100.13.
Fourthly, the knowledge of the glory and greatnesse of the Creator, should inflame in vs indignation against Idols, and the worship of the creature, Ier. 10.3, 7.10.11.12.14.16. Rom. 1.25.
Fiftly, the remembrance of our Creator, and Creation, should worke in vs an abatement of our pride and iollitie, and dull the edge of our fierce appetite to sinne, Eccles. 12 1.
Sixtly, the consideration of our equalitie in our Creation, should keepe vs that we transgresse not against our Brethren: Wee haue all one Father, and one GOD hath created vsMal: 2.10. Iob: 31.14.15.. Thus of the Creation.
The third thing in Christs relation to the Creatures, is, that All things are for him.
For him.] In diuers, respects: first, as it is hee onely,All things are for Christ, in diuers respects in whom the Father is well pleased; and so the loue of God to the World is for his sake. Secondly, as all the Creatures doe serue to point out the Sonne, as well as the Father, and that because they shew Christ, as the wisedome of the Father. And be sides, their changes and corruptions doe cry for the libertie of the sonnes of God in Christ: and further, they are all at commaund, for the propagation, and preseruing of the kingdome of Christ. Thirdly, as he is heyre of all thingss, they are for him, that is, for his glory; so as hee is not onely the Efficient, but the finall cause of all things. The Carpenter makes his House, perhaps fot one more honourable then himselfe, but not so Christ in making this great House, the World. The consideration of this point, that all things are for Christ, should teach vs diuers things.
First, wee should lesse dote vpon the world, and the things thereof,Vses. in as much as these things were principally made for Christ, and not for vs. And secondly, wee should vse all these things as helpes to lead vs to CHRIST, Thirdly, in the vse of the Creatures, wee should be carefull to expresse the glory of Christ, by giuing thankes, by magnifying his Wisedome, Power, Goodnesse, etc. and by distributing them; according to his appointment, as to the poore, and to the maintenance of the worship of God: for seeing they are his, and for him, wee should despose of them as hee requires. Lastly, it should keepe vs from the vse of all ill meanes: for seeing it is for Christ, wee should not lye, deceiue, vse false weights, runne to Witches, or take any other vngodly course; for hee needes not our lye, nor desires to bee helped by any sinnefull course.

The fourth thing which Christ is commended for, is his Eternitie.

Hee was before all things.]

Eoure things in the immensitie of Christs diuine nature.The Immensitie of Christs Diuine Nature hath foure things in it. First, infinitenesse in respect of it selfe. Secondly, incomprehensiblenesse in respect of our sense, and vnderstanding. Thirdly, incircumscriptiblenesse, in respect of place. Fourthly, Eternitie, in comparison of time. That Christ is eternall these places proue, Prou. 8.22. etc. Mich. 5.2.4. etc. Reuel. 1.8.11. and 21.6. and 22.13.
The Eternity of Christ may be thus defined: it is a pleasant, and at once, perfect possession of endlesse life.The Eternity of Christ, described and explained. And hereby may the eternitie of Christ appeare, to differ from the eternity of all other things. The Heauens haue an endlesnesse of Essence, but they want life. The Diuels haue an endlesse, not onely being, but life; but it is not a pleasant life. The Saints in Heauen haue a pleasant life till the day of Iudgement, but they haue not whole possession. The Angels in Heauen haue a whole possession, but it is not at once, but successiuely, both in reuelation and ioy: I say, it is whole in them, because their whole Nature or Essence is possessed of pleasant and endlesse life. And lastly, Christs eternitie differs from all eternitie, of all the Creatures, because no creature hath the former things absolutely perfect; that is, such a possession of endlesse life, as vnto which nothing is wanting, for they want many of the perfections that are in Christ, though they bee perfect in their owne kinde.
Seeing Christ was before all things, wee should preferre him before all things: wee should acknowledge his Title as heyre of all things: as the eldest among all things, wee should willingly heare him speake, and honour his words; wee should trust in him, and liue by faith, etc.
And in him all things consists.] That is, hee vpholds, rules, and gouernes all things by his prouidence: and this is the fift thing by which our Redeemer is described in relation to the World. That prouidence is giuen to the Son, as well as Creation, these places proue, Heb. 1.2.3. Prou. 8.15. Iohn 5.12. Christ is not like the Carpenter, that makes his house, and then leaues it: or like the Shipwright,How al things consist in Christ. Conseruando. Prescribendo. Mouendo. Ordinando. Disponendo. that frames his Ship, but neuer after guides it. All things are said to consist in him, in respect of Conseruation, in that he keepes all things in their being: in respect of Precept, in that from him are prescribed the Lawes, by which Nature, Policie, and Religion are gouerned: in respect of Operation, in that all things moue in him: in respect of Ordination, in that hee appointeth all things to their end: in respect of Disposition of the meanes to the end: and lastly, as the vniuersall cause of Nature, and naturall instincts in all Creatures, by which they further their owne preseruation.
Obiect. But we see the meanes by which all things are wrought and preserued, as by their causes? Sol. The meanes notwithstanding, all things, consist in Christ: first, because Christ vseth not the meanes necessarilie: secondly, hee ordaines the meanes as well as the end: thirdly, the meanes is many times euill, in matter or forme; yet the worke is made good by Christ: fourthly, he is not tied to the meanes, but he can worke either with, without, or against the meanes: fiftly, all meanes, hath his efficacie from Christ. But the words would be particularly weighed.
As Christ is God, al things consist in him foure wayes.In him.] All things consist in Christ, both in generall, as hee is God; and in speciall, as he is Redeemer. Foure waies, all things consist, in, or by CHRIST; as hee is God: first, in respect of Vbiquitie, hee comprehends all things, and is comprehended of nothing. The Nations are but a droppe of his Bucket, and time it selfe is but a drop of his Eternitie: secondly, in respect of power, in his power this whole frame stirreth: thirdly, in respect of Omniscience,
 and Wisedome, for all is within his knowledge, and receiueth order from his Wisedome: fourthly, in respect of decree; for the world to be made did from euerlasting hang in the fore knowledge, and pre-ordination of Christ.
As Christ is Redeemer, all things consist in him three wayes: first,And as he is Redeemer, three waies. because he is that attonement which kept the world from being dissolued for Adams sinne: secondly, because the respect of him and his Church, is that that keepes vp the world to this day: if his body were once compleat, the world would not stand one houre: thirdly, because the promise made to man, concerning his prosperity, in the vse of all Creatures, are made in Christ.
All things.] Euen all things which are, or are done in Earth, or Heauen;Act: 17.25. things visible, or inuisible, which haue either being, life, sense, or reason, past, present, or to come, aduersitie as well as prosperitie, etc.
Consist.] This word notes foure things: Order, Continuance, Cooperation,The word Consist, notes foure things. and Immutabilitie.
First, the Creatures consist, that is, by an excellent Order, agree together in a glorious frame: for God is the God of order, and not of confusion.
Obiect. There be many miseries, euils, and mischiefes in the world,Obiect. 4. and therefore how can there be order in all things? Sol. First,Solut. there may be order in respect of God, though not in respect of vs. Secondly, it followeth not that there is no order, because wee see none: O the depth! etc. Rom. 11. Thirdly, many of the reasons of the fearefull miseries that are in the world, are reuealed. As the iustice of God, in punishing of a sinnefull World, eyther whole Nations, or particular persons, the humbling of his Children, and the preparing of them for Heauen, and such like. Fourthly, there may bee Order, in respect of the whole, though not in respect of euery part.
Obiect. 2.Obiect. 2. There bee many sinnes in the world, and those consist not in Christ, neither tend they to order. Sol. The truth is,Solut. that those come into the world by the Deuill and man, and they are by the prouidence of God not effectiue, but permissiue. Yet so as there is operation in foure respects about the sinnes of the world: for first, Christ is the Author of the Motion in generall; though not of the euill of the Motion. Secondly, Christ, worketh, in that he withdraweth grace, being prouoked thereunto. Thirdly, he worketh, in determining, or setting a measure vnto sinne, that it passe not his bounds. Fourthly, he worketh, in conuerting the sinne to a punishment of the sinner, or in working thereout an occasion of humiliation, and of grace in the penitent.
Secondly, Consisting notes the continuance together of the Creatures, for by the prouidence of Christ it is that no substance in Specie that was at first made, euer ceased; but there are still as many Creatures as euer were: and the very singulars of euery sort, doe consist in Indiuidu^, as long as pleaseth Christ: and the like may be said of the essentiall qualities of all the creatures.
Thirdly, Consisting, notes the Cooperation of the Creatures, so as by the prouidence of Christ, all things worke together for his glory: and all things are ready at Christs will and commaund by ioynt mouing, etc.
Fourthly, Consisting, notes immutabilitie, in the prouidence of Christ.
Thus of the Doctrine: the Vses follow.
And first, the meditation of the prouidence of Christ,Vses. serueth for great reproofe of wicked mens securitie in sinne, who carelesly adde sinne vnto sinne, so it may bee hid from men: as if they were of the minde of those that thought God did not see, or had forsaken the earth, and the care of mens actions below. But seeing all things consist in Christ, wicked men cannot stirre but Christ discouereth them, as plainely as any thing that is in his owne heart. Yea, seeing all things consist in CHRIST, it checketh the doubtfulnesse, and mistrustfulnesse, that is in the hearts of Gods Children;
 as if in their crosses God did not care for them, or that they should be helpelesse. This is at large reproued in these places, Esa. 40.27. and 49.14. etc. and 54.7. etc.
Secondly, seeing all things Consist in CHRIST, it should teach vs to trust in Christ, and not in the second causes: and it should make vs lesse carefull for our preseruation, neuer asking what wee shall eate, or what wee shall put onMath: 6.: yea, seeing be rules all things, let vs willingly subiect our selues to his Scepter, and let him be our guide vnto deathPsal: 49.14..
What we must do that it might go vvell vvith vs.Qu. But what must we doe that it might go well with vs, by the prouidence of Christ? Ans. First, we must be Saints, if we would haue Christ to keepe vs and preserue vs: that is, such men as hide not their sinnes, but confesse them, and forsake them, and liue innocently1 Sam: 2.9. Esa: 48.17.18. Psa: 5.8. and 7.10. Hos. 14.9.10. Pro: 28.13.. Secondly, true prosperitie must be learned out of the Word, we must be taught to profit: And the next way to get Christ to blesse vs in our Houses, is to waite vpon his direction in his House; for all prosperitie depends vpon Gods promise, and if wee would prosper, we must doe such things as are of promisePsal. 1.3. and 23. Esa: 48.17.. Thirdly, wee must in true humilitie and sense of our owne vnworthinesse, rest vpon the prouidence of Christ. It is iust if I prosper not in my estate, if I will not trust God with it. Fourthly, we must pray God to direct the workes of our hands continuallyPsal: 90.7.. Fiftly, wee must take heed of crueltie, and despising and backe-biting of Gods poore afflicted SeruantsPsal: 41.1.2.3. and 140.11.12.13..
Lastly, if all things consist, and are preserued in CHRIST, then much more the righteous are preserued with a speciall preseruation, and in a peculiar safetie. In the 37. Psalme this point is excellently and at large handled, both by direct proofe, and by answere to all the vsuall Obiections against their safetie. That they shall be preserued, is affirmed Verse 3.17.23.25.28. The Obiections answered; are many.
Obiect. 1. Wicked men flourish. Sol. a righteous man should neuer grieue at that; for they shall soone be cut downe, like the grasse, and wither as the greene hearbe, Vers. 12.
Obiect. 2. Righteous men are in distresse. Sol. Vers. 6. The night of their aduersitie will be turned into the light of prosperitie: and as surely, as they can beleeue when it is night that it shall be day, so surely may they bee perswaded, when crosses are vpon them, that comfort and deliuerance shall come.
Obiect. 3. But there are great plots laid against the righteous, and they are pursued with great malice, and their intended ruine is come almost to the very issue. Sol. Vers. 12.13.14.15. The Lord sees all the plots of wicked men, and laughes at their spitefull and foolish malice; while they are busie to destroy the righteous, and hope to haue a day against them, the Lord seeth that their owne day is comming vpon them: euen a day of destruction, a day of great iudgement, and eternall miserie; their Bow shall bee broken, and the Sword that they haue drawne shall enter into their owne heart.
Obiect. 4. But the iust haue but small meanes. Sol. Vers. 16.17. A little that the righteous hath, is better then the riches of many wicked; for the armes of the wicked shall be broken, and the Lord vpholdeth the iust.
Obiect. 4. Heauy times are like to befall them. Sol. Verse 19. They shall not be ashamed in the euill time, and in the day of famine they shall haue enough.
Obiect. 6. But the wicked waxe fatter and fatter, and they preuaile in vexing the righteous. Sol. Verse 20. Indeed the wicked are fat, but it is but the fat of Lambes, their prosperitie shall soone melt, and as they bee like smoake in vexing the godly, so shall they bee like smoake in vanishing away.

Obiect. 7. But the righteous doe fall. Sol. Vers. 24. Though bee that fall, yet hee falls not finally, nor totally; for hee is not vtterly cast d^^^e^ and besides, there is an vpholding prouidence of God in all the falles of the righteous.
Obiect. 8. Wee see some wicked men that doe not so fall into aduersitie, but rather are in prosperitie to their dying dayes. Sol. Vers. 27. Though they doe, yet their seede shall be cut off.
Obiect. 9. But some wicked men are strong yet, and in their seede spread also. Sol. Vers. 35.36. Note also, that those spreading Bay-trees many times soone passe away; and they, and their houses, are sometimes vtterly cut off.
Obiect. 10. But vpright men are vnder many and long crosses. Sol. Vers. 37. Yet, his end is peace.
Obiect. 11. But no body stands for the godly, when they come into question. Sol. Vers. 39.40. Their saluation is of the Lord; hee is their strength, he will helpe them, and deliuer them, etc.
But if we would be thus deliuered, obserue
1. That wee must not vnthankefully fret at Gods prouidence, verse 1. 2. Wee must trust in the Lord and doe good, vers. 2.3. 3. Wee must delight our selues in the Lord, and not place our contentment on earthly thinges, vers. 4. 4 Wee must commit our wayes to God. Vers. 5. 5. Wee must get patience, and humble affections, vers. 7.8.9.10.11. 6. Wee must be of vpright conuersation, vers. 14. 7. Wee must be mercifull, vers. 25.26. 8. Wee must speake righteous things, and get the Law into our hearts, vers. 30.31. 9. Wee must keepe our way, and waite on GOD, and not vse ill meanes.



Verse 18. And hee is the Head of the Body, the Church; hee is the beginning and first borne of the dead, that in all things hee might haue the preheminence.

OVr Redeemer is described before, both in his relation to God, and to the World. In this verse, and the rest that follow to the 23. hee is described as hee stands in relation to the Church: and that two wayes. First, in relation to the whole Church, vers. 18.19.20. Secondly, in relation to the Church of the Colossians, vers. 21.22
The praise of Christ in relation to the whole Church, is first briefely propounded, and then more largely opened. It is propounded in these words. And he is the head of the Body, the Church.] There is great oddes betweene the worlds subiection to Christ, and the Churches: for the faithfull are subiect to Christ as the members are to the Head; but the wicked are subiect as vile things vnder his feeteEphes. 1.22..
Great are the benefits which come to the Church from CHRIST, as her Head. I instance: in sixe, viz. Loue, Sympathie, Audience, Aduocation, Vnion,The benefits flow from Christ as the head of the Church. and Influence. First, Infinite Loue: no man so loues his Wife, as Christ loues his ChurchEphes. 5.27.. Secondly, Sympathie, by which Christ hath a fellow-feeling of the distresses of all his members, that which is done to them, hee takes it as done to him, whether it be good or euillMath. 18.5. and 25.40.45. Heb. 2.17. and 4.15.. Thirdly, Audience, and willing acceptance of all the desires and prayers of all his members: the Head heares for the Body. Fourthly, Aduocation, no naturall Head can so plead for his members, as doth our mysticall Head for vs. Fiftly, Vnion, wee as members, are honoured with the Vnion of Essence; in that hee hath taken our nature: with the Vnion of Office, so as the members
 are annointed Kings, Priests, and Prophets, in their kinde, as well as Christ: and also with the Vnion of Vertue, and benefits: by which Vnion wee partake of his Righteousnesse, Holinesse, and Glory. By Vertue of this Vnion with Christ, the faithfull haue the euerlasting presence of Christ; to and after the end of the WorldMath. 28.. The last benefit is influence; influence I say, both of Life (for the second Adam is a quickening spirit1 Cor. 15.) and Light, (for Christ is the Fountaine of all true Wisedome1 Cor. 1.30.: the Head seeth for the Body, and the Body by, and from the Head) and Grace, (for of his fulnesse wee receiue all grace,) and Motion, for all good desires, feelings, words, and workes, come from the working of the Head in vs.
Our head is more glorious then all politicall heads.The politicall Head is the glory of the World; and the misticall Head is the glory of the Church: yet the misticall Head excells the politicall many wayes. For,
1 CHRIST is the Head of such as are not together in the being of Nature or Grace.2 CHRIST is a perpetuall Head; the other is but for a time.3. CHRIST is a Head by Influence, the other but by Gouernement.4. CHRIST is an absolute Head; the other but subordinate to Christ, and his Vice-gerent.
That Christ might become our Head, wee must consider what hee did in fitting himselfe thereunto: and secondly, what hee doth in vs. For himselfe, hee tooke the same Nature with his Church; else had the Church beene like Nabuchadnezzars Image. Yet as hee tooke our Nature, so wee must know that hee bettered it. The Head differs in worth from the Body, because therein is seated the minde, which is the noblest part of man: so in the humane Nature of Christ, dwells the Godhead bodily; and by expiation, in his owne person, Christ takes away the sinnes of the Church, which else would haue letted all Vnion. And lastly, hee exalted his suffering Nature, and seated himselfe aloft, as meete to haue the preheminence, and become Head of all the faithfull: And as the Head is thus fitted, so are the Members: for, 1. they are collected out of the World, by the sound of the Gospell: (Let them lie hidden in the world that meane to perish with the world.) 2. They are framed, formed, proportioned, and begotten, by daily hearing. 3. They are ingrafted in an vnspeakeable, and inuisible Vnion; presently in truth, afterwards in sence.
Church.] This word is diuersly accepted: it is taken sometime in euill part, for an assembly of wicked men; and so there is the Church of the malignantPsal. 26.5. Acts 19.32.40: sometimes for the faithfull in heauenEphes. 5.27.: sometimes for Christians on Earth1 Tim. 3.15. Acts. 5.11.: and this not alwaies in one sense: sometimes for the Pastors of the Church, and Gouernours, as some thinke, Math. 18.17. sometimes for the People, and the Flocke1 Pet. 5.2. Act. 20.^8.: sometimes for particular Churches. And lastly, sometimes for all the Elect of God, that haue beene, are, or shall be: so Math. 16.18. Ephes. 1.23. and 5.23. And so here.
The Church of Christ is glorious in three praises.

1 She is One.
R^^: 2.18.12.2 She is Holy.
3 She is Catholique.

She is One, in respect of one Head, and Seruice: in respect of one Spirit and Binder, and in respect of one Faith and Constancie in doctrine. Shee is Holy, by segregation from the sinnefull world, by the inchoation of the grace of Christ, and by imputation of his righteousnesse. She is Catholique, especially, in the New Testament; in respect of place, the Elect may bee in any place: in respect of men, for it is gathered of all sorts of men: and in
 respect of Time, for it shall continue vnto all times, euen till time b^^ no more.
Thus of the Doctrine concerning Christ and the Church. The Vses follow.
The first Vse is for Confutation: and that three waies.Vses.
First, in vaine doe the wicked enemies of the Church pride themselues in the greatnesse of Learning, Power, Meanes, etc. thinking to suppresse the being or glory of Christs Church on Earth; for the stone that the Builders refused, will proue the Head of the corner.
Secondly, in vaine doe the Papists goe about to maintaine their ministeriall Head; for the Church is neither without a Head, nor many-Headed. And it is absurd to excuse it, that the Pope is but a Head vnder Christ: for the body were monstrous that had two Heads, one aboue, and another vnder.
Thirdly, in vaine doe carnall men pleade their hopes in Christ, when they can yeeld no sound reason to prooue they are Christs Members. They are not members of this body vnder this Head, that want Faith; that haue not the spirit of Christ; that are not quickened with the life of Grace; that are not wrought vpon by the word of Christ, nor built vpon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, that feele no influence of graces from CHRIST; that want the knowledge of Prophets, or mortification of Priests, or victory ouer the World, as Kings; that eyther pride themselues in their owne ciuill righteousnesse, or can fall away wholy, and for euer.
The second Vse is for Instruction: and first, as Christ is considered to be our Head, wee should.
1 Pray, that God would open the eyes of our vnderstanding, that wee might with sense and affection see what the hope of cur calling isEphes. 1.19.22. etc., to become members of such a Body, vnder such a Head.
2 Take heede of all pollutions, that might any way tend to the dishonour of our Head, whether it be of Flesh or Spirit2 Cor. 6..
3 Consider our place in this Body, and vnder this Head, and not presume to know about what is meeteRom. 12.4.5..
4 Vse all meanes to grow in this Body, and not pull it backe, or shame our Head by spirituall securitie, or vnprofitablenesse: and to this end wee should sticke fast to the words of the Prophets, and not suffer our selues to bee carried about by euery winde of doctrine, and follow the truth in LoueEphes. 4.14. to 16., without pride or discord.
5 Obey as the Members doe, in Vnion with the Head by faith; in Communion with the fellow-Members by Loue, and with a naturall voluntarie, and not extorted obedience.
Secondly, if the Church be the body of Christ, and wee Members of this Body, wee should learne to carry our selues one towardes another, in all humblenesse of minde, and long-suffering, supporting one another, and keepe the bond of peace in the vnitie of the spiritEphes. 4.2.3.4.5.. And wee should labour to profit one another with the gifts God hath bestowed vpon vs, that our graces, as holy oyntment, may runne downe from member to member: and all our Loue should be without dissimulationRom. 12.6.9.: in giuing honour, going one before another, in as much as what honour one member receiueth, is done in some respect to all. And wee should willingly distribute to the necessities of the Saints, and reioyce with them that reioyce, and weepe with them that weepeRom. 12.10.13.15.16., out of the Sympathy of Members: by all meanes shunning to giue offence in the least thing; especially not censorious, or contentious in matters of indifferencie1 Cor. 10.24.14..

Lastly, all discontentments with our place or calling, or estimation in the body, and all contempt, or enuie, at the gifts or place of other Christians, should be banished out of our hearts1 Cor. 12.15.22.23.26..
Thus of the excellencie of Christ, in relation to the Church, as it is briefly propounded: the explication followes.
The head hath three Priuiledges, or excels all the Members in Order, Perfection, or Vertue, and Efficacie. The preheminence of Christ is three wayes considered. First, in respect of the dignitie of Order, verse 18. of order I say, toward the Members. Secondly, in respect of perfection in himselfe, in the fulnesse of grace, verse 15. Thirdly, in respect of Vertue, Efficacie, and influence toward the whole body, verse 20.
The primacie of CHRIST in order, or relation to the Members, is twofold. First, in the estate of Grace, Hee is the beginning. Secondly, in the respect of the state of Glory, He is the first begotten of the dead.
Christ is said to be the beginning, in three respects.He is the beginning.] Christ may be said to bee the beginning, in three respects. First, as he is the first fruits, for whose sake the rest are accepted, and blessed. Secondly, as hee is the repayrer of the world, decayed by mans sinne. Thirdly, as hee is the beginning of the good things that are in the Church: hee is both the obiect and efficient cause of Faith. Mortification flowes from his death, and new Obedience from his Resurrection; Iustification is wrought from his obedience.
Vses.And this shewes the miserie of all carnall men, that are not members of Christ: in respect of the life of Grace they are dead: in respect of Faith they are Infidels: in respect of Iustification they are without God: in respect of Repentance they walke in trespasses, and sinnes: in respect of Communion of Saints, they are strangers from the Common-wealth of Israell. There can bee a beginning of no true felicitie without CHRIST. Christ is said to be the beginning of the creation of GodReuel: 3.14.: and from thence is inferred a most seuere reproofe of mans lukewarmenesse in matters of Pietie, Repentance, and Grace, Reuel. 3. vers. 15.16.17. And if Christ be the Authour and beginning of Faith and grace, it should teach vs to perseuere in the Faith, and contend for the truth, and keepe that is committed to vs, with all Patience, Wisedome, and ConstancieHeb. 12.2.. And in as much as he is Alpha, hee will be Omega: as he is the beginning, so he will be the end; and therefore blessed are they that doe his Commandements. And let him that is righteous bee righteous still: and let prophane men, that will not by Faith and Repentance seeke vnto Christ, be filthy stillReuel. 22.11.13.14..
The first begotten of the dead.] Christ, as head of the Church, holds his relation both to the liuing, as their beginning, and to the dead as their first begotten.
There is a threefold primogeniture of Christ: Hee is the first begotten. First, in respect of eternall generation; as he is the Sonne of God. Of this before. Secondly, as hee is borne of the virgin Mary; for shee is said to bring forth her first begotten SonneMath. 1.. Thirdly, when God raised Christ out of the Graue, hee is said to beget his Sonne, for so the words of the second Psalme: Thou art my Sonne, this day haue I begotten thee, are applyed to the Resurrection of CHRISTAct. 13.33.. In that Christ is said to be the first begotten of the dead, three things may bee noted, as implied heere, concerning the members of Christ: and three things concerning Christ himselfe as Head.
First, concerning the Members, these things may be gathered:
1 That not onely wicked men, but the true members of Christ die, Heb. 9. Psal. 89. 2. Sam. 14. The consideration of this, that the godly must dye, may serue for many Vses: first, Why doth vaine man dye then without wisedome

Iob. 4.21.? secondly, how shall wicked men escapeJob. 21.32. Esay 28.? their Couenant with death must needes be disanulled: thirdly, it should cause vs deepely to digest the vanities of this lifeEccl. 2.16.17: fourthly, it should cause vs to take heede of E^es, Least yee die; for it is out of all question, die wee must, and therefore meere it were, we should prouide for it, without mincing or procrastinating: lastly, wee should incourage our selues, and die like the members of Christ, with all willingnesse, Faith and Patience.
2 The gouernment of Christ reacheth as well to the dead as to the liuing Members. This the faithfull were wont of old to note, when they would say a man were dead, they would say, he was ioyn'd to his people. This should bee a great encouragement vnto godly men to die.
3 From Coherence; that if wee would haue Christ to bee the first begotten to vs when wee are dead, wee must subiect our selues to his Ordinances, that hee may be the beginning of true Grace to vs while we liue.
Secondly, concerning the Head, these three things may be noted:
1 That hee was among the dead, and this was good for vs: for thereby hee dissolued the power the Diuell had to inflict death, or the feare of it, vpon his MembersHeb: 2.17. Heb. 9.15., and thereby hee finished the expiation of all our sinnes, thereby hee ratified Gods Couenant, thereby he kils the power of sinne in vs, and thereby he takes away the curse of our naturall death.
2 That hee was not onely among the dead, but he was begotten among the dead, that is, raised from death to life; and this also was profitable for vs, for he rose to our Iustification, Rom. 4, 23.24. to our viuification, Rom. 6.4. to our deliuerance from wrath to come, 1 Thes. 1.10.
3 That hee is not onely begotten, but the first begotten among the dead; and that in three respects. First; as hee was more excellently raised then any of the dead are; for hee carried no corruption to the graue; and hee saw no corruption in the graue, and hee was but a short time vnder the power of the graue. Secondly, in respect of time; hee was the first that rose from the deadActs 26.23.. Thirdly, in respect of efficacie; it is hee by whose power all the rest rise1 Cor. 15.20.22..
This must needes be a great comfort to vs while wee liue,Iohn 5.21. and 11.28. against the time our bodies must go into the house of darkenesse, the darkesome lodging in the graue; onely, let vs seeke the vertue of the Resurrection of Christ in this world, and the experiment of the vigor of it, first vpon our soules, in plucking vs vp out of the graue of sinne, to walke before God, in newnesse of lifePhil. 3 9..
That in all things hee might haue the preheminence] These words are added for further amplification or Explanation of the former. They giue vnto Christ a primacie and preheminence in all things: First, ouer both liuing and dead: as hee is the beginning to the liuing, and the first begotten to the dead. Christ then hath the preheminence, he is first in all things, Mat. 28.18. Rom. 4.9. Phil. 2.9. Ephes. 1.23. Hee is first many waies: first in Time,He is first in diuers respects. as before all things: first in Order, hee hath a primacie of order, hee is the first to be reckoned and admired in the Church: first in the dignitie of Person, hee excells in both Natures all that is in the Church or euer was: first in DegreeIohn 1.5.: first in GouernmentMat. 20 27. Luke 19.4. Esay 9.: first in Acceptation with GodMat. 17.5.: lastly, hee is first Effectiuely, as the cause of all the respect, order, and excellencie in others: hee i^ the Roote out of which springs all the glory in the Church.
The vse is, first, for Terrour to all those that sinne against Christs preheminence, as they doe in a high degree; that hauing begunne in the Spirit,Vses. will end in the flesh: such as hauing knowne the way of righteousnesse, afterwards turne from the holy course, with the Dogge to the vomit, and with the Swine to the wallowing in the mire2 Pet. 20.21. Reuel. 2 4.19.. Secondly, the consideration of Christs primacie and
 preheminence, should learne vs to take heede of climbing in the Church; it is dangerous to desire to be chiefe; it is almost the sole power of the Head of the ChurchMath: 20.27. Marke 9.35. and 10.44. 3 Iohn 9.10.. Lastly, let it bee our care both in heart and life, to yeelde Christ the preheminence; which we shall doe, if we labour to know nothing more then Christ crucified; if wee minde the things of Christs Kingdome, more then the things of this life; if wee make him our chiefe refuge by Faith, for all happinesse and reconciliation;How we may in life yeelde Christ the preheminence. if wee make him our ioy; reioycing more in Christ then carnall men can doe in the World, (for a discontented life denies Christ the preheminence;) if the zeale of Gods house can eate vs vp; if in all our actions wee performe the worship of God first; if we stick not to confesse and professe Christ; if wee honour the faithfull, and contemne the vile, and ioyne our selues to such as feare God, though they bee despised in this world: and lastly, when wee can in all things rather chuse to please God then men.



Verse 19. For it pleased the Father, that in him should all fulnesse dwell.

THere is great reason Christ should bee acknowledged head, as in the former Verse, by reason of his primacie and preheminence; so in this Verse, by reason of the plenitude that dwells in him: No naturall head so full of senses, as hee is full of Grace.
It is to be noted in the generall, that the head should excell the members in gifts: and therefore it is a fault in Cities, when the people chuse vnto themselues vnmeete men to be their Heads. God may chuse Saul following his Fathers Asses, because if he make Princes, he can giue spirit vnto Princes; but it is not so with men; they may giue the Office, but they cannot giue the gifts to execute it. And it is likewise a great shame to such Rulers of the people, as are so farre from repressing disorders, that they are disordered themselues and their housholds. So domesticall Heads likewise, if they would not see swearing, lying, whoring, passions, idlenesse, etc. in their Children and Seruants, they must be free from ill example themselues, and be as heads excelling the rest of the family in gifts and good behauiour.
It pleased.] The mouing cause and foundation of all the grace shewed to the Creature, is the good pleasure of the will of the CreatorEphes. 1.5. 2 Thess. 1.11.. Why is Israell plantedPsal: 43.3.? why are the great mysteries of God hidden from the wise, and reuealed to BabesMat. 11.27.? why hath the little Flocke a KingdomeLuke 12.32.? why hath God mercy on some and not on othersExod: 33.19.? why hath Iob riches, and why are they taken awayIob. 1.? why is Iudgement and righteousnesse in a forlorne world that deserued nothingIer: 9.24.? why is Iuda as Potters clayIer. 18.6.? why is the world saued by preaching1 Cor. 1.21.? why are some predestinate to be adoptedEphes. 1.5.? why is the Mysterie of Gods will opened now and not beforeEphes: 1.9.? To conclude, why is all fulnesse in the Head, or any grace in the Members, but onely, because it pleased him?
Vses.The vse of this is: first, to teach vs to doe likewise, that is, to doe good without respect of desert; it is Royall, yea, it is Diuine: Secondly, it should teach vs, if we would get any grace or blessing from God, to examine our selues, whether wee be in his fauour, and to labour in all things so to serue him, as to please him. Thirdly, to subiect our Reasons and Affections to Gods Will, though hee should shew vs no other Reason of his doings, but his Will: for wee must alwaies know that things are alwaies iust, because hee willed them. Fourthly, in our troubles, and vnder crosses, it should teach vs patiencePsal. 39.9., and to labour to pacifie God, by Prayer and Humiliation, in the Name of Christ, and to acknowledge the soueraigntie of God, referring our selues to his pleasure for deliuerancePsal. 40.13.; not trusting vpon the
 meanesPsa. 4.4.3.6.. Lastly, it may be a comfort that nothing can befall my Christian, but what pleaseth God.
Doct. 2. God is well pleased inEsay 42.1. CHRIST: He^ loues him infinitely; hee can bee content hee haue any thing, yea, all things: and therefore it should teach vs to flie to Christ for helpe, and heare himMat. 17.5. 2 Pet. 1.17.. And wee should neuer seeke nor acknowledge any other Mediator or Aduocate, seeing God is well pleased in him.
That in him should all fulnesse dwell.All fulnesse is in Christ in fiue respects.] Doct. There is a fulnesse and absolute compleatenesse in Christ. 1. In respect of Members; so the Church is the fulnesse of ChristEphes. 1.23.. 2. In respect of the inhabitation of the Diuine Nature in the Humane; for the God-head dwels in him bodilyCol. 2.9.. 3. In respect of Power; so all power, and fulnesse of authority was giuen to him, ouer all things in heauen and earthMat. 28.. Fourthly, in respect of merit, for here is great fulnesse, if we consider, either who merited, not man onely, but God also: or when hee merited, viz. from the very moment of Conception: or for whom, not for himselfe, but for millions of others: or what hee merited, viz. remission of all Sinnes, Graces of all kindes, Glory that will last for euer. 5. In respect of Grace; there is a compleatnesse of Grace in Christ, not onely in respect of the grace of personall Vnion, or of Office, or of Adoration, but in respect of habituall graces, or gifts, and endowments of his soule. The last is heere meant; all fulnesse of gifts dwell in him.
The VsesVses. follow.
First, Great is the mystery of godlinesse; God manifested in the Flesh, iustified in the Spirit, etc.1 Tim. 3.16.. Secondly, this is ioyfull newes to all Christs members; for of his fulnes they receiue Grace for Grace. Thirdly, this confutes Papicolists in the opinions of their head: hee cannot bee a Head, in whom there is not fulnesse to serue the whole body: and therefore the Pope can bee no head of the whole Church. Lastly, let the rest of Christ bee glorious to our soulesIsay 11.10.. Hee hath the words of life, whither shall wee goe from him? Thus in generall.
This fulnesse hath increase of praise three wayes:
1 It is all fulnesse.2 It is in him.3 It dwels in him.
For the first: there is in Christ all fulnesse, both in respect of the number of GracesEsay 11 2., and in respect of the measure of themIohn. 3.34.: and therefore let the Christian reioyce in the Lord1 Cor. 1.30.; and in all wants of the soule, seeke to him by Prayer in Faith; for from him, and out of his fulnesse, may bee had Wisedome and Sanctification1 Cor. 1.30., Counsell and StrengthEsay 11.2., Ioy and GladnesseEsay 61.3.; yea, a Christian should bee couetous, seeing heere is enough to bee had; and therefore should labour to be full of KnowledgeEsay 11.9., and of the feare of GodProu. 19.23., and of good fruitsIames 3.17. Phil. 1.11.. This also reprooues the Iusticiaries, and Sancti-colists, Pharises and Saint-worshippers. A fulnesse is no where to be had but in Christ, and there is so much as needeth no supply from Saints or Angels. It shewes also, that the common Protestant serues an Idoll in stead of Christ, in as much as hee gets in his relation to Christ, no more Ioy, Grace, and Holinesse. The true Christ hath all fulnesse, not onely in himselfe, but by influence, for the good, and according to the state of his Members.
For the second; this fulnesse is in Christ: and this hath matter of great weight; for thereby is implyed the misery of all vnregenerate men. There is no fulnesse, compleatnesse, sufficing felicitie wheresoeuer, to bee had out of Christ. And besides, the Emphasis imports great comfort to the true conuert; for this fulnesse is in Christ. God doth not looke to haue the members actually absolute in themselues, it will serue turne that all fulnesse bee in the head. And in as much as the perfect blisse of a Christian is in his
 Christ, it is well for his safety, against the malice of Sathan, who now may bite the heele, but cannot touch the head. And from hence we must learne, if we would euer get, by participation and influence, any grace from Christ, we must by Faith and effectuall calling, get into Christ.
Thirdly, in that hee saith, this Fulnesse dwells in Christ; it notes the continuance of it: the personall Vnion shall neuer bee dissolued, and therefore the habituall graces of Christ, shall neuer bee abolished. And these Graces had neede continue in him, for in him rests the calling of the Elect, not yet gathered, and the perseuerance of the Saints.
Vses.The Riuers must needes be empty if the fountaine be dry. This is comfortable, wee may now beseech him to helpe our vnbeleefe, as well as the man in Gospell. Wee may finde ioy and victory in CHRIST crucified, as well as Paul, his Grace will still bee sufficient for vs. There dwells in him still fulnesse of wisedome to keepe vs from errour: fulnesse of Grace, to keepe vs from Apostacie: fulnesse of Ioy, to keepe vs from Despayre: fulnesse of power to preserue vs against all euill men and euill Angels: onely, refuse not knowledge, when hee offers the meanes: wincke not when the Sunne shines: Shut not the doore, when hee knockes: fight, when hee giues thee Weapons: and cast not away thy confidence, and let no man take thy Crowne.
Hitherto of the plenitude in the Head.



Verse 20. And by him, to reconcile all things to himselfe, and to set at peace, through the blood of his Crosse, both the things on Earth, and the things in Heauen.

IN these words the Redeemer is described as a Head by influence: the Apostle shewes vs, the good comes from Christ, as our Mediator: and the summe of all is, that hee reconciles vs to God.
In this Verse there are eight things to be noted.
First, why, or the moouing cause; and that is, It pleased him; for that must bee supplyed out of the former Verse, as the Copulatiue (And) sheweth. Secondly, by whom, or the Instrument; By him. Thirdly, what, to reconcile. Fourthly, whom, in generall, All things. Fiftly, to whom, or to what end, viz. To himselfe. Sixtly, the effect, making peace. Seuenthly, the meanes of merit, By the bloud of his Crosse. Eightly, what in particular, viz. things on earth, and things in Heauen.
Reconciliation is our first step to happinesse.The principall poynt in the whole Verse to bee obserued, is, that man hath then attayned the cheefe good, when his soule is reconciled to GOD: this is the summe of all that which Christ hath procured for his Church. Blessed are the people, whose God is the Lord. Others may bee more rich then they, but none more happy; for heereby man is ioyned to the fountaine of all good, and not onely hath interest in his fauour, but reapeth vnspeakeable benefits by communion with his Attributes, Word, Workes, Holinesse and Glory. Our reconciliation with God giues vs a title to a better happinesse then euer Adam had, it estates vs in the possession of eternity, and frees vs from immortall woe.
Vses.All this should encourage, with all care and constancy to seeke Gods fauour, and forsake our sinnes, that we may be reconciled, whatsoeuer it cost; sparing no labour or teares, till wee se the face of God with ioyIer. 50.5., This shewes also, the wofull estate of such men as are left to themselues, and haue this peace and reconciliation hid from their eyes. And of all Iudgements, it should most greeue vs to be separate from God. If to bee reconciled bee our greatest happinesse, to misse the comforts of Gods presence and loue, cannot
 but be an extreame affliction. And to this end, wee should beseech God to deliuer vs from a blinde or stony heart, or a sleepy conscience, or impure affections: for these, if they raigne in vs, hinder the vision of God.
And.] This carrieth vs to it pleased the Father, in the former Verse.Our reconciliation is founded in Gods good pleasure. Whence wee may note that our reconciliation stands with the euerlasting good pleasure of Gods will; and therefore it followes: 1. That our reconciliation cannot bee hindered or altered: 2. That it ariseth from no sudden motion in GOD, but is anciently decreed: 3. That wee are not reconciled for our merit; for it was decreed before we had done good or euill: 4. That the reasons of the reiection of some, and the gathering of others in time, are iust, though not alwayes exprest, because there is no decree without Gods counsell: 5. That if euer wee would haue the comfort of our Election, wee must make sure our Reconciliation; wee can neuer know Gods eternall loue to vs, till wee finde the experience of his fauour in our Reconciliation: the Prisoner knowes not what fauour is in the Kings breast, till his Pardon comes.
By him.] Doct. Christ is the instrument of our Reconciliation:Christ is the meanes of our reconciliation. the first Adam tooke God from vs, the second Adam restored God to vs. Man would needes become God, and therefore lost God from vs: God out of his loue becomes man, and restores vs againe to God. The world is now restored by the same wisdome it was first made.
Gods Image is restored in vs, by him that is the eternall Image of the Father. The middle Person in the Trinity is the Mediator betweene God and Man, the naturall Sonne makes men Sonnes by Adoption: it is Christ that both can and ought to reconcile vs. He could not doe it if hee were not God; he ought not to doe it if he were not man1 Tim. 2.5. Rom. 3.25. 1 Cor. 1.3. 1 Iohn 2.1. 1 Cor. 3.11. Acts 4.13..
This Doctrine yeeldes vs matter of admiration of the loue of Christ,Vses. if we consider what either hee was, or what wee were. The Lord in the forme of a Seruant, procures the saluation of the Seruant: hee that was the beginning of Gods workes, repaires him, that at best, was the last of them. God descended from heauen to earth, that man might ascend from earth to heauen: God is made the Sonne of man, that man might be made the Sonne of God: hee that was rich became poore, to make vs rich; the immortall became mortall, to make vs immortall. Hee is a Physician to vs sicke, a Redeemer to vs sold, a Way to vs wandering, and Life to vs dead. Secondly, this should teach vs in all suits to God, to seeke to Christ the Sonne of God: it is he must offer vp our Prayers, procure our Pardon, and make our Peace; yea, it is hee and none other. Thirdly, wee should seeke the testimony of Iesus, as well as his Ransome: if hee witnesse to our Reconciliation, wee neede neuer doubt of it: if hee giue no witnesse, wee can haue no assurance. The Testimony of Iesus is giuen, partly by the Promises of the Word, (hee putting spirit and life into them for our particular comfort,) and partly by the witnesse of the Spirit of Adoption, in the vnutterable feelings and ioy of our hearts1 Tim 2.6. Esay 55.6. 1 Cor. 1.6..
Reconcile.] The word imports a restoring of one to Amitie, from which he was by his owne fault fallen. There is a three-folde estate of man: there is the estate, 1. of Innocency; and heere the man is at Amity with God, 2. of Corruption; and heere is mortall enmity betweene God and man: 3. of Grace; and heere they are made friends, and the League renewed. Into the first estate wee came by Creation; into the second by Propagation; and into the third onely by Regeneration. The distinct knowledge of this three-folde estate of man, cle^res Gods Iustice, from the blame of all those plagues, broke in vpon man-kinde, through corruption: and it should scarre wicked men out of their wretched condition, as they are by nature
 seruants of corruption. And it greatly commends the mercy of God, that could loue vs when wee were enemies.
In the performance of this worke of Reconciliation or Mediation, there are six distinct things done by Christ: the first is Discretion, or Dijudication of the cause: hee takes notice of the state and businesse of the Church. Secondly, hee doth report the Will of God, the Couenant and Conditions of agreement with God, to the Church. Thirdly, hee makes Intercession for the offending party. Fourthly, hee satisfies and expiates for sinne. Fiftly, hee applyes that Satisfaction. Sixtly, hee conserues the Elect in the state of Reconciliation. Discretion and Relation belong to the Propheticall office: Intercession and Satisfaction to the Preisthood;Who are not reconciled to God in Christ. Application and Conseruation to his Regall Office. Enquire then whether thou bee reconciled to God in Iesus Christ. I consider it negatiuely; thou art not reconciled, if thou bee not enlightened and inspired with the holy Ghost, to lead thee into all truth. For if Christ did reconcile thee, as a Prophet, hee must teach thee both by his Word and Spirit. Againe, thou art not reconciled, if thou haue not consecrated thy selfe to kill the beasts, thy sinnes, in sacrifice before the Lord; and by the Spirit of Intercession, to powre out thy soule in Gods sight. When Christ reconciles as a Priest, he powres vpon man the spirit of Compassion and DeprecationZach. 12.12.: Thou art not reconciled, if Christ beget thee not by the immortall seede, or rule thee not by the Scepter of his Word, or conserue thee not in vprightnesse, with respect of all Gods Commandements.
Why the Church is called all things.All things.] That is, the Church or Elect of God; all the faithfull. The Elect are called All things: 1. because of their number, there is a world of them2 Cor. 5.19.: 2. Because there is for their sakes a reconciliation with all the Creatures in generall; for corruption is taken from the whole, though not from euery part: 3. Because God doth not receiue their persons into fauour, but all things that belong vnto them, that may concerne their felicitie: 4. Because whatsoeuer they haue, in heauen or earth, comes by vertue of this Reconciliation.
Vses.The Vse is: 1. to teach vs to take notice of the worlds vanitie: What is all the world, if Gods Children were out of it? Nothing. The Elect are all things, worth all, better then all. Kingdomes and Scepters and all the glory of the earth, is nothing in Gods account. And all is now corrupt with sinne, God would haue it knowen, hee stands not bound to any in the world, or the whole world, but onely to the Elect. 2. It should teach vs to know no man after the flesh, that is, not to respect men for their Lands, apparrell, titles, parentage, etc. but for Grace2 Cor. 5.16.. 3. Wee should not much wonder at thee disorders are in the world: for were it not for the Elect, it would soone appeare, by the ruine of all, how little God cared for rebellious Reprobates. 4. It is a great comfort, no one of the Elect shall perish; for all things be reconciled. 5. It should teach vs to make much of them that feare the Lord. Let them be in stead of all things in our account. Lastly, seeing all things are reconciled, now let vs keepe the peace, euen the vnitie of the Spirit, in the bond of PeaceEphes. 4.6.
To himselfe.] Some reade, in him. There is difference betweene for Christ, by Christ, and in Christ. For, noteth the meritorious cause: In, noteth the coniunction with the head: By, noteth the instrument.
To himselfe foure wayes.Doct. We are reconciled in Christ or vnto Christ. This is true foure waies. 1. As hee is the person, by whom we are reconciled: 2. As his glory, is the end of our reconciliation. 3. As his glory and holinesse, is the patterne after which our happinesse and holinesse is proportioned. 4. In respect of his loue, prouidence, custody and protection, vnto the which wee are receiued.

The Vse of all may bee to teach vs: 1, To take heede of opposing,Vses. disgracing, or persecuting of such, as are reconciled to God; for, hee that toucheth them, toucheth the apple of Christs eye. Note hee saith, to himselfe. 2. In the vse of all things, to carrie our selues so, as wee prouide to giue account, and giue the things to God which are Gods, and as good Stewards dispose all things in that time, and according to those rules, Christ hath appoynted. 3. Seeing wee are now brought so neere vnto God, wee should humble our selues to walke before him in all reuerence and feare: And to this end, wee should labour for purity of heart, that wee might see GodMich 6.8. Mat. 5.7. Heb. 12.29. 1 Sam. 6.10.: Yea, wee should hate all spirituall pollutions, and bee zaalous in all good workes. And seeing God hath chosen vs to himselfe, wee should set vp the Lord, to bee our God, to serue him with our whole heart, and haue respect to all his Commandements1 Pet. 2.9.11.12. Tit. 2.13. Deut. 26.16.17. And to this end wee should labour for speciall sinceritie in the profession of Religion: an ordinary care will not serue the turne: if wee will liue with the multitude, wee may perish with the multitude2 Chro. 15 3.. But let vs cleaue to the Lord with a perpetuall Couenant, and resolue to receiue him as our guide vnto the deathIer. 50.5. Psal. 49. vlt. 1 Who made peace..
Set at peace.] The effect of our reconciliation is peace. Concerning this peace, I propound fiue things.
1. Who made it: no other can set a peace among the Creatures, but hee that reconciles men to the Creatour: he is the Prince of peaceEsvy 9.7.; the chasticement of our peace was vpon himEsay 53.; He is our peaceEphes. 2.^3. 2 With whom they are at peace..
2. With whom the faithfull are at peace: they are at peace, first, with themselues; Peace rules their heartsCol. 3.15.. Secondly, with good AngelsPsal. 34. Heb. 1.14.. Thirdly, with the seede of Abraham, the Iewes; the partition wall is broken downeEsay 2.15.. Fourthly, with Gods Ordinances, God creating peace, or els the Word would alwayes bee goring and smiting with the stroakes of warre, and words of vengeanceEsay 11.4. and 57.19.. Fiftly, with the godlyEsay 11.6.7.. Sixtly, with all CreaturesIob 5. Heb. 2.18. Psal. 91.13.. Onely there can be no peace: first, with the Powers and Principalities; for after the two strong men haue fought, there is no more peaceEphes. 6.12.: secondly, with the World, the World hath hated the Master, and therefore the seruants may not looke for better entertainmentIohn 15.8. 3 The effects of this peace..
3. The effects of this peace, which are principally two: first, the restitution of soueraignty and dominion ouer the Creatures: secondly, the safety of the Christian in all estates; for from this peace flowes great securitie and protection, euen to the poorest Christian, either from, or in dangersIob 5.15 etc. 4. What we must do to attaine the sense of this peace..
4. That wee may attaine the sense of this peace, wee must bee reconciled to GodHos. 2.18.: we must be sincere worshippersHos. 2.17.: we must keepe vs in our wayesPsal. 91.13.: wee must get a meeke and quiet spiritPsal. 37.12.: wee must in nothing bee carefull, but in all things shew our requests vnto GodPhil. 4.7.: wee must loue God and shew it by the loue of the knowledge of his NamePsal. 91.14. Vses..
Vses. First, Gods Children should know this priuiledge for themselues, it will be a preseruation against sinne. 2. Hence wee may gather the miserie of all carnall persons that are not reconciled to God. They want the potection of Angels, they are vnder the gouernment of the God of this world; the Creatures are armed against them, they are stript of the royall priuiledges arising from the communion with Saints; yea, God fights against them, in, and by themselues, as by terrours of conscience, and by vnquiet affections and passions, giuing them ouer to an vnruely heart. What are Enuy, Malice, Lust and Rage, but so many weapons to fight against the soule? Yea, God fights against the sinner, by the deadnesse of his heart, which both affamisheth the soule in spirituall things, and takes away the contentment of outward things.
By the bloud.] Heere he notes how wee are reconcililed, viz. by the bloud
 of Christ, this is that bloud of sprincklingHeb. 1^.24., the bloud of the immaculate Lamb1 Pet. 1:19., the bloud of the euerlasting CouenantHeb. 13:20., Christs owne bloudHeb: 13:12. The fruits and effects of Christs blood.
Many are the fruits and effects of the bloud of Christ: 1, We are elected through it1 Pet: 1:2.: 2. It ratifies the Couenant of GodLuke 22:20. Heb: 9:18.: 3. It is that Reconciliation, iustifying vs from our former sinnesRom: 3:25. and 5:9. Ephes. 1:7. 1 Ioh: 1:7. Reuel: 7:14.: 4. It ioynes Iew and Gentile together in one Citie; yea, in one houseEph: 2:13: etc: 5. It purgeth the Conscience from dead workesHeb: 9:14. and 10:4.: 6. It turnes away wrath, and saues vs from the destroying AngellHeb. 11:18.: 7. It makes Intercession for sinnes after CallingHeb: 12:24.: 8. It makes perfect in all good workesHeb: 13:20.: 9. By it the Faithfull ouercome the DragonReuel. 12:11., and AntichristReuel: 19.23.: Lastly, it opens the Holy of Holies, and giues vs an entrance into heauenHeb: 9:7. and 10:19..
The Vse is: first, to teach vs, to take heede of sinning against the bloud of Christ; for, if it be thus precious, it must needes diffuse a horrible sinne-guiltinesse, vpon such as transgresse against it. If Abels bloud, wronged, cryed so fearefully; and the bloud of Zacharias, what shall the bloud of Christs doeMat: 23:30:35. Luke 11:50. How many wayes men sinne against Christs bloud.? And men sinne against Christs bloud: 1. By resisting the meanes of application of Christ crucified: 2. By prophane Swearing and Cursing: 3. By ascribing remission of sinnes to the workes of the LawRom: 3:20:24:25.: 4. By committing the sinne against the holy GhostHeb: 10:26.29: 5. By returning to the lusts of our former ignorance1 Pet: 1:14.: 6. By prophane and vnworthy receiuing of the Sacraments1 Cor: 11.: And in the Sacraments men offend against the bloud of Christ:Vses. First, when they come to it with an opinion of reall presence, either by Transubstantiation or Consubstantiation; for thereby they deny the truth of the bloud of Christ by consequent, and open a gap to the adoration of Christ, in, or before, Bread or Wine. Secondly, when men vse the Sacraments but as bare signes, not discerning spiritually the presence of the Bloud and Body of the Lord. Thirdly, when men come thither vnbidden. being not called, nor within the compasse of the Couenant by conuersion. Fourthly, when men come to eate this Lambe, but without the sowre hearbes of godly Sorrow for their sinnes, and Repentance. Fiftly, such as come without Faith (by which they lay holde on Christ,) and Loue (by which they are ioyned to Christians.)
Thus of the first Vse.
Secondly, the consideration of the dignitie of Christs bloud should teach Christians to esteeme their new birth. It is better to bee borne of the bloud of Christ, then of all the blouds of menIoh: 1:13.: seeing by his bloud wee haue the attonement, wee should reioyce in GodRom: 5:11.: and comfort our selues in this great prerogatiue, that our many sinnes and infirmities are done away in the Intercession of Christ, his Blood speaking better things then the Bloud of AbelHeb: 12:24..
Thirdly, wee should neuer bee much perplexed for the ordinary troubles befall vs; for if wee looke vpon the Authour and finisher of our Faith, hee endured the shame and contradiction of sinners, yea, and shed his bloud too: whereas we haue not yet resisted vnto bloudHeb: 12.2:4..
Fourthly, it should enflame vs to a desire of all possible, both Thankefulnesse, giuing glory to him that shed his bloud for vsReu: 1:5.: and Obedience, striuing to walk worthy of the effusion and application of such precious bloudHeb: 13:20., striuing after perfection in all well-doing.
Of his Crosse.] It was needfull our Sauiour should be vpon the Crosse, that so hee might bee the accomplishment of what was signified by the Heaue Offering and the Brazen Serpent, and that so hee might beare the speciall curse of the Law for vs: of all deathes, the death on the tree, beeing by a speciall Law of God made accursed.
Vses of Christs crosse.The consideration of this, that Christ suffered on the Crosse, should teach vs both Humiliation and humility: we should bee pricked in our hearts, to
 thinke of it that our sinnes caused him so to bee piercedZach. 12.12.: and wee should put on all humblenesse of minde, when wee see him that was equall to God, abasing himselfe for vs, in the forme of a Seruant, to dye on a treePhil. 2.8. etc.: yea, the more basenesse hee suffered, the more wee should glory and reioyce in his sufferings: nothing should glad our hearts more then CHRIST, and him crucified.Gal. 6.14.
Further, Christ dyed on the Crosse, to breake downe the partition wall, and to slay HatredEphes. 2.16. 1. Cor. 1.13.: And shall Enmitie and Discord liue, when Christ is de^d? Shall hee be nayled, and shall not our vile affections bee nayled downe with him? Besides, it should bee our care to see to it, that the Crosse of CHRIST be not made of none effect1 Cor. 1.18., which is, when by Faith it is not applied, when the Doctrine of Christ is not GODS power in our soules; when our Flesh is not crucified with the Lusts of itGal. 5.24.: and when wee take not vp our Crosse to follow ChristMath. 10.38.: And lastly, when wee are so bewitched that wee cannot obey the truth.
By him.By him repeated for foure reasons.] This is repeated in the Originall (though the Translation expresse it not) for foure Reasons: first to shew how hardly men are drawn to ascribe from their hearts, their happinesse vnto Christ. Secondly, to shew the necessitie of it: It is not possible to be saued, but by the imputed righteousnesse of CHRIST. Thirdly, to shew that all things in Christs action and Passion, were meritorious, least men should superstitiously dote or dreame vpon his Bloud, or the word of the Crosse, or the signe of it, or the like. There is no merit in Bloud, but as it was in him. Fourthly, to conclude the worshippe of Angels, which abuse beganne then to grow among the Colossians.
Both the things vpon earth.] This All things, by a distribution, is againe repeated, to medicine the doubtfulnesse of Gods Children, which question it, whether Christs merits extend vnto them; as also to inflame vs to an admiration of the vertue of his death, by considering how farre it extends.
On Earth.] Note here two things. First, that eternall life is begunne in this life: wee should neuer see Gods face in Heauen, if wee taste not of his fauour on Earth. And if this must be begun on earth, why doe men deferre so great a worke as their reconciliation, as if it belong to heauen rather then to be done on earth; yea, this taxeth the slownesse of heart, and discontentment of Gods Children, This knowledge, ioy, affection, etc. is the same thou must haue in heauen. And wee should learne hence, to liue on earth, like the Citizens of Heauen, Citizens will not liue so rudely as the Country Swaines, much more oddes ought there to be betweene Sarazens and Hagarens, if I may so say; much difference betweene them that dwell in SION. and those that haue no portion but in SINAY. Gods Children are the Sonnes of the Free-woman, and Citizens; wicked men are the Children of the Bond-woman, and Forrainers, and strangers from the Common-wealth of Israell.
Secondly, where hee saith, vpon the Earth, and yet in Heauen, I might note the vncertainetie of our abode on earth: wee haue nothing to possesse but the outside of the earth, which is ready to shake vs off daily.
All things in Heauen.] For the meaning of these words, wee know,Whether Angels be reconciled in Christ or no. that there are in Heauen, both Angels and Saints. And it may bee questioned whether Angels be reconciled in Christ or no. Though Angels sinned not, yet Angels haue gain'd by Christ a more perfect adhering to God, and establishing in their standing, encrease of knowledge, and of IoyLuke 15.10.; yea,Ephes. 3.9. the Angels are reconciled by Christ thus, that is, they are made friends with vs, with whom they were at enmitie: yet I thinke this is not meant here, but the Saints onely are intended, because it seemes, he entreateth here of Christ,
 not onely as head (for so hee is head of Angells) but as Mediator betweene parties fallen out. Whence wee may note two things: first, that the very Saints now in hea^en, once needed the merits of Christ; none come there but were first reconciled, which may be a comfort to the afflicted spirits of mourning and drooping Christians, if they consider that the greatest Saints did neede remission of sins as well as they. And besides, it pounds to pieces merit of workes, inasmuch as these Saints came not into heauen, but by the merits of Christ. Secondly, wee may learne that Christ merited not onely our persons, but our grace and glory.



Verse 21. And you hath hee now also reconciled, that were in times past strangers, and enemies, because your mindes were set in euill works.

HItherto of the description of the Redeemer, as hee stands in relation to the whole Church: In these two Verses hee is described by relation, in particular, to the Church of the Colossians. In this description consider two things: First, the miserie the Colossians were in, without Christ: Secondly, the remedie in Christ. Their miserie is both propounded and expounded: It is propounded to stand in two things: viz. Alienation and enmitie: It is expounded in two things; viz. that they were thus miserable; first, in their Mindes; secondly, in their Workes: the remedie followes in the next Verse.
Before I come to consider of their miserie, there are certaine wordes of Coherence to be weighed, viz. And you hath hee now also reconciled: where obserue first, the word of Connexion, And: secondly, the benefit repeated, reconciled: Thirdly, the person whom, you: Fourthly, the time when, hath now: Fifty, the person who, Hee.
Six things obserued from the coherenceFrom the generall consideration of the matter contained in this Verse and the next, with the Coherence, six things may be obserued.
First, that CHRIST is a true Head, to euery particular Church.
Secondly, that then is any people happy, and not before, when the Gospell gathers their soules to God.
Thirdly, they cannot be miserable, that cease to be strangers and enemies to God, whatsoeuer their outward estate be.
Fourthly, Doctrine must be applied. For the humiliation of Gods Seruants, so to Dauid. For the conuincing of the wicked, so to Ahab. For the triall and detection of the temporary Faith, so to Herod. For the hardening of the reprobates, and their reiection, and cutting downe by the Sword of Gods seruants, and for the speciall consolations and directions of Gods Seruants, And therefore Ministers should imploy themselues in application, and to that end should study for power of matter, as well as forme of words, and turne themselues into all formes, requesting, beseeching, reproouing, etc. with all diligence and sinceritie. The People also must know that their profiting lies in application: and to this end, they should attend, meditate, repeate, pray, striue against Securitie and Obiections, keeping aliue the sparkes that are kindled in their soules. When a man can conscionably apply the Word, it shewes, hee truely hates sinne, and is a true hearer.
1 Cor. 2.11.Fiftly, men may know particularly, they are reconciled; which both checkes Securitie, in not labouring for this knowledge; and confutes Papists, and drowsie Protestants, that say it is presumption to thinke so.
Sixtly, Experience giues sure testimonie to the Doctrine of the Gospell: then wee know profitably, when wee know the doctrine in our owne case, as the Colossians here their Reconciliation. Wee neede not wonder
 then, if wee see that the most powerfull parts of practicall Diuinitie haue little or no testimonie, or if it bee, it is darke and seldome, from the most men; yea, from many Church-men. The cause is, they neuer had experience themselues. And we should learne to esteeme their iudgement most, that doe draw Religion most into practise; for God will shew the humble his way.
And you.] In the gathering of Soules, God workes beyond desert, and many times beyond probabilities. If we respect the men, they were Gentiles, hardened by hundreds of yeeres, in custome of sinnes: if wee respect the meanes, it is Epaphras, none of the greatest of the Apostles. Which should teach vs to liue by Faith, and vse Gods ordinance with confidence: As in the businesse of conuersion, so in matter of preseruation, knowing that God is not tyed to desert or meanes.
Also.] Doct. The Church and Kingdome of Christ is in this world still in progresse; Christ hath not done, when hee hath conquered Rome spiritually, that had conquered the world before corporally, but here is a fresh increase and a new; You also. And thus it will be still, till the end of the world: and therefore wee should euery one doe what wee can to helpe forward the Kingdome of God, and the adding of such soules as yet belong to the vocation of Christ. And this wee may doe, both by furthering the Gospell preached, and by seeking a holy seede; getting within the Couenant our selues, and by education, labouring to amend what by propagation we haue marred. Yea, the consideration hereof; should much encourage vs in the combate against Sinne and the World: for in the warre, Souldiers vse to gather spirit and valour vpon the tidings of new supplies.
Now.] Men are not reconciled till redemption bee applied: Christ dyed before, but they were not reconciled till now: It is not safe for men to rest in the Historicall beliefe of Christs death: either learne to die to sinne, to crucifie thy flesh, and to take vp thy Crosse daily, or else forbeare to mention CHRIST; for it is in vaine, thou hast no part as yet in Christ.
Hath.] Though Sanctification, while wee tarry in this world, be vnperfect, yet Reconciliation is past so soone as a man is turned to God. Gods rich fauour may stand with the many wants and infirmities of man: but then we must remember it is free and gracious: for if wee be perfectly reconciled and yet not perfectly sanctified, then it must needes follow, wee are not reconciled from our owne workes.
Hee.] That is Christ, which being againe mentioned, shewes, 1. that hee is God, seeing Roconciliation is here giuen to him, which was before ascribed to the Father. 2. It proues that in the one essence of God are more Persons then one. 3. It proues that Christ died willingly: hee is not onely the meanes but the vndertaker of our ReconciliationHeb. 9.14.: hee is not onely the Sacrifice, but the Priest also.
Reconciled.] The repetition or application of this word and worke to the Colossians, shewes that there is one constant way, that God holds vnalterably with all his people. No sort of men can be happy, vntill they be reconciled: if men will not minde their peace, and sue out their pardon in Christ, their hope will faile them; there is no other way to be saued.
Thus of the words of Coherence: There remaines both their miserie in this verse, and the remedie of it in the next verse.
Strangers and Enemies, etc.] In generall wee may first obserue,Good to thinke much of our misery. that it is profitable for men to know and meditate of their naturall miserie, though men be neuer so vnwilling to it; yea, though they be already deliuered from it. For the consideration hereof shewes men the neede of a
 Sauiour, and as a Schoole-master traines them vp to Christ: it mollifies the stony hearts of men; it breedes watchfulnesse ouer our nature, when wee know it is so poysoned and corrupted: it makes vs compassionate ouer others in their distresse or infirmities: it sets an high price vpon spirituall things, and makes vs account Gods fauour our greatest ioy: it makes vs cleaue to God in a perpetuall Couenant. To omit many other commodities that arise hereof, it reproues the seldom teaching and learning of the doctrine of mans naturall miseries.
wicked men are strangers in fiue respects.Strangers.] Vnregenerate men are strangers in fiue respects: 1. In respect of Heauen, not onely pilgrimes here, but without promise of a better life, so continuing. 2. In respect of God, without God in the world. 3. In respect of Gods people, not fellow-Citizens, but ForrainersEphes. 12.. 4. In respect of the speciall prouidence of God, Strangers to the Common-wealth of Israell. 5. In respect of the Life of GodEphes. 4.17.: And that if wee consider either the rule of life, they account the Law a strang thingHos. 8.; or the fountaine of life, viz. Regeneration, They are dead in sinneEphes. 2.1.; or the Obedience of holy life, Their imaginations are onely euill, continuallyGen. 8..
But if any aske how this strangenesse comes; the word in the originall seemes to note it; for it is estranged, which is more then Strangers; for it imports they were not so created, but made so. They were made so; 1. Originally, by the transgression of the first man, from whence flowed the first strangenesse betweene God and man; man running from God, and God refusing to delight in the sonnes of men. 2. By their owne actuall sinnes, which separate betweene God and themEsay 59.2.. Alienation is to the workers of iniquitieIob. 31.3. The hurt of liuing thus estranged..
Quest. But what hurt is it to carnall men to be thus estranged? Ans. There is no saftie against dangers, where God is not to protect men: there is no comfort in affliction, where one can neither looke to God, nor the Saints, for succour and comfort.
The God of this world doth rule effectually in all the Children of disobedience, they are in bondage to the world, they are in bondage to their owne flesh, euen to a passionate, blinde, hard heart, and rebellious nature. They want the delightfull refreshing of all the blessings of God, his ordinances, graces or outward fauours: All glory is departed from men, when God is gone. Besides, obstinacie may cast them into a reprobate sense and eternall death may swallow them vp.
That wee may bee deliuered from this strange estate of separation, the bloud of Christ must bee applied, wee must become new Creatures, our peace must be preached, accesse must be had to God by prayer, wee must be ioyned to Gods Children, we must bee built vpon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, and our soules must become Temples for the holy Ghost to dwell in: all this is set downe in the second of the Ephesians from Vers. 13. to the end of the Chapter.
And to this end we must take heede of working iniquityIob. 31.3.: of IgnoranceEphes. 4.17.: of an vncircumcised and an vnmortified HeartEzech. 44.7.: of strange DoctrineHeb. 3.9.: of the strange womanProu: 6.: of strange Fire, that is, Will-worship: and of the Manners of strange Children; for all these, by effects, will estrange.
Lastly, if it be so great a miserie to be estranged, woe be to them that lye in this miserie, and regard it not: the lesse sense the more danger; and most faultie is that frowardnesse in any, that professe to feare Gods Name, that voluntarily bring a curse vpon themselues, by estranging themselues from the societie of the faithfull. But let all that know Gods mercie in their reconciliation, reioyce in their deliuerance from this miserie.
Enemies.] Vnregenerate men are enemies both actiuely and passiuely:
 Actiuely, they are enemies to their owne soules;Enemies they are both actiuely and passiuely. for hee that l^^^^ iniquitie hates his owne soule: 2. to holinesse of life, they hate to be reformedPsal. 50.: 3. to Gods children, for it is certaine, they shall be hated of all carnall men, for Christs names sakeJohn. 15.8.: 4. to the light, hee that doth euill hates the lightIohn. 3.22. Amos. 5.10.: 5. one to another, they are hatefull and hating one anotherTit. 3.3. Who haue God.: 6. to God. Obiect. Sure no man hates God. Sol. Many men doe hate God, as appeareth by the threatning in the second Commandement: and the Scripture else-where, notes such as in Gods account hate him; such are these: 1. Such as with-stand the truth, and labour to turne men from the Faith, Acts 13.8. 2. Such as are friends to the World, Iames 4.4. 3. The carnall wise men of the world, whose wisedome is enmitie to God, Rom. 8.7. 4. All workers of iniquitie, Psal. 37.18.20. and 92.9. 5. All Scoffers, that reproach Gods Name, Truth, or People, Psal. 74.18.22. 6. All that hate Gods Children, Psal. 81.14.15. and 83.2.3. and 129.3.5. Iohn 15.18.23. 7. All those that refuse to subiect their soules to the Scepter of Christ, and will not be ruled by his ordinances: These are called his enemies, Luke 19.27. And among other, such are those loose people that liue vnder no setled Ministery. Lastly, all Epicures, whose God is their belly, and minde onely earthly things, and glory in their shame, Phil. 3.17.18. Passiuely, they are enemies to God, who hates them, Psal. 5.4. to Gods ordinances, which smite, and pursue, or threaten them, Psal. 45.4. to all the Creatures, who are in armes against the sinner, till hee bee at peace with God: and in particular to the Saints, who hate the company and assemblies of the wicked. Psal. 26.4.
And all this shewes the great misery of wicked men: and how can they but be miserable, that are in the estate of enmitie? All seueritie will bee accounted Iustice, all their vertuous praises but faire sinnes: stript they are of all the peculiar priuiledges of the Saints; and that which men would desire to doe their enemies, God will certainely, by an vnauoydable prouidence doe to them. All the Creatures are against him: a wicked man is as hee that should alway goe vpon a Mine of Gunne-powder: eyther by force or by stratagem, the Creatures will surprise him. O that men would therefore labour to mortifie actiue hatred in themselues, that the passiue destroy them not; and seeke to Christ, in whom onely this enmitie can bee remoued.
Againe, this makes against merit; for what could wee merit that were enemies? And let such as are deliuered, and haue felt the bitternesse of this enmitie, take heede of secret sinnes after Calling, vnrepented of, least GOD returne and visite them with the strokes of an EnemieIob. 13.24. etc. Jer. 30.14. Esay 63.19. (...)..
In the minde.] It greatly matters in the businesse of mans happinesse, how the mindes of men are ordered: 1. Man makes it the fountaine of all his actions; it is his priuie Counsellor: hee speakes first with his minde, hee obeyes his mindeEphes. 2.3.: it is the shop, whence hee frames all his engines against God and Man. 2. The Diuell especially labours to be possessed of this fort, and to haue it in his custodie2. Cor. 10.4.. 3. The godly man repenting, first labours to be renued in his mindeEphes. 4.23.. 4. God especially lookes after mans minde, which appeares in that hee gaue a Law to the mindeRom. 7., setting as it were a Guarde to rule and appoint it: and the inward worship of God is here performed. We must loue God with all our mindeMarke 12., and pray in minde1. Cor. 14.. God makes a speciall search after mens mindes: it is his speciall glory to search the heart, and minde of man2. Chron. 18.: and if God be enraged, the strength of the battaile is directed against the minde, and his worst strokes light there: one of his last curses is a reprobate minde.
The consideration hereof may serue for reproofe of the great carelesnesse that is in the most, for the mind, and the inward man, and the purity thereof.
 Thought is not free, as many fondly thinke; hee will neuer truely repent for euill workes, that doth not first care to repent for euill thoughts, and such like corruption in the minde. There should man begin his repentance, where God begins the discouery of our miserie.
And let vs learne to be more watchfull against the sinnes of our mindes, and be more grieued for the drosse and corruption wee finde there, and learne more to hate the sinnes of the minde, such as are ignorance, distracted seruice, false opinions, emptinesse of holy meditations, euill, dishonourable, impure, and vnchast thoughts against God or man; pride, malice, frowardnesse, vanitie, security, and vnbeliefe.
Doct. 2. There is in vnregenerate men a strange minding of sinne, they imagine mischiefe, they haue a spirit of fornication, profound to decline, deepely set: they trust in their owne wayes; so as many times, they regard neither Gods word, nor the rod, nor the threatnings of God, or rebukes of man; neither can they be stirred with the foure last things. This shewes, as mans misery, and death in sinne, so the wonderfull mercy of God, in forgiuing such sins: It is a comfort, that sinnes of set knowledge may bee forgiuen. And hence may be gathered a difference betweene the sinnes of the regenerate,Plena voluntate. and the sinnes of the vnregenerate; for the godly sinne not with a full minde, they are not set in euill; sinne rebels in them, but not raignes. Lastly, this may let vs see how little cause wee haue to stand vpon our mindes or reason, or naturall parts, in matters of Hope and Saluation.
In euill Workes.] If the dependance, and the words themselues be duely considered, wee may here gather fiue things: First that the euill workes of the sinner, cause the strangenesse and enmitie aforesaid. Secondly, that a wicked man can like himselfe well enough, though his very workes, and outward behauiour be euill: He can blesse himselfe in his heart, when his iniquitie is found worthy to be hatedPsal. 36.2.. Thirdly, that where the life is euill, the minde is euill; the heart cannot be good, where the workes are nought. Fourthly, that hee that allowes himselfe in one sinne, will pollute himselfe with many sinnes. [Workes] Fiftly, when God lookes vpon the workes of euill men, they are all euill:Note. note a difference; if the carnall man looke vpon his owne workes, they are all good; if a godly man looke vpon them, they are partly good and partly euill; but if God looke vpon them, they are all nought, because his person is nought, his heart is nought, his end is nought, the manner is nought, etc.
Hitherto of their miserie, both as it is propounded and expounded.
Quest.A Question may be asked, how it comes to passe, that men haue so little sense of their miserie,Ans. and are so loath to take notice of it? For answere hereunto wee must vnderstand, that this comes to passe, because the God of this world, hauing possession, blindes their eyes, and men doe not examine themselues-before the Law of God. And they are with-drawne by the deceitfulnesse of sinne, which in particular they haue allowed themselues in: neither doe men remember their latter ends, or the Iudgement of God before their death. Their eyes are not annointed with eye-salue; a number haue not the word to direct them, and some are deceiued by false Teachers, which cry peace, peace, where there is no peace. And the most are deceiued with false opinions and conceits; for eyther they thinke, that such like places as this, are true of Gentiles, and not of them: whereas vnregenerate Israel is as Ethiopia vnto God:Amos 9.9. or they feare that this knowledge will make men melancholy. Yea, some are so foolish, they say, this course driues men out of their wits: thus Paul is mad, and Christ hath a Diuell: or they thinke, late Repentance will serue the turne, and then they may haue time enough to consider. Thus of their miserie.




Verse 22. In that Body of his Flesh, to present (or make) you holy, and vnblameable, and without fault in his sight.

IN this Verse the remedy of their miserie is set downe: where obserue: first, the Meanes: secondly, the End. The Meanes is by that body of his flesh through death: the End is to present vs, etc.
In that body of his flesh, through death.] Heare are two things: 1. the Nature of Christ: 2. the Sufferings of Christ. But first in the generall, I obserue two Doctrines.
First, there is no remedy for the sinner, but the death of his Sauiour: how foolish mankinde hath beene distracted about the cure for their miserie, is lamentable to consider: Adam gets Figge-leaues, and Israel a foolish CouerEsay 30.. As for Death and Hell, men are at a poynt, they haue made a couenant with them. Or they thinke they are helped of their misery, if they can forget it: they can blesse their hearts, that they will not feele the smart of any cursesPsal. 36.2. Deut. 29.19.; or they will make satisfaction, the sonnes of their bodie shall serue for the sinnes of their soulesMich. 6.; or else the Temple of the Lord, their going to Church must make God amendsIer. 7.. Others couer all, with the garments of their owne ciuill righteousnesse: others put their trust in the wedge of gold, and say to it, thou art my confidence. But vnto vs, there is no name by which we can be safe, but the name of Iesus Christ. Hee must rescue vs, that first created vs: hee makes vs partakers of loue, that was the Sonne of Gods loue: hee makes vs adopted sonnes, who himselfe is Gods naturall Sonne.
Secondly, It is profitable to bee much in the meditation of Christs sufferings, that it might sincke into our minds, that we must goe out of ourselues for happinesse; and such meditations open a way to godly sorrowEzec. 12.12.. They tend to the mortification of sinne, and they encline the heart of a Christian to bee willing to suffer with him: for hee suffered as the Master, wee are but Seruants: hee suffered for others sinnes;The good that comes by meditating of Christs sufferings. wee deserue more then wee can suffer by our owne sinne. Hee suffered all sorts of crosses, and infinite much: we suffer but light affliction. And the thought of his sufferings, may make vs willing to contemne the world, seeing heereby wee discerne that his kingdome is not of this world. Yea, wee owe vnto Christ the remembrance of his sufferings. It is a small thing he requires of vs, when he wils vs to thinke on him often, what he hath endured for vs.
In that body of his flesh] These words note Christs Nature: yet wee must consider which Nature: in Christ there were two Natures in one person, personally vnited: his diuine and humane Nature. His diuine Nature was from Eternity, Immutable, Immortall, Impassible. His humane Nature, was conceiued, and borne in time; Mutable, Mortall, Passible; one and the same: without time begotten of the Father, the Sonne of God, without Mother; and in time borne of the Virgine, the Sonne of Man without Father: Sonne to both, Naturall and Consubstantiall. These Natures are in one person, for, that God and Man might become one in Couenant; one is become God and man in person. These Natures are personally vnited: this vnion is personall, but not of persons; and it is a vnion of Natures, not naturall.
In these words the Apostle speakes of the Nature assumed, viz. his Humane Nature. And there are two things to bee noted in these words. First, that hee saith, that body, not the body. Secondly, that hee saith not simply, his body, but that body of his flesh.
That body.] Heere hee poynts out a speciall excellency in the body of Christ, aboue all other bodies in Heauen and Earth:Christs body more excellent then all other bodies. for his body was without sinne, formed by the ouershadowing power of the holy Ghost; so is no mans else. 2. It is assumed into personall vnion with the diuine Nature.
 3. It was honoured with speciall Prophesies, Types and Sacrifices. 4. This body was offered vp as a full expiatory Sacrifice. 5. It is to be remembred to the end of the word, in the Sacrament.
Christs body not like ours in two things.Body of his flesh.] To note, that it was a true Body, like vnto ours; and to distinguish it from his Sacramentall and Mysticall body. In two things Christs body was not like ours, and in three things it was like. It was not like: first, in the manner of subsisting: it was not independent, or a person of it selfe. 2. In the vicious accidents of the substance of it, no sinne, either could or ought to infect it: Could not; because originall sinne was restrained by the Holy Ghost: Ought not, because in it a purgation for our sinnes must be made. In three things it was like ours: first, in substance, hee tooke our whole Nature; hee was the seede of the Woman, of Abraham, of Dauid,In 3. things it was like. the Sonne of man, etc. And hee tooke the parts of our Nature, both soule and body. 2. In properties, and thus hee assumed both the properties of the whole Nature, in that hee was finite, and create. And in the parts, as in the soule, hee assumed, Vnderstanding, Will, Memory: and in the Body, Figure, Quantitie, and Circumscription, etc. 3. In infirmities, for hee assumed not onely our Nature, but the infirmities of Nature. But wee must know that hee tooke the defects, or infirmities, thay call miserable: not those they call damnable.
Thus of the Doctrine of his Nature: his Sufferings follow.
Through death.] The death of Christ doth reconcile vs, in as much as it ratifies the couenant, and takes away the guilt of the sinnes of the former Testament, and the vertue of it eats downe the power of present sinnes, and destroyes the power of our naturall death.
Christs death differs from ours, in three things.Christs death differs from the death of all the Elect, in three things. First, in that in death hee sustained not his owne person, but dyes as our surety, and so is a sacrifice for sinne. Secondly, hee was in death a whole burnt offering; for as hee dyed in body, so his soule was an offering for sinne, in as much as hee sustained the sence of the infinite wrath of God in his Agonies. Thirdly, in that his death was the death of him that was the Sonne of God. Hitherto of the doctrine, of the Nature and sufferings of Christ, the Vses follow.
Vses of Christs death.First, for Instruction. The consideration of all this should teach vs, 1. to value reconciliation, with all the graces that flow from it, according to the worth of the meanes by which they are procured. If there were no other way to know the worth of Gods Fauour, Knowledge, Spirituall refreshings, and Graces, yet by the price, payd for the purchase of them, wee may discerne they are worth more then all the world. 2. Is it not possible for vs to hate sinne, vpon the consideration of so pregnant an example of the odiousnesse of it, when the imputation of sinne brought the Sonne of God on his knees, to his death. O the soule Lethargie, that hath ouergrowen vs! 3. That wee may haue the profit of the Incarnation, and Passion of CHRIST, in his naturall body, wee must bee carefull to get into his mysticall body. 4. The Apostle vseth the Meditation of Christs humiliation to the death, as an argument to perswade vs to Compassion, Mercy, Fellowship in the Spirit; Vnitie, Humility, Clemency, and meeknesse of minde, Phil. 2.1. to 9.
Secondly, wicked men may here see what smart they are like to feele from the vnpartiall iustice of God. Doth hee not spare the body, the flesh, the bloud, the life, of his owne Sonne, when hee became but a surety for sinne? How shall vngodly men, euer enemies, and neuer sonnes, that themselues haue committed sinne, escape, when the day of wrath shall come?
Thirdly, godly men may heere see great reason of comfort, not onely by
 considering the great loue of Christ, and the great benefits must needs flow from his death; but if two things bee weighed: 1. the honour done to our Nature, in that in the humanity of Christ it is ioyned to the diuine Nature. This makes amends for that breach that is made by the damnation of millions, in our nature. 2. The great certainty of Gods couenant,1 Tim. 3.16. Phil. 2.6.7. of Grace and Mercy. For a mans couenant, if it be once confirmed, no man abrogates it, or addeth, or taketh from it: therefore,Gal. 3.9. much more Gods Couenant shall stand vnchangeable, being ratified and confirmed by the death of Christ.
Thus of the Meanes.
The end followes, in these words: To present you holy, and without spot, and vnblameable in his sight. And in these words, is both the presentation, and the sanctification of Christians to be considered.
To present you.] The originall word is very significant, and diuersly accepted: it signifies to restore: so Acts 9.41. to assemble, Acts 2.26. to make present: so Acts 23.23. to make ready, furnish, purge, or make cleane, Acts 23.24. to make acceptable, 1 Cor. 8 8. to make manifest, 2 Tim. 2.15. to proue euidently, Acts 24.13. to assist, and stand too, Rom. 16.2. 2 Tim. 4.16. to offer by way of dedication, or gift to God, 2 Cor. 11.2. Luke 2.22. Col. 1.28.
It is true that Christ restores vs, collects vs,Ephe. 5.27. Ephes. 1.6. brings vs into Gods presence, clenseth vs, makes vs acceptable, assists, and defends vs, and manifests vs to be holy. But I take it principally in the last sence, hee presents vs by dedication to God. Thus Christ shall present vs wholly, both at the day of iudgementRom. 14.10., and in the day of death, when hee shall deliuer the soule to God. Thus also Christ doth present vs in this life: 1. When by the preaching of the Gospell, hee seuers and segregates vs from the world, and brings vs into Gods houshold. 2. In Iustification, when clothing vs with his owne righteousnesse, hee becomes our Iustification. 3. In new obedience: and that two wayes: first, when hee presents our workes, couered with his intercession. Secondly, when hee causeth vs to present our selues to GOD, both by Prayer and consecration of our selues to Gods Seruice, and holines of life. It must bee euery mans care then to seeke his presentation from Christ, and to that end, by Couenant, Prayer, and practise, deuote himselfe to a subiection, to all the ordinances of Christ.
Thus of Presentation: Sanctification followes.
Holy, vnblameable, and vnreproueable in his sight.How the words are to be vnderstood] At the first sight I should encline to vnderstand these words, either of Iustification, or our consummate holinesse at the day of iudgement; but that the sway of Interpreters force me to expound them of Sanctification. It is greatly to bee waighed, that a man in this life should be here sayd to be holy, vnblameable, and vnreproueable, or as the other Translation hath it, without fault in his sight. For the better conceiuing of it, wee must compare with these words, other Scripture, wherein is giuen vnto the godly, that they haue cleane hands, and a pure heart, Psal. 24.4. that they are pure, Prou. 21.8. vpright in heart, Psal. 97.11. sanctified throughout, 1 Thess. 5.23. perfect,1 King. 8:61. or vndefiled in their way, Psal. 119.1. perfect, 2 Cor. 13.11. Phil. 3.15. Matth. 5.48. faultlesse, Iud. 24. without spot, and blamelesse, 1 Pet. 3.14. walking in all Gods wayes, 1 King. 8.58. and that they keepe Gods couenant, Psal. 25.10. and 78.8.10. and 132.22. Thus Noah is sayd to be perfect, Gen. 6.9 Ezekiah walked before God, with a perfect heart, Esa. 38. Dauids heart was perfect, 1 King. 11.4. Zachariah and Elizabeth were both righteous before God, and walking in all the commandements of the Lord blamelesse, Luke 1.6.
The question is, how those sayings should bee true, and in what sence they are meant: And for the cleering of the doubt, the way is not simply to reiect the propositions, as impious, and vntrue, and hereticall, as some ignorant
 and malicious persons doe: but seeing they are the sacred words of Scripture, to consider what it is may bee attained, and what Gods requires of vs. To thinke with the Papists, or Anabaptists, that any mortall man can performe the obedience required in the morall Law, perfectly; so as neuer to commit sinne against the Law, is a most blasphemous, detestable, and cursed opinion, for there is no man that sinneth not: the best of the Saints haue had their thousands of sinne. But those places are to bee vnderstood of the righteousnesse of the Christian, as hee is considered to bee vnder the couenant of grace, and the Gospell, not of Legall perfection, but of an Euangelicall innocency and vprightnesse. Not as their workes are in themselues, but comparatiuely, either with the workes of wicked men, or as they are in their desire and endeauour, and as they are presented in the intercession of Christ, who couers th^ imperfections that cleaue to the workes of the faithfull. Sometimes the faithfull are sayd to be perfect, that is, strong men in CHRIST; compared with the weake Christian, and Infant in grace: so that wee see what a Christian in this life may attaine vnto; the rigour of the Law being taken away, in the couenant of grace, and the imperfections of his workes, and frailty, being couered in Christs intecession.
Holy.] This word Holy, is the generall; and comprehends the other two. For holinesse is either internall, and that is expressed by the word (...), vnblameable, or externall, and so it is exprest in the word (...), vnreproueable. Holinesse is giuen to God, and so essentiallyLuke 1.49.; to the spirit of God, and so effectiuely, because it workes it in others; to Christ, as he deriues it by influence to his membersActs 3.14. Luke 1.35.; To Angels, Matth. 25. to sacrifices, by way of type; to the Couenant of GOD, as it promiseth holinesse to the faithfullLuke 1.71.; to the Prophets, as Teachers of holinesseActs 3.21.; to the Scriptures, as the rule of holinesseRom. 1.2.; to places, for the holinesse of the subiect: but heere it is a glorious adiunct, conferred vpon the faithfull by Christ.
Foure things obserued about holinesse.Concerning holinesse of heart, and life, in generall, there are heere foure things to be noted. 1. The necessitie of it; wee can neuer be reconciled or glorified without it, Tit. 2.12.13. 2. The difficultie of it, lesse then the power of Christ crucified, cannot make men lead a holy life. 3. The meritorious cause of it: holinesse is merited by Christ, as well as saluation. 4. The order: men must first bee reconciled to God, before they can get holy grace, or lead a holy life.
Vnblameable.] Christian perfection hath two things in it. First, vprightnesse of heart, noted by this word. Secondly, vprightnesse of life, noted by the word following.Internall holinesse hath seuen things in it. Internall perfection or holinesse, must haue these things in it. First, the staine of former sinnes must bee washed away with the teares of repentanceIer. 4 4.. Secondly, the inward worship of God must bee set vp in the heart: some impressions men haue of an externall worship, but of the inward worship, men are naturally almost wholly ignorant. God is inwardly worshipped, by the constant exercise of grace from aboue, as Loue, Feare, Trust, Delight, Desire, etc. 3. There must bee in vs an assurance of Gods fauorHeb. 10.22. Acts 15.9.. 4. There must be a freedome from preuailing euils in the mind or affections; in the minde, as ignorance, wicked thoughts, errours; in the affections, as impatiency, lust, seruile feare of men, maliceProu. 19.2. Psal. 41.6. Iam. 1.4., etc. 5. Hypocrisie must not raigne, our desire must be more to be good, then to seem soPsal. 125.4.. 6. Our whole heart must be set vpon Gods whole Law, to haue respect vnto all Gods Commandements. God abhors a diuided heartHos. 10.2., and a double heartIam. 4.8.. 7. The minde must be set vpon heauenly things, and conuerse in heauenCol. 3.1.. Where these things are happily attained vnto, there the heart is vpright, whatsoeuer defects, or infirmities be in it: these things are different in Christians, in the degrees; for there is an infancy, and weaknesse in sanctification, as well as Faith.

The signes of an vpright heart are these: first, it desires perfe^^^^^Phil. 3.:Signes of an vpright heart.: secondly, it will not cease well-doing for crossesJob 2:3.: thirdly, it will (...) God, though aloneIosh. 24:15.: fourthly, it will not follow the eye, it is not sens^^llIob 31:7.: fiftly, it reioyceth in the loue of CHRIST, aboue all thingsCant: 1:3.: sixtly, It will ^^^^te for lesser sinnes, as Dauids did, 2 Sam. 24. seuenthly, it is constantPsal: 78:37. Rules..
That we may attaine an vpright and vnblameable heart. In generall wee must get a new heartEzek: 36:27.. In particular, 1. we must by mortification circumcise our heartsDeut: 3:6.: 2. we must get Gods Law written in our heartsIer: 31:33.: 3. wee must seeke and loue purity of heartProu: 22:11.: 4. wee must keepe our hearts with all diligenceProu: 4:17.: lastly, we must walke before GodGen: 17:2. Motiues..
Motiues to inward holinesse. First, wee shall neuer see the righteousnesse of God imputed, till we be vpright in heartPsal. 36:10.. Secondly, a pure heart is one of the cleerest signes of a blessed manMatth: 5:6.. Thirdly, God searcheth to finde what mens hearts are, as well as what their liues are2 Chro: 28:9.. Fourthly, the eyes of the Lord behold all the earth, to shew himselfe strong, with all them that are of a perfect heart2 Chro: 16:9.. Fiftly, light is sowen for the righteous, and ioy for the vpright in hartPsal: 97:1^. What externall holinesse must haue in it. Lastly, the whole 125. Psalme encites heereunto.
Vnreprooueable.] This word notes the externall vprightnesse, or Christian perfection of life. Externall innocency must haue in it diuers things. 1. we must be free from the grosse sinnes of euery Commandement. 2. wee must cease from our owne workesHeb: 4:10., keepe vs from our wickednesse2 Sam. 22.23.: and not turne after the wayes of our owne heartEsa: 57:17.: that is, wee must bee sure to cease from our particular beloued sinnes: 3. our families must be well ordered, both for peace, labour, and pietieTit: 1:6:7.: 4. wee must bee free from IdolatryD^ut: 18:3.: from the customary sinnes of the tongueJam. 3:3:: from the raigne of hardnesse of heartProu: 21:29.: from hasting to bee rich; for hee that hasteth to be rich cannot be innocent, as the Prouerbe is. Lastly, wee must loue our enemies, Matth. 5. vlt. That wee may attaine heereunto, wee must walke in the way of good men, Prou. 2.20. wee must set Gods Lawes euer before vs, and let them be our warrant, 2 Sam. 22.23. we must not be destitute of heauenly gifts, 1 Cor. 1.6.8.
In his sight.] These words may bee referred, either to our presentation, or to our sanctification. And whereas some would thinke that they ouerthrow the former sence of the words, and prooue, that hee entreats heere of our holinesse in Gods sight by iustification, they are deceiued; for they may find these words giuen to sanctification, ordinarily in Scripture, as Luke 1.6.7. Heb. 13.21. 1 Iohn 3.22. Reuel. 14.5.
The words being referred to Sanctification, import foure things.
First, that what we are, or doe, is in his presence: so the words vsed, Luke 2.18. and 13.26. Acts 10.33.
Secondly, that God is a witnesse of all wee doe: so the words vsed, Luke 8.47. 2 Cor. 7.12. Gal. 1.20.
Thirdly, that God accepts of what is truel^ good, in any measure, Luke 1.75.
Fourthly, that God highly prizeth all that is good in the good, Luke 1.25. 2. Tim. 2.3. and 5.4. As the words there vsed shew.



Verse 23. If yee continue grounded, and stablished in the faith, and bee not mooued away from the hope of Gospell, whereof yee haue heard.

THe second part of the Epistle,The diuision of the third part of the Epistle. viz. the proposition of Doctrine hath beene handled hitherto, from the twelfth verse vnto these words. In these words, and those that follow, to the end of the second Chapter, is contained the third part of the Epistle, viz. matter of exhortation: wherein hee both perswades and disswades. The perswasion is contained in this
 verse, and the rest, vnto the eight verse of the next Chapter. The disswasion is from verse 8. of Chapter 2. to the end of the Chapter.
In the perswasion, the Apostle exhorts them to perseuerance, both in Faith and Hope: whereis to bee obserued: 1. the matter to which hee exhorts, in the beginning of this verse, and the reason to enforce the exhortation, in all the verses following. The matter to which he exhorts is two-fold: first, to perseuerance in Faith, in these words, if yee continue grounded and stablished in the faith: secondly, to perseuerance in hope, in the next words: and be not m^^ned from the hope of the Gospell, whereof yee haue heard. From the coherence and generall words of the Exhortation, we must obserue, that Gods children after they haue gotten true grace,Consideration of the doctrin from the Coherence. and are comforted in their reconciliation, must looke to their Faith and Hope. It is not enough once to get Faith and Hope, but after they are conceiued in vs, they must be daily looked to: for the iust must liue by his faith: It must be to him according to his faith, not according to his friends,Heb. 2:5. Heb: 11. Ephes: 3:16. Acts 15.9. 2 Tim: 3:15. 1 Iohn 5:4. money, labour, meanes, etc. By faith he must draw vertue out of all Gods ordinances: by faith hee must purge his heart of his daily sins: by Faith and Hope, he walkes with God, and ouercomes the world. This may greatly reprooue mans carelesnesse; men looke to their Grounds, Cattell, Shops, etc. but who lookes to their Faith and Hope?
If you continue grounded and stablished in the faith.] Heere are two things: first, the manner of the propounding of the exhortation, viz. with an If: secondly, the exhortation it selfe: where note; 1. the dutie, continue: 2. the manner of the duty, grounded and stablished: 3. the obiect, in Faith.
Why propou^ded with an If.If.] The Apostle propounds this Exhortation with an If, because hee speaketh to a mixt multitude, among whom were many that would not continue; and thereby shew they were not truely reconciled. Yea, it was needefull that the godly amongst them, should haue it thus doubtfully set downe, that so they might be more carefull to settle and establish themselues in the Faith, that they might hold out in it.
Men will fall away: looke for it.As this (If) lookes vpon the wicked, it shewes, that in places where the Gospell gathers soules to God, many that for a time were forward, and greatly affected, will afterwards fall away. And therefore Gods seruants, both Ministers and People, should looke for Apostacy, and not bee ouermuch troubled when they see any fall away.
What makes many fall away.It is not amisse to consider by what meanes or motiues men are plucked away from the loue of the truth. Some fall away for hard sayingsIoh: 6:30:42 52:60:61: etc., some cannot follow Christ long, because of their carnall friends: others are corrupted with lewd company: others cannot beare the reproofes of their faults; and if they bee reprooued, either they will lift Amos away from Bethel, or they get themselues away from hearing Amos. Some heare this Sect euery where so ill spoken of, that they will be better aduised ere they settle vpon such courses. And the rather, because they doe not see the multitude set out with them, or great men yeelde any countenance to such strict courses. Others are seduced by time-seruing flattering, false, or corrupt teachers, who (labouring to hinder the efficacy of the doctrine of painefull Ministers) hope to accomplish either the stopping of their mouthes, or, the increase of their bonds, crat lest their disgrace with the peopleEzek: 13.19:20:22. 2 Tim: 3.12:13:14. Heb: 3 12:13. The faithfull may fall away in some respects.. Others are ensnared with the earthly things, and forsake the sincerity of the truth, to embrace this world with Demas. Many fall away for the Crosse, and all are catcht with the deceitfulnesse of some sinne.
Quest. But may the faithfull fall away and not continue? Answ. The faithfull may lose, and fall from 1. some degrees of innocency of life 2. Some degrees of the working and efficacie of Gods Spirit. 3. Some degrees of Communion with Christ. Their Communion may be lessened,
 though their vnion can not be dissolued. 4. from Faith,Quoad sens^^. Quoad gradum Quoad act^^. Quoad doctrinam. Quoad media doctrinae. Seauen things from which the Elect can neuer fall. Psal. 94.14.145:14. Motiues to continuance. of which (...) ^^kes mention heere. And thus they may fall; in respect of sense: in resp^^^ of some degree: in respect of some acts of faith: in respect of some Doctrine of Faith: and lastly, in respect of the meanes of the doctrine of Faith: But there are seauen things from which the Elect can neuer fall: first, eternall life, Iohn 10.29. secondly, confirming grace in some measure, Psalm. 14.5. thirdly, remission of sinnes past, Esa: 43.25. Fourthly, the seed either of doctrine, or grace, 1 Iohn 3.9. Fiftly, the spirit of sanctification. Sixtly, the habite of Faith, Luke 22.32. Seauenthly, vnion with CHRIST, Iohn 17.22.23.26.
Continue.] Three things I propound concerning perseuerance. First, some reasons to moue vs, to labour, to hold out, and continue. Secondly; rules to be obserued, that wee might continue. Thirdly, the helpes the faithfull haue to further their perseuerance.
For the first: Vnlesse we continue, wee shall neuer haue the full truth of God, nor be made free by it: nor haue sound comfort, that wee are the Disciples of ChristIoh. 8.31.32.. Neither is any man fit for the kingdome of God, that puts his hand to the plow, and lookes backeLuke 9.62.. The branch cannot beare fruit, except it abide in the VineIob. 15.4.. And, if they continue not with vs, it is because they were not of vs1 Ioh^ 2.19.. It had beene better (for men) neuer to haue knowne the way of righteousnes, then after they haue knowne it, to turne from the holy Commandements, deliuered vnto them. For if after they haue escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of Iesus Christ, they be againe entangled, and ouercome; the latter end will be worse then the beginning2 Pet: 2:19.20.. Yea, the very children of God by backesliding, may fall into a miserable condition; the powers of Hell may assault themPsal. 77.11.. They may go to the graue with vnrecouerable affliction: yea, they may lose some graces, without all restitution in this world: as the ioy of their saluation, plerophorie, or full assurance, etc.
For the second: If thou wouldest continue,Eight rules ^or Continuance. thou must obserue eight rules. First, thou must get a continuing faith: get thee an infallible assurance of God fauour, arising from the wise Application of Gods promises, and the sure witnesse of Gods spiritJoh. 6:40.. Secondly, thou must at first be throughly cleansed of all thy filthinesse; making conscience to repent of all sinne, and haue respect to all Gods Commandements. And thou must bee sure thou get a new heart: for the old heart is deceitfull, and will not hold out in any thing that is goodEzek. 36.26.27.. Thirdly, thou must continue to vse the meanes of preseruation* thou must still heare, pray, read, conferre, meditate, and receiue the Sacraments; for the spirituall life is preserued by meanes, as well as the naturall. Fourthly, thou must ioyne thy selfe to such as feare God, in the societie^ and fellowship of the Gospell. The affections, and desires of many, are blasted, and soone vanish, like a morning cloud, for want of communion with such as are able to direct, comfort, admonish, or encourage themIer: 32:39:40 ^hil: 1:5:6.. Fiftly, thou must see to it, that thou get knowledge, as well as affectionHos. 2.19.20 Psal: 145.20.14.; and affection as well as knowledgen. Sixtly, thou must so receiue the truth of ^he doctrine of Christ, as thou be also ready and willing, to confesse it, and professe it, amidst the different opinions, and humours of menMath: 16.16. Seuenthly, Thou must be a sheepe; meeke, tractable, profitable, sociable, innocent: for boisterous, conceited, peruerse, vnteachable natures will neuer hold longIohn 10.28..
Lastly, thou must be euer wary, and take heede of crosse teachings, and the puffs of contrary doctrine: and withall, take heed of coldnesse, in following the truth, and of discord with such as feare God. Many times personall discords worke through mens singular corruptions, apostacy from the truth once receiuedEphes: 4:13.14..

The summe of all in; that, if we get a iustifying faith, and be once assured of Gods fauour; if wee at first make a through reformation; if wee daily sticke to, and wait vpon the meanes; if wee conuerse with Gods children; if we haue wise affections, that are warmed with pietie, and shewed with discretion; if wee make a sound profession of the sinceritie of the truth; if we be meeke, and teachable, and follow the truth without coldnesse, or contention, wee shall neuer fall, but continue as Mount Sion, that cannot bee moued. And out of all this wee may discerne the cause of the backe-sliding of many, either they were deceiued by a temporary faith; or neglected the constant vse of Gods ordinances, or were sleighthie in mortification; or they forsooke the fellowship of the Saints; or they were tost with contrary doctrine; or they were people of vnruly affections; or were seduced by secret lusts.
Helpes for continuance.For the third: though it be a hard worke to continue, by reason of the infirmities within vs, and the impediments from without vs; yet a Christian hath great helpes to further him in perseuerance: hee hath helpes, first, from the Saints, and is furthered by their example, by their exhortations, and by their prayersHeb: 12:1. and 10:24. 1 Tim: 2:1.: secondly, from the immortall seede which is within them, which hath as great aptnesse to grow as any seed in Nature: and is a seed that is sowen, for continuance, euen for Eternitie it selfe1 Iohn 3:9.. Thirdly, from the easinesse and grace of the Couenant, in which they stand in fauour with God. And here it would be obserued how the words of the Co^enant runne: for when God saith, He will make his euerlasting Couenant, his promise is, that hee will not turne away from them, to doe them good: and his feare he will put in their hearts, that they shall not depart from himIer: 32:4.. And in another place he saith, hee will not onely clense them, but hee will giue them a new heart, and take away the stony heart out of their bodies, and put his spirit within them, and cause them to walke in his statutes, and to doe themEphes: 36:26.27.. Fourthly, from the spirit of God, which is in them; for the spirit sets the soule at libertie2 Cor: 3:17.: and furnisheth it with gracesGal: 5:22.: sealeth vp vnto the day of redemptionEphes. 1.14.: strengtheneth the inward manEphes. 3.16.: shewes the things giuen of God1 Cor: 2.12.: is a perpetuall ComforterJohn 14.16.: Leadeth into all truthJohn 15.13.: frees from condemnation, and the rigour of the LawRom: 8:1:3:10. Zach: 12.12., Rom. 8.1.3. is life for righteousnesse sake, vers. 10. mortifies the deedes of the flesh, verse 13. beares witnesse that they are the children of God, verse 16. is a spirit of prayer, to cause them to cry Abba Father, verse 15. helpes their infirmities, and makes request for them, verse 26. Fiftly, from CHRIST: for from Christ they haue protection, Iohn 10.18. Influence, Iohn 15.1.4.5. Intercession, by which hee couers their sinnes and infirmities, presents their workes in his merits, and mooueth the Father to keepe them from euill, etc. Iohn 17.9.11.15.17.22. Sixtly, they haue helpes from his Ordinances; for by Prayer, when they aske according to Gods Will, they may bee sure to haue any thing, 1 Io^n 5.14. And by the Sacraments, Faith is confirmed, and sealed, and Grace nourished.
How many wayes the word furthers continuance.And by the Word they are many wayes furthered. I take but onely the 119. Psalme, to shew how our continuance is helped by the Word. It redresseth our waies, verse 9. It keepes from sinne, verse 11. It strengthens against shame, and contempt, vers. 22.23.143. It quickens, and comforts, verse 25.28.50.54.93.111. It makes free, verse 45. It makes wise, verse 98.100. It is a Lanthorne to our feete, verse 105.130. It keepes from declining, verse 102.104.118.155.160.165. Lastly, they are helped by the promises that concerne perseuerance, and preseruation, and falling away: such as are contained in such Scriptures as these, Iohn 13.1. 1 Cor. 10.13. Rom. 8.29. Psal. 84.12. 1. Tim. 4.18. Reuel. 2.25.26.

Grounded, and stablished in the faith.] It is not enough to get Fa^^h, and continue in it; but wee must be grounded and stablished: and when he (...), stablished in the Faith, wee must vnderstand, the Doctrine, profession, exercise, assurance, and effects of Faith. And this establishing, and grounding of our hearts, hath in it, particular Knowledge, Certainety, Resolution, and Contentment.
To be thus established, would fortifie vs against all the changes,The priuiledges of an established and grounded heart. and alterations of estate, or Religion in aftertimes: and as the Coherence imports, it would much further vs, in the attainement of an vnstained and vnrebukeable life: whereas of doubting can come nothing but the shunning of God, the libertie of sinne, and desperation, and the like. Besides, this grounded establishment in Faith, would free our profession from the dishonours, which an vnsetled or discontented Faith, or life, doth cast vpon vs. Atheists, Papists, Epicures, and Belly-gods, if this were in vs, would be astonished to see the power of Religion, in our resolued contentment, and to consider how vnmooueable wee were; so as the gates of Hell could not preuaile against vs. Besides the vnsearchable solace that a peaceable and restfull conscience would breed in vs.
That wee might be thus grounded, and stablished,What we must doe, that wee might bee grounded and stablished. diuers things are carefully to be obserued. 1. Wee must be founded on the Prophets, and ApostlesEphes. 2.20.; we must be daily conuersant in the Scriptures. 2. We must be much in praier, but in practise of prayer wee must nourish the hatred of euery sinne; and daily labour to encrease in the reformation of euill. And it is a great helpe to be much with such as feare God, and call vpon God with a pure heart. It would much establish vs, to see the faith, affections, feruencie, and power of Gods spirit in other, in prayer2 Tim. 2.19.22.. 3. There is a secret blessing of God, in setling a mans heart, followes vpon well doing: so as to bee abundant in Gods worke, is a great meanes of stedfastnesse; whereas a fruitlesse and barraine life, is both vncomfortable, and vnsetled1 Cor. 15.58. 1 Tim. 6.19.. 4. Wee must pray God to giue vs a free and ingenuous spiritPsal: 51.12. What a free spirit is.: wee must pray to God to giue vs a minde, cheerefull, speedy, full of incitations to good, glad of all occasions to doe good, free from the staine of the sinnes of the Time, Nation, or calling, and from the raigne of former lusts, inclineable to serue God, and our Brethren by Loue: fearing the Gospell more then the Law, and Gods goodnesse more then his iustice. 5. Wee must set an order in Faith and Life. It is exceeding behoouefull in matter of opinions, to deliuer vp our soules to some sounde frame of Doctrine, in which wee will euer quietly rest; and in matters of life, to gather out of the Commandements a platforme of liuing, that might fit our owne casePro: 4.26.. 6. Wee are not vsually setled, and soundly stablished, till wee haue beene shaken with affliction, and haue gotten the experience which the Crosse learnes vs1 Pet. 5.10.. Lastly, wee must consecrate our selues to God, endeauouring daily to practise what wee daily heare: for hee that commeth to CHRIST, and heareth his sayings, and doth them, is like a man which hath built a House, and digged deepe, and layed the foundation on a Rocke; and when the flood arose, and the streame beat vehemently vpon that house, it could not shake it, because it was founded on a RockeLuk: 6:48.49..
Quaest.Quest. What should be the reason why many after long profession, and much hearing, and some comfortable signes of assurance,Ans. at sundry times conceiued, should yet be vnsetled, and distracted,The causes why many after long profession, and some signes of hope, are still so vnsetled. and shew so much perplexitie and want of firmenesse, either in contentment or practise?
Answ. This is occasioned diuersly. First, sometime for want of a distinct direction, or carefull examination, about the application of the signes of Gods fauor: some Christians haue not the signes cleerly and distinctly collected: others that haue them, and know the vse of them, grow sloathfull and
 negligent, and are iustly scourged with the want of the glory of this establishment.
Secondly, sometimes it comes to passe, for want of vsing priuate meanes more conscionably; as Reading, Prayer, or Conference.
Thirdly, it is so sometimes with Christians, because of some sinne they lye in, without repentance; there may be some sinne, which they too much fauour; and are loath to forsake, whether it be secr^t, or more open.
Fourthly, Vnfruitfulnesse, and barrennesse in good workes may cause it: for if Faith did beare fruit vpwards, it would take roote downewards.
Fiftly, many are grieuously pressed, vnder legall perfection, being not able distinctly to discerne the benefit of the Couenant of grace, in freeing them from the curse, and rigour of the Law. The ignorance of this one point, hath, and doth couer the faces and hearts of millions of Gods Seruants, with a perplexed confusion, and feare without cause.
Sixtly, many professors liue in much vnrest, for want of discerning things that differ, and the right vse of Christian liberty.
Seauenthly, there is a kinde of luke-warmenesse in practise, after hearing, which is in many scourged with the withholding of this rich grace of spirituall stedfastnesse. I say, luke-warmenesse in practise: for it may bee obserued, that many heare with great affection, and continue to be stirring, in expressing their liking of the Word, and yet are exceedingly negligent in the conscionable and daily practise of such rules, as in the ministerie of the Word they seeme to receiue with admiration, and great liking.
Eightly, this comes by reason of the want of patience, and a meeke spirit: some Christians are froward, passionate, transported with violent affections, either of anger, or worldly griefe: and these seldome or neuer, gaine any long rest, or continuall contentment: troubled affections, greatly hinder setlednesse, euen in the best things.
To conclude, many professors reuolt to the world, and giue themselues to an vniustifiable liberty, in following either their profits, or their pleasures. And therefore no maruell, though Grace and true Religion, thriue so slowly in them, when they eate vp their hearts and liues with these cares and delights of life.
Hitherto of Faith. Now of Hope.

Be not moued away from the hope of the Gospell, whereof yee haue heard.]

Though by Faith wee are interressed in Gods fauour, and our soules garnished on earth with diuers graces, as the fruits of Faith, and our liues protected with caelestiall priuiledges; yet the glory of our kingdome is neither of this world, nor in this world. Hope must guide vs to future things, as well as Faith to present: and therefore the Apostle Peter doth with great reason teach vs to blesse God, for begetting vs againe to a liuely hope1 Pet. 1.3.: our whole happinesse may be branched out into these two parts. First, what wee haue already on earth; and secondly, what wee looke to haue hereafter in Heauen. The one, Faith procures, the other, Hope assures. Now in that wee haue not all our happinesse here, but hope for it elsewhere, it should teach vs diuers things.
First, wee should effectually pray vnto GOD to giue such sound wisedome, and reuelation, by his word and spirit, that wee may indeede know this hope of our callingEph: 1.18..
Secondly, in all troubles, wee should bee the more patient, seeing wee holde our full and finall deliuerance (when wee shall feele no more troubles or crosses) by Hope. Perfect saluation is had here onely by HopeRom: 8..
Thirdly, when our friends go out of the world, such as were deare vnto vs in the bonds of grace, we should not mourne immoderately for them; for
 that were to proclaime our want of knowledge, or want of sense and feeling, in the thoughts of the happinesse of another world1 Thes. 4.13.. Yea, fourthly, seeing the greatest part of our happinesse is yet to come, wee should learne to place our ioyes in the contemplation of Heauen, according to the Apostles direction; who biddeth vs reioyce in HopeRom: 12.12.. And lastly, wee should prepare for death, and wait when the time of our changing should come, that wee might enioy the glorious libertie of the Sonnes of God.
Not moued away.] Doct. It is not enough to haue hope, but wee must get to be vnmoueable in it: for as the Authour to the Hebrewes shewes, wee should be diligent to get and haue a Plerophorie, or full assurance of Hope to the endHeb: 6:11.. Wee must holde fast the confidence, and reioycing of hopeHeb: 3.6.. This is our sure and stedfast Anchor, to which wee should in all stormes haue our refuge, to holde fast by itHeb. 6:18:19.
The Vse is two-fold: first, it may reproue that vnsetlednesse,Note. and discontentment is found in men, in the times of their affliction, when euery crosse can moue them away from their confidence. We would think him a strange man, that in time of peace, would walke vp and downe with a Helmet on him, and when hee were to go into any battell, or fray, in the middest of the fight, when it was at the hottest, would take his Helmet, and throw it off him. And yet so strange are we. In prosperitie wee out-bragge all men with our hope in God, and our strong confidence; but when the Diuell, or the World, beginne to deale their blowes, and to molest vs with sharpest assaults, then we grow heartlesse, or impatient, and throw away our hope, when wee haue most neede of it. Secondly, it should teach vs to labour after this vnmoueablenesse of hope; which, that it may the better be done, two things are to be looked to. 1. that our hope be a true hope: 2. that we vse the meanes to make this hope vnmoueable.
And for the first, wee must consider three things. First, what hope is not true hope. Secondly, what persons haue no hope. Thirdly, what are the effects or properties of true hope. Some things of many, in each of these, shall be instanced in.
First, there is a hope, of which men shall one day bee ashamed: such is,What hope is not true hope. mens hope in their richesPsal. 52.7.; in the arme of fleshIer: 17:5.; in oppression, vanitie. and sinnePsal: 62.10.: in the instruments of deliuerance, as the Bow, or Sword, etcPsal: 44:6.: in the deceitfull conceits of their owne brainesEsa: 28:15., or in their ciuilitie of life. (This is to trust in MosesJoh: 5:45. Who haue not true hope..) All these, and other such like hopes, are egregiously vaine.
Secondly, there are many sorts of men in the world, concerning whom it is plaine in Scriptures, they haue not hope. For in the generall, there is no hope in any vnregenerate man1 Pet: 1:3. Ephes: 2:12.; and in particular it is cleere, there is no true hope; First, in the ignorant, Psalm. 9.10. Secondly, in prophane men, that make no conscience of sinne, Psalm. 115.11. Thirdly, in the presumptuous, that blesse their hearts against the curses of the Law, Deuter. 29.19. Fourthly, in the Hypocrite; for though hee haue wouen to himselfe, out of the bowels of his poisonous breast, a faire webbe of hope, yet it shall be as the house of the Spider, one swope of Gods Beesome shall easily lay him and his hope in the dust of miserieIob. 8.13.. Lastly, it is not in workers of iniquitie, that make a Trade of sinne, and euery day plodde about mischiefe.
Thirdly, true hope is most stirring in affliction, and then it shewes it selfe by foure things.Which are the effects or properties of true hope.
First, By Profession: it will not onely know, but acknowledge that truth, which is according to godlinesTit. 1.1.2.. It will confesse, and professe; wheras the common hope, seldome, or neuer at any time, holds it conuenient to be so forward.

Secondly, by Abnegation; for it will endure scornes, losses, temptations, oppositions, etc. It is not moued away by the carnall reasons of the flesh; the disdaine of carnall friends; the violence of vnreasonable aduersaries, or the like: the chaine will not feare it, nor the reproach shame it1 Tim. 4.10.. It will be busie, though it haue no thanke for his labourAct. 28.20.: And it will not hast to ill meanes, to get out of distresseEsa. 28.15.16.: Whereas the common hope is frighted with the noyse of a chaine, and put out of countenance with a scoffe of disgrace: it will speake CHRIST faire, but loose nothing for his sake: it likes preaching well, but it will neuer beleeue it is so as the Preacher sayes: it loues GOD aboue all, but yet it must haue a care to see to it, at any hand, that such and such friends be not displeased: it will be better aduised then to be in danger of such and such troubles. And if it be hard bestead, it will venture to send to a Wizard, to vse now and then a lye, or an oath, or a little fraud, and false dealing, etc.
Thirdly, by Mortification: Hee that hath this hope, purgeth himselfe, that he may be pure, as Christ is pure1 John 3.3.. It stirreth vp to much praier, confession, sorrow, fasting, and spirituall reuenge. Hee that hath most hope, is most in the humiliation of his soule. It is not as the world conceiues, that Mortification is the way to desperation: but the common hope hath no hands to doe good workes; nor eyes to shedde these teares; nor stomacke to abide this fasting; nor flesh to endure this reuenge; nor tongue to speake this language.
Fourthly, by Perseuerance: It will not cease from yeelding fruitIer. 17.8.. Iob guided by this hope, resolues to trust still in God, though he kill himIob. 13.15.: but the common hope will be sure then to fayle when there is most neede of help.
What wee must do, that we might be vnmoueable.Now that wee might be vnmoueable in this Hope, wee should waite patiently vpon Gods ordinances, that wee might abound in the comforts of the Scriptures, increasing in Knowledge and WisedomeRom: 15:4. Prou: 24.14.: but especially, wee must sticke to the Word preached, and neuer giue it ouerEphes. 1.1.4.: nourishing euery grace of Christ2 Thes: 2.16.: and wee must be much in prayerPsal. 62.8. and 61.2.3., and soundly carefull to deny all vngodlinesse, and worldly lustsTit. 2.12.13. Iob: 11:14:15..
Thus of the Duty, and the Obiect [Grace.] Now of the Meanes, by which it was wrought, which was the Gospell preached.
Of the Gospell.] Doct. The Gospell is the ordinarie meanes to breede hope in a mans heart2 Tim. 2.10. Rom. 1.16., and therefore it is called the Gospell of the kingdome; and the Gospell of SaluationMath: 4.13. Ephes. 1.13.. And the Gospell breedes hope, as it shewes vs the Doctrine of our reconciliation with God; and as it containes the promises of the Couenant of Grace; and as it shewes our deliuerance from the rigour and curse of the Law: and lastly, as it shewes Christ crucified, with all his merits.
Of which ye haue heard.] Doct. The Gospell is then most effectuall when it is preached: and more particularly, what efficacie is in preaching, may appeare by these Scriptures following: Psal. 51.8. Esay 55.4. Luke 4.18. Rom. 10.14. 1. Cor. 1.21. etc. Act. 10.36.42. and 15.21. 2. Cor. 1.19.20. Gal. 3.1. 1. Tim. 3.16. Tit. 1.3.
Againe, in that the Apostle alleadgeth the efficacie of the Doctrine they heard, to proue that they ought not to be moued away from it: wee may note, that that Doctrine which conuerts soules to God, is true; and men ought to continue in it. The Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.2. proues his Doctrine to be true, by this seale of it: and this must comfort faithfull Teachers, against all the scornes of men, if they gather soules to GOD, and breede hope in Gods people. And the people must hence confirme themselues in their resolution, to sticke to their Teachers, when God hath giuen this Testimonie to their ministeries. Thus of the Exhortation.

The Reasons follow:
1 From consent of the Elect, Verse 23.2 From the testimony of Paul, Verse 23.24.3 From the testimony of God, Verse 25.4 From the excellency of the Doctrine of the Gospell, Verse 26.5 From the excellency of the subiect of the Gospell, Verse 27.6 From the end or profitable effect of the Gospell, Verse 28.7 From the endeauour of Paul, Verse 29.
Which was preached vnto euery Creature vnder Heauen.] These words containe the first reason, and it stands thus: In as much as the doctrine taught you, is the same Doctrine that hath beene taught to, and receiued by all the Elect; therefore yee ought to continue in it, and neuer be mooued from the Grace wrought by it.
Quest.Quest. But was the Gospell preached to euery Creature vnder heauen? Ans.Ans. Some vnderstand the meaning to be this: that the Apostle intends to note, by the preaching of the Gospell to euery Creature, onely thus much;How the Gospell was preached to euery creature. That it was now no more confined in Iudea, but was published to Gentiles as well as Iewes: and so it was preached to euery Creature, in as much as all mankinde had as much interest as the Iewish Nation. Others thinke the speech imports no more, but that the fame of the Gospell was spred by the Marchants and other that lay at Rome, Ierusalem, and other great Cities, vnto all knowen Countries of the world. Others thinke it is no more then if hee had sayd, it was published farre and wide: as in Iohn they say, the whole world goeth after him; but they meane a great multitude; an vsuall Hyperbolicall speech. Lastly, others thinke, that when he saith, it was preached, he meaneth it should be preached to euery creature; the time past being put for the time to come, to import, that it shall as certainely be done, as if it had beene done already. But I take, it is meant of the preaching of the Gospell by the Apostles and Euangelists, in the conuersion of so many Nations to the Faith of Christ.
There may bee seuen Obseruations gathered out of this speech of the Apostle. First, that Doctrine onely is true which is agreeable to the Doctrine of the Apostles, by which the world was conuerted to God. Secondly, wee may see that no power is like the power of the Word of God: heere it conuerts a world in a short time: And our eyes haue behelde that it hath almost in as short time restored a world of men from the power of Antichrist. Thirdly, we may by this phrase bee enformed, that the words, all, and euery one, are not alwayes in Scripture to bee vnderstood vniuersally, of all the singular persons in the world, as the Vniuersalists conceiue. Fourthly, they were but a few Fisher-men that did this great worke, and they were much opposed and persecuted, and in some lesse matters they iarred sometime among themselues. Whence wee may obserue, that Doctrine may bee exceeding effectuall, though 1. but few teach it; 2. though they bee but of meane estate and condition; 3. though it be opposed by crosse and contrary teaching; 4. though it be persecuted; 5. though the people be in disposed and nuzled in sinne and superstition, as these Gentiles were; 6. though the Preacher be often restrained; 7. though there be some dissention in lesse matters. The fift thing that may be gathered hence, is, that in the conuersion of sinners, God is no respecter of persons; men of any age, nation, sex, condition, life or quality, may bee conuerted by the Gospell. And sixtly, it is plaine heere, that preaching is the ordinary meanes to conuert euery creature: so as ordinarily there is none conuerted but by preaching. Lastly, if any one aske what shall become of those nations, or particular persons, that neuer yet heard of the Gospell; I answer, the way of God in diuers things
 is not reuealed; and his Iudgements are like a great deepe: It belongs to vs to looke to our selues, to whom the Gospell is come.
Thus of the first Reason.
The second Reason is taken from the testimony of Paul, and hee giues a double testimony; 1. By his Ministery; 2. By his Sufferings.
Wherof I Paul am a minister.] Out of these words many things may be noted:
First, in that the Apostle, notwithstanding all the disgraces and troubles that befell him for the Gospell, doth yet lift vp the mention of his Ministery therein, as an inducement to the Ephesians: It may teach vs, that the glory of Gods truth is such, as no man neede to bee ashamed to teach or professe it, nay, there can be no man or woman, to whom it may not bee their cheifest glory, whatsoeuer carnall worldlings or timerous Nicodemites conceiue of it.
Secondly, in that so great an Apostle doth not disdaine to yeelde his testimony, of purpose to shew that Epaphras their Preacher had taught nothing but what hee had likewise taught: it sheweth that it is the property of faithfull and humble Ministers to strengthen the harts and hands of their Brethren; though they be their inferiours, and then it will follow, that they are proud, and enuious, and malicious persons, that by crosse teaching labour to encrease their bonds, whom God hath honoured with successe in their labours in the Gospell: such are they, that in many places striue to pull downe as fast as others builde, making hauocke in the Church, and bending their whole might in their Ministery to hinder the sincerity of the Gospell, and the conuersion of sinners.
Thirdly, in that the Apostle vrgeth his owne testimonie, [I Paul,] it sheweth that the testimony of one Apostle is better then a thousand others; One Paul opposed to many false Teachers: which should teach vs to conuerse much in the Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets (which are of like authority.) And the rather, because the best of other men may erre; nay, haue erred: and therefore a heape of humane testimonies should bee of no value against one Scripture. And as the people should try the Spirit by this witnesse, so should Preachers make conscience of it, to take more paines to enforme the consciences of the people, by the testimony of the Word, then by humane authority, of what sort soeuer.
Fourthly, in that heere is but one Paul, that comes in, to confirme the truth of the Gospell, it shewes that many times the soundest Teachers are the fewest in number. Heere it is so in the best times of the Church: so it was before; there was but one Michaiah for foure hundred false Prophets: so in Christs time there was a swarme of Pharisaicall, proud, vaine glorious, hypocriticall, silken Doctours, that loued the cheefe roome, and sought preheminence, teachers of liberty and strife, defenders of traditions, and their owne glory and greatnesse, when Christ and his Disciples were by their enuy scorned, as a few precise singular fellowes.
Fiftly, in that the Apostle stileth himselfe by the name of Paul, and not of Saul, it may intimate that men truely regenerate hate the vaine name of their vnregeneracy: it is a foule signe when men can glory in the titles and names of their lewdnesse and sinne past.
Lastly, in that the Apostle tearmeth himselfe a Deacon, (for so the word translated Minister, is in the originall) it notes his great humilitie: it was a happy time in the Church, when the Apostles called themselues Deacons: and then beganne the Church to decay in true glory, when Deacons would needes be Apostles.
Thus of the second Reason, and the 23. Verse.




Verse 24. Now reioy^^ I in my sufferings for you, and fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the Church.

THese words containe the Apostles second testimony, and it is taken from his sufferings for the Gospell: and hee conceiueth that they haue great reason to perseuer in the loue of the truth, since hee hath with ioy endured so many things for the confirmation of the doctrine hee had taught.
In these words I note two things: First, the Apostles ioy in affliction: secondly, the Reasons which mooued him vnto his reioycing. His suffering in which hee doth reioyce, hee amplifies by the time [now;] and the diuers sorts of crosses he endured, which hee expresseth indefinitely, when he saith plurally, [my sufferings;] as also by the vse of them, [for you,] that is, for confirmation of your Faith and encouragement. The Motiues are foure, first, because they are (the afflictions of Christ,) secondly, because they are laid vpon him by the Decree of God; his measure is set him, and hee hath almost done his taske, hee is ready to dye: thirdly, because they are but (in his flesh:) fourthly, because they were for the good of (the Church.)
Now reioyce I in my sufferings.) Doct. Gods Children haue much ioy;The godly reioyce in afflictions. euen in affliction they are cheerefull, and with great encouragement, they beare their CrossesRom. 5:3. James 1.2. 2 Cor. 7.4. and 8:2. Heb. 11.37. 2 Cor. 1.5. etc.: and if any aske the reason why they are so glad in their affliction and trouble; I answer, Gods Seruants are the more cheerefull vnder crosses, because they know: first, that the Prince of their Saluation was consecrate through afflictionHeb. 2.10: The reasons why the godly are so cheerefull in affliction.. Secondly, that their Sauiour did therefore suffer, that he might succour them that sufferHeb. 2.18. Iohn 16.33.. Thirdly, that the sting is taken out of the Crosse, and therefore it is not so painefull to them as it is to the wicked men. Fourthly, that the same afflictions are vpon their brethren that are in the world1 Pet. 5.9.. Fiftly, that the way to life is such a kind of way, a strait and narrow troublesome wayMat. 7.4.. Sixtly, that after all their troubles are a while borne in this world, they shall haue rest with the blessed in heauen, when the Lord Iesus shall bee reuealed, and better and more enduring substance, then any here they can want or loseHeb. 10.34. 2 Th^ss. 1.6.7.. Yea, that their afflictions are to bee accounted a part of that treasure that they would lay vp against the last day. Seauenthly, that God will in the meane time comfort them in all their tribulation2 Cor. 1 4.. Eightly, that their manifold temptations serue for great vse; as for the triall of their precious Faith, and refining of all Graces, with the purging out of much drosse and corruption in their natures1 Pet. 1.6.7.. Ninthly, that no afflictions can separate them from the loue of God in Christ, with many other reasons, which I might instance in, besides those mentioned in the end of this Verse. If any yet aske, how Gods Seruants haue attained to such Ioy, since there are worlds of people, that in their troubles, could neuer be induced to conceiue of such contentment, by any reason could bee brought them; I answer, that there are diuers things in Gods Children, which are not in wicked men; which are great causes of, and helpes to ioy in tribulation: As, first, they will receiue the light, and treasure vp holy knowledge, which they finde singular vse of in their Troubles: whereas an ignorant mind is vsually attended with a distempered hartHebr. 10.32.34.. Secondly, they haue Faith in God, and carry about in their hearts the warme and enflamed loue of Iesus Christ, and are therefore able to trust in Gods prouidence in any distresse1 Pet. 1.7.8.. Thirdly, Gods Children hold such a course as this when as (...), the sufferings, which are mala poena, euils of punishment doe fall vpon them, they presently run and reuenge themselues vpon those inward (...), mala culpae, euils of sinne; euen their secret passions and affections, and by crucifying them, they worke their peace and tranquility within themselues: for no man would bee hurt by his afflictions
 without, if he would mortifie his passions withinGal. 5.24.. Fourthly, they are much in Prayer, and keepe a good Conscience, in an vpright, innocent, and sincer conuersation2 Cor. 1.5.11:12.. And lastly, the word is a continuall Fountaine of ioy in all troubles, which keepes them from discouragement, or vnquietnesse. Psal. 119.
For you.] These words may bee referred either to reioyce, or to Sufferings: It is true, Gods seruants doe feele great ioy one for another1 Thess. 3.7.. And to thinke of the grace or prosperity of other of Gods Seruants, is many times a great comfort in trouble. But I rather thinke the words are to bee referred to [Sufferings] and then the sense may be, for you, that is, for the doctrin, which as the Apostle of the Gentiles, I taught you: Or for the confirmation of your Faith, and encouragement to like patience. And the rather, because the offering of him vp for the sacrifice and seruice of their Faith, was as the consecration of the first fruits to God, vpon which followed a greater blessing vpon the whole Church.
Vses.The consideration heereof should teach Gods people, not to faint at the troubles of their Teachers, since they are for them, (though to carnall reason it seemes contrary,) yea, the Apostle, Ephes. 3.13. saith, it is their glory. Which also shewes the vaine paines that wicked men take, when they persecute faithfull Teachers: for though they thinke thereby to plague the people, that so greatly relie vpon them; yet indeede God turnes all so for the best, that those sufferings are for them, and not against them. And if wicked men were thus perswaded, they would spare such wicked labour: and if the godly could beleeue this, it would make them vnmooueable in trouble; for what shall make against them, if this kind of rroubles make for them?
And fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ.] Some of the late Papists gather from these words, that CHRIST did not suffer all that was needefull for mans deliuerance from sinne, but left a deale to bee suffered by his members, especially men of principall note: and hence grew their Supererogation, Satisfactory paines, and Indulgences. But that this cannot bee the meaning of this place, is cleere, first, because that doctrine is contrary to other Scriptures, as Esay 53.4.5.6.8.10.11.12. Iohn 19.30. Heb. 10.1. to 15. Heb. 9.14.25.26. 2 Cor. 5.14. 1 Iohn 2.1. Psal. 49.7. Secondly, themselues being Iudges, this sense brings in a grosse absurditie: for if the words bee vnderstood of the suffering Christ left to his people to endure, for satisfaction for sinne, then it will follow, that Paul suffered all was wanting, and so there should remaine none for any other to suffer; for hee saith, hee suffered the rest of the sufferings of Christ. Thirdly, Caluin and Fulk say, that none of the Fathers did heere thus vnderstand the words:August. tract. 84. in Iohn. and it is plaine, that S. Augustine is flat against this sense, when hee saith, Though Brethren die for Brethren, yet no bloud of Martyrs is shed for remission of sinnes: this Christ onely hath done. And Leo, a Pope, could say, The iust receiue, not giue Crownes. And out of the fortitude of the faithfull, arise examples of Patience, not gifts of Righteousnesse. Fourthly, the next Verse cleereth this: for hee did thus suffer, according to tae dispensation giuen him of God. Now, hee was giuen to edifie, not to redeeme the Church. Fiftly, their Schoole-Diuines are against them; the Glosse hath it thus, Provobis, i. Confirmandis in doctrina Euangelij. Aquinas doubts not to say, that to affirme that the Passions of the Saints are added to make vp, or fulfill the Passion of Christ, is hereticall. Caietan referres the word, quae desunt vnto in carne mea. The plaine meaning is, that the Apostle did endure that measure of afflictions that GOD in his counsell had appoynted him to endure for the Name and Gospell of CHRIST, and the good of the Church, in the confirmation and encouraging of mens mindes in the truth of the Gospell.

Of Christ.] His sufferings may bee sayd to bee the sufferings of Christ,How our afflictions are the afflictions of Christ. either as Christ is taken for the whole mysticall body, (which is not strange in Scripture; for by Christ, in 1 Cor. 12. hee meaneth the body of Christ,) or as hee is the head of the Church: and so the afflictions of Gods seruants may be sayd to be his sufferings; either because they bee such as hee should suffer himselfe, if hee were on earth; or because they were layd vpon him by Christ, for the Churches good; or because they were for Christ and his doctrine; or because they deserue nothing, but all the praise is Christs; or because of the sympathy of Christ with the Christian, who accounts them as if they were his sufferings. And in this latter sense I thinke cheefely, these words are to bee taken: for it is certaine, Christ doth so feele the miseries of his people, that hee accounts them in that respect, to bee his owne miseries, as these places shew, Heb. 4.15. Rom. 8.17. Matth. 25.42. etc. Phil. 3.10. 1 Pet. 4 13. 2 Cor. 1.4. Acts 9.4. Hence grew that witty diuision of Christs sufferings into (...) and (...); so as the first should be vnderstood of the sufferings hee endured in his owne person, and the latter of the sufferings he felt in his members.
The consideration of this,Vses. that Christ accounteth the afflictions of his members to be his owne, may serue for diuers vses: For first, it shewes that they be in a wofull case, that haue ought to doe against Christs Ministers, or any of his Seruants. They would easily graunt it, that the Iewes were brought into great distresse, by the wrongs they did to Christ himselfe; then must it also follow that they cannot scape scot-free, that despise, reuile, traduce, or any way abuse the Messengers or Seruants of Christ, since hee accounts it as done to himselfe. Secondly, this may b^e a wonderfull motiue to stirre vs vp to be industrious in well-doing, and in helping and releeuing the poore Members of Christ, since wee are sure to haue thankes and reward from Christ himselfe, as if wee had done it to him. Lastly, in all our suffe^ings wee should striue that wee might be assured that our sufferings are his sufferings. And that it might be so, wee must be sure of two things: 1. that wee bee found in himPhil: 1:9:10.; for vnlesse wee be the members of Christ, we cannot haue the benefit of this Sympathy: 2. that we suffer not for ill doing2 Pet: 4:15. etc..
Rest of his sufferings.] Doct. So long as Christ shall haue a member on earth, there will rest something for him to suffer in his members: and therefore wee should learne not to promise our selues rest and ease while wee are in this world.
To fulfill.] The word signifieth, either to doe it in stead of another, as if the Souldier fight in the Captaines roome; or to doe it in his owne course or turne, according to the appoyntment of his Gouernour, and in such proportion as is required: and thus I thinke it is taken heere. It is certaine, that all the Afflictions of the members of Christ come from Gods decree, and the continuance and measure of them is appoynted of GodReu: 2:8:10. Esay 27:7:8:9. 1 Thess: 3:3:4.. And therefore it should encourage euery Christian the more cheerefully in his course, and when his turne comes, to take vp his crosse and follow Christ, and neuer stand much vpon the malice of men, or the rage of Diuels, but to looke principally to God, with this assurance, that God will deliuer him when his measure is full.
In my flesh.] Doct. 1. God doth afflict the flesh of his Seruants, hee spareth not the best of his Seruants heerein. Vse is, to teach vs,Vses. therefore not to pamper our flesh, but to bee resolued to suffer it willingly, to bee vsed like the flesh of Christ and the Saints. But especially, we should take heed of taking care for the fleshRom: 13: vlt,, or seruing the fleshGal. 6.: It is an vnseemly thing in a Chri^tian to make very much of his flesh, but it is worse to spend his cares about t, but worst of all to let hi^ whole husbandry bee onely for his outward man.

Why some of Gods serua^ts are so vnmoueable in affliction.Secondly, great things may be suffered, and yet the soule be vntouched: as heere the Apostles sufferings (which were exceeding great and manifold) reach onely to his flesh; they enter not into his soule. And the reason why some of Gods Seruants are so vnmooueable in their crosses, is, because they conuerse in heauen, and their spirits walke with God, and so are without reach of these earthly perturbations. Besides, when a mans heart is settled and grounded in the truth, and in the assurance of Gods loue, what should disquiet his soule that knoweth nothing to mourne for but sinne, and the absence of God? and nothing ioyous, but what comes from the light of Gods countenance?
Note.Thirdly, he that hath felt the troubles of the soule for sinne, is not much troubled with the crosses that are but outward. The vse is, for great reproofe of carnall Christians, that are seldome obserued to greeue, but when somewhat ayleth their flesh; but on the other side, are not at all touched with the miseries of the soule. As also, wee should learne of the Apostle, in all outward crosses, to say with our selues, why should I bee troubled or disquieted? or rather, why should I not bee ioyous, since what I endure is but in the flesh? and since the Lord doth spare my soule, let him doe whatsoeuer pleaseth him.
Lastly, we may heere note the wonderfull loue and compassion of Christ, that pittieth not onely our soules but our flesh, accounting what wee suffer, to be as his sufferings. Is it not enough that hee should accept of the contrition of our soules, but that also hee should regard the sorrowes and troubles of our flesh?
Two kindes of sufferings: 1. of the Church; 2. for the Church.For his bodyes sake, which is the Church.] Sufferings are of two kindes: Eyther, of the Church; or for the Church. Of the Church, are also of two kindes: Eyther, Chastisements, or Trials. Sufferings for the Church are likewise of two sorts: Eyther, Expiation, and so Christ onely suffered; or Martyrdome for confirmation of Doctrine, or encouragement in practise, and so the Saints haue suffered for the Church.
The principall Doctrine from hence is, that the particular sufferings of Gods Seruants, especially the Ministers, serue for the good and profit of the whole body.Vses. The Vse is manifold: First, wee should heereby bee enformed to minde the good of the Church, and to seeke the aduancement of Religion, and the good of religious persons, aboue our owne estate. Our care should bee most for the body of Christ, and wee should reioyce in any seruice wee could doe to the Church of God. Secondly, such as are called to suffer, should labour to shew all good faithfulnesse, zeale, constancy, and holy discretion, seeing their sufferings concerne more then their owne persons. Thirdly, this should stirre vs vp to pray for such as are in trouble for good causes, since their afflictions are some way for our sakes2. Cor. 1.11.. Fourthly, this may encourage poore Christians, that complaine they haue not meanes to doe good; they may be hence enformed, that if God call them thereunto, they may doe good, yea, to the whole Church, by their sufferings: no wants can hinder, but that the poorest Christian may profit others, by prayer, fastings, counsell, admonitions, comfort and suffering. Fiftly, since the sufferings of the righteous are for our confirmation and encouragement, wee should vse the meditation of such sufferings, when wee finde our selues inclineable to discouragement, or impatiency, or doubting. Lastly, this greatly reprooues carnall Christians, which are so taken vp generally with the care of their naturall bodies, that they haue vtterly neglected the care and seruice of the mysticall Body. And in as much as men are generally so barraine in doing good, it is a plaine signe there is no hope that euer they would suffer for God.

Secondly, further hence may be noted, that the Doctrine or sufferings of the Saints, are no priuiledge or benefit to any but the true Church; and therefore Papists haue no cause to boast of Peter and the Saints, so long as they remaine a false Church.
Thirdly, we may also obserue hence, that they only are of the true Church, who are of the body of Christ; and therefore we must be sure, we be members of Christ, before we glad our hearts with our priuiledge in the Church. And a member of Christ thou art not, vnlesse, 1.Who are members of Christ. thou beleeue the remission of thy sinnes; for we are ingrafted onely by Faith: 2. Vnlesse thou haue had in thy soule an influence of holy graces from Christ, as from the head: 3. Vnlesse thou worke the workes of Christ, and bring foorth the fruits of a reformed life; for thereby thou must try whether thou bee a true plant in this Vine. And lastly, if thou be of this body, thou hast some roome in the affections of Gods Children, or else it will be hard to prooue that thou art a fellow member.
Fourthly, here wee may see, that seldome comes there any good to the Church, but there is suffering for it; it cannot be redeemed but Christ must dye: and if the merit of this Redemption be applied, Paul must dye. It is an ill signe thou hast no true grace, when thou sufferest nothing for the grace thou trustest to: It is an ill signe that God is not with the Watch men of Ephraim, when they suffer nothing for the efficacie of their doctrine. Neyther may any thinke this may be preuented by meekenesse or wisedome, for the treasures of both these were in Christ, and yet hee was a man full of sorrowes.
And for conclusion,Arguments against the Crosse. out of the whole Verse wee may gather together a number of Arguments against the Crosse: 1. Paul suffers: 2. One may reioyce, notwithstanding afflictions: 3. The longer wee beare the crosse, the better able wee shall be to endure it; this may bee gathered out of the word [Now.] 4. They are such as Christ accounts his: 5. They come from the decree of God: 9. Their measure is set by God: 7. Wee beare them but in our course, others haue gone before vs, and after vs must others follow: 8. Christ suffered the great brunt of Gods wrath; our sufferings are but small reliques, or parcels, that are left behinde. 9. The measure will once be full, and that shortly: 10. They are but in the flesh for the most part: 11. Christ respects the troubles of our flesh, as well as the affliction of our spirit: 12. Wee may profit the Church by our sufferings.



Verse 25. Whereof I am made a Minister, according to the dispensation of God, which is giuen to mee, for you, to fulfill the word of God.

IN this Verse is contayned the third generall Reason: and it is taken from the testimonie of God. Wherein hee shewes, that they ought to continue in the Doctrine they had receiued; because God by a speciall dispensation, had ordained him, and the rest of the faithfull teachers, by their ministeries, to serue to the good of the members of Christ, by fulfilling and accomplishing thereby whatsoeuer concernes the saluation eyther of Iew or Gentile.
In this dispensation I consider fiue things: First, who is the Authour of it; GOD: Secondly, what kinde of dispensation it is,(...) viz. a houshold Administration, for so the word importeth: Thirdly, what hee dispenseth; viz. the seruice of his Ministers: Fourthly, how hee dispenseth; viz. by graunting out a Commission to them in particular, vnto mee is giuen: Fiftly, to what end; viz. To fulfill the word of God.

From the Coherence with the 23. Verse, I note, that if men would bee established in Faith and Hope they must be subiect to the power of the ministerie of Gods Seruants. From the Coherence with the former Verse, I note that if the Ministers of CHRIST doe finde that their seruice is auaileable and powerfull to profit the soules of the people, they must not thinke it strange, that they fall into many tribulations.
From the generall consideration of the whole Verse, I obserue, both the dignitie and the restraint of the Ministery. The dignitie of a Minister stands in three things: first, that hee is Gods Ambassadour: Secondly, that by his Commission hee is sent vnto Gods people, who are the onely Worthies of the world: thirdly, that a great part of the efficacie of the word, rests by Gods appointment vpon him and his Office. The restraint is likewise in three things: first, hee is a Minister or Seruant; not a Lord or Sauiour: secondly, he receiues his commandement from God: he must not runne of his owne head, nor hold his office by meere humane ordination: thirdly, the word of God must be his ground and rule, for all his dealing, in dispensing the things of God.
Of God.] God is the dispenser of all good things to the Church, but in speciall of the Ministry of his Seruants, both in respect of the Embassage, and the calling of the Embassadour; and in respect of the efficacie of the Embassage; both in the preparation and power of the Teacher, and in the hearts of the hearers.
Vses.Which should teach vs especially two things: First, in the Churches want of able Ministers, to seeke to God, the great Lord of the Haruest, to send foorth more Labourers. And secondly, we should reuerence Gods Ministers, in as much as they are the Dispensers of Gods Secrets1 Cor: 4.1.. Ministers also may hence learne, to execute their Commission with all diligence2 Tim: 4.1.2.: In the declaration of the truth, approuing themselues to mens Consciences, in the sight of God2 Cor: 4.2. and 2.17.: with discretionMath: 24.45 and 13.52., as becomes Seruants of GodTit: 1.7. etc., rebuking sinne with all zeale and powerMich: 3.8.. Lastly, hence ariseth the wofull estate of such Ministers as preach not the Gospell1 Cor: 9.16., and of such People as heare not Gods Ministers1 Iohn 4.6., eyther for want of meanesPro: 26:18., or through wilfull vnbeliefeLuke 16:31..
Thus of the Person dispensing.
This kinde of dispensation is (...): God gouerneth his Church with a houshould gouernment, as a Father gouerneth his familie, not as a Tyrant, that rules what by right hee ownes not; nor as a Monarch, that knowes not the thousand part of what he rules; nor as a Captaine, that traines his Souldiers onely to labour and danger while their treasures are at home; nor as a Schoole-master, that rules children that are not his owne: but as a most prouident and louing Father, that keepes none but hee ownes them, and knowes them particularly, and prouides for them, and all at homeMath. 20.1. Gal. 6.10. Ephes: 3.16. and 2.19. Math: 13.27. and 21.33. Vses. How we may know whether we be of Gods househould..
The vse is: first, for Instruction; If wee would haue God to rule vs, with this most familiar and fatherly prouidence, wee must then be sure, that wee be of his Houshould. And that wee may try, first, by the manner of Gods taking possession of vs: for before he comes thus to rule vs, there is a strong combate betweene Christ and the Diuell, that strong man. And if sinne and Sathan rule still in our hearts, the Lord is not there, neyther can wee serue two MastersMat: 12:29 Luke 16.13.. Secondly, by our affection to Gods glory and his people: if wee be right, the zeale of Gods house will eate vs vp. Thirdly, by the gifts of Gods Spirit: as namely, by the spirit of prayer; for Gods house is a House of Prayer, and all his houshould can and doe pray. Fourthly, by the priuiledge of the house; for if we be admitted of God, the Sonne doth make
 vs freeIohn 8.35.. Fiftly by the soueraignty of Christ, for as many as haue this ^^nour, they doe submit themselues to be ruled, by the word, and spirit of ChristLuke 1.33.. If the Sonne cannot rule vs, the Father will not owne vs. And further, if we finde our selues to be of this houshold, wee should liue in the houshould of God; shewing all faithfulnesse in vsing our talents, and carefulnesse in dispensing those earthly things that God hath trusted vs withall: And also obseruing the orders of Gods house; and not receiuing appointment from the example, will, custome, or traditions of menGal: 4.8.9. What good men get by their ministers.
The third thing is, what hee dispenseth, viz. The ministry of his seruants, whereof I am a Minister.] The Church hath great need of Ministers
Quest. But what good doe they to vs? Ans. They are Gods Embassadours, to reconcile vs to God2 Cor: 5:20.: they are the arme of the Lord, to collect vs out of the world2 Thes: 2.14. Esay 53:1.: they are the light of the worldMat: 5:15., and the Salt of the earthMatth: 5.13.: they are our spirituall Fathers to beget vs to God1 Cor: 4.15. 1 Pet: 1.23., and Nurses after wee are begotten1 Thes: 2.7.: they are our Intercessours to God, being our mouth in publike and in priuate, rising vp in the gap, praying to stay Gods anger: they are Stewards ouer Gods houseLuke 12:42., and the Keyes of heauen are deliuered to themMath: 16. Iohn 20.23. Math: 18.18.. All which should stir vs vp to honour and loue them, with a singular loue for their workes sake.
Which is giuen to mee.] Ministers must bee called by speciall commission from God, as well as by outward calling from man.
To fulfill the word of God. Diuers things may be hence obserued. First, the Word is that speciall treasure, and the chiefe portion that God hath left, both to Ministers and People. Secondly, whatsoeuer the word seemeth to be vnto carnall men, yet it is certaine, God will see to it, that all that is in it shall be fulfilled. Thirdly, the Preachers of the Gospell, are the meanes to set the word a working. And therefore no wonder, though troupes of people that are not subiect to the ministery of the word, finde little power it it. Besides, it euidently confutes those that thinke by reading at home, to get enough both for knowledge and saluation: for it is preaching that by Gods blessing and ordination doth put life into the word, and brings it into accomplishment. Fourthly, Quest. How may wee conceiue of it,How the Ministers fulfill the Word. that Gods Ministers do fulfill the word? Ans. The word is said by them to bee fulfilled foure waies: 1. if we respect preaching it selfe: 2. if wee respect the manner of preaching: 3. if we respect the suffering that followes preaching: 4. if we respect the efficacie of preaching.
For the first: Paul may be said to fulfill the word, in that he doth preach, as he was by his commission appointed; he was charged by God to preach, and in obedience to Gods word or will, hee did preach it. It is not enough for Ministers to receiue commission to preach, but they must fulfill it: and therefore woe to those Loyterers, and Non-sidents, that care more to fill their barnes, then to fulfill their ministration.
For the second: Ministers are said to fulfill the word, when they execute their Commission in a due manner: and this they doe; first, when they preach with all diligence: secondly, when they hold out to the end, not taking paines for a Sermon or two, or a yeere or two, till they can get preferment, but with all constancy, perseuering in the labour and worke of their Ministry, till their course be ended, and the fight finished2 Tim: 4.8.: thirdly, when they reueale all the counsell of God, that is needfull for their hearers: thus Paul fulfilled the word, Act. 20.18.
Thirdly, Ministers fulfill the Word by afflictions, for thereby they confirme the hearts of their hearers: as also, thereby is fulfilled vpon them that which is in Scripture so oft fore-told, should befall the faithfull dispensers of the wordIoh. 15. and 16 and 17..

Quest. Can all Ministers shew their b^nds for the Gospell? Answ. Nay, some can shew the liuings they haue lewdly gotten, their ease, their dignities, their resisting of the word, faithfully taught by others, the disgraces they haue cast vpon their Brethren; but alas, their paines or sufferings may easily be reckoned. But w^e vnto them; for, for all the euill they haue done, they haue brought euill vpon their owne soules: the Lord Iesus shall consume them with the breath of his co^^ing.
Lastly, in respect of the efficacie of the word, it is fulfilled by them; for many great things, threatned or promised in the word, were to bee accomplished by them, some extraordinary, some ordinary. The extraordinary, were bound to certaine times, such as were heretofore, the calling of the Gentiles, and the induration or obstinacie of the Iewes; and such as are now in doing, or to be done, as the reclayming of the world, by the euerlasting Gospell, the downefall of Antichrist, and the gathering of the Iewes: These things haue beene promised in the word, and haue, are, and shall be, wonderfully fulfilled by the ministry of Preachers. The ordinary are fulfilled in the Church at all times: and thus the Word is fulfilled in the elect, and in the reprobate. In the elect, Ministers fulfill the Word; 1. In conuerting those by the word, which were fore-ordained of GodRom: 1:16. and 15.19.. 2. In conueying Christ to their soules: so as the word is not a bare history of the merit, and grace of Christ, but is fulfilled in the application of ChristRom. 8.4. 2 Cor: 2.14. 1 Cor. 1.17. Gal: 3:1:3:5.. 3. By diuiding the word amongst them, as the food of their soules, to preserue them. 4. By the application of the Promises, which are effectually in the Ministery fulfilled in the hearts of the hearersLuke 4:21.. Lastly, in causing the Elect to fulfill the Word, both in obeying the WordRom. 15.18., and in perseuering in the doctrine to the end. In the Reprobate they fulfill the Word: 1. In hardening them, 2 Cor. 2.15. 2. By making them inexcusable by illumination: 3. In occasioning many sinnes through their owne wilfull corruption, Rom. 7.8. 4. In slaying them, or by sentence cutting them off, Esay 11.3. Mat. 16 16. 2 Cor. 10.6.
The Vse of all this is: 1. To shew the necessitie of continuall preaching, seeing by it, the word must be fulfilled: many are still to be conuerted, and all to be comforted, directed, strengthened, reproued, etc. 2. To iustifie the continuall trauaile of faithfull Ministers, that will neuer giue ouer to exhort, reproue, conuince, etc. They are enioyned to see the word of God fulfilled, and therefore no wonder though they will not let men rest in their sinne and securitie. 3. To teach vs in all temptations or afflictions, to run to the word preached, for thereby God will certainely performe all needfull consolation, or direction, or humiliation. 4 To informe Ministers, that they must adde indefatigable paines, since so much is to be fulfilled by them. 5. To admonish stubborne sinners, to take heed of prouoking God, for if the word may not be fulfilled in their saluation, it shall be fulfilled in their induration.



Verse 26. Which is the Mysterie hid since the world beganne, and from all ages, but now is made manifest to his Saints.

THese words are the fourth generall Reason, taken from the excellencie of the Gospell: which is here described in foure things: 1. By the nature of it, a Mysterie: 2. By the antiquity of it, since the world beganne, or from ages and generations: 3. By the time of the full reuelation of it, viz. Now, in the new world by Christ: 4. By the persons to whom it is reuealed, viz. the Saints.
The Mysterie.] The Gospell is a great Mysterie1 Tim: 3:16., a ^idden MysterieRom. 16.25., hidden in GodEphes: 3.9. 2 Tim: 1.9.: because it was a secret in the purpose and grace of the Father, before the world began. Hidden in Christ, because hee was that store-house in which the Father laid vp all his treasuresCol. 2.3., that concerne mans life and immortalitie:
 and because he was the me^itorious ca^^^ of all our happines. Hi^^^^ in the WordRom: 16.26., because the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, are the sacred fountaines of knowledge; and originals, from the bowel^ of which flow the comforts of the Gospell to the Church. Hidden also in the darke shadowes of the Ceremoniall Law. Hidden from Adam himselfe in Paradise, so long as he acknowledged his happines by the Couenant of workes. Hidden from the Gentiles many hundred yeares, while they serued dumbe Idols, and had not the Sunne of righteousnesse shining among them. Hidden from the Iewes in part and comparatiuely, because in a manner all the Iewes were ignorant of the manner of Christs Kingdome, and of the calling of the Gentiles, and such like: comparatiuely, in respect of vs; they had the light of a Candle, but we haue the light of the Sunne: and therefore Iohn is said to be least in the Kingdome of God. Hidden from the naturall man still, who cannot perceiue the spirituall things of God1 Cor: 2:7:14; no, though otherwise he abound with wit and learning. Hidden also from the very faithfull, comparatiuely, in respect of what they shall know in the kingdome of glory; and in respect of the differences of degrees among themselues now.
Quest. But why is the doctrine of mans happinesse so obscure to many,Quest. euen in the Church, in these dayes? Answ.Ans. Man is by nature couered with the vaile of originall blindnesseEsay 25.8.; and besides, hee is bewitched with the deceitfulnesse of his actuall sinnesHeb: 3:13., the God of this world, with his wiles and subtilties, his deepenesse and his methodes, blindeth many thousands, to their destruction, that he may hide the Gospell from them2 Cor: 4:3. Ephes: 6. Reuel. 2. 2 Cor. 10.4.. Also euill thoughts nursed and fortified, as thicke clouds, hide the light from diuers: to some, in iudgement, Christ speakes in ParablesMath: 13.: others shall neuer haue the light was offered, because they vsed not the light they had. The enuious man in many places sowes the tares of corrupt doctrine. And vnto many congregations for want of sincere preaching, Immortalitie and life is not yet brought vnto light2 Tim: 1:10. Tit 1.3., besides, the transplendencie of the doctrine it selfe is such as exceedes the capacity of the most.
Quest. But how comes it, that euen the godly themselues in all places,Quest. attaine to so small a measure of knowledge in the Gospell? Ans.Ans. There are remnants of naturall blindnesse, euen in the best: and the sinne that hangs on so fast, is not without pollution, and an obscuring propertie. Faith also, that should haue principall vse in conueying this light, is not without some mixtures of doubts and other drosse. Affections are not without their fumes, which becloud the vnderstanding: sometimes they want the meanes, sometimes they are negligent in the vse of them; and to see perfectly is the onely priuiledge of the new Ierusalem, that is aboue.
The VsesVses. are for reproofe, for Information, for Instruction, and for Consolation.
First, it reproues the horrible prophanenesse of those that so securely contemne the Gospell, so sacred a Mysterie: and fearefull is the curse with which God doth auenge the quarrell of his word, euen this, that vnto these men, the Scriptures both read and preached, are a sealed BookeEsay 29.11.. And is the Gospell a Mysterie? then singular is their dotage and madnesse, that say, they know as much as any of them all can teach them.
Secondly, wee may hereby bee informed concerning the necessitie of preaching: the greater the Mysterie is, the greater need of laborious and studious men, that are thereunto set apart, to make manifest those secrets of the Kingdome: for this is the appointment of God our Sauiour, that by preaching committed to certaine men, thereunto sanctified, (as the Apostle saith,) the word promised before the world beganne, should be manifested in due timeTit: 1.2.3..
Thirdly, this should teach vs diuers duties: 1. Let euery man account of
 faithfull Teachers, as the Ministers of Christ, and such as dispence the Mysteries of God1 Cor: 4.1.. 2. Wee must bring Faith to the Gospell, else it will not profitTit. 1.1.3. Heb: 4.2.: Reason and Sense are no competent Guides or Iudges in these diuine Mysteries. And the Lord hath commanded these secrets to be manifested and reuealed by the Scriptures, for the triall of his Elect, and for the exercise of their obedience, in beleeuing as well as in doingRom: 16.25.26:. 3. As we should bring a resolution to beleeue Gods word in all things, though it be neuer so contrary to sense, and to common reason of the world. So when the Lord doth reueale his promises and statutes to vs, wee should hide them in our hearts as great Iewels and worthy Treasures, meete to bee kept in our secretest remembrance, and the very bowels of our AffectionsJer: 31.34.. 4. This Doctrine vrgeth the necessitie of obseruing the rules of preparation: and to this purpose wee may finde fiue things charged vpon vs, all drawne from this consideration of the mysterie of the Gospell. First, wee must be sure wee be turned to the Lord by true repentance; for till then, the vaile cannot bee taken away2 Cor. 3.16.: though the word were neuer so plaine in it selfe, yet wee cannot discerne it, by reason our vnderstandings are couered with a vaile, and no man can looke vpon this bright Sunne, till his eyes bee annointed with eye-salueReuel: 3.18.. Secondly, in as much as the Booke is sealed with seauen seales, and no man nor Angels is able powerfully to vnfold and open Gods eternall comforts to the conscience of man for his saluation, saue onely the Lyon of the Tribe of Iudah, which is also the Lambe slaine, hauing seauen eyes, which are the seauen spirits of God: therefore in acknowledgement of his wisedome and power, wee must go vnto him, importunately begging this Blessing, for his glory, that the Booke may be opened, euen to enrich vsReu: 4.1.3.4.5.6.12.; and that to this end hee would make acceptable the odours of our desires and prayers to God. Thirdly, wee must remoue lets; for if it be a mysterie in it selfe, wee had not neede to bring hardnesse of heart with vs, or worldly cares, or troubled affections, or a sluggish spirit, or preiudicate opinions, or inordinate lusts, or any such impediments. Fourthly, wee must bring with vs the loane and aduantage of former doctrine communicated to vs: for to him that hath for practise and increase, shall be giuen; but from him, that hath not for imployment and conscionable vse, shall be taken away that which he hathMath: 13.11.12.. Fiftly, wee must bring a pure Conscience, as a holy vessell, to receiue this mysterie of faith in1 Tim. 3.9.: and the conscience is then pure, when it is purified by the bloud of Christ, and doth daily excite the desire of puritie of heart and life, bearing with the loue and liking of no sinne.
Ministers must also here learne, with all reuerence and painefulnesse, to behaue themselues as becommeth those great Mysteries: they must not only be cleane themselues by holinesse of heart and life, but must in compassion to the people, and the holy feare of the Maiestie of Gods truth and presence, teach with power, frequencie, perspicuitie and authority, and since the Lord hath made them his Stewards of his Mysteries, and holy Iewels, and Treasures, it is required of them that they be faithfull1 Cor. 4.1., both in applying them to the right owners, and in setting them out according to their truth.
Lastly, the meditation hereof may serue for singular comfort to all those that finde mercy from the Lord in the reuelation of his Mysterie: blessed are their eyes that see it, and their eares that heare itMath. 13.16.. They are more happy then many millions of men besides.
Hid since the world beganne, and from ages.] (...). The first of these words is diuersly accepted, sometimes it is translated from Eternitie,(...). as Psal. 52.1. The goodnesse of the Lord hath endured from all eternitie, as Beza thinkes, writing on Luke 1.70 sometimes, Since the world beganne, as Luke 1.70. Acts 3.21. sometimes it signifieth but of old, or a long time agoe:
 as the Hebrew word (which is thought to answer it) is rendred, Psal. 119.52. sometimes it is taken for the space of a mans life, as Peter said; Thou shalt not wash my feet, (...), that is, neuer while I liue: and in the 3. Eph. vlt. there is such a phrase as this, Glory to God, etc. (...): as if it should be rendered vnto or throughout all the generations of the world of worlds, that is, of the world to come. And 2. Pet. 3. vlt. hee saith, glorie to him, (...): that is, hencefoorth, to the day of eternity. There is vnto man two worlds: the one begins with his life, the other with his death. But some would haue it thus, (...), a seculis, i. a filijs seculi huius, from the men of this world: sometimes the word notes the state of things in the world, as Rom. 12.2. (...), Bee not conformed to this World: and Ephes. 2.2. (...); According to the course of this world; but other render it Ages; and so from ages, may note the time of the Gentiles, or the time since the world began: so that is well rendred, in the last Translation, [Hid from ages and from generations,] And if any will haue the two words distinguished, then it may be from ages, quoad Tempora; from generations, quoad successiones hominum; but howsoeuer it is, it fully imports the great antiquity of the Gospell. If the Papists will plead antiquity, let them haue recourse to the Word, or if their Trumpery will not beare the triall of this antiquity, it is because there is no truth in them; and let this bee a sufficient stay to all godly mindes, that our Doctrine is grounded vpon the Doctrine of the Prophets, Patriarkes, and Apostles, which are the best ancients: but this is generall.
Ages and generations.] From the particular consideration of these words diuers things will arise.
First, the transitory estate of the world may heere be noted: the things of the world in their best frame are so mutable, that they expire and are altered with varieties, and the men of the world haue but their short time, and then they goe out and leaue their roomes to their succeeding generation; which may serue for diuers vses, if it be seriously thought on. First, it should cause vs to feare him that cannot onely change vs, but mowe downe with his Sithe whole generations of men, before whom the nations are but a little dust of the ballance, or drop of the Bucket: and we should also magnifie and adore that God, that is of himselfe subiect to no change, and liues for euermoreReuel. 4.10.. Secondly, it should make vs in loue with the world of worlds: and to admire the blessed estate of such as shall be accounted worthy to obtaine that world, and the resurrection from the deadLuke 20.25., to such an Angelicall and vnchangeable condition; and to this end we should be quickened to a serious preparation for the world to come, seeing wee haue but our turne and course vpon earth, wee should not fashion our selues to this worldRom. 12.2.: wee should refuse to square our actions according to the lusts and humors of men1 Pet. 4.2.: let vs serue, not the time nor the fancies of men, but the King of times1 Tim. 1.17.. Secondly, wee should looke to it, that neither the cares of this world choake, nor the GOD of this world hide or take from vs, the word of the kingdomeMatth. 13. 2 Cor. 4.4.. Thirdly, and if wee must not serue the men of the world, nor the things of the world, much lesse may wee serue sinne: for if any man bee a seruant to sinne, hee shall not abide in the house to the next worldIohn 8.34.. Fourthly, this may abate the great opinion of the wisedome of this world: for what shall it profit mee to haue great skill to get money and meanes for this life, if I haue no skill or wisedom for the sauing of my soule? What shal it aduantage me to haue a nature and carriage, tilled and fitted for the winning of friends for this world, if I know not how to make mee friends for a better world? what auaileth it to haue gifts for an eminent place in mans Common-wealth, and for want of grace bee not acknowledged of the Common-wealth of Israel? to what purpose
 is it to be a Disputer of this world, and in the day of Christ to be swallowed vp with amazed silence, as not hauing a word to say for thy poore soule? And yet prouidence for our future estate may be learned from these Children of this world. For if the Children of sinne, be so industrious to make shift for their time, how much more should the hearts of the Children of eternitie be enlarged to an inflamed care of large prouision for their immortall estate? Fiftly, this should embolden vs to a willing forsaking of our selues, in the worst of all outward trialls, which is, to forgoe euen all for Christs sake and the Gospells, if wee be put to it. What great thing is it to part with that little All that we haue in this world, seeing it could serue vs but for a little time; and at length wee must leaue all? and besides, by a voluntary abnegation wee shall be aduantaged in the gaine of an eternall recompence of reward a hundred-fold better.
 Againe, in that the Gospell is hid from whole Ages and Generations of men, wee may see that whole multitudes may be in a miserable estate; and that it is no priuiledge for any in sinning, that many are such sinners. Neither  is multitude, or succession of men, in one minde for matters of Religion, any note of the true Church. For here are whole ages, and many successions of men, that all liued and died without the knowledge of the Gospell: it is a slender prop for Faith to rest on, to say our Fathers, and fore-fathers  liued and died in this or that minde or opinion. Further, wee may obserue hence the infectiousnesse of sinne: how naturally it will spread, euen to the poisoning of whole Worlds of men. If sinne but once get a fountaine, if the  Lord stoppe it not, into what riuers of contagion will it defuse it selfe? Also, we may see how fearefull a thing it is to fall into the hands of an angry God, since the liues of so many millions cannot finde pitty or pardon with him.  And the insensiblenesse of sinners may hence be noted also. When would those ages and generations of men haue awaked out of their idolatrous sleepe, if the Lord by the voice of his Sonne, and his Seruants, had not awaked them? Moreouer, it may be manifest from hence, that the Lord in  dispencing his grace, is not moued by any outward things: for what can any person or people haue to commend them by to God, which those Nations had not? Lastly, we may here see it verified, that Gods iudgements are like a great deepe: it is not for man to conceiue that hee should be able to search into them. Yet least any should stand still, and be swallowed vp with amazement, at the fall and ruine of those worlds of men, let him consider of these things following. First, that these people were instructed by the Creatures,Note. and had a Law written in their heartsRom. 1. and 2.. Secondly, that these terrible desertions, and exquisite iudgements, were deserued by an infinite measure of horrible sinnes: which if wee could soundly consider of, our Obiections about their falls would be much dulled. Thirdly, that it is God that prescribes and describeth Iustice: and therefore things are iust, because he doth them; not that first man must pronounce them iust, and then God will doe them. Fourthly, that the reasons of this dealing may bee iust, though not exprest vnto vs. Fiftly, that Christians are charged to be wise to sobrietie: they may not let their thoughts runne as farre as they will, but must let God alone with his secret iudgements. Sixtly, that the things are now strange and obscure, shall be more fully reuealed in the day of Christ, when all shall bee cleered and made manifest.
Obiect.Obiect. But some Papist may say, it is plaine by these words, that the Scripture is hard, and not fit for the common people, seeing it is called a mystery.
Solut.Answ. This place cannot helpe them; because it is said, that now it is reuealed; and so their cauill comes out of season. 2 Because it is, and was hidden from carnall men, not from Gods seruants: wee doe not wonder
 though the Scriptures bee as a sealed booke vnto such carnall wretches as they are.
Now reuealed.] God hath reuealed the mysterie of his Will diuers wayes:How the mysterie is reuealed. first, by Dreames: by Day-visions: by Types and Sacraments: by Angels: by Prophets, and extraordinary Men: by CHRIST, appearing in our Nature: by his Spirit: by the Scriptures, and by the ordinarie Preaching of the Ministers, Dreames, Visions, and Types, were peculiar in a maner to the olde Testament: the ministerie of Christ, in his owne person: of the Prophets, and extraordinary Men, and Angels, is now ceased: so as vnto vs this Mysterie is reuealed, by the Spirit, in the ministerie of Gods Seruants, and in the vse of the Scriptures.
Quest. But was not the Gospell reuealed till now, since CHRIST?Quest.
Answ. Yes, it was: as these places may proue, Iohn 8.56.Ans. Abraham saw his daies, and Moses wrote of him. All the Prophets gaue witnesse vnto Christ,1 Pet. 1.10. Act. 10.43. Rom. 1.2. Christ is the same yesterday, and to day, and for euer, Heb. 13.8. but the Gospell was hidden in respect of the time of the manifestation of the glory of Christ (especially to the Gentiles) and diuers things in the manner of Christs kingdome were not reuealed vnto them1 Pet. 1.10.: as also in respect of cleerenesse of reuelation, and the more ordinary life and power of the graces of the Messias, and the more plentifull efusion of the gifts of the spirit. Fiftly, that it was not reuealed before, viz. as it is now, they had before Christ (...), that is, the promise of the Messias to bee exhibited, and wee haue (...), the tidings of the Messias exhibited. Two things may be here obserued.
First, That Gods Seruants may know their owne particular blessednesse for he saith, it is reuealed to the Saints.
Secondly, that the seasons of the reuelation of the Gospell, in the power of it, are singular priuiledges, and greatly to be heeded, and therefore woe is to those soules that neglect such dayes of grace, it is double condemnation. It is damnable to sit in darkenesse, and haue no meanes of life, but it is much more the condemnation of these worlds of prophane persons, that light is come into the world: yea, into the Countrie: yea,Ioh: 3. euen to their owne Townes and Congregations; and yet they will loue darkenesse rather then light. And on the other side, it should teach men that know the time of such visitation, both to beare witnesse to the light, by presence, countenance, maintenance, and establishing of it for them and theirs; and also to walke as the children of the light, euen as a people exceedingly priuiledged, and blessed of God.
To his Saints.] The word Saint is somtime giuen to ChristPsal. 16.10., somtimes to AngelsIob 15.15., somtimes to the blessed in heauenMath 27.52., somtimes to the faithful on earthPsal. 16.3.. The Pope hath his Saints, and such are the choyse of the most desperate Traitors, as he ordereth his Canonisations in our daies: And the world hath his Saints to; and they are ciuill honest men: but here, by Saints, hee meaneth the faithfull on Earth; and they are Saints, that are holy by the righteousnesse of FaithAct: 26:18.: that haue the spirit of Sanctification1 Cor: 3:16.17.: that are separate from sinners by a holy callingRom: 1:6. 1 Cor: 1:2.: that are reformed from the principall euils of their former conuersation1 Cor: 6:11.: that call vpon the name of the Lord1 Cor. 1:2.: that are consecrate to God in speciall holinesse of life.
Quest. But if a man liue ciuilly in the world, will not that serue the turne?Quest.
Answ. It will not:Ans. The defects of the ciuill honest man. our righteousnesse must exceede the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharises. And it may be profitable oft to recount the defects of the ciuill honest man. First, he wants sinceritie in the first Table. Secondly, hee sticks not at the inward corruptions of the second Table. Thirdly, his praise is of men, in his best actions, or else some other corrupt ends. Fourthly, hee is wholy voide of the inward worship of God, and in the outward
 hee is either secure or superstitious. Fiftly, hee neuer trauelled in the new birth for his honesty. Sixtly, he wants the righteousnesse of Faith. Seuenthly, for the most part his heart is not sound nor vpright in his family, especially for matter of Gods worship.



Verse 27. To whom God would make knowen what is the riches of his glorious mysterie among the Gentiles, which riches is Christ in you for hope of glory.

THese words containe the fifth generall reason, taken from the excellency of the subiect the Gospell in the preaching of it propounds vnto men: and that is Christ. And in this reuelation of Christ, consider, 1. to whom: viz. to the Saints: 2. by whom: viz. God: 3. what is the cause, viz. the Will and good Pleasure of God. Hee would. 4. the manner: 1. if we respect the vnregenerate world, it is in a Mysterie. 2. if we respect the grace communicated, it is a glorious and rich mystery. 3. if wee respect the place where Christ as a Sunne of righteousnesse riseth: it is in you: that is, in the heart of man. 4. if wee respect the persons hee makes choyce of, it is the miserable Gentiles. Amongst the Gentiles. 5. if wee respect future things, he is reuealed as the hope of glory.
To whom.] Of the persons to whom, I haue spoken in the end of the former verse, onely this Doctrine may be added. That only the Saints, that is, holy men, find Treasures and Riches in the power of the glorious Gospel of Christ. The Lords secret is onely with them that feare himPsal. 25.14.: till faith be reuealed men are shut vpGal. 3.23., as in a dungeon or prison; the Lord speakes peace onely to his people and his SaintsPsal. 85.8.. The righteousnesse of God is reuealed to the iust man that will liue by faithRom. 1.17.. Flesh and bloud, till there be a new birth, is not capable of this reuelationMatt. 16.17., men that hate to be reformed haue nothing to doe with Gods CouenantPsal. 50.. Hence we may see where the fault is when men be so auerse, and vnteachable, when people haue the meanes and cannot vnderstand to profit and doe good, it is onely in their owne hearts lusts, and wickednesse of life: and therefore let euery one that would grow rich in knowledge, labour to bee abundant in practise, for the sauing knowledge of this mystery encreaseth, as grace and holinesse groweth.
God.] Doct. God is the author of all sauing knowledge: he is the Father of lights. The vse is therefore: First, if any man lacke wisdome, let him aske it of GodIames 1.5.. Secondly, let all that would haue knowledge vse good means. Those people that are too wise to vse reading, hearing, conference and prayer, are but in a miserable case, those they account silly people, euen as babes and sucklingsMatt. 11.25, in comparison of them, carry away the blessing, while they liue and die in their sinnes. Thirdly, in the ministery of men, we must beleeue them no farther then they bring warrant from the word of God: it is Gods word, and not mens sayings or precepts, must be our guide: a feare of God bred by mans precepts will be in vaineMatth. 15.. Fourthly, wee should prize euery dramme of true knowledge got from the Word, at a high rate, euen to excell all other things, as being the peculiar gift of God.
Would.] The reasons of the dispensation of spirituall fauours in Christ, are not in vs, neither in will nor worke, but in the good pleasure of GODS will; which should teach vs with so much the more thankefulnesse to expresse our admiration of Gods loue, that could finde nothing in vs but cause of hate, euen for euer; what are wee, or what are our fathers houses, that wee should bee thus exalted in the Courts of our God? and withall, wee should in all things resigne our selues ouer to Gods will, as the highest cause of all things: wee should rest in his approuing will, as our cheefest happinesse, and obey his prescribing will, as the absolutest and perfectest forme of holinesse,
 and be subiect to his disposing will, being patient in all trialls and troubles, because hee did itPsal: 39.9.. Lastly, this might breake to powder carnall hopes: how canst thou plead, thou hopest that God will saue thy soule, seeing there is simply nothing in thee that the Lord cares for; and thou hast not sought his grace by sound Repentance and true Faith?
Make knowne.] Diuers things haue beene noted before, concerning this manifestation and reuelation of the Gospell: that which onely I will here adde is the effects of it. The proper effect of the powerfull publication of the Gospell is, to bring life and immortalitie to light2 Tim: 1.10.: But the accidentall effect, is to make variance and oppositions amongst men. When CHRIST comes in this manner, hee comes not to bring peace: as the Fanne scattereth the Chaffe from the Wheat, so is the word, powerfully preached. I need go no further then this Citie for an instance; though matters of controuersie haue beene wholy forborne, and differences in matters about Church-gouernement and ceremonies haue not beene so much as touched with publike preachings; and that matter of regeneration, faith, and sanctification, hath beene almost onely vrged: yet see what stirres; what differences of censures; what indignation at the reformation of any soules that haue beene wrought vpon by the word; what inuectiues; what strange reports, what abhominable lies, and slanders haue beene almost weekly raised, and divulged throughout all the Country round about?
What is the riches of the glory.] The Apostles varie^ie, and effectuall tearmes are to be noted, though he haue spoken much, yet hee is not drawne drie; but speakes still with great feeling and efficacie, both of words and matter. And indeed as any men are more holy, they haue the more deepe and tender Affections in the meditation of the glory of the things of the Gospell. This holy man cannot fall vpon the mention of the Gospell, but his affections burst out into great tearmes of Admiration, as if he thirsted after varietie of words to expresse his inward estimation: and as it is a signe of a sanctifying disposition to be so affected; so, when we see holy men striuing for wordes to expresse the glory of spirituall things, it may secretly condemne the coldnesse and barrainnesse of our dull spirits, that vsually through the deceitfulnesse of sinne, proue to haue the dullest affections, where wee should bee most stirred: and the Apostle doth well in seeking these affecting tearmes, that so hee might excite affection and appetite in the hearers; for people will no longer profit by the word, then they admire it, and long after it with estimation: and therefore it should be a holy discretion in Ministers, to study by all meanes to teach in such a manner as might most stirre affection and iust admiration at the power and fitnes of the Word. But here a question may be asked. Say that we haue gotten a great affection to the Word,Quest. What wee must do to keepe affection in the admiration of the word. and that wee doe highly esteeme of it, and long after it, what must wee doe to keepe this appetite, that wee lose it not, and that it die not in vs by little and little? I answere: thou must looke to thy selfe in fiue things. First, take heede of euill company: the people that cried out, for very admiration, Hosanna, blessed be he that commeth in the name of the Lord;Ans. when they were gotten among the Scribes and Pharises, had altered their note, into Crucifie him, crucifie him. Secondly, thou must purge often, that is, thou must, by mortification, be oft in humbling thy soule, by confession and sorrow to God in prayer; else fulnesse and satietie will ouer-charge this appetite, for so must hee doe that hath a stomacke apt to be filled with ill humours: as experience, both in body and soule shewes. Thirdly, if thou wouldest not despise prophesying, thou must try all things, and keepe that which is good; which thou doest if thou obserue these two rules: 1. if in hearing such Ministers as haue either their hearts, or the doctrine vnsound, thou separate the pretious
 from the vile. 2. If in hearing the best men, thou be especially carefull to keepe that part of Doctrine, as did particularly touch thee, and so was in a speciall manner good for thee. Fourthly, thou must looke to thy selfe, that the profits, pleasures, or lusts of the world, steale not away thy heart from communion with God, in the meanes. Whoredome and Wine, and the cares of this life, etc. will take away any mans heartHos: 4.11. Luke 21.34.. Fiftly, thou must exercise thy selfe in the rest of Gods Ordinances, else disvse in one, will in time breede contempt of all, and God will not haue all the honour giuen to one of his ordinances; and doth of purpose many times withdraw his blessing, (which is the bellowes of affection and estimation) from one of his ordinances, because hee will be sought in all.
Againe, out of the Apostles tearmes, we may obserue the great excellencie of the Gospell: for wit, it is a mysterie most deepe: for worth, it is riches: and for credit, it is glory.
True knowledge, is a rich knowledge.Riches.] Doct. The true knowledge of Christ is a rich knowledge. Hence the Corinthians are said to be rich in knowledge1 Cor: 1.5.: and Paul compares it with, and commends it beyond, all earthly richesPhil: 3.9.: and it is so both in respect of the Obiect, which is CHRIST, the fountaine of all Treasure; and in respect of the nature of it, being a part of eternall lifeIohn 17.3.; and in respect of the effects, because it makes a man rich in grace. And it appeares by the contrary;Vses. for to be blinde is to be poore, and naked, and miserableReuel: 3.17.: and  therefore they are farre wide that thinke all this studying of the Scriptures, and following Sermons, will make Men beggars; they remember not that to take the Gospell from Ierusalem, was to leaue their houses, as well as Gods House, desolateMat: 23.37.38.39: and the want of the knowledge of GOD in the Land, was the cause the Lord contended with them by so many iudgementsHos: 4.1.2.: and if any Nation vnder Heauen may auouch the truth thereof, this English Nation may: for wee may well say, the Gospell hath beene a rich Gospell vnto vs: it hath brought vs Peace, and Prosperitie within our walles, and abundance  into all the quarters and corners of the Land. Hence also wee may gather a tryall of our faith: for if wee haue faith, wee are carefull to seeke, and as glad to finde, sauing knowledge, as the carnall man is to finde his earthly wealth. Parents also may hence know which way to go about to make their children happy, euen by stirring vp in their hearts the instruction and nurture of the Lord.
Glorious.] Doct. This mysterie is glorious; and it is so, First, if we respect the originall of it: it was begotten and conceiued in the bosome of Eternitie. Secondly, if wee respect the persons imployed in the ministery of it, viz. GOD himselfe, CHRIST, Angels, and the choyse of men. Thirdly, if wee respect the effects: It brings glory to God; for vpon the opening of the Booke by the Lambe, there followeth Himnes to GodReuel: 5.. It brings a glorious rest to the hearts of Christians, when they are satisfied in the assurance of the tidings of Gods loue, and purged of those vnruly affections, that so tormoiled their hearts before.Esa: 1.10. Besides, the glorious priuiledges which after men are called out of darkenesse, they enioy in this maruailous light1 Pet: 2.9.. Finally, it shewes a Christian the glory of Heauen: this should comfort Gods Seruants against the scornes of the world, and troubles of life. The Gospell with disgrace and much want, is a great portion; and it matters not how wee be esteemed in the eyes of the world, if wee be made glorious by the Gospell in Gods eyes; and in the eyes of the Saints: they are glorious times when the Gospell workes openly in the life and power of it.Nine Vses of the Doctrine of the calling of the Gentiles.
Among the Gentiles.] In the calling of the Gentiles, wee may informe and instruct our selues many wayes.
First, it should settle vs in the assurance of the truth of Gods promises.
 Neuer any promises more vnlikely: and besides, they lay dead for a long time. That which Noah foretolde, is come to passe: for Iaphet is perswaded to dwell in the Tents of SemGen. 9.27.. That sea of knowledge, which Esay spake of, is likewise gloriously accomplished among the Churches of the GentilesEsa: 11.10.. Ieremie said, the Gentiles should come vnto God from the ends of the earth, and it is fulfilledIer: 16.19.. The concourse to the preaching of the word, which Micha and Zacharie foretold, is likewise verifiedMich: 4.1. Zach: 8.20..
Secondly, wee may hence see that the word will make great alterations where it comes.
Thirdly, that God is tied to no place nor people: if the Iewes will not bring forth fruits worthy of the Gospell, but despise it; the Lord will prouoke them to enuy: euen calling to himselfe a people that sought him not.
Fourthly, that they that are last may be first, and that they that now are not vnder mercy, may go to heauen before vs.
Fiftly, that as any people are more sensible of their miserie without grace, they more see the riches of their calling. The Gentiles that wallowed in sinne, and wickednesse, see a wonderfull glory in Religion, when by the Gospell they are conuerted. And that may be the reason why Publicanes and Sinners are so deepely affected, and inwardly touched, when ciuill honest men are scarsely moued with any sense of the need of their conuersion.
Sixtly, their conuersion may assure vs, that none are so miserable but the Gospell can make them happy.
Seauenthly, wee may see cause to bewaile the hardnesse of our hearts. Can the Gospel conquer so mightily and effectually, these worlds of people, to the obedience of faith, and such a tender sense of the glorious riches thereof: and are our hearts no more melted and stirred within vs? Though the Lord cry and roare, and stirre vp himselfe in his iealousie, as a man of warre, yet are wee deafe, and heare not; and blind, and see not.
Eightly, in that he saith, that this mysterie is glorious among the Gentiles, it shewes, that the Monarchy of CHRIST ouer these conquered Gentiles, is truely glorious. Which may iustly confound our Statists and Politicians, that can see no glory but in earthly kingdomes.
Ninthly, let vs that are abiects of the Gentiles, that haue no true honour but by Gods couenant, draw water with ioy out of these Wels of SaluationEsa: 12.3.: and lastly, our calling, that are Gentiles by nature, should make vs in compassion of the Iewish nation, pray heartily for their restoring; since they were cut off, that wee might be grafted onRom. 11.: and the Law came out of Sion, and the word of the Lord out of IerusalemEsa: 2..
Which riches is Christ in you.] Out of these words 4. things may be obserued.
First, that there is one and the selfesame happines, conferred by the Gospell to all the faithfull; the same I say, in nature and qualitie, though not the same in quantitie, the same spirituall meate, and the same spirituall drinke; the same GOD, and Father, the same CHRIST, and Sauiour; the same meanes, and the same merits, the same graces, and the same glory. Which may serue for good vse. For if the Lord giue vs the same wages hee did his best Seruants, wee should striue to doe the same worke: wee should bewaile our sinnes with the same sorrowe, and watch ouer our liues with the same care, and abound in the same fruites of righteousnesse, and liue by faith in all tryalls and tentations, as they did. And againe, it may be comfortable for penitent sinners. For the same God that had mercy on Dauid, will confirme vnto them (if they truly desire his fauour, and will forsake their owne imaginations) by an euerlasting couenant, the sure mercies of DauidEs: 55 1.4 8.. And if by faith we proue our selues the children of faithfull Abraham, we shall be blessed with AbrahamRom: 4.24. Gal: 3.9.12..

Christ the only true riches of the Christian.Secondly, that Christ is the onely true riches of the Christian, 2 Cor. 8.9. Eph. 1.7. and 2.7. and 3.8. Heb. 11.26. This may serue for diuers vses. 1. To warne vs, that we despise not poore Christians, seeing they are made rich in the faith of Christ, and heires of the KingdomeIam: 2.5.. They are truly rich men, though they be neuer so meane in the world. 2. Let vs all looke to our selues, that wee despise not this riches of the bountifulnesse of God, when in the Gospell it is offered vnto vs: though wee may goe on with the hardnesse of our not repenting hearts, yet if by speedy repentance wee preuent not our ruine, we shall heape vp wrath against the day of wrath, euen the day of the declaration of the iust vengeance of God vpon such obstinate and secure sinnersRom: 2.4.5.6. 3. Let not worldly rich men glory in their richesJer: 9.24., but rather vse their outward riches as helpes to further them vnto this true treasure: else their riches shall not shelter them in the day of Gods wrath against the woes denounced against themIob: 36.18.19 Luke 6.12.. Lastly, would any man know some sure way how to thriue with great successe in these spirituall riches? let him then amongst other things, especially, remember to pray hard: for the Lord is rich to all them that call vpon himRom: 10.12..
Thirdly, CHRIST is in the faithfull2 Cor. 13.5.: hee liues in themGal. 2.20.: hee dwels in themEphes: 3.18.: but that this doctrine may be more fully vnderstood, I propound fiue things.

1. How Christ is conueied into the soule of the faithfull.
2. By what effects he discouereth himselfe to be there.
3. What they get by his comming.
4. What intertainement they ought to giue him.
5. Who haue not Christ in them.

How Christ is conueied into the faithfull.For the first, there is this order. First, God secretly giues Christ to the beleeuer, and the beleeuer to ChristRom: 8.32. Esa: 9.6. Iohn 17.6.: then Christ begins to manifest himselfe, riding in the Chariot of the word2 Cor: 2.14. The word (that before was a dead letter) receiueth life by the presence of Christ, and that both in the Law and the Gospell. The law being made aliue, attacheth the particular sinner, and playeth vpon him the part of a Sergeant, accuser, Iaylor, or Iudge. And the sinner putting in baile, the Law brings him to Christ, and will not let him goe to anotherGal: 3.24.: then the Gospell gets aliue, and crucifies Christ before his eyesGal: 3.1.: and propounds varietie of sweet promises. The sinner being beaten, and wounded almost to death before hee would yeelde to the arrest of the Law; seeing now whither he is brought, laments with vnspeakeable groanes his owne sinnes, and the horrible torments hee sees the Sonne of God put to, for his sake: and at the same time the spirit of the Sonne working saith, a wide doore is opened, Christ enters in with vnvaluable ioyes, wrought in the heart of the sinner.
How we may know that Christ is in our hearts.Now if you aske by what effects Christ discouers himselfe to bee there. I answere there is a light (when Christ comes in) that giues the Knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Christ2 Cor: 4.6.. And being rauished, they behold as in a mirrour, the glory of God, and are transformed into the same Image, the spirit of God making them suddainely new Creatures2 Cor: 3:18. 2. The conuert now findes a sauour of the things of the spirit: and his heart is bowed to be subiect to the law of GodRom: 8.5 7.. 3. Hee is baptized with the fire of zeale, and holy affections, and desiresMath: 3.11.. 4. There appeares a battell and combat in the soule, and much lusting on either side, the spirit resisting with teares, and strong cries. 5. In this combat Christ vndertaking the battell, sends out by his ordinances, his arrests, and apprehends one by one, euery imagination that rebelliouslie puts it selfe forward in the opposition, and exalts it selfe, and will not leaue till it be brought in subiection, so as the obedience of Christ may haue the vpper hand2 Cor: 10.5.. 6. The spirit of the Sonne discouers himselfe as a spirit of supplications,
 by which the tender infant beginnes to learne with holy desires, and secret incouragements to speake in Gods language, and by prayer to make knowne his griefes and wants, in the best manner, vttering his affiance in God, as a FatherGal: 4.6.7.. 7. The loue of God, and of Christ, and of Gods Word, and Gods people, is shed abroad in his heart, and it now constraineth him to holy duetiesRom: 5.9. 2 Cor: 5.14.. 8. The body growes dead in respect of sinne, and the spirit is life for righteousnesse sakeRom: 8.10.: resolution more and more increasing, both for reformation of sinne, and new obedience. 9. Hee findes himselfe proclaimed free, the prison doore set open, his fetters knocked off, his wounds made by the law healing apace, his depts paid, and himselfe in a new world, inioying a true Iubile2 Cor. 3.17. Esa: 61.1.2.. 10. He liues thenceforward by the faith of the Sonne of God, for Saluation, for Iustification, and for preseruationGal: 2.20 2 Cor: 13.14. 11. The heauenly dewes of spirituall ioyes, often water and refresh his heart in the vse of the meanes, with delightfull peace and tranquility in his heart and conscienceHos: 14.6 Rom: 14.17. Lastly, in a holy couenanting with God, his daily purposes and desires are to cleaue vnto God, deuoting and consecrating himselfe and his vowed sacrifices vnto God, in the mediation of Christ.
Thirdly, the benefites hee hath by the inhabitation of CHRIST,The benefits come by Christ dwelling in vs. are such as these. 1. GOD is in Christ, reconciling him, not imputing his sinnes2 Cor. 5.19.. 2. Christ is made vnto him Wisedome, Sanctification, Righteousnesse, and Redemption1 Cor: 1.30.. 3. All the promises of Christ are to him, Yea, and Amen: hauing the earnest giuen in the spirit, and the same sealed by the same spirit2 Cor. 1.20.22.. 4. Hee is not destitute of any heauenly gifts1 Cor: 1.6.7., but hath the seeds and beginnings of all sauing graces. 5. The grace of Christ shall be sufficient2 Cor. 12.9. against all temptations, by the power of Christ that dwels in him, and as his outward afflictions doe abound, so shall the consolations of Christ abound also2 Cor: 1.5.. 6. Paul is his, and Apollo is his; yea, all things are his, as he is Christs1 Cor: 3.22.23., he hath his interest in all the means of saluation. 7. God hath giuen him Christ, how shall hee not with him giue him all other things alsoRom: 8.34.35.? Finally, eternall life is the gift of God, in, and with Iesus ChristRom: 6.23..
For the fourth, if you aske what you must doe when you finde Christ in your hearts. I answere, if you liue in the spirit, walke in the spiritGal: 5.24., let olde things passe, and all things be new: for if you be in Christ Iesus, you must be new Creatures2 Cor: 5.16.17., the olde conuersation in times past will not now serue turne, but the olde man with his deceiueable lusts must be cast offEphes: 4.22.: Now thou must learne also to liue by Faith, and not by sence, and carnall hopes as thou hast done. For CHRIST keepes his residence in our hearts by faithEphes: 3.16.: for in that wee henceforth liue in the flesh, wee must resolue to liue by the faith of the Sonne of God that liueth in vsGal. 2.20.: beeing assured that in him are all the treasures of holinesse and happinesse. And to this end thou must pray constantly to God, that thou mayest bee able to discerne the length, bredth, depth, and height of this loue and louing presence of ChristEphes: 3.18.. For otherwise it is a knowledge passeth all naturall vnderstanding, and his working in vs is aboue all wee can aske or thinke. Why should a Christian feare any want, that carrieth a Mine of treasure within his owne breast? And what a shame is it that wee grow not exceeding rich, seeing there is nothing but Faith and Prayer will get itRom: 10.12.? and why should we feare eyther tribulation, or persecution, or paine, or perill, seeing this is our victory, euen our faith, and wee are assured that in the end wee shall be in all these things more then conquerours through him that loueth vs, and liues in vsRom: 8.35.37?
Further, doth the spirit of meekenesse, and of Christ, dwell in thee? Oh then, aboue many things learne lowlinesse and humilityMat. 12.29., and if the Lord giue thee a tender and a harmelesse heart, watch with all carefulnesse that thou bee not beguiled from the innocent simplicity that is in Christ Iesus1 Cor. 11.3..
 Lastly, thou must labour for inward sinceritie, both of thoughts and affections: thy heart is Christs chamber of presence, where hee alwaies resides, and as thou art carefull to looke to thy behauiour because of mans presence, so must thou much more looke to thy heart, to keepe it cleane, and pure, and chast, and euery day to dresse it new, since the King of glory is come in to dwell with thee. Men would bee very carefull to looke to that roome where they would giue their best entertainement. Alas, wee haue no better roome then our hearts to welcome our Sauiour into: And shall not wee keepe them with all diligence? woe be to vs, if wee tempt or grieue him by our inward vncleannesse.
5 Seauen ill signes that Christ dwels not in a mans heart.Now for the fift point, there are seauen ill signes that Christ dwells not in a mans heart.
First, when a man sauours nothing but carnall things.
Secondly, when a man hath, or desires, or esteemes, or labours after no other knowledge, but what is ordinary or naturall.
Thirdly, when a man makes no conscience of inward sinnes.
Fourthly, when a man hath no zeale in Gods worship, or holy affections towards God, and his people, and his word.
Fiftly, when a man hath not a faith that he can liue by.
Sixtly, when a man neuer feeles the heauenly ioyes of Christ in his heart.
Seauenthly, when a man can liue in any grosse sinne, without trouble and anguish of spirit or desire, and indeauour to breake it off by repentance.
The hope of glory.] The riches of a Christian are either in this life, and so it lies in the grace of IESVS CHRIST; or else in the world to come, and so it is glory, euen a most glorious and admirable excellency of felicitie; which shall haue in it eternall righteousnesse, and the continuall blessed vision of God, eternall ioyes, and perfection of all things round about, euerlasting honour, and singular esteeme, most sweete societie with holy Angels, and blessed Saints, with vnspeakeable peace, and rest; together, with that admirable clarification of the very bodies of the righteous.
Vses. Phil: 3.21. Col: 3.1.2. Rom: 5.3. 2 Cor: 4.18. 1 Pet. 4.13.The consideration hereof should allure vs to the continuall thought of Heauen, and to a feruent affection after it, striuing to expresse our hope of Heauen, by a conuersation that tends to glory and immortalitie: and to this end wee should be importunate with the Lord, to shew vs this glory by the spirit of reuelation, that we may be able profitably to solace our soules in the middest of the tentations and afflictions of this world, with a serious contemplation of our right, in Iesus Christ, to this admirable glory, that is to be reuealed.Jam: 2.5. Rom: 15.7. And the meditation of the glory poore Christians shall one day haue, should teach vs to honour them now, and receiue them into our heartie and inward societie, and to vse them as such, as we are assured are the heires of more glory then this world is worth: and lastly, doe we looke for glory from God in another world, then wee should seeke to glorifie GOD in all things, with all our might in this world.
Secondly, wee may in these words note, that where Christ will glorifie in another world, there he is the hope of glory in this world. A Christian holds his glory by this Tenure. Now concerning this hope, many things haue beene noted already vpon the fourth verse, and vpon the 23. verse: and therefore thither I referre the Reader.




Verse 28. Whom we preach, admonishing euery man, and teaching euery man in all wisedome, that we may present euery man perfect in Christ Iesus.

IN this verse is contained the sixt generall Reason, taken from the end and profitable effect of the Gospell. If they continue constant, by the power of the word, they will be made fit to be presented in some measure of ripenesse and perfection, vnto God, in Iesus Christ.
Two things are in the verse to be obserued: the Meanes, and the End: the meanes is preaching; which is amplified by the parts of it, admonishing and teaching, and by the manner of it, in all wisedome.
Whom we preach.] The reason why the Apostle falls so often into the mention and praise of their preaching, is to rescue it from the contempt, vnder which many times it lay disgraced.
There are foure things may be obserued here,The honour of Ministers. which tend to expresse the honour of the ministery in this place. 1. They are as it were, the Lords high treasurers, to dispense the riches of the kingdome of Iesus Christ. And if such an office bee in such request vnder earthly Princes, what is it to be so honoured of the Prince of all Princes? All the world is beholding to the ministery, for they shew that Mine of incomparable Treasure; they dig it vp; they offer it as spirituall Merchants: yea, the Lord by them doth as it were, particularly inrich all Christians. 2. This honour of publishing the Gospell, is now taken from the very Angels, and giuen to them: now Wee, not the Angels, preach vnto you. 3. They haue the best subiect that euer men had to intreat of: all other Sciences are b^ (...) comparison of them, they intreat of Christ, and grace, and glory for euer by him: nay, 4. herein differs preaching from all other relations whatsoeuer, that they doe not preach of Christ, but they preach CHRIST, that is, they giue what they speake of.
And these three little words expresse diuersly the duty of Ministers. 1.The dutie of Ministers. they must preach, that is plaine. 2. they must preach diligently, which may bee gathered from the expressing of it in the present-tence: It was not a sufficient excuse, wee haue preached as diligently as any in our young times, or before we came to such preferment: No, this must be the comfort of a Minister, and his continuall plea; wee doe preach; not, wee haue preached. 3. They must preach CHRIST, that is, that part of Diuinitie that concernes Redemption, Iustification, and Sanctification. 4. They must labour in preaching, to expresse as much as lies in them, consent. Consent, I say, with the Prophets, and Apostles, and consent with their fellow Ministers; Wee, not I, there is one only truth for all Ministers to teach. 5. They must resolue to winne the honour and reputation of their ministery, for the worke of it, not from the reward of it: they must get their credit by preaching, not by their great liuings.
And from hence also is impliedly to bee collected the iust reproofe of many Ministers.
1. Such as preach not: some would preach and cannot:The reproofe of Ministers. some can preach but will not: some neither can nor will, all shall be iudged accordingly in the day of Christ, when he shall call for an account of their Stewardship.
2. Such as preach, but not Christ; and these are not all of a sort: for 1. some preach themselues, not Christ: or if they paint out Christ, it is in their owne likenes; so as vnder his name they commend themselues to the world 2. some preach, but it is beside Christ: in raking together mens inuentions. And surely, that so great affecting of human authorities in preaching, when it is with a kinde of neglect of the search of Scriptures, as if
 they wanted wit or power, cannot be iustified. 3. Some preach, but it is against Christ: and such are they that care not couertly to contradict the maine Doctrines of Christ, or else bend themselues in their whole ministery to strengthen the hands of the wicked, and make sad the hearts of the righteous.
Thirdly, such as preach Christ; but it is for enuie: and to increase the bonds and disgraces of others; or it is not diligently, or they preach not Christ crucified (they teach not soundly the doctrine of mortification) or they preach not Christ risen againe: they teach so coldly, so barrainely, so insufficiently, as if Christ were still in the graue: some there bee that preach of Christ, but it is chiefly of his Crowne and Scepter: they are neuer kindled, till they get into questions of Church-gouernment: they teach their hearers the doctrine of reforming of Churches, when they had more neede to teach them how to reforme themselues, and their housholds.
Admonishing and teaching.] There is some a-doe among Interpreters, to put the difference betweene these two words. Some thus: Admonishing them that are out of the way: teaching them that are in the way. Some thus: Admonishing them that are ignorant: teaching them that haue knowledge. Some thus: Admonishing those that teach false doctrine, or contradict the truth: teaching such as are desirous to learne the truth. Some thus: Admonishing about things to be done: teaching about things to be knowne. Some thus: Admonishing to stirre affection: teaching to informe the vnderstanding. But I thinke there is no necessitie thus to restraine the senses, so as it may be thus. Admonishing, that is, checking, rebuking, warning the ignorant, wandring, wayward, sloathfull, dull, or prophane hearers both about things to be done and knowne: and teaching the rest the whole doctrine of Christ.
Admonishing.] From this word, these things may be obserued.
First, Preachers must intend to rebuke sinne, as well as to direct or comfortEsa: 58.1. 2 Tim: 3.17. Heb: 9.10. Act: 20.31. 1 Thes: 5.11..
Secondly, men commonly neuer care for instruction, to grow in Christ, till they be touched with the rebukes of the word for sinne.
Thirdly, preaching may be said to admonish in diuers respects. 1. the very sending of the Word preached to any place, is a warning to men to looke to themselues, and repentAct: 17.3.: for then is the Axe laide to the roote of the TreeMath: 3:11.. 2. Because preaching doth set before vs such examples as doe admonish1 Cor: 10.11.. 3. Because by it Christ secretly smites the earth, that is, the consciences of carnall men, that are so glued to the earthEsa: 11:3.: many a time is their hearts smitten, that the world little knowes of; but especially, by preaching are the publike abuses in the liues of men publikely reproued.
Euery man.] Euery one needs to be rebuked and admonished: and there is no man nor woman but they are bound to stoope to the rebukes of the Word; whether they be rich or poore, learned or vnlearned, Iew or Gentile, young or old, in authoritie, or vnder authoritie, conuerted or vnconuerted.
Vses.The Vse of all should be to teach vs to know them that are ouer vs, and admonish vs in the LordThes: 1.12.. Now there are diuers reasons to perswade men to be willing to suffer admonition: 1. It is noted to be in Gods account a beastly qualitie to rage, or to be senselesse, when we are rebuked: therefore Dauid saith, be not as the Horse or MulePsal: 32.9.. 2. If we will not be rebuked, sinne lies at the dooreGen: 4:12.: and wee know not how soone wee may be arrested with iudgement. 3. Thou maist by stubbornesse prouoke the Lord so much, that in his very iudgement hee may set a continuall edge vpon the word, to rebuke thy conscience, so as rebukes being now turned into a punishment, the Lord may consume thee by them, eating vpon thy conscience as a mothPsal: 39.11.,
 till hee haue wearied thee with his secret buffets and terrours, and then in the end, cast thee off into a reprobate sense. Woe is vnto man, when the Lord in his Word, or by his Spirit, sets himselfe to disgrace and vexe him. 4. Instruction is euill onely to him that forsaketh the way, and hee that hateth correction shall dieProu: 11.10.. It is a brand of a scorner, to hate him that rebuketh himProu: 15.12., and a man that hardeneth his necke when hee is rebuked, shall suddenly be destroyed, and cannot be curedProu: 29.1.. 5. The Lord may be so much incensed by sinnes of this kinde, that at length there will be no remedy: as hee was by the Iewes, 2 Chron. 36.2 Chron: 36.11.16.. Lastly, great is the profit of admonition, to such as are wise to make vse of it, as these places show, Psal. 141.5.6. Iob. 5.15.16.17. and 36.8. to 16. Prou. 28.13.
Teaching.] This is the second part of preaching:What wee must doe to profit by preaching. this also is absolutely necessary: we shall not partake of Christs riches, or be fit to be presented to God without it. Now that wee may profit by publike preaching, wee must pray God by his Spirit to lead vs into all truthIohn 14.: and wee must striue to be truely humble, for the Lord will teach the humble his wayPsal: 52.9.: and wee must be much in confessing our owne sinnes vnto God in secretPsal: 119.26 118. 2 Chron. 6.26.27.28.29.30.; wee must take heede of forwardnesse in trusting to our owne reasons, and wils, and affections, and bring Faith to the word, glorifying it in what wee vnderstand, and wayting vpon God for what yet wee want, mourning for our owne vnteachablenesse, and praying God to be with the mouth of the Teacher, opening to him a doore of vtterance.
Euery man.] This is againe added, and not without reason: for it imports: First, that euery man is bound to liue vnder some teaching and admonishing Ministerie. Secondly, that the people, yea, all Gods people, must be instructed; contrarie to the doctrine of the Papists. Thirdly, a right perswasion of this, that the word will admonish and teach euery man, would make men more quiet vnder rebukes, and more willing to be taught. Hee saith not, you, but euery man; to import that the word hath not a particular quarrell at some one man, but will finde out the sinnes of all men, etc. We see by experience that this is the sore in many mindes, that either the Preacher should meddle with no body, or not with such as they: hee must not meddle with great men, or not with Schollers and learned men, etc.
In all wisedome.] These words may be vnderstood either of the subiect matter taught, or of the instruments, the Teachers; or of the effect in the hearers.
For the first: the word of God is well called wisedome,Why the word is called wisedome. eyther as it is the patterne, or Image, or resemblance of Gods euerlasting wisedome, which from all eternity in his counsell hee had conceiued: or as it portrayeth out Christ, who is the naturall wisedome of God: or as it vnfoldeth the depths of Gods wise prouidence, especially in his Church: or comparatiuely with all the formes of Doctrine, conceiued by the wisest of the Gentiles, or any carnall men.
For the second: these words may be referred to the Teachers,What it is to teach in all wisedome. and then the sense is, they must teach in all wisedome. They are called wise menMath: 23., and that they may teach in all wisedome: first, they must be sure they teach truth, and not errours: neither errors of Doctrine, nor errours of fact. It is a grieuous shame for Preachers out of the Pulpit, of purpose to disgrace some kinde of men, to report of them things vtterly vntrue: especially to faile often or vsually this way. Secondly, they must labour to expresse the power of the spirit, as well as a sound forme of Doctrine. Thirdly, they must make vse of all opportunities and aduantages, to worke vpon the people, when a doore is opened. To preach wisely, is to preach seasonably. Fourthly, they cannot preach in the wisedome of God, if they hunt after and effect that
 which the Apostle cals the wisedome of words1 Cor: 1.17.: or excellency of words1 Cor: 2.1.. Fiftly, there is a speciall wisedome in fitting doctrine to the state of the hearers, to giue euery one his owne portion.
Thirdly, it may be said to be in all wisedome, by effect in the hearers; as being such a preaching as tends to worke true wisedome in the hearers, as well as other graces: a wisedome I say, by which they vnderstand their owne wayPro: 14.8.9.15.16., and denie their owne reason, in the things of God: becomming fooles, that they may be wise1 Cor: 3., and know their daies of peace, and accordingly, gather in SummerProu: 10.5., euen in the seasons of Grace, while it is yet called to day; walking with the wiseProu: 13.20., preferring spirituall things aboue all earthly, as things that are truely excellentPhil. 1.10., carefully watching ouer themselues, and with all precisenesseEphes: 5.15. or circumspection; auoyding euen the lesser euils, redeeming the time, with all discretion, labouring to auoid all occasions of iust offence; and lastly, considering and prouiding for their latter endDeut: 32.22. Job: 4. vlt..
Quest.Quest. But can all wisedome be attained? Ans. Hee saith, all Wisedome, either comparatiuely with the knowledge of the heathen or carnall men:Ans. or else, by all wisedome, hee meaneth all, necessary to saluation: or else hee meaneth wisedome of all kindes, though not perfect in euer kinde.
We present our hearers to God in fiue respects.That we may present euery man.] The hearers are said to bee presented to God by their Teachers in diuers respects. First, as they gather them out of the world, into the profession of the Faith of Christ. Secondly, by framing and working vpon the hearts of their hearers, fitting them for Christ, euen in the presence of Christ, in his ordinances. Thirdly, by forcing men through the strength of terrour or comfort, to runne and present themselues to God. Fourthly, they may bee said to doe it in respect of their prayers, carrying the suites of the people vnto GOD. Fiftly, they shall present them at the day of Iudgement, when euery Teacher shall say, Here Lord I am, with the Children thou hast giuen mee.
Vses.This should teach the people so to order themselues towards their Ministers, that they might haue incouragement to goe to God, either for them, or with them. To this purpose they should honour them, maintaine them, obey them, shew their hearts and states to them, etc. And woe is vnto them that despise Gods Ministers, or discourage them; that hate their doctrine, or shun their society: howsoeuer they account of them, yet these are the men should haue made way for them to Christ, they are of his Priuie Chamber, and the dust of their feete shall witnesse against contemners; yea, the time shall come, when they would be glad to haue them excuse them to ChristLuk: 14.18.19., but it shall not be granted. And Ministers also may from hence both be comforted, considering the honour Christ hath done them, and instructed to looke carefully to their Flockes, and to goe to God for them, and by all meanes to carry themselues, so as they that must once giue an account for their People.
Perfect.] The word (...), is not in the Text in some Copies: but Stephanus hath it in, and it is acknowledged of the Translators and Expositors both old and new; and therefore perfection cannot bee denied, onely the sense must be inquired into.
How we are perfect.The faithfull are said to be perfect, first, comparatiuely with wicked men, or the Gentiles vnconuerted: Religion will make a man perfect in comparison of that which by nature man can attaine vnto: secondly, they may be said to be made perfect, that is, to want nothing that is absolutely necessary for saluation: thirdly, in righteousnesse, there is perfection; and so they shall be absolutely perfect at the day of Iudgement, and are alreadie perfect in respect of Iustification; yea, this word here vsed, is giuen to the sanctification of the faithfull, and that two wayes: first, as to be perfect notes
 nothing else but to be a strong man in Christ, so Heb. 5. vlt. Secondly, as to be vpright is accepted with God for perfection, by the benefit of the Couenant of Grace, and the Intercession of Christ: Thus I thinke the very word is vsed in these places, 1. Cor. 2.6, Phil. 3.15. Iames 1.17. Heb. 6.1.12.13. Thus there is perfection in Doctrine, Heb. 6.1. In Faith, Iames 2.22. In Hope, 1. Pet. 1.13. In loue, 1 Iohn 4.18. and Iohn 17.23. In Vnderstanding, 1 Cor. 14.20.
Quest.Quest. But who is a strong man in Christ, or a perfect man, as here?
Ans. First, hee that is a strong man in Christ can forgiue his enemies,Ans. Twelue signes of a strong Christian. and pray for them, and doe good to them, Mat. 5.48. Secondly, hee doth finish his worke, hee doth not beginne sleightly, and worke for a spirt, but perseuers. The word vsed in that sense, Iohn 17.4. Thirdly, he doth hold a constant amitie and holy communion with Gods Children, 1 Iohn 4.12. Iohn 17.23. Fourthly, hee hath renounced the world, denied himselfe, and consecrated his life to God, Rom. 12.12. Fiftly, he will not be carried away with euery winde of Doctrine, but will acknowledge and follow the truth, with all constant vnmooueablenesse, Ephes. 4 13.14. Sixtly, he presseth after perfection, forgets what's behinde, and lookes to the marke of the high price of his calling, labouring to finde out the vertue of Christs death and Resurrection, Phil. 3.13.14.15.10.9. Seauenthly, he hath a Plerophory or full assurance of the will of God towards him, Col. 4.12. Eightly, he can digest the stronger Doctrines of Religion, Heb. 5.14. Ninthly, patience hath in him her perfect worke, Iames 1.4. Tenthly, he sinnes not in word, Iames 3 12. Eleuenthly, he keepes the word, 1 Iohn 2.5. Twelfthly, he is setled in the loue of God, and hath not feare but boldnesse, 1 Iohn 4.17.18.
Euery man.] Euery true Christian might be made a strong Christian, which may serue for great humiliation to such as hauing the meanes, haue neglected so great grace or measure of it. What knowledge, what power or gifts, what abundance of faire fruit we might haue had, and borne, if wee had attended the meanes, and seriously laboured to redeeme the time? wee might many of vs haue beene Teachers, that now need to be Catechised.
In Iesus Christ.] All that supposed perfection that is out of Christ Iesus, is not worth seeking after, whatsoeuer carnall men propound vnto themselues, concerning the worth of their owne proiects, yet all in the end will proue vanity that is not in Christ Iesus. And contrariwise all true perfection is in CHRIST which should so much the more comfort fearefull Christians, seeing their perseuerance and the perfecting of grace begunne, is in him, it is his office to see it performed, and it will bee accomplished by his power, as it is giuen for his merits: and it should teach all the faithfull to make much of communion with Chirst, to keepe their hold, and not let goe their confidence: to preserue by all meanes tendernesse, in an holy intercourse with Christ; for if once Christ absent himselfe, the worke of grace will stand still. Thirdly, this shewes how perfection can bee attributed to Christians; namely, as in Christ Iesus the euill of their workes is couered by him, and what is good is presented by him to the Father. Lastly, it should teach vs in all our wants to seeke to Christ, in the vse of all meanes appointed by him, to giue or confirme grace, waiting vpon him with Faith and Prayer.




Verse 29. Whereunto I also labour and striue, according to his working that worketh in mee mightily.

IN this Verse is contained the seauenth reason to inforce the Exhortation, and it is taken from the great paines of the Apostle, and the great successe the Lord was pleased to giue to his paines.
Whereunto.] Some read [in whom,] viz. in which Christ, that is, by whose assistance, and blessing, and protection, etc. But I take it as it is here, Whereunto: and so it may bee referred either to the Exhortation in the three and twentieth Verse, or to perfection in the Verse before. It is sure that the perfection of Ministers labours should be the perfection of their hearers. It is not enough to know how to preach Sermons, but it must tend nor onely to beget men vnto Christ but also to build them vp, which is a wonderfull hard worke, and few Ministers are well skilled herein; and therefore Ministers should much consult with God, and the people should pray constantly, and earnestly for their Teachers.
Labour.] An effectuall Ministery is a painefull Ministery: the Lords work must not be done negligently2 Tim: 4.1.2.3. 1 Thes. 5.12.; which may iustifie continuall and daily preaching.
Quest.Quest. But what needes all this preaching. Ans. It is exceeding needfull; for it is the ordinary meanes to saue mens soules,Ans. The need of daily preaching. and to beget Faith: and in as much as there are daily still to be added to the Church, therefore still the meanes is to be vsed, besides the secret iudgement of God in the induration of the wicked, and leauing them without excuse. And as there needes daily foode for the body, so doth there for the soule: and the Lord by his word doth heale the daily infirmities of his peoplePsal. 107.. Men thinke it needfull the Exchequer should be open all the yeere, that their Law-cases may be determined: and more neede it is, the Lords spirituall Exchequer should stand open for the daily determining of the Cases of Conscience, which arise in the soules of Gods people: and wee need a daily light for our paths, and Lanthorne for our feetePsal. 119.. What shall I say? our very Calling needes direction out of the word, and our crosses and temptations cause vs to feele a daily neede of the comforts of the word to be applied to vs: the godly are to bee incouraged in well-doing, and that continually; and wee all neede to be called vpon daily, for reformation and preuention of sinne. Grace will not hold out without meanes, and Knowledge must be encreased; and a daily Ministery is of singular vse to prepare vs for death, and weyne vs from the world. These and many other be the reasons of daily preaching, which should greatly reproue such Ministers as labour not, either for want of gifts, or pluralitie of places, or distraction of businesse, or for very idlenesse, or vnwillingnesse to take paines. Woe vnto them, for as they prouide euill for their peoples soules, so they reward euill to their owne soules.
Note the Apostles affection in obseruing GODS prouidence in the successe of his labours.According to his working that worketh in mee mightily.] Before I consider particularly of these words, I note how feelingly the Apostle speakes of Gods Prouidence, and with what affection hee sets out the obseruation hee made of it: which greatly shames the most of vs, that are so excessiuely dull in apprehending, and so affectionlesse in the thought of things. Now if any would know what should be the reason wee are so dull, and the Apostle so tenderly sensible of Gods power and prouidence: I may answere, that a number of vs are not throughly perswaded of Gods particular prouidence: besides, hee was excellently acquainted with the word of God, and thereby, hee saw liuely, how euery promise or threatning came into execution: there could hardly any thing fall out, but hee remembred some
 Scripture that fore-told or fore-shewed it. And no question hee knew how vnable the meanes was to worke without Gods blessing. Further, it is certaine, that such holy men as hee, sought Gods blessing by prayer, and therefore now they were affected, when they obserued what followed their prayers. And besides, the Apostle did walke with God in a great measure of sanctitie and holy care in all things to keepe his communion with God, whereas wee are estranged by our corruptions, and for the most part negligent in a daily walking with GOD. Lastly, hee was humble, and not conceited of his owne gifts, and had consecrated himselfe, and deuoted his life to Gods glory, and therefore hee was sensible of the glory of God in his working prouidence.
But the maine particular Doctrine is,It is God that workes in the ministery of the Word. that in the Ministery of the Gospell there is Gods speciall working: for it is Gods worke to raise vp men that will labour in the Gospell, considering the ill successe in many hearers, and the infirmities in themselues, and the strange discouragements from the world: and when the Lord hath gotten him Labourers, it is his working, that they can get fit Meditations and Affections into their hearts in priuate, and fit vtterance in publike: it is not Art and learning alone that will furnish them with powerfull matter. And thirdly, it is Gods working to extend the power of the word to the hearers, so as the heate of it goe not out before it kindle in the peoples hearts. What shall I say? it is Gods mighty working that the people are preserued and daily built vp by the word in Grace. All which should teach vs to place our Faith, not in men but in the power of God. And let wicked men bee aduised least by resisting the Ministery they bee found fighters against God: and it may bee a great comfort to a Minister to; for if God worke for vs and by vs, it matters not who be against vs. And lastly, Christians should make much of, and bee thankefull for, and greatly admire all Knowledge and Grace gotten from the word, for it was wrought by the very finger of God.

FINIS.




THE ANALYSIS of the second Chapter.
TWo things are contained in this Chapter. First, the continuation of the exhortation begun in the 23. verse of the first Chapter, to v. 7. Secondly, a dehortation, from verse 8. to the end.
The exhortation is continued two waies: First, By alleaging more reasons, v. 1. 2. 3. Secondly, by prolepsis, remouing sundry obiections, v. 4. 5. 6. 7. There are three reasons to presse them to care of perseuerance in the doctrine they had receiued: The first reason is taken from the care of the Apostle, for the deliuerie and defence of the Gospell, in these words, I would you knew what great fighting I haue for your sakes and for them of Laodicea and for as many as haue not seene my face in the flesh, vers. 1.
The second reason is taken from the effects of the Gospell, and they are two: 1. consolation, that your hearts might be comforted: 2. loue, and knit together in loue.
The third reason is taken from the adiuncts of the Gospell, and they are three: First certaintie, vnto all riches of full assurance of vnderstanding. 2. Sublimitie, to the ackowledgment of the mysterie of God euen the Father and of Christ, v. 2. Thirdly, perfection in these words, in whom, or, in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, v. 3.
Thus of the reasons; The answer of obiections followes.
Ob. 1. Why doth the Apostle vrge vs so largely with this exhortation. Sol. This I say lest any beguile you with inticing words.
Ob. 2. But how doth he know our estates being absent. Sol. To this he answereth, that though he were absent in the flesh, yet he was present in spirit,
Ob. 3. But it is charitie to entertaine surmises of vs, Sol. He saith he did reioyce in there order and stedfastnes present; But he wrote this to warne them to take heed.
Quest. Tell vs at once what you would haue vs doe. Answ. v. 6. 7. two things are to be done: the first concernes holy life, the second faith. Concerning holy life, there is first a precept, walke on. secondly, a rule after which that precept is to be squared, viz as yee haue receiued the Lord Iesus Christ. Concerning faith, there is first a precept,
 they must be rooted built vp, and stablished. secondly, a rule, as they had been taught.
And thus of the exhortation: The dehortation followes, from v. 8. to the end. There are three parts of the dehortation. First, hee setteth downe the matter from which he dehorts, v. 8. Secondly, he giues six reasons to confirme the dehortation, from verse. 9. to 16. Thirdly, he concludes and that seuerally from v. 16. to the end.
In the 8. verse he sets downe three thinges from which he dehorts. 1. From Philosophie, which he calls vaine deceits. 2. From traditions of men. 3. From the ceremonies of Moses, which he calls the rudiments of the world.
The reasons are, 1. because they are not after Christ, v. 8. 2. Because in Christ there dwels all the fulnes of the God-head bodily, v. 9. where note an excellent description of Christ; In him, he notes his person; the Godhead, his diuine nature; corporally, his humane nature, and dwells, the vnion of both; and for the measure, it is in all fullnes.
3. Because we are compleat in Christ, without any of these thinges, v. 10. Here note the persons, yee, the time, are, the benifit, compleat, the author, Christ, the limitation, in him.
4. Because we are circumcised without hands, and therefore need not circumcision made with handes, and consequently no ceremonies. This reason is propounded, v. 11. and confirmed by prolepsis, v. 12.
Concerning Circumcision without hands, fiue thinges are to be noted. 1. the persons, yee. 2. the time, are. 3. the manner, set downe negatiuely, without hands. 4. the form of it, affirmitiuely, putting off the bodie of the sins of the flesh. 5. the efficient cause, the circumcision of Christ.
Ob. But it followes not we are circumcised without hands, therefore need not circumcision with hands. Sol. It followes to vs now in the new Testament, because we haue baptisme in steed of circumcision with hands: we are buried with Christ by baptisme.
Ob. But was not Circumsion a more liuely signe. Sol. It was not, which he shewes to be true, both in respect of mortification, buried with him, and in respect of viuification, raised vp together with him by baptisme, which is amplified by setting downe what is required in them to whom baptisme is thus effectuall, viz. the faith of the operation of God.
5. Because none of these can helpe vs in miserie, nor further to happinesse, when we want it, v. 13. The words in themselues expres a two fold estate of Christians, First, what they are by nature, and so 1. they were dead in actuall sinnes. 2. they were in the vncircumcision of the flesh, in respect of originall sinne. Secondly, what they were in the state of grace, 1. they were quickned. 2. they were forgiuen all their sinnes.
6. Because Christ hath cancelled the Chyrographie that was against vs, which were these ceremonies, v. 14. 15. concerning these, two things may be noted. 1. what the ceremonies were in themselues. 2. how the Church was discharged of them.

For the first they were for honor, ordinances of God, for vse, hand-writings, for effect, they were against vs.
For the second, Christ on the crosse cancelled them, fastned them, and tooke them out of the way: yea, he spoyled the Diuels, and triumphed ouer them openly, who had the power to serue execution for forfeitures, v. 15.
Thus of the reasons: the conclusion followes from v. 16, to the end. The conclusion hath three branches. For first hee concludes against ceremonies, v. 16. 17. Secondly against philosophie, v. 18. 19. Thirdly, against traditions, v. 20. to the end.
In the conclusion against ceremonies, note 1. the thinges which are named to be abrogated, viz. the respect of meats and drinks. 2. of times, which are threefold, 1. daies. 2. moneths. 3. Sabbaths, these are the things, v. 16. The reason is v. 17. because these are but shadowes of things to come, and the body is Christ.
In the conclusion against philosophie, note first the thing which in speciall hee reasons against, viz. Angell-worship. Secondly, the reasons by which he condemnes them that brought it in, 1. they did it hypocritically, vnder pretence of humblenes of mindes. 2. they did it ignorantly, aduancing themselues in things they neuer saw. 3. they did it proudly, rashly puft vp in there fleshly minde. 4. they did it dangerously: their danger is laid downe, and amplified; Laid downe in these words, not holding the head amplified by a digression into the praises of the mysticall body of Christ, 1. for ornament furnished. 2. for vnion, knit together by ioynts, and bands. 3. for growth, increasing with increase of God.
In the conclusion against traditions, obserue, first the matter condemned, why are yee burthened with traditions, amplified by the kinds, touch not, taste not, handle not, v. 21. Secondly, the reasons, 1. yee are dead with Christ, v. 20. 2. Yee are dead from the rudiments of the world, therefore much more from traditions. 3. They are burthens. 4. The matter of them is light, and vaine, and idle, v. 21. 5. They all perish with the vsing. 6. They are after the commandements and doctrines of men, v. 21.
Ob. But there seemeth to bee a depth in them, Sol. Hee confesseth that they haue a shew of wisdome, and that in three things. 1. In voluntarie religion. 2. In humblenesse of minde. 3 In not sparing the bodie. But yet he censures them two wayes. 1. It is but a shew all this. 2. It with-holdeth the honour due vnto the bodie, neither haue they it in any estimation to satisfie the flesh. v. 23.



THE METAPHRASE vpon the second Chapter.
VERSE. I FOr I would yee knew what great fighting I haue for your sakes, and for them of L^odicea, and for as many as haue not seene my person in the flesh.FOr I would ye were throughly informed of it what greate care, conflict, strife, and fighting I haue for your sakes, and for them of Laodicea, and for such as I neuer knew, but onely heare of to be such as embrace the Gospell which we preach, and to this end I tell you of my care and fighting so to moue you to be much the more resolute in perseuering in the faith and hope of the doctrin you haue receiued.
Verse 2. That their hearts might bee comforted and they knit together in loue and in all riches of the full assurance of vnderstanding to know the mysterie of GOD euen the Father and of CHRIST.Greate are the benifits which you and all those that belieue in your parts receiue from our paines in the Gospell, for heereby both your hearts are comforted with true refreshings, and besides you are hereby knit one to another, and established in brotherly loue; and as the benifits of the adiuncts of the Gospell should much moue you to sticke still to it if you consider how rich GOD hath made you, in the infallible and full perswasion of vnderstanding which you haue felt, and withall what admirable desires there are in the doctrine of the Gospell concerning GOD the Father and CHRIST.
Verse 3. In whom are hid all the treasures of wisedome and knowledge. Vers^ 4. And this I say least any should begu^le you with inticing words V^rse 5 For though I bee absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, reio^cing and beholding your order, and the steef^stnesse o^ your faith in Christ. Verse 6. As yee haue therefore receiued CHRIST IESVS the LORD, so walk ye in him.Or lastly, if you consider the perfection of the doctrine of the Gospell, either as it conteines the treasures of wisedome and knowledge, or as it shewes vs CHRIST, in whome are all admirable perfections of all sorts of rich knowledge.
Now if you aske me why I am so tedious in vrging these things. I answere it is only for feare least any should by plausible and probable inticements of speech beguile you from the simplicitie that is in CHRIST.
And if you say I know not your estate, I answere though I be absent from you in the flesh yet I am present with you in the spirit, and if you thinke that this discourse implies that I dislike you, know that I do truly reioyce to heare of your good order of life, both publike and priuate, and how stedfast your faith in CHRIST is.
Now if you aske me at once what is the summe of all I would haue you to doe, I answere that as concerning holy life, I would haue you walke on in the same manner as yee haue receiued CHRIST hitherto.

And for matter of faith,Verse 7. Rooted and built vp in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye haue been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiuing. Verse 8. Beware lest there bee any man that spoyle you through Philosophy and vaine deceit, through the traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. I would haue you by all meanes to seeke to to be further rooted and built vp and stablished in the assurance of faith accordingly as you haue beene taught, but by any meanes remember to abound in all thankfulnesse to GOD, for the happie estate you are in: And thus for what I haue to exhort you to in matters of doctrine.
Now I must enter vpon matter of dehortation, take heede, lest anie man of what gifts or profession soeuer, make a prey of your soules, and carrie them away as a spoile: And in particular looke to it in three things, first in Philosophie, not simply in the doctrines of Philosophie, but in such deuises, and vaine fancies, as vnder colour of such speculation, or from the authoritie of Philosophers are brought in by any. Secondly, take heede of traditions of men. And thirdly, of the ceremonies of Moses, which were things at first brought in to bee as the A. B. C. or alphabet to traine vp the people of GOD in the principles: But now this and the other are not to bee regarded for many reasons, wherof the first is, they are not after CHRIST.
Besides there is such an infinite fulnesse in CHRIST,Verse 9. For in him dwelleth all the fulnesse of the godhead bodily. Verse 10. And ye are compleat in him who is the head of all principality and power. by reason of the diuine nature that dwels by an vnexpressible vnion in the humane nature, that we need not seeke to any thing else but only vnto CHRIST.
And you your selues in CHRIST haue all compleatnesse, and fufficiency by reason of your mysticall vnion with him, and such is the fulnes of CHRIST, that the verie Angels those excellent and potent creatures, are subordinate to him, and acknowledge him as their head, which by the waie shewes that they are not to be worshipped.
And to speake yet more expresly what should you do with circumcision or any part of the law ceremoniall,Verse 11. In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh by the circumcision of CHRIST. Verse 12. In that yee are buried with him through baptisme, in whom yee are also raysed vp together through the faith of the operation of GOD, which raised him from the dead. Verse 13. And you being dead in your sinnes, and the vncircumcision of the flesh hath hee quickned together with him, forgiuing you all your trespasses. Verse 14. Blotting out the hand-writing of ordinances that was against vs, which was contrary to vs, and tooke it out of the way, nayling it to his crosse. seeing in CHRIST yee haue receiued that which was signified by circumcision; for in him you are circumcised not with the hands of men, as they were vnder the law, but by the finger of the spirit of GOD: which stands in the mortification of that bodie of sinnes, which yee were guiltie of while yee were in the flesh, and this ye haue by the vertue of CHRISTS circumcision.
And if you say that Abraham had the circumcision without hands, and yet was circumcised in the flesh, I answer, that we haue baptisme instead of that circumcision, and therefore need it not: and the rather because baptisme doth so liuely set out our spirituall buriall and resurrection with CHRIST, which all they attaine vnto that haue the faith of GODS operation, that is, that can beleeue that which GOD by his power will do what he promiseth in baptisme, grounding their faith vpon the resurrection of CHRIST from the dead.
And further this should moue you to disregard those things, because they neither could help you when you were miserable, nor conferre the benefits vpon you which you enioy without them, for in your estate of nature you were dead in actuall sinnes, and in respect of originall sinne you liued in the vncircumcision of the flesh: and since you were quickned by true regeneration you haue obtained the forgiuenesse of all your sins, and therefore what would you haue more from these things.
Lastly, the ceremonies though they were ordinances of GOD at the first, yet they were hand-writings against vs, and now CHRIST hath
 cancelled them, and fastned the obligation vpon the crosse, and so taken them out of the way. and therefore you should neuer more haue minde to them.
Verse 15. And hath spoiled the principal^ties and powers, and hath made a shew of them openly, and hath triumphed ouer them in the same crosse. Verse 16. Let no man therefore condemne you in meat and drinke, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new moone, or of the sabbath daies. Verse 17. Which are but a shadow of things to come: but the body is in Christ Verse 18. Let no man at his pleasure beare rule ouer you by humblenes of mind, and worshipping of Angels, aduancing himselfe in etc. Verse 19. And holdeth not the head, wherof all the body is furnished and knit together by ioynts and bands, etc. Verse 20. Wherefore if yee bee dead with Christ from the ordinances of the world, etc. Verse 21. As, touch not, taste not, handle not. Verse 22. Which all perish with the vsing and are after the commandements and doctrines of men. Verse 23. Which things haue indeede a shew of wisdome, in voluntary religion and humblenesse of minde, and in not sparing the bodie, neither haue they it in any estimation to satisfie the flesh.And the rather because our Sauiour hath not only cancelled them, but he hath spoyled the Diuels which had power to execute the forfeitures of these bonds, I say both in himselfe on the crosse, and in vs daily he hath and doth spoyle them, and triumph ouer them, and make an open shew of them, so as we are freed from the danger of their arrests.
Now therfore I come to the conclusion which I direct distinctly, first, against the ceremonies, then against philosophy, and lastly against traditions. First, I say, let no man condemne you, (or if they doe care not for it) condemne you I say for any of the ceremonies, whether it be about meates or drinkes, or about the ceremoniall dayes, or moneths, or sabbaths, that were required in that law.
For these and all the rest were but shadowes of things to come, and now in CHRIST we haue the substance and body of them.
The like I say against philosophie and in speciall against Angell worship, let no man beare rule ouer your consciences, for they that bring in this doctrine, do it hypocritically vpon pretence that it tends to make men humble, and they do it very ignorantly, for they neuer saw the kingdome of Angels, nor what is done in heauen, and most proudly doe they aduance themselues, swelling in the vaine conceits of their fleshly mindes.
Yea, they that bring in this doctrine fall from the foundation, and hold not CHRIST, who is the head of the Church, of whom euery member doth depend, and the whole body is excellently furnished, and indissolubly knit together, and encrease with the encreasing of GOD.
And lastly for traditions, I wonder at it you should be clogged with them, seeing you are deliuered from them in the death of CHRIST, and they are not so honourable as the ceremonies of Moses, but are vile burthens.
Thinke but with your selues, how vainly they impose vpon you, when they say, touch not, taste not, handle not.
Besides all these are perishable things, and fit nothing at all to eternall life, and further they are euidently the common documents and deuises, and doctrines of men, that neuer had warrant in the word of GOD.
It is true, they find out many faire pretences to blind mens eyes withall, as that heereby wee shew speciall Zeale to GOD in doing more then hee commandeth, and these things seeme to tend to humilitie and the taming of the flesh, but all these are but shewes, and therefore naught whatsoeuer they say, because they yeelde not a due respect euen to the body of man.



CERTAINE OF THE choisest and cheefest points handled in the second CHAPTER.

HOw many wayes faithfull Ministers fight. fol. 3.
The comfort comes by the word with the answer of manie obiections. fol. 5. 6.
Causes why many finde no more comfort in the word. fol. 7
Seuen inconueniences of an vncomfortable heart. fol. 7.
The differences, author, bond, seat, effects, obiects and properties of loue, and rules for preseruing it. fol. 7. 8.
Foure sorts of disturbers of the Church. fol. 8.
Seuen things of which we should be assured. fol. 9.
Seuen signes of full assurance, and what we must doe to get it. fol. 9.
Wherein our spirituall riches lie. fol. 10.
An answer to the obiquitaries. fol. 11.
What Pithanoligie is. fol. 13.
Who are deceiuers. fol. 14.
Rules to preuent beguiling. fol. 14.
Of order in the Common-wealth, and the Church, and in the Familie. fol. 15. 16.
Ten helpes of order in conuersation. fol. 16.
Rules to bring our liues into order. fol. 17.
Nine lets of order. fol. 17.
Of stedfastnesse of faith. fol. 18.
The properties of a man stedfast in faith. fol. 18.
The causes of vnsettlednesse. fol. 18.
The meanes of stedfastnesse. fol. 19.
The vnconueniences of an vnstedfast faith. fol. 19.
How weake faith may bee discerned, and the causes of vnsettlednesse or weake faith, and remedies. fol. 19.
Causes of faith weakned, signes, and remedies. fol. 20.
Causes of the losse of stedfastnesse. fol. 20.
The effects of falling away. fol. 20.
Remedies for the losse of stedfastnesse. fol. 21.
The priuiledges of such as receiue Christ. fol. 24.
Rules for perseuerance to be obserued in our first conuersion. fol. 24. 25.
What a free spirit is. fol. 26.
Signes of a true heart. fol. 26.
Rules for perseuerance to be looked to after our calling. fol. 26. 27.
How philosophie becomes vaine deceit. fol. 30.
Of traditions in the Church of the Iewes and of the Gentiles, and in the times of the fathers in the Primitiue Church and in Poperie. fol. 31. 32.
Of the abrogation of the Law. fol. 33.
Morall, Iudiciall, and Ceremoniall in what respects. fol. 34.

How the diuine nature can bee in the humane, and how Christ was like vs, and how vnlike. fol. 36.
Distinctions of vnions. fol. 37.
Gifts supernaturall and naturall in Christ. fol. 38.
A threefold wisdome in Christ. fol. 39.
Of the power of Christ. fol. 39.
Christians are compleat both comparatiuely and positiuely, and that foure wayes. fol. 40.
The compleatnesse of the weake Christian. fol. 41.
The compleatnesse of the strong Christian. fol. 41.
Of Angels, as they are principalities and powers. fol. 42.
The benefits Angels haue by Christ as their head. fol. 42.
A two-fold circumcision. fol. 43.
Of circumcision in the flesh, what is signified by it, and the ends of it, and why it was abolished. fol. 43, 44.
Eight reasons of the hard kindes of phrase or speech in Scripture. fol. 44.
What circumcision without hands is. fol. 45.
The time of circumcision without hands. fol. 46.
Six defects of the carnall Israelite. fol. 47.
The practises of the flesh, and courses to tame it. fol. 47. 48.
Why our sinnes are called a bodie of sinnes, vers. 11.
How many wayes sinne is put off. vers. 11.
Of the circumcision of Christ. vers. 11.
Ten reasons why Christ was circumcised. vers. 11.
Christians buried in three respects while they liue. vers. 12.
The degrees of mortification, and what the buriall of sinne is. vers. 12.
Christ raiseth men vp diuers wayes. vers. 12.
Of the resurrection of graces. vers. 12.
Of the resurrection of duties. vers. 12.
Of Baptisme. vers. 12.
What faith hath to doe in baptisme or in sanctification. vers. 12.
Of the operation of God, and in what things we haue warrant to beare our selues vpon the power of God. vers. 12.
A foure-fold death, and of death in sinne. vers. 13.
Of the vncircumcision of the flesh, vers. 13.
Of quickning and our new birth, the meanes, necessity, prerogatiue and signes of it
Of forgiuenesse of sinnes. vers. 13.
Of the hand-writing that was against vs, and the cancelling of it. v. 14.
Of a great combate. vers. 15.
Of the battle betweene Christ and the Diuels. vers. 15.
Of Christs victorie and triumph ouer the Diuels both in himselfe and in vs. fol. 72. 73.
Of ceremonies, and how they were shadowes; of meats, and daies, and saboths. fol. 74. 75.
Of the Christian race, and lets in running. fol. 77.
Rules to be obserued concerning this race of godlinesse. fol. 77.
About worshipping of Saints and Angels against the Papists in three things. fol. 78.
Of the pretence of humblenesse of minde. fol. 79.
Of the diuers kindes of ignorance. fol. 80.
How men please themselues in their owne deuises. fol. 81.
Of pride, and how it is in vaine in three respects. fol. 82.
The priuiledges flowing from our vnion with Christ. fol. 84.
Wherein the Church groweth fol. 85.
Three things that make men grow. fol. 86.




CHAPTER II.




VERSE. I.

For I would ye knew what great fighting I haue for your sakes, and for them of Laodicea, and for as many as haue not seene my person in the flesh.


THe exhortation begun in the 23.The order of the first part of this chapter. verse of the former chapter is continued in the first 7. verses of this chapter: wherein the Apostle propounds three other reasons for confirmation, and answers diuers secret obiections. The reasons are in the three first verses, and the answer to the obiections in the foure next.
The first reason is taken from the care the Apostle tooke for them in the worke of his ministerie, in this verse. The second reason is from the effects of the Gospell, viz. consolation and loue, vers. 2. The third reason is from certaine adiuncts of the Gospell, viz. certaintie, sublimitie, and perfection, vers. 3.2.
Ob. But what needs all this adoe, might some of the Colossians say? Why are we thus tediously vrged, and with so many reasons?
Sol. vers. 4. This I say lest any man beguile you.
Ob. But you are a stranger to vs, and absent from vs, how know you our estate?
Sol. vers. 5. Though I am absent in the flesh, yet I am present with you in the spirit.
Ob. But it is vncharitablenesse to entertaine such conceits of vs, as if wee were a people corrupt and fallen away.
Sol. vers. 5. For your present condition, I reioyce in your order, being fully assertained of your present stedfastnesse of faith in Christ. But I write this to keepe you as you are, that you may not be drawen away.
Quest. But what would you aduise vs? Tell vs briefly, and at once, what you would haue vs to doe?
Answ. As you haue receiued Christ Iesus the Lord, so walke in him, etc. v. 6.7.
Thus wee see the order and generall meaning and dependance of all these first 7. verses.
In this first verse the Apostle would stirre vp the Colossians to constancy in the Gospell receiued, by shewing his great care and daily strife for them and their good.
It is not vnlawfull in some cases to praise a mans selfe: the Apostle heere doth it: nor is it vnlawfull to vse rhetoricall insinuations, to winne and excite affection in the people. Paul would perswade by shewing his owne care for them. But sure it is, Ministers shall hardly euer profit the people, or powerfully
 perswade with them vnto constancie in receiuing and retaining the care of their doctrine, vnlesse they shew their owne care in teaching, and their owne loue to the people they would perswade.
What a greate conflict.] Paul shewes his great loue to them: hee fighteth for them, and this he did when in all likelihood he should imploy his cares for himselfe, being now in such straits, as it were in the middest of death, and the rather they should be affected with this proofe of his loue in them, because they were absent from him.
For.] This for shewes an aitiologie; for it points to a dependance vpon the last verse of the former chapter: there he had shewed what paine hee tooke, and how mightily the Lord had shewed his power in working through his ministerie. Now he tels of a fight and combat, which euidently imports, that when the Gospell workes vpon mens consciences, and the ministerie of Gods seruants proues effectuall and powerfull, there will follow some stirre and opposition, there will be a conflict and strife.
Yet hence also may begathered, that the grace of the Gospell is excellent, and worthy the hauing, else there would not be so much adoe to hinder it.
What great conflict or fighting.] (...) the originall word is diuersly rendred: some render it care or solicitude, some danger; sometimes it signifies a race, as Heb. 12.1. sometimes it signifies only to striue: but heare and in diuers places it is fitly rendred a conflict, or fighting, or wrestling. But leauing the signification, the matter is plaine, that if Ministers execute their offices sincerely, they must looke for a battle and oposition. Indeed the life of faithfull Ministers is but a continuall battle; they must looke to suffer and be shamefully intreated1 Thess. 2.2.: if they be bold to speake the Gospell of God, it will be with much contention: if they discharge the trust God hath put in them, not pleasing men but God that trieth the heartsVers. 3.4., warre they must, this is their comfort, it is a good warfare1 Tim. 1.18., and a good fight2 Tim. 4.7.: to vndertake the ministerie, it is to goe a warfare1 Cor. 9.7.12. Enemies to sincere preaching..
If any aske how this fight should grow: I answer: First, it is manifest the deuill is the enemie of all goodnesse, and will crosse the Gospell what he can: Besides, the flesh both in Ministers and people will lust and striue against the spirit; a Minister should haue something to doe to beate downe his owne flesh1 Cor. 9.27.. And in the Apostles times Tyrants with their ciuill or rather vnciuill sword did fight against the truth: so did heretickes with the tares and poison of their infectious doctrine: so did the Infidels also with slanders and outrages. And though these cease, yet opposition will rise from other sorts of men: for in generall all men of wicked life will be contrarie to sound doctrine1 Tim. 1.10.; and particularly both worldlings and epicures doe in all places discouer their dislike of the faithfull and diligent preaching of the Gospell, in as much as the word would restraine the excesse of their pleasures and cares of life; yea the ciuill honest men of the world, though they giue heauen good words, and can be long more quiet then the former, yet let once their inward corruption bee ransacked, or their speciall euils powerfully vnmasked, they will become like horses and mules, they wil strike at all that crosseth the praise of their quiet estate. And for temporizers, it is wonderfull euident, that in all places they hold it a point of their care, to se that sound preaching be disgraced. For howsoeuer by Gods singular mercie amongst vs in this Nation, by the lawes of the Kingdome, preaching is both established and protected with honour, yet because in practise people of all degrees tend to libertie, and many greate ones like not that preaching that should discouer or restraine the greeuous excesses of the time: hence it is that such as serue the humours of men, and run in the current or prophanenesse, doe euery where take all aduantages to disgrace painfull and godly Preachers and preaching. Besides, such is the hellish spight and rage of Papists and popish persons in all places, that in imitation of their
 holy father, who is noted to oppose and exalt himselfe2 Thess. 2.4., they, especially the locusts among them are as horses prepared to the battleReuel. 9., as soone as the Gospell begins in any place to be sincerely taught. Lastly, this opposition many times is made by corupt teachers, men that either are poysoned with vnsound opinions, or otherwise be of corrupt and ambitious mindes, as Iannes and Iambres resisted Moses, so doe these resist the truth2 Tim. 3.8., and withstand the words of faithfull men, and doe much euill2 Tim. 4.14.15., these by cunning craftines lie in waite to deceiueEph. 4.14.. So that there are 12. opposites, that set against the sinceritie of the preaching of the Gospell.
Now if any aske how Paul,How many waies faithfull Ministers fight. and so euery faithfull Minister doth fight against these: I answere, that as the aduersaries are diuers, so their fight is diuers also. For against there owne flesh they fight, by renouncing the world, and the care or confidence in wordly hopes, making profit and credit stoop to the calling of God.
2. Against the temtations of Satan and the many obiections by which he labours to discourage or hinder them, they fight by care, that is, by a daily studie, deuising how to aduantage the good of the Churches, deuoting their best desires for the peoples good.
3. They fight by apologie and iust defence, and so both against corrupt teachers, and the calumnies and slanderous reproches of the wicked.
4. They fight against the corruptions and abuses of the time, by reproofes and the denuntiation of the threatnings of Gods word. 5. They wrestle and fight euen in prayer to God,Col. 4.12. and so they fight by complaining against the iniuries of wicked men, or else by striuing with God himselfe to ouercome him by importunitie. 6. They fight euen by their sufferings: they winne many battles by their very patience, and fayth in affliction, by enduring the fight of affliction.
The consideration of this fight, may first awaken carlesse Ministers, in as much as they proportion out such a course of preaching as they can escape blowes, it giues iust cause of suspition that they are combined with the enemies, in that they are let alone and not opposed.
Againe, this may both sound an alarme, to all faithfull Ministers to arme, and prepare for a fight: and it may comfort them, in that this hath beene the case of the best of Gods seruants. And withall the people may learne how to be affected to their godly Teachers: doe your Ministers so many waies labour and striue for you, and shall not you striue for them, by apologie, prayer, care and all waies of iust defence?
I would you knew] Q. Why was the Apostle so desirous they should know, his care, patience, fighting etc. for them? Answ. There might be greate cause of it. 1. To remoue all conceit that he did not respect them. 2. To incourage them to constancie in that doctrine for which he suffered so much. 3. It might arme them with patience to suffer, if they should be called to it, considering his example. 4. That so they might be stirred vp the more earnestly to pray for him. In generall this shewes that it is not enough, that wee loue one an other, but we must manifest it, especially affection between the Minister and his people should not be concealed.
For you and for them of etc.] There were two sorts of godly men in the Apostles times. 1. such as were conuerted mediately by the Apostles, in their owne persons. 2. such as were conuerted by others sent of the Apostles, The Apostle here shewes he loues these latter as well as the former.
There is a communion with the absent members of Christ, euen with such as we neuer saw in the face, a communion I say in the same head, and in the same spirit, and in the same priuiledges, of a regenerated life. And we see here we are bound to desire and indeuour the good of the absent Saints as well as
 the present, we may fight for the absent, by prayer, by apologie, by our sufferings, and by vsing the meanes of consolation or information, yea, herein is a liuely triall of our true loue to the brethren, if wee can loue them wee neuer saw, for the grace of God we heare to be in them.
For them of Laodicea.] Though there were many Cities of this name, yet I thinke this is the Laodicea mentioned Reuel. 3. If the estate of these Laodiceans be well marked as it is there described, we may obserue, That in matters of religion and Gods worship, they were neither hot nor colde, That they thought they had as good hearts to God as any, that they were in loue with no sauing grace, that they were vtterly ignorant of the doctrine of their miserie, that they would take no paines either about iustification or sanctification, etc. yet no doubt God had his remnant among these, Christ was Amen in this Church, he did faithfully performe his promises, and they were such as by a new creation of God were begotten againe, euen amongst so carelesse a multitude. The generall securitie of a people, doth not simplie dissolue the couenant with a people, and the Gospell is with all care to be taught, though but the tythe of men be wrought vpon by it.
And for such as neuer saw my face.] Two things may bee heere further noted.
1. That wee haue the profit of the prayers and holie endeuours of such as we neuer saw in the flesh.
2. That it is a great benefit to enioy the presence of those that are eminent in Gods seruice, for that is implyed in the words. Certainely it is one thing should make vs willing to die, because then wee shall see the Worthies of the Lord, face to face; if so much greefe, Act. 20. because they should see Pauls face no more, then what ioy shall it be when we shall sit downe in the kingdome of heauen, with Abraham, Isaac and Iacob.



VERS. 2. That their hearts might bee comforted and they knit together in loue, and in all riches of the full assurance of vnderstanding to know the mysterie of God euen the Father and of Christ.

IN the beginning of this verse is contained the second reason, taken from the effects of the Gospell, which are two: the first, consolation; the second, establishment of their hearts in brotherly loue; the rest of the words of this verse belongs to the third reason, as shall appeare afterward.
This is the fruit of the care and earnest strife of godly Teachers in their painefull labours of the Gospell, that it breeds much comfort in the hearts of Gods people, and likewise greatly confirmes them, and settles them in the mutall loue one of another: it knits their hearts together. And contrariwise we may generally here note the hurt and mischeefe that false and corrupt teachers bring vpon men. They hinder the consultations of Gods people, in that they draw them away from God the fountaine of all consolation: and likewise they withdraw them from the societie and fellowship with the Saints. But this is but generall. I consider distinctly of each of these effects.

That their hearts might be comforted]

The people whose harts are not effectually wrought vpon by the Gospell,  are voyde of the consolations of God. They are in comfortlesse distresse; a naturall heart is a comfortlesse heart;An vnregenerate heart is a comfortlesse heart. and they must needes be without comfort, for they are without God and Christ, and the promises, and communion with the godly, which are the wells of comfort: besides by reason of the vaile of ignorance, their soules sit in darknes: and what comfort can they haue in such a continued spirituall night of darknes? neither will the disorder of their affections, passions or lusts, suffer their hearts to enioy any true ease or rest, or ioy,
 and how can comfort dwell, where euill angells haue their throne? the powers of hell preuaile in euery child of disobedience: and the ioyes of the holy Ghost are altogether restrained from them, neither can there arise any true consolation from outward things, for in their owne iudgments most an end they are at a want of contentment, they are daily fretted with the interruptions befall them: and vanity and vexation of spirit, are the inseparable companions of earthly things, or if they were not, what were the possession of all things, if they be set before the thoughts of death or Gods wrath,Note. or the last iudgment, or hell? Imagine a man driuen out of the light by diuils, where he should see nothing but his tormentors, and that he were made to stand vpon snares or grennes with iron teeth ready to strike vp and grind him to peeces, and that he had gall powred downe to his bellie, and an instrument raking in his bowels, and the paines of a trauiling woman vpon him, and an hideous noyse of horror in his eares, and a great gyant with a speare, running vpon his necke, and a flame burning vpon him round about, do you imagine this man could be solaced in this destresse, with bringing him strawes or trifles to play withall? Alas, alas, this is the estate of euery wicked mans if he had eyes to see what belongs vnto him, and what is his danger, as these places shew, whence these comparisons are taken, Iob 18.18.7.8. and 20.24.15. and 15.20.21.26.30. certainely heauen and earth shall passe away before one iote of these miseries shall be remoued out of the way so as they should not fall vpon wicked men being impenitent: and alas what then can outward things doe vnto them? Oh then shall not men be warned and awaken, and stand vp from the dead that Christ may giue them light? and shall not our bowels turne within vs, to thinke of this comfortles distresse of so many thousand soules? And will the rebellious world still rise vp against the messengers of God, that giue them warning of their miseries? shall he still be made to sinne in the word, and be taken in a snare, that reproueth in the gate? Oh the vnexpressible senselesnesse and slumber that possesseth the hearts of some men! But I come to the second doctrine.
This is a maine end of the Gospell to bring men to true consolation and  contentment. The Gospell brings ioy, because it brings knowledge,The Gospell brings a man the true consolation. which refresheth the minde, as the light doth our senses, it comforts as it reviues Gods fauour in Christ: how can it be but comfort, when it giues the Spirit, which is the Comforter: and it is a daily refreshing against the guilt of sinne and the afflictions of life, it shewes mortalitie and the hope of glory to come; it discouers the mines of treasure that are in Gods promises, and it shewes vs also our right in earthly things, as it is conferred vpon vs in Christ.
The vse is first for confutation,Vses. it doth not make men desperate and melancholie: but contrariwise it easeth and solaceth the hearts of men.
2. All that are in any distresse either inward or outward, may here be directed whither to goe for hearts ease and comfort, viz. to the word, and though any vse of the word in sinceritie hath much life, yet is the power of the word most auaileable in the sincere preaching of it. In the 19. Psalme, this is one euident fruit of the word, that it reioyceth the heart: Now if wee seriously consider the praises of the word in that place wee shall perceiue not only that this truth is maintained, but many obiections are answered too:The solace that comes by the word, with the answers to diuers obiections Psal. 19. only this we must know, that where the word hath this effect, it must first conuert vs to God, for to the vnregenerate minde, it doth not so worke: but where mens hearts are turned to God, it is perfect, it is of excellent and exquisite vse, it is good for all occasions, it will direct in all our wayes, and comfort in all distresses.
Ob. But may a man trust vpon it, if he subiect himselfe to the word, and waite vpon God in it, that he shall be directed and comforted?

Sol. Yes, for the testimonies of God are sure, they neuer faile.
Ob. But might one say, it may be great learned men might finde so much good by it, but alas I am vnlearned and simple. Sol. It makes the simple wise. The word can help the vnlearned aswell as the learned.
Ob. But can it be that the word should fit my turne, to serue for my particular occasion, of need, of direction and comfort? Sol. Yes, the statutes of the Lord are right, and out of the fitnes they haue to our estates, they greatly reioyce the heart.
Ob. But I am much troubled with euill thoughts, and continuall infirmities, and weaknesses, besides many outward faults. Sol. The word of the Lord is pure, it is so by the effect, it will make thee pure, it will purge out those euills, and greately help thee against these corruptions, that molest, and trouble, and annoy thee.
Ob. But I cannot tell how to do to order my course for hereafter, if I were now comforted. Sol. It giues light to the eyes: it will teach vs what to doe.
Ob. But yet there are many euills that I am by nature so addicted to, or by custom so intangled in, that I feare God will neuer take any delight in me etc. Sol. The feare of the Lord is cleane: That word of God which tells vs how to feare God, is cleane by effect, it will pull downe and master any sinne, and cleanse our hearts and liues of it.
Ob. But how may I know it will worke this in me, though others haue found it so: because I know not how I shall perseuere and hold out?
Sol. The feare of God endures for euer, The word I say which workes in vs the true feare of God, will neuer cease to be effectuall, and there is as much force in it now, as euer was in it. No time can euer weare out the efficacie of Gods word in the hearts of such as feare God. If it haue wrought the true feare of God in thee, thou maiest be assured thou hast right to the directions and comforts conteyned in it, and it will still be of force to thee, if thou waite vpon God in the true vse of it.
Ob. But I see many are otherwise minded, and some teach otherwise.
Sol. Yet the iudgments of the Lord are true: Gods word must and will stand howsoeuer we are minded.
Ob. But may a man find help against any sinne, from the word, and direction in all things? Sol, Yes, for Gods iudgments are righteous altogether. They are exactly sufficient, to make a man a godly man, compleat in all his wayes, and to order him in all that iustice he should performe, either towards God or man.
Ob. But might not the hearts of men be delighted with other things, and mans estates made happie with other treasures? Sol. No, it is more to bee desired (the word is) then fine gold, yea then much fine gold, sweeter also then hony and the hony-combe.
Ob. But if I should deuote my selfe thus to the word, the world would account me a very foole, and that I would grow to strange simplenesse. Sol. By them is thy seruant made circumspect. Nothing teacheth men true discretion, but Gods word: and if many hearers bee not circumspect, tis either because they attend not to the word, or because they are not Gods seruants.
Ob. But what profit will come of all this? Sol. In the sound practise of the directions of the word there is great reward.
Thirdly, this may comfort Gods seruants in their choice: they haue chosen the better part, in that they haue set their hearts vpon the word, howsoeuer the world thinke of them.
Fourthly, wee may heere see the state of scorners and contemners of the word, implyed: let them mocke on, but this they shall haue, they shall neuer taste of the ioyes of God.

Fiftly, Gods seruants should bee admonished from hence, to expresse the power of the word in their carriages, that the world might see and know there is wonderfull comfort and contentment in following the Word.
Lastly, this may serue for the humiliation of all such as haue long heard the Gospell, and yet haue not gotten any sound contentment.
Now that men may not bee mistaken, it will not be amisse to discouer the true causes of this want of contentment in many that enioy the Gospell.Causes vvhy many find no more comfort in the Word. It is true that the proper effect of the Gospell is to comfort: but it is true also, that it comforts only Gods seruantsEsay 65.15.. Againe, if men haue not mourned for their sinnes, no wonder though they bee not comfortedMatth. 5.4. Esay 61.1.2.3.. Besides, many doe not lay vp the word in their hearts, and then how can it comfort their hearts? We must be a people in whose heart is Gods lawEsay 15.7., if we would feele this inward ioy and consolation. Many also are ensnared with grosse sinne, whereas only the righteous sing and reioycePro. 29.6.. Many want assurance, and therfore no wonder though they reioyce not with those vnspeakable ioyes, which are companions of faith and the loue of Christ only1 Pet. 1.8.9.. Besides, many haue but little ioy, because they vse but little praying: we must pray much if we haue our ioy fullIoh. 16.14.. Further, some through vnbeleefe resist comfortPsal. 77.3..
There are seuen inconueniences of an vncomfortable heart. 1.Seuen inconueniences of an vncomfortable heart. It is exceeding liable to temptations. 2. It is vnder the raigne of continuall vnthankfulnesse. 3. It is easily perplexed with euery crosse; and turned out of frame and quiet. 4. It is a daily let to the efficacie of all Gods ordinances. 5. It is accompanied with strange infirmities, in doing good duties. 6. It is vsually barren in the very disposition to doe good. 7. It prouokes God to anger, Deut. 28.47.

Being knit together in loue.]

Loue is in God, in Christ, in Angels, in Saints glorified,Difference of loue. in godly men conuerted, and in carnall men also. In the Trinitie it is infinite, in Christ without measure, in Angels and men glorified perfect, but measured, in godly men on earth vnperfect, but holy; in carnall men vnholy, yet naturall; in the other creatures without reason by instinct.
Tis a religious and holy loue amongst the members of Christ is here meant.
The author and fountaine of this loue is God, 2 Cor. 13.11.The Author, Bond, Seat, Effects, The bond internall is the spirit, externall is the Gospell: the subiect or seat of it is the heart, yet not euery heart, but a pure heart, 1 Tim. 1.5, The effects are a heauenly comfort in the Gospell, with all the fruits of it.
If thou as^e whom thou must especially loue; I answer, the Saints, that is,Objects, such as thou seest to striue after holinesse of life, making conscience of their wayes. These and all these are to be loued.
Neither will bare affection to them serue,Properties of loue. but thou must seeke to haue fellowship with them in the Gospell, Phil. 1.5. and 2, 1. If thy loue to Gods children be right, 1. it is diligent1 Thess. 1.3., 2. in things indifferent it doth not willingly offendRom. 14.15. Gal. 5 13., 3. it will couer a multitude of sinnes1 Pet. 4.8., and it will forgiue great offences vpon repentance2 Cor. 2.7.8., 4. it is compassionate and liberall1 Joh. 3.17. 2 Cor. 8.24. Rules for preseruing loue., lastly, it hath the properties mentioned 1 Cor. 13.4.5.6.7.
That this holy and religious loue might be preserued amongst Christians, diuers rules must be obserued. 1. Men must not so much respect their owne earthly thingsPhil. 2.4.. 2. Men should labour with all meeknesse for vnion in iudgement, without all contention and vaine gloriePhil. 2.2.3.. 3. Men must take heede of reioycing in the euils one of another1 Cor. 13.. 4. Men must get more patience to suffer longer, and vpon more occasion1 Cor. 13.. 5. Wee should with all possible care endeuour to encrease in knowledge, and sense of Gods loue, for that enflames to the loue one of anotherPhil. 1.9.. 6. We must studie to be quiet, and meddle with our owne businesse1 Thess. 4.11.. Lastly, wee must much and often thinke of our liuing together in heauen, for the hope of heauen and the loue of the Saints are companions.

The restraint of this loue.Yet that wee may not mistake, there are diuers sorts of people with whom we may not hold open and professed loue, and vnion, and amity, and societie. 1. With such as are open enemies to the truth, by Infidelity or Idolatrie1 Cor. 6.. 2. With men that liue in notorious wickednesse and prophanenesse, such as are Atheists, swearers, drunkards, adultererers, vsurers, etc.Psal. 26.5.6. Ephes. 5.6. Phil. 3.18. 3. With scandalous brethren, that make shewes of religion, and yet are lewd in conuersation1 Cor. 5.. 4. With corrupt teachers and seducers, that would draw men from the sinceritie that is in Christ, and speake euill of the way of righteousnessePhil. 3.2.. 5, With those members of the Synagogue of Satan, whose tongues are set on fire with the fire of hell, in respect of slandering and disgracing such as truely feare GodReuel. 2.9.. 6. With such professors of religion that liue idly, and in that respect walke inordinately, and will not be reclaimed, but in that respect liue offensiuely2 Thess. 3.6.. 7. With such as openly refuse to obey the sayings and censures of Gods seruants2 Thess. 3.14.15.16..
As the knitting together of Gods people is wonderfull comfortable, and a gracious effect of the Gospell: so to disturbe the loue and vnity of the Church and people of God, is most execrable and abominable. It is a greeuous sinne to disquiet and disioyne Gods seruants. Now if we obserue in our owne times who they are that are that are disturbers of the Church and vnitie amongst true Christians,Foure sorts of disturbers of the Church. wee shall finde foure sorts of men may bee iustly taxed with this greeuous fault. 1. Papists and halfe-Papists, these in all places labour to hinder the progresse of the Gospell, and the vnitie of the Church: 2. Ambitious temporizers: Diotrephes had his hand deepe in this sinne. Too many there are that scarce know any readier way to couer their damned Simoniacall practises, and to aduance their owne aspiring ends, then to blaze and enlarge, and with bitter exaspirations to proclaime that heauie rent and dissent of opinion, that hath diuided the sonnes of the same mother. 3. Men of flagitious and wicked life: for wicked men disturbe Gods Church, both by their sinnes vexing the righteous, and by their rayling opposing the truth, and cause God by his iudgement to afflict his owne Israel. 4. Sectaries and humorous persons, that out of their hellish pride, despise all the assemblies of Gods people, because they fauour not the fantasticall proiects. These many of them diuide from vs both in Church and habitation.
Thus of the affection it selfe. But I must more specially yet consider of the manner in the word knit together.
(...).Knit together.] The originall word, when it is taken properly, it signifies to set in a frame of building, but vsually it is taken in the new Testament in a b^rrowed sense: sometimes it is to demonstrate a thing by euident testimonieAct. 9.22., sometimes to assureAct. 16.10., sometimes to instruct1 Cor. 2.16., but most frequently to knit together as the members are knit in a bodieEphes. 4.16.; and so it may well be taken heere: and so wee are considered as ioyned together in the mysticall bodie of Christ. And wee may hence obserue, 1. That our vnion one with another must be sanctified in one head; if we be not ioyned to Christ, we doe in vaine pleade our loue to men. 2. Our affections must carrie vs to a thirst and constant desire to procure the good of the bodie; the bodie of Christ must bee dearer to vs then our particular good. 3. That wee must respect all that feare God, and not contemne the meanest Christian. We are knit to the whole bodie, and not to some one member onely.
Thus of the second reason, viz. from the effect of the Gospell.

And vnto all riches of the full assurance of vnderstanding.]

The third and last reason is taken from the adiuncts of the Gospell, which doe more and more appeare by the power of it, in the paines of Gods faithfull seruants: and thefe are three; 1. certaintie, 2. sublimitie, 3. perfection. The first is in these words.

The Gospell is certaine two wayes: 1. In it selfe, 2.The Gospell is certaine two waies. in the infallibility and stedfastnesse of the perswasion of the Elect. In it selfe the Apostle had good reason to say so; for it was no new deuice lately broached, but long before from the beginning propounded to Gods seruants, and confirmed in all ages by the Prophets, etc. But in this place it is considered in the certainty of the perswasion of the godly, by faith laying hold vpon it and beleeuing it. This he expresseth in the word full assurance or plerophorie.A twofold fulnesse. The fulnesse of a Christian is either generall or speciall: the generall is that fulnesse which euerie member hath in Christ their head, and by influence from him. The speciall is that fulnesse wherin some members excell. Thus some are full of the spiritEphes. 5.18., of loue1 Thess. 3.12., of ioyRom. 15.13. 2 Cor. 7.4., some in obedience and good workesActs 9.36. Phil. 1.11. Reuel. 3.1. 2 Cor. 10.6., some in faith and knowledge. So Rom. 15.14. So heere.
Quest. But is full assurance essentiall vnto true faith? Answ. Some seeme to say so: but I see no reason so to thinke. And experience shewes vs many worthie in the praises of the Gospell, and yet haue not gotten full assurance. Full assurance is in the greatest faith, but faith may be true in the least measure, though it be not so confirmed: it is essentiall to a strong faith, not to a litle faith.
Quest. May this plerophorie or full assurance be had in this life? Answ.Full assurance may be had. It may without all doubt, as these Scriptures euidently proue, 1 Thessal. 1.5. Heb. 6.11. and 10.22. Rom. 4.21.
Quest. But are we bound to labour for this full assurance? Answ. We are,It must bee sought. Heb. 10. he saith, let vs draw neere in the full assurance of faithHeb. 10.22.: and in the sixth chapter they are exhorted to shew their diligence vnto the full assurance of hope to the endHeb. 6.12.. We make no question but we ought to make sure our houses and lands, etc. and shall life and happinesse lie vnassured?
There are 7. things wherein this assurance hath been imployed. 1.Seuen things of which we should be assured. There is a full assurance of the things done by Christ, mentioned Luk. 1.1. 2. There is a full assurance required in the knowledge of our libertie in things indifferentm. 3. There is a full assurance requisite vnto the perswasion of the truth of their ministeries to whom we subiect our soules, as the originall word imports, 2 Tim. 4.5.17. 4. We must be fully assured of the doctrine of the Religion that we professe. 5. There is a full assurance of the hope of a better lifeHeb. 6.12.. 6. There is a full assurance sometimes in speciall and particular persons, as that to Abraham about his sonne, Rom. 4.21. Lastly, there is a full assurance of faith in Gods fauour, vpon the warrant of Gods word and spirit. This is chiefly to be laboured for.
Now there are seuen properties or signes of a plerophorie or full assurance of faith. 1. It will receiue the word in affliction with much ioy1 Thess. 1.6.. 2.Seuen signes of full assurance. It will not bee carried about with every winde of doctrineEphes. 4.14.. 3. It is industrious and laborious in the duties of loue to Gods childrenHeb. 6.11.12. 4. It is vnrebukeable and full of innocencie and integritie of life: it cannot possibly stand with any presumptuous sinneHeb. 10.22.23.. 5. It will giue glorie to God against all sense and reasonRom. 4.20.. 6. It mortifies and extinguisheth all headstrong affectionsEsay 11.7.9.. 7. It is carried with full sailes vnto holy duties (for so the word signifies) and is fruitfull in good workes. 8. It is able to admonishRom. 15.14. What we must doe to get full assurance..
If wee would obtaine this plerophorie, wee must bee much in hearing and prayer, for they doe both exceedingly settle faith: especially wee must attend much vnto the promises of God, and the testimony of the spirit of adoption: and we must get calme and quiet affections, we must grow in grace, and striue to be strengthened in the inner man. But especially we must begge it often of God by prayer, and striue against hardnesse of heart, and vnbeleefe, carefully discerning and reiecting the obiections of Sathan and the flesh, consulting daily with such as haue the ouersight of our soules.



Vse.The consideration hereof may both confute the Papists, that plead so earnestly against the assurance of faith, and it may serue also to scourge the wanton distempers of carnall Protestants, that against a principle of their owne Religion, will so commonly disgrace the assurance of faith, by saying men cannot be so certaine of their owne saluation. And it may excite all that feare God to labour after it, and the rather considering the worth of it, as the word riches of full assurance imports.
Riches of full assurance.] There are two sorts of rich men: there is a worldly rich man,Wherein our spirituall riches lie. and a spirituall rich man. Now our spirituall riches lie, 1. in the word of Christ dwelling in vsCol. 3.16., 2. in the spirit of ChristTit. 3.6., 3. in works of mercy and liberalityEphes. 2.4. 2 Cor. 8.1. and 9.11., 4. in sufferings and patience, 5. in praiersRom. 10.11., 6. in good works1 Tim. 6.18., 7. in vtterance and all holy knowledge1 Cor. 1.5.; lastly, it lies in our faithIam. 2.5.: and so the more full assurance we haue, the more rich we are. Now this in generall may informe how to conceiue of rich men, and who are to bee accounted indeede great rich men; and it may lesson worldly rich men not to swell in the thoughts of their greatnes, but rather reioyce that God hath made them low: and withall it should teach them to thinke more highly of poore Christians, that haue the true grace of Christ, whom God hath enriched with faith and holy graces of his spirit.
Assurance is riches in many respects.Worthily is full assurance of faith called riches, for it doth all that riches can doe vnto men. It comforts the heart, it defends from dangers, much better then outward riches can, for the iust liue by their faith. It gaines the godly more true reputation, then houses, or land, or money could doe. It abounds more to spirituall mercy and well-doing with more sufficiency then outward riches can, and it buyes for the soule all necessaries: it is vnto Gods seruants according to their faith, and vnto faith all things are possible: yea, it doth that that all the riches in the world cannot do, for it will settle a mans heart against all earthly mutations, yea it will make a man stand vndaunted against the rage of tyrants, yea of death it selfe; yea in some sense it will fence a man against the weapons of God himselfe: though God kill Iob in the battell, yet he will not let goe his hold, but hee will still trust in him, yea the Lord is pleased many times to yeeld the victorie to the wrestlings of faith, and accounts it no disparagement to bee ouercome of the faith of his seruants, and to let them binde his hands, that he should not doe, what otherwise he might and would haue done: how can it be but great riches, when it brings a man the assured pardon of all his offences? and how doth it establish the heart of a man in his religion, more then ten thousand arguments or volumes of controuersies?
Thus of the adiunct certainty; the sublimity of the Gospell followes.

To the acknowledgement of the mysterie of God, euen the Father and of Christ]

The Gospell is a diuine mysterie, both for the admirable depth of it, for it is a secret only God can reueale, and for the excellency of the subiect it entreats of, which is God the Father and Christ.
How the Gospell is a mysterie, and to whom, hath been shewed in the former chapter: onely let vs from the repetition of it here, be confirmed in this, neuer to trust the iudgement of carnall persons, in matters of godlinesse and saluation, for they pronounce of things they neuer effectually vnderstand, they cannot perceiue the things of God; and withall we should be excited to a daily care of faith, for reason will not reach heere.
Further we may here obserue, That when the Lord doth reueale this mysterie vnto vs, we must not only beleeue it, but we must acknowledge it, euen by an outward profession of our faith in Christ, and our consecration of our selues, to the worship and knowledge of God. The world wonderfull hardly brooks acknowledgement: most men aske what needs this profession? they will not vnderstand that we must beare about, and hold out the light of the
 truth receiued, labouring to winne glorie to God by the power of confession and obedience.
Of God euen the Father and of Christ.] Diuers things may bee from these words particularly obserued.
1. We may see here the glorie of the Gospell, and the studies of Christians, they haue the onely excellent subiect in the world: other sciences consider of the creature, but Theologie of the Creator.
2. Heere is a plaine proofe of the diuine nature of Christ, for God is sayd to be the Father of Christ.
3. From coherence wee may know, that as men grow in faith and loue, so they will be more and more settled in the doctrine of the persons of the Trinitie, tis such a mysterie as is reuealed by degrees, as holinesse and other sauing knowledges increase in vs.
4. That wee neuer rightly know God till we know Christ, Matth. 11.27. 1 Ioh. 2.23.
5. Wee may hence obserue the miserie of all vnregenerate men, they neither know God nor Christ aright.
6. That howsoeuer we be ignorant in many other knowledges and that of matters of religion too, yet it is a glorious riches to know God to be our father in Christ, and to be fully assured of Gods loue in Christ.



VERS. 3. In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdome and knowledge.

IN whom] In quo, is referred either to Christ or the Gospell, it is true either way: or rather both are conioyned together in one sense; In Christ who is the subiect of the Gospell, is all treasures etc, or in the Gospell as it entreats of Christ, is all treasures etc, so that these words containe a third adiunct of the Gospell, and that is singular perfection of wisdome.
Note heere with what feeling the Apostle speakes, when he fals vpon the mention of Christ, and the Gospell: hee abounds in powerfull affections and admirations of these things, which may wonderfully abase and humble vs, for our barrennes both in thoughts, and affections, and words, when we haue to deale with the things that belong to the kingdome of God.
Againe, if there bee any such treasures in Christ and the Gospell, wee may conclude it is not in vaine to deuote our selues to the knowledge of Christ in the Gospell, though it cost vs neuer so much pains, or care, or cost, and though we be neuer so much opposed by the flesh and the world.
Further, wee neede not doubt but that all things needfull to saluation and happinesse, are contained in the word, heere are treasures of wisdome and knowledge, wee neede no traditions nor inuentions of men, nor decrees of Popes etc.
The vbiquitaries abuse this place,Answer to the vbiquitaries. to prooue a reall communication of the properties of the diuine nature to the humane. Now for answer to their cauill, diuers things may be propounded.
1. If the words bee vnderstood of the Gospell, then their conceit wholly fals to the ground. 2. If they bee vnderstood of Christ, yet there is no necessitie to vnderstand them, as these treasures are in Christ himselfe only, but as they are in his members by communication. 3. If as it is in him, yet it is not necessarie to vnderstand it of all knowledge in generall, but of that which is needfull for the saluation of the Elect. 4. If of all knowledge, yet the Apostle saith not that it is in the soule of Christ, but in Christ. 5. If in the soule, what wisdome? not increate and infinite, but created wisdome.
Thus in generall.
In whom] Wisdome and knowledge are in Christ, in Angels, in Men, but
 indifferently:The difference of knowledge in Christ and Angels and men. in Christ, by vnion; in Angels, by vision; in men, by reuelation. There are diuers gifts conferred vpon the humane nature of Christ, the gift of personall vnion, the gift of office of mediator, and head of the Church, the gift of adoration, with his diuine nature, and the gifts they call habituall, which aboue the measure of men or angels are conferred vpon him.
Which may comfort vs against all our defects in our selues, for though we haue so many wants, yet wee haue an head in whom wee haue all fulnesse, and it should bee our course to make vse of this doctrine, by stirring vp our selues daily to lay holde vpon Christ for the supply of our wants out of the riches of his grace.
Are hidden] The admirable excellencies of wisdome and knowledge in Christ are sayd to be hidden, 1. In respect of our apprehensions, because we can neuer reach to the depth of them, 2. In respect of the crosse, that followed Christ and his members: for the crosse like a vaile obscured the glorie of Christs perfections, both in himselfe, and the communication of his gifts to his members.
And may not this teach vs singlenes of heart, and humility, euen more to seeke to bee good then to seeme to be so? Christ was contented his treasures should bee hidden, and shall wee fret ourselues when our drops of grace are not admired? shall it not be enough to vs that we shall appeare in glory, when his glorie shall be reuealed?
All treasures] Wisdome and knowledge in Christ is called treasures, not for the quantitie only, but for the worth also, for grace and knowledge are the best treasures.
Which may shew the miserie of all wicked persons, for in as much as they are not of Christ, they are destitute of the treasures of God: and contrariwise, they are most happy that haue Christ, for in him they find all true treasure and riches, he ca^not be poore that hath Christ, nor can he be rich that wa^ts Christ
Quest. But what is the cause that so many Christians want treasures, and yet professe Christ?
Answ. Either they want workmen, to digge for the mine, through want of Preachers: or else they digge for this treasure in a wrong earth, by seeking it, but not in the Scriptures: or else men know not the mine, when they finde it: or else they let the earth fall vpon their worke, after they haue begun, through negligence in sleightly working in their entrance.
Of knowledge and wisdome.] The different termes may note but the same knowledge in Christ, but for our capacities varied: It is true that there is in Christ a most admirable perfection, both of the knowledge of contemplation, and of the wisdome and discretion of working and practise, and thus it was in him, in his owne obedience, and is still by participation to his members to make them wise and discreet, as well as full of vnderstanding and iudgement: sure it is that Christ would be rich vnto vs, in the gift of holy discretion, aswell as in the gift of holy vnderstanding, if wee would seeke it of him, for hee is made vnto vs of God wisdome1 Cor. 1.30., neither can true wisdome bee found in any men vnder the sunne, that haue not the true grace of Christ, neither can any Christian be found without the grounds of heauenly wisdome, such wisdome I meane as none of the wisest men in the world could euer attaine, for though it bee true, that there may bee and are many deficiencies in such as otherwise truely feare God, yet if the best wisdome be enquired after, the meanest and simplest Christian doth exceed the greatest and exactest politician, or disputer of this world. For what wisdome can it be for a man to haue excelling skill to know the secrets of nature, or the order of ciuill affaires, or the wayes to aduance his own outward estate, and yet know no certaine and safe way how to saue his owne soule?




VERS. 4. And this I say lest any should beguile you with inticing words.

WHereas the Colossians might aske, why the Apostle is so large in vrging them to constancie, he shewes in this verse, that it is to preuent the inticements of seducers.
1. It is the dutie of euery Minister to labour by all possible meanes, to preserue his people, that they be not beguiled: tis not enough to teach them true doctrine, but they must be watchfull, that neither Sathan nor euill men infect and corrupt them.
2. It is the vsuall practise of the deuill, when the word hath wrought with any power in any place, to assay by all meanes, to draw away and deceiue the mindes of the people: let men looke to themselues, and not liue securely* for certainly the deuill will attempt them with all cunning and fraud.
3. If these words be compared with the Apostles exhortation in the 23. verse, of the former chapter, it will appeare manifestly, that one reason why many are deceiued, is there vnsetlednes, in the doctrine of faith and hope: if they had been established in their assurance of Gods fauour in Christ, and the hope brought by the Gospell, they could not haue been so deceiued, and beguiled, or not so easily.
4. The way by which men are in points of religion deceiued,(...) What Pithanalogie is. is not by apparant falshoods, but by probabilities of truth: the Apostle calls them paralogismes of pithanologie. Pithanalogie, which the Apostle condemns is a speech fitted of purpose, by the abuse of Rhetoricke, to intice and by tickling the affections of men, to please and seduce; and heerein properly lyes the abuses of Logick or Rhetorick in matters of Diuinitie, when out of affection, and some subtle purpose to deceiue, vaine and false arguments are varnished and coloured ouer, and made probable to the mindes of the simple* yea though the matter taught be sometimes truth, yet many mindes are beguiled, from the power and profit of it, by placing their respects and affections, vpon the wisedome of the words and the affected artificiall frame: otherwise there is singular vse both of Logicke and Rhetoricke, when they are applied to set out the wisedome of God in his word, vpholding the hidden depths of the power of the word of God: the very preaching of the Gospell is exceeding effectuall, when without affectation, men vse their arte, to expresse the natiue force and life of the words of the holy Ghost in scripture: but the chiefe thing in generall, is for vs hence to learne, that heresie and error, was neuer so vnclothed, but it was presented to the world with greate colours and probabilities; many simple people wonder that Papists or Brownists should be able to say so much for their idolatrie or schisme: but we must know, that any heretikes that euer were, haue brought greate probabilities for there heresies as well as they. The deuill were wonderfull simple, if he should thinke, to bewitch men so far, as to beleeue with any confidence, things that had manifest apparance of falshood, that cannot be. Thus in generall.
Now in particular, concerning the corrupting or deceiuing of the soules of men, wee may consider three things. 1. The miserabel estate of the soule, that is deceiued, or beguiled, or corrupted. 2 How the soule is corrupted. 3. The meanes to preuent it.
For the first, looke what the carcase is when it is putrified, such is the soule when it is corrupted, it is spiritually loath some, and wonderfully vnpleasing vnto God, and cast out of his sight: and the more is the miserie of such soules, because to pleade th^t they were deceiued, will not serue turne; wee may deceiue or be deceiued, but God will not be mocked.
For the second, if we aske by whome or how the soule is deceiued or corrupted?
 It is to be answered generally, wee must take notice of it to beware: the two greate deceiuers,Who are deceiuers. are the deuill and Antichrist2 Cor. 11.3. 2 Thess. 2.. It is true that by the malice of Sathan, and frowardnesse of wicked men, Gods faithfull seruants are euerie where called deceiuers2 Cor. 6.. They that most labour to preserue mens soules from corrupting, are most charged with seducing; but these are so called and are not.
The most ordinarie deceiuers, are 1. carnall friends, 2. the Profits and pleasures of life, 3. euill companie, this corrupts like leauen, 4. carnall reason, 5. sinneHeb. 3.13., 6. but especially corrupt and false teachersIer. 23.14. Ezech. 13.10. Mich. 3.5. Gal. 5.9. 3. Rules to preuent beguiling..
Thirdly, if we would not be beguilde and deceiued, we must looke to three things, 1. we must get a stedfast faith in Iesus Christ, plerophorie or full assurance of Gods fauour is a wonderfull preseruatiue against corruption of doctrine or life. 2. we must constantly cleaue to the meanes, vnto which God hath giuen testemonie by the power of his presence, and blessing; wee should get vnder the shelter of a powerfull ministerie, and this will be a rocke of defence. 3. we must preserue vprightnes of life, and our care of innocencie in what we know to be required: contrariwise, so long as we are vnsetled, and want assurance, especially if we liue not vnder the power of the word, we are in continuall danger to be drawne away: and so it is with vs too, if wee fall vnto the loue of any sinne, of knowledge; for corruption of life is many times scourged with corruption of doctrine and opinions.
But if we would haue more aboundant caution for our preseruation, then I will follow the similitude of beguiling amongst men, from whence by comparison, we may learne many things, for our caucion and observation.
Men that would thriue in their estates, and would not be beguiled in the world or wronged, obserue most an end, these rules. 1. They will buy such things as are durable, not toyes or trifles: so should we, we should set our hearts vpon eternall things, and not minde earthly things, which will last but for a short time, and when death comes, if we trust vpon earthly things, wee shall finde our selues deceiued. 2. They will know their commodities themselues that they sell or buy: so should we both for the sinnes wee would part with, and the opinions, or duties, we would purchase. 3. They will know the persons, with whome they deale: so should wee try the spirits. 4. They will haue all the securitie may be had: so should we see all warranted by the scriptures, for other securitie we cannot haue put in that is sufficient if the diuell or the world or corrupt teachers, tempt and intice vs, wee must put them to it, to put vs in securitie from the scriptures, which because they cannot doe, we must wisely reiect them. 5. Men that deale for much, are glad to seeke the protection of some greate men: so should we seeke the protection of the great God. 6. If men doubt in any thing about their estate, they will presently consult with their friends, and in difficult cases they will haue opinions of Lawyers too: so should we doe if we would haue our states safe, wee must propound our doubts one to a nother, especially to our Teachers, that they may resolue vs out of the word of God.



VERS. 5. For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, reioycing and beholding your order, and the stedfastnes of youre faith in Christ.

THese words depend vpon the former, as the answer of two obiections; First, they might say, How doth he know our estates? to which he answers in the first words, That though it were true, that he were absent, in respect of the flesh, yet it was also true, that he was present in the spirit, both in that his affection, carried him to a daily thought of them, and so to a willinges vpon all
 occasions to take notice of their estate: and besides, as some thinke, hee was acquainted with their estate extraordinarily, by reuelation of the spirit. And thus also he secretly giues them notice to looke to their wayes: for hee takes notice of all that passed amongst them. How carefull should we be in all our courses, as well as they? For we haue the spirit of God in vs, and the people of God round about vs. Heere also Ministers may take notice of their duties: their spirits should cleaue to their people, and their daily thoughts and cares should runne vpon them, they should still obserue them, and watch ouer them in the Lord.
Ob. 2. But might some one say, Is it charitie in the Apostle, being thus absent, to entertaine surmizes and hard thoughts of vs, as if wee were falling away, etc. Now to this he answers, that though he wrote this to exhort them and to warne them, yet he did greatly reioyce to know so much as hee did of their order of life, and stedfastnesse of faith. Many are so diseased, that they thinke, if a man reprooue them or admonish them, that then hee hates them altogether, and likes nothing in them: but the Apostle to preuent that, acknowledgeth the praise of their life and faith. A holy minde can reioyce in the good things of those he warneth or reprooueth.
Your order] Order hath originall in God, he is the God of order1 Cor. 14.33., as all disorder and confusion is of the Diuell. Order is that wonderfully commends whatsoeuer it is in. There is a kinde of seede of order sowen in the creatures. This order in man is their eutaxie or well disposing of themselues.
The Apostle might commend their order generally, both in relation to the common-wealth, and to the Church, and in their families, as also in their particular conuersation.
That there might be order in Common-wealths,Of order in the common-vvealth. God hath set man in authoritie, (for by him Kings raigne and haue their powerProu. 8. Rom. 13.) and hath communicated a part of the honour of his owne diuine lawes to their ciuill lawes, viz. That they should binde mens consciences so farre as they are not disagreeing from his word. Besides, hee hath recorded threatnings against the disobedient, and acknowledgeth Magistrates to beare his image, to be as it were Gods by representation, and hee guides them by his spirit for the time, many times qualifying them with gifts, and guiding their mouthes in iudgement, (for a diuine sentence is in the mouth of a King) yea hee himselfe drew a plat-forme of rules for Common-weales, to giue them a taste of gouernment.
Now that men may attaine to this Eutaxie and good order in Common-weales, they must reade the law of God, and let that bee a generall guide to them, and they must propound sanctitie as well as felicitie, as the end of their gouernment; and in calling to office, they must be carefull not to set the feet where the head should be, but to chuse men that feare God and hate couetousnesse, and are men of courage. The feare of God and courage is wonderfully wanting in all sorts of Magistrates. And as for courage, in respect of the people, what are they the better if they haue a good man, that will doe no good, then if they had euill men, that would doe no euill? Yet in truth Magistrates, whether good or euill men, doe much euill by suffering euill to be vnpunished. But to returne to the point, Magistrates that would preserue order, must giue good example themselues, and mend the disorders of their one households, and bring such a sympathie and loue of the people, as they should both preserue their authoritie, and yet remember that they rule their brethren. And in their gouernment they cannot obserue order, vnlesse they punish vice as well as command or prouide for vertue and wealth. Besides, they must take away the persons or places that are occasions of disorder, and they must charge and remunerate as well as punish. Finally, the people out of the obligation of conscience must striue to liue in order, with reuerence and feare
 yeelding ready obedience and furtherance to those that are placed in authority ouer them.
Order in the Church.There is order also in the Church: and thus there is order in doctrine, for milke must be propounded before strong meat, or with sufficient reference to the parties to be taught. There is order also to be obserued in the time, places, and manner of celebration of Gods worship. There is order also to be respected in the vse of things ecclesiastically indifferent. There is order in the subordination of persons, in the ministery, some to rule, some to teach, some to exhort, some to distribute. There is order also to be obserued in the discipline of the Church, proceeding by degrees with offenders, so long as they are cureable.
Order in the family.Neither may our families be without order; order I say, not only in the duties that concerne the maintenance of the familie, but also in the exercises that concerne religion and the seruice of God in the familie. In families there must be a care also of reformation: especially that openly prophane persons, only for temporall aduantage, bee not retained or admitted there. In the familie also there must bee a daily exercise of patience, humilitie, knowledge, and all other Christian graces, that concerne mutuall edification. What should I say? There is a mutuall relation in all the members of the familie one to another, and the discharge of their seuerall duties one to another is charged with a daily care of order.
But I thinke the Apostle commends the order of holy life vnto which euery Christian is bound. It is certaine we can neuer soundly proceed in godlinesse without a care of a settled frame and order of liuing. Wee may not liue at a venture in religion. Tis not enough to doe good now or then, by flashes. There is an order in holy conuersation. We must walke by ruleGal. 6.16.. There is an holy disposing of our waies requiredPsal. 50. vlt.. It is required of vs that we should ponder the pathes of our feetPro. 4.26.. Wee must order our affaires with discretionPsal. 112.5.. This is called the way of prudence or vnderstanding. There is a guiding of our feet vnto the wayes of peaceLuke 1.79.. Tis a wonderfull curse to be left to our securitie to walke in darke and vncertaine wayes: and contrariwise the vision of the saluation of God is promised to such as dispose of their wayes arightPsal. 51. vlt.. And to bee carefull of an orderly course of life, is to keepe our soulesPro. 19.16., and peace shall be vnto such. But alas, men haue corrupted their wayes, and their vnderstandings are darkned, and they are strangers from the life of God: neither will men cease from their rebellious wayes. The ciuillest men walke after the way of their owne hearts, yea the most men hate those that are right in their wayes, and are like Dan, that would bite the heeles of such as endeuour to walke in sincerity. Some hypocrites there are that will know the way of the Lord, and aske of him the ordinance of iustice, as if they would bee carefull to please God; but alas they were neuer washed from their olde sinnes, and they quickly returne with the dogge to their vomit, and corrupt their waies, being of purpose set on by the Diuell, to make a clamorous profession, that so their fall might more dishonour the glorie of an exact and circumspect conuersation. Alas, what should I say? There is wonderfull want of order in the very liues of Gods children. Scarce the tithe of professours of sinceritie of the Gospell, that haue gathered a catalogue of holy duties, and obserued out of the word that frame and order of settled holy conuersation.
Ten helpes of order in conuersation.There are 10 helpes of order in holy life: 1. knowledge, 2. vprightnesse, that is, an vnfained resolution to shew respect to all Gods Commandements; 3. constant diligence, 4. watchfulnesse, 5. contemplation or meditation, 6. prayer, 7. reading the word daily, 8. frequent hearing of the Gospell preached in the power of it, 9. a tender conscience, 10. societie and fellowship with gracious Christians in the Gospell.

There are many impediments of an orderly conuersation:Nine lets of order. 1. Men are not reconciled to God, and so not being in Christ, they receiue not influence of grace from Christ to enable them to walke in an holy course. 2. In others tis negligent mortification; the staine of former sinnes being not washed away, there remaines in them an ill disposition to sinne. 3. Many are ensnared with euill opinions, either in doctrine, (and so errour of life is the scourge of errour in opinion) or else about practise, as that such strictnesse is not required, or it is impossible, or none doe liue so. 4. Many know not what order to appoynt vnto themselues. 5. Many are confirmed in a heart accustomed to euill, and they loue some one sinne, wherein they especially breake order. 6. Sathan striues aboue all things to keepe men in a dead sleepe, that they might not awake to liue righteously, or expresse the power of godlinesse. 7. Many are so set in the way of the vngodly, that their very euill society chains them downe to a necessitie of dissolutenes. 8. Many are put out of all order by their daily distempers and disorders in their families. Lastly, some faile and fall through very discouragement, receiued either from opposition, or contempt, or scandall.
Now if any be desirous to know in generall what he should do to bring his life into order, I shall profitably aduise fiue things: First,Rules for bringing our liues into order. that hee doe resolutely withdraw himselfe from the sinnes of the times, and keepe himselfe vnspotted of the world, in respect of them. Now the sinnes of the times are apparant, pride of life, contempt of the Gospell, coldnesse in faith and religion, swearing, profanation of the holy Sabbath, domesticall irreligiousnesse, contention, vsury, whoredome, drunkennesse, and drinkings, oppression and speaking euill of the good way. Secondly, that hee obserue the more vsuall corruptions of the calling of life hee liues in, and with all heedfulnesse shun them, whether he be Magistrate, Minister, or priuate person. Thirdly, that he especially striue against and subdue the euils that by nature hee is most prone vnto. Fourthly, he shall doe wonderfully profitably,Vse of catalogues. if hee would get a catalogue of duties out of the whole law, that directly concerne himselfe in particular, which is very easie (especially by the helpe of some that are experienced) to be distinctly gathered, labouring to shew all good faithfulnesse in duties of pietie as well as righteousnesse, and to striue for inward pietie as well as outward, resoluing to continue, as well as once to begin. Hence it is, if wee marke it, that the holy Ghost in diuers Scriptures drawes for the people of those times diuers catalogues, either of grace which specially tended to their praise, or of duties that most fitted their state, or of sinnes that they must most carefully auoyd, as being most commonly committed: yea, it could not but be of excellent vse, if we did taske our selues to the more strict obseruation of some of those catalogues, either of grace, or sinnes, or duties, as wee might perceiue they most fitted vs.
But if euer we would goe about the order of our liues,More rules. wee must in generall 1. labour to weaken the loue of earthly things. 2. We must resolue to keepe our hearts with all diligence, I meane we must with all care and conscience striue against inward sinnes. 3. We must put on a minde to liue by faith, whatsoeuer befall vs. 4. If we fall, we would speedily recouer our selues by confession and prayer* and not accustome our selues to sinnes either of omission or commission.
Vpon the consideration of all this, what should we doe,Vses. but euen pray the Lord that he would make his way plainePsal. 5.8. before our face, and direct the workes of our handsPsal. 90. vlt., and hold vp our goings in his pathesPsal. 17.5.^, that our steps doe not slide? And to this end we should euery one be p^^cing and amending his waies, making his paths straight, being ashamed and confounded for all the disorder of our liues past. But if thou goe about this, bee not (...), a man that hath
 two hearts, for then thou wilt be vnstable in all thy wayes; either goe about it with all thy heart, or else let it alone. What shall I say but this, let vs all learne the way of God more perfectly.
Thus of order.
The second thing hee commends is their faith, which hee praiseth for the stadfastnesse of it.
The stedfastnesse of their faith.] Concerning stedfastnesse of faith, I propound fiue things to be considered of. 1. That it may bee had, and ought to be sought. 2. What the nature and properties of it are. 3. What is the cause why the faith of many is not stedfast. 4. What we must doe to attaine it. And lastly concerning vnstedfast faith.
The stedfastnesse of faith may be had.For the first, that it may be had, is manifest: for God that giueth the earnest of his spirit, and sealeth and annoynteth vs in Christ, doth stablish vs in him2 Cor. 1.21.22.. There is a sure foundation of God2 Tim. 2.19. Matt. 7.24., vpon which we may found our affiance. And God willing more abundantly to shew vnto the heires of promise the immutabilitie of his counsell, interposed himselfe by an oath to confirme his promise, that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might haue strong consolation, which flie for refuge to lay hold vpon the hope set before vs: which hope wee haue as an anchour of the soule both sure and stedfastHeb. 6.17.18. And we are commanded to resist stedfast in the faith1 Pet. 5.9.. And wauering is secretly threatned and disgraced by the Apostle Iames, after he had charged that wee should pray in faith without waueringIam. 1.6. The properties of the man stedfast in faith..
Now for the second, there are many excellent properties and praises in a stedfast faith: for a man that is indeed settled and stedfast in his faith, knowes both the truth and the worth of the loue of ChristEph. 3.17.19; hee is able to contemne and denie the allurements, examples, customes, and glorie of this world1 Ioh. 5.4. Gal. 6.14.; hee can beare aduersitie with singular firmnesse of heart, without hasting to euill meanesRom. 5.4. Isa. 26.16., or limiting God for the manner, or time, or instruments of deliuerance: hee can stand in the combat against frequent and fierie tentations, and goe away without preuailing infection; he can beleeue without feelingsRom. 4.. The promises of God are not yea and nay2 Cor. 1.18.19., but alwayes a sure word and vndoubted. He hath a kinde of habituall peace and contentation in his conscience, with easefull delights and refreshings in the ioyes of Gods fauour. Hee hath a kinde of spirituall boldnesse and confidence when hee approacheth to God and the throne of his grace. Lastly, he can looke vpon death and iudgement, with desire to be dissolued.
The causes of vnsettlednes.And for the third thing, the reasons why many men shew not this vnmoueablenesse, and stedfastnesse, are diuers: some haue not faith at all2 Thess. 3.2., some haue not a true iustifying faith, but either rest vpon common hope, or an historicall or temporarie faith. In many the presumption of certaintie doth hinder stedfastnesse it selfe. Some want powerfull meanes, that should establish them; and some hauing the publike meanes, are iustly blasted in their faith because of their daily neglect of the priuate meanes. And this reason may be giuen also why some of the better sort are not yet stablished, namely because they are so hardly excited and perswaded seriously to trie their owne estates, by the signes of Gods fauour, and markes of saluation. And for the worser sort, they shun triall, because they know before hand their state is not good, and besides they liue in some one master sinne or other, which they cannot be perswaded to forsake, and therefore resolue at least for a time to liue at a venture, and referre all to the vnknowen mercy of God.
The means of stedfastnesse.4. If we would be established in beleeuing, 1. we must be much in the meditation of the promises of God. 2. we must be much in prayer, and the acknowledgment of secret sinnes, obseruing the comforts of Gods presence, and keeping a record of the wonders of his presence, and striuing to retaine constantly
 the assurance, we sometimes feele in prayer. 3. wee must cast about, how to be more profitable in well doing: An orderly life, especially fruitfullnesse in our places, doth maruellously though secretly, establish and settle a mans heart in faith 1. Cor. 15.58. whereas it is almost impossible, that a barren life should haue much stedfastnes, of assurance; againe, would wee yet further know, how it comes to passe, that some men get such a stedfastnesse aboue many others? Obserue then and you shall finde, that when they finde the pearles of grace, and the meanes, they will sell all to buy them: Now the loue to the meanes, is like death or Ielousie; that cannot be resisted, there is in them a constant coueting of the best things, with a true hunger and thirst after them, and if they offend God they cannot be quiet, till they returne and confesse their sinne, and get fauour: they will not liue dayes and weekes in a voluntarie neglect of communion with God, and therefore reape this unmoueablenesse, as the fruit of their daily conuersing with God.
Thus of stedfastnesse in it selfe.
Now in the contrarie, concerning an vnstedfast faith, I propound two things to be considered, 1. The effects or consequences, and concomitants of it: And then the kinds of vnsetled faith.
Not Scripture onely, but vsuall experience shew the many inconueniences that attend such as are not stablished in the faith.
1. They want the many comforts, the stedfast faith feeleth.The inconueniences of an vnstedfast faith. 2. They are disquieted with euery crosse. 3. They are tost with the winde of contrarie doctrine, yea the very truth is sometimes yea with them and sometimes nay: sometimes, they are perswaded, and sometimes they are not. 4. They finde a secret shunning of the ordinances of God, when any aproach should be made vnto God. 5. The feare of death is almost inseperable. 6. They are sometimes frighted with feares of perseuerance, besides their daily danger to be foyled, by the baits of Sathan and the world.
Vnstedfastnesse may be considered three wayes.Vnstedfastnes of faith three vvayes. 1. as faith is weake. 2. as faith is weakned. 3. as stedfastnes is lost.
For the first, in the first conuersion of a man vnto God, while they lye yet in the cradle of godlinesse, They are assayled with much doubting and many feares, etc.
Quest. But what might some one say,Hovv vveake faith may be discerned. How can faith then be discerned in the midst of so many doubts and feares? Answ. The truth of their faith and grace appeares, 1. By their earnest and constant desire of Gods fauoure. 2. By the tendernes of the conscience in all their actions, and their daily feare of sinning. 3. By their frequent complaints of vnbeleefe, and secret mourning for it. 4. By the lowlinesse of their cariage, even towards the meaner sort of those that truly feare God. 5. By their desire after the sincere milke of the word. Lastly, by their indeuour to walke inoffensiuely.
Quest. But seeing their faith is true,Causes of the vnsetlednes of faith vveake. what is the cause of the vnsetlednesse of it? Answ. They are vnsetled, partly because they haue yet but a small measure of sauing knowledge: and partly because they descerne not the consolations, offered to them: and partly for want of application of particular promises, that belong vnto them: and sometimes it is for want of some of the meanes: and in some it is, because they see a greater power in some of their corruptions, then they thinke can stand with true grace.
Now for the remedies of this vnsetlednes;Remedies for faith vveake. This weake faith will grow setled more and more, if they continue vpright in the vse of the meanes, especially as their reformation and victorie ouer sinne increaseth, and as they grow more and more confirmed in the diuorce from the world, and carnall companie, and they grow more expert in the word of righteousnesse, especially after the Lord hath refreshed them with the frequent comforts of his promises,
 and presence, besides conuersing with the faithfull and established Christians: And all this the sooner, if they doe propound their doubts, and by asking the way, seeke daily derection, especially if they resigne ouer their soules to the ministerie of some faithfull and mercifull man of God, who as a nurse shall daily feed them, with distinct and particular counsell and comfort.
Thus of the vnstedfastnes that acompanieth faith weake.
Now there is an vnstedfastnes accompanieth faith weakened, that is such a faith as was sometimes stronger; For the clearer vnderstanding hereof, I consider three things. 1. The causes of this weaknes of faith. 2. The signes to discerne it. 3. The remidies.
Causes of faith vveaknedThere may be diuers causes or meanes to weaken strong faith. 1. Losse of meanes. 2. secret sinnes ordinarily committed, not lamented not reformed. 3. Presumptiously to vse ill meanes to get out of aduersitie. 4. Relapse to the loue of the world.
Signes of faith vveakned.The signes to discerne it, are 1. the sleepinesse of the heart. 2. feare of death. 3. constant neglect or secret contempt of fellowship with the godly. 4. The ceasing of the sensible working of Gods spirit within. 5. Raigning discontentment. 6. Securitie vnder knowne sinne.
Remedies for faith vveakned.The remedies are 1. A serious and sound examination of the wants and faults, which by this weaknes they are fallen into. 2. A constant and daily iudging of themselues, for their corruptions, till they recouer tendernesse of heart, and some measure of godly sorrow for them. 3. It will be expedient that they plant themselues vnder the droppings of a daily powerfull ministerie. 4. The meditation of their former feelings. 5. The vse of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; this is a meanes to confirme faith both weake and weakned. Lastly, they must hold a most strict watch ouer their hearts and liues, till they be re-established in a sound course of reformed life.
Thus of faith weakned.
3. Stedfastnes may be lost, note that I say stedfastnes of faith may be lost, I say not that faith may be lost that is true faith; this stedfastnes was lost in Dauid, Salomon, and it is likely in Iob too.
Causes of the losse of stedfastnesse.The causes of this losse of stedfastnes are diuers; in some it is the inundation of afflictions, violently and vnresistably breaking in vpon them, especially raising the fierce perturbation of impatiencie, thus it was in Iob. 2. In some, it is some horrible sinne, I say horrible sinne, either because it is some foule transgression, as in Dauid and Salomon; or made horrible by long continuance in it.
Steps in falling avvay.Now into this euill estate, some fall suddenly, some by degrees, commonly it begins at spirituall pride, and proceeds after from the carelesse vse of the meanes, to the neglect of them, and from thence to a secure disregard of the inward daily corruptions of the heart, ioyned with a bold presumption of some infolded mercie of God, till at length they fall into some speciall sinne or wilfull relapse.
The effectsThe effects. and concomitants of this relapse, and losse of stedfastnes, are diuers, and fearefull, as 1. The ceasing of the comforts of the spirit, the spirit being a sleep, and in a manner quenched. 2. The heart is excommunicated from the power of Gods ordinances, as they may feele when they come to vse them. 3. Spirituall boldnes or incouragement to come vnto God is lost with it. 4. They are secretly deliuered to Satan to be whipped and buffeted with tentations many times of blasphemie or atheisme, or otherwise through his spirituall wickednesse, held in internall vassalage. 5. Most an end, the outward prouidence of God is changed towards them, yea some times they are scourged with horrible crosses. 6. Many times they are giuen ouer to be punished with other sinnes.

Yet for the more full vnderstanding heereof,Distinctions about apostasie. it will be profitable to consider of some distinctions, both of the persons, and the cause, and the effects. For of these that fall from their stedfastnes, some are sensible of it, some are insensible: Those that haue their hearts wakened after this losse, doe vsually feele a strong conflict of terrours, the conscience being wearied with the tortures that their wounded spirit is tormented withall, vnder the sence of Gods fierce anger, and in many of these their terrour is renued vpon euery crosse, yea almost at euery word of God, so doth the conceit of Gods fighting against them preuaile with them.
Now in the insensible, the speciall effect is a spirituall slumber or lethargy, with the rest of the ill effects before in common propounded.
Secondly, a distinction must bee made of the cause, for the sinne is sometimes secret, sometimes open: now the consequents or fruits of open falling, by open sinne is diuers, vsually the fall thereof is great, it makes a wonderfull noyse in the Church, besides it wounds the hearts of Gods children, and breeds exceeding great distaste in them. Further their fals makes them wonderfull vile before the world, the mouth of euery beast will bee open to raile against them: wicked men will keepe the assise for them, yea the bankes of blasphemie in wicked men will bee broken downe, so as they will with full mouth speake euill of the good way of God; besides it cannot bee auoyded but many will bee defiled by it, and wonderfully fired and confirmed in sinning.
Againe, wee must distinguish of effects or consequents, for some are ordinarie, some extraordinarie: for sometimes besides the ordinarie euents, the Lord scourgeth those fals with Satanicall molestations, either of their persons or houses, yea, sometimes they are smitten with death.
1. Quest. But doe all these come alwaies for sinne?
Answ. Not alwayes, but where sinne is presumptuous they doe.
2. Quest. But doe all these things befall all such as fall into presumptuous sinne? Answ. The iudgements of God are like a great depth, and he afflicts how hee will, but these are his rods, he may vse all of them, or any of them as pleaseth him.
3. Quest. But are these things found in those that lose their stedfastnesse by the violence of crosses? Answ. Though many of them are, when the crosse hath a mixture with any speciall impatiencie, as in Iobs case: yet properly they are rods for presumptuous sinnes.
Obiect. But is it not better may some say, to continue as we are, then to acknowledge and make profession and bee in this danger to fall into so euill an estate? Solut. Is it best to liue and die a begger, because some one great heire through his owne default hath ruined for a time his house? Or is the condition of a begger better then of a Prince, because Nabuchadnetzar was seauen yeeres like a beast?
4. Q. But if his losses be thus many and miserable, is there any thing left in him? Answ. There is. 1. His seede abides in him, the holy seede of the word can neuer be rooted out of him wholly. 2. Hee hath faith though it bee in a trance. 3. Grace is aliue in him, though hee bee in the state of a palsie man, or as one that hath a dead palsie, and yet is aliue. 4. Hee hath the spirit of God in him, but he is locked vp and taken prisoner.
Now for the remedies of this losse of stedfastnesse,Remedies for the losse of stedfastnesse. they must know that there is required of them, a speciall humiliation, note that I say a speciall humiliation: For they must in priuate afflict their soules before the view of their speciall sinnes, and Gods fierce wrath, with strong cries and sighes vnspeakable making their moane before God, They must cry vnto God out of the deepe, as the Psalmist saith. Besides they must shame themselues openly by making
 themselues vile before the people of God, so did Dauid, and Salomon, and Paul; yea they must voluntarily resigne ouer themselues vnto Gods scourging hand, being so desirous to be cleansed of their sins, as to bee contented God should wash them throughly though it were with many crosses. And further they must bee reuenged of their owne flesh, by straitning and curbing themselues in their lawfull desires and delights. Thus of their speciall humiliation: Now secondly, they must take speciall paines to recouer their faith in God, and to get pardon of their sinnes, They must crie daily vnto God, they must search againe and againe in the records of Gods promises, especially waiting vpon the preaching of the Gospell, to see when the Lord will returne and haue mercy by reuiuing of their hearts with the comforts of his presence. And for this they must be wonderfull carefull of the spirit of grace, to stir it vp by daily prayer, and to obserue with all watchfulnesse the stirring of it, resoluing with all thankfulnesse to acknowledge any measure of the reuiuing of the spirit.
Lastly, when they are in any measure recouered, they must looke to two things. 1. They must forsake all appearance of euill. 2. They must vse a continuall watchfulnesse, and with feare and iealousie looke to their hearts, euen in their best actions: least Sathan beguile them, and they reuolt againe, and then their case of reciduation be worse then the former, blessed is the man that feareth alwayes.
Thus of the losse of stedfastnesse, especially, as it is in the cureable, for there is a losse of stedfastnes, and the ioy of Gods saluation euen in the Elect, which in this life is incureable; Of this I can say little, because the Scripture is in this poynt exceeding sparing, and because the iudgements of God, especially of this kinde are exceeding deep, who can wade into them? only a word or two of it. This losse is incureable two wayes, sometimes in the crosse or iudgement it brought vpon the offender, sometimes in the vnstedfastnesse it selfe; for sometimes though the Lord restore inward ioy and assurance, yet hee will not remooue the outward signe of his wrath, sometimes hee drawes backe the outward affliction, but doth not restore the inward comfort, or not in so great a measure, so as some of Gods children, may die without the sense of the ioy of Gods saluation till they come to heauen, yea they may die in greate te^rror and despaire: yet the Lord may be reconciled, and they may truely repent, though these terrors or iudgements be not released: because God many times will thereby purge the publike scandall and cleere his owne iustice: Besides, such spectacles doe giue warning to a carelesse world, to let them know that God hath treasures of wrath for sinne if they repent not. Thus of the doctrine of stedfastnesse of faith, and vnstedfastnesse also; now briefely for some vses of it.
Vses.It may serue for great reproofe, of the great neglect of seeking this stedfastnesse of faith. We may complaine aswell of the common Protestant, as of the Papists heerein, for they are alike aduersaries to the assurance of faith; let such as are touched with feare of God and desire to beleeue, trauell more and more for attainement heereof, and to this end cleaue to the sure word of the Prophets and Apostles, and labour in the practse and excercise of all holy and Christians graces.
And for particular consideration of the troubles and losses of Gods children, we may note. 1. That it is a wonderfull fearfull thing to fall into Gods hands, and that the promises of God yeeld no protection to a willing offender: woe vnto prophane beasts; if sinne make God angry towards his owne children, and make them also vile before men, then where shall those beasts that wallow in sinne appeare; if they be iustly abased that fall once into one sinne, what shall be the confusion of face and heart in those men, when all the sinnes they euer committed, shall be reueled before Gods Angels, and men
 at the last day? 2. They that stand haue great reason to take heede lest they fall from their stedfastnesse, and bee carried away with the errour of the wicked.Psal. 56.9. and 116.7. 3. We should be wonderfull thankfull, if God hath kept vs from f^lling, it is his singular grace to keepe the feet of his Saints.




VERS. 6.7. As yee haue therefore receiued Christ Iesus the Lord, so walke yee in him.
7. Rooted and built vp in him, and stablished in the faith, as yee haue beene taught, abounding with thankesgiuing.


IN these two verses the Apostle concludes the exhortation begun in the 23. verse of the former chapter 3 for whereas after all these reasons and the answer of sundry obiections, they might finally haue sayd, tell vs then at once what it is you would haue vs to doe? the Apostle answers summarily, that concerning holy life, hee would haue them walke as they haue receiued the Lord Iesus Christ: and concerning faith, hee would haue them to bee rooted and soundly edified and established in the faith, especially to abound in thankfulnesse to God for their happy estate in Christ Iesus.
The 6. verse containes a precept concerning holy life, viz. to walke on in Christ, and a rule by which that precept is to be squared, and determined, viz. as they haue receiued Christ Iesus the Lord.

As yee haue receiued Christ Iesus the Lord, etc.]

These words may bee diuersly vrged vpon them, according to the diuers sences may be conceiued of them, For
1. To walke as we haue receiued Christ, may beare this sence, namely, to frame our obedience according to the measure of the knowledge of Christ we haue receiued, it shall be to vs according to what we haue, to whom God hath giuen much, of them hee requireth much; and iudgement certainely abideth for him that hath receiued the knowledge of his masters will, and doth it not, if our practise bee according to the knowledge wee haue, this may bee our comfort, God will accept of vs: and otherwise they are but in a miserable case that are barren and vnfruitfull in the knowledge of our Lord Iesus Christ2 Pet. 1.9..
2. Such a sense as this may be gathered, viz. So liue with care of a godly life, as ye neglect not to preserue the doctrine, concerning Christ, ye haue receiued. Certainely it ought to bee the care of euery godly minde, to doe his best to preserue the purity of the doctrine hee receiued together with Iesus Christ; great is the generall neglect of many sorts of people heerein.
3. Or thus, Let the doctrine you haue receiued from Christ Iesus be your onely rule both for life and manners, So liue and walke as you haue receiued; The Apostle commandeth to separate from euerie brother that walketh inordinately, and not after the traditions which they had receiued of the Apostle2 Thess. 3.6.. By tradition he meaneth the holy word of God deliuered by liuely voice vnto the Churches, while yet it was not written, euen the same which now is written: The elect Lady and her children are commended for walking in the truth, as they had receiued commandement of the Father2 Ioh. 4.. Yea so must wee sticke vnto the word receiued, as if any man teach otherwise he should be accounted accursedGal. 1.9. 1 Cor. 15.1.2.. For the Apostles receiued it not of men, but by the reuelation of Iesus ChristGal. 1.12.. And as they haue receiued of the Lord, so haue they deliuered vnto vs1 Cor. 11.23.. Therefore wee must conclude with the Apostle, These things which wee haue learned and receiued, and heard out of the holy word, those things we must doePhil. 4.9..
4. The sence may bee thus; as yee were affected when yee first receiued Christ, so walke on and continue, at first men receiue Christ with singlenesse of heart, with great estimation of the truth, with wonderfull ioy, with feruent
 loue to Gods children, with a longing desire after spirituall things, with endeauour to beare fruit, and without the mixtures of mens traditions and inuentions.
Now then they are exhorted to take heede that they lose not what they haue wrought2 Io^. 9., but preserue those holy affections and desires still; striuing against the witchcrafts of Sathan and the world, that they be not beguiled from the simplicity that is in Christ Iesus.
The doctrines hence to be noted are.
1. That Christians doe receiue Christ, and that not onely publikely into their countries and Churches (which yet is a great priuiledge, for Christ bringeth with him many blessings, and stayes many iudgements, brings a publike light to men that sit in darknesse and shadow of death, and raiseth immortalitie as it were to light and life againe) but priuately and particularly into their hearts and soules.The priuiledges of such as receiue Christ This is the happiest receiuing of Christ. Oh the glory of a Christian in receiuing Christ!Phil. 3.9. for he that receiueth Christ into his hart, receiueth excellent illumination, vnspeakably ioy1 Pet. 8., sure attonementRom. 5.11. and 3.25., hid MannaReu. 2.17., eternall graces1 Cor. 1.6. and 4.7., yea the very spirit of ChristRom. 8.9., to make him know the things giuen of God, to set the soule at liberty2 Cor. 3.17., to mortifie the deeds of the fleshRom. 8 13., to be a spirit of prayerZach. 12.12., to giue answer concerning our adoptionRom. 8.15., to furnish the soule with giftsGal. 5.22., to seale vs vp to the day of redemptionEph. 1.14., to be an eternall comforterIoh. 14., to be life for righteousnesse sakeRom. 8.10., to helpe our infirmitiesRom. 8.26., and to raise vp our dead bodies at the last dayRom. 8.11.. Lastly, he that receiueth Christ, receiueth with him the promise of an eternall inheritance, into which hee is presently acknowledged an heire, yea, a Co-heire with Christ Iesus.
2. The second doctrine. It is not enough to receiue Christ, but wee must walke in him; to walke in Christ, is not only so to liue, as we be sure that Christ liueth in vsGal 2.20., or to walke after the appoyntment of his will expressed in his word, but it is cheefely to continue a daily care of holy perseuerance in the graces and duties of holy life, holding fast our communion with Christ, this the Apostle thinks wonderfull needfull to bee often vrged and pressed by all meanes vpon vs,Heb. 9.15. Rom 8.17. so shamefully doe many fall away, and so cursedly is the sinceritie that is in Christ Iesus pursued by the Diuel, and the flesh and the world, and so necessary is the endeauour to preserue the glory of perseuerance in all well doing to the end. Oh this perseuerance, it is a wonderfull thing, and where is the man that doth not lose something of what hee had? Oh that wee could bee soundly awakened to the care of it, or that wee had mindes that would bee willing to doe any thing wee could to further it: but alas there is not a heart in vs, there are diuers excellent directions in the word to confirme vs heerein, if we were not ouercome with sluggishnesse.
There are diuers things which if they were looked to at our first setting out, we were sure to hold out and continue walking in Christ. As,
Rules for perseuerance to bee obserued in our first conuersion.If men did at first put their hearts to these questions of abnegation, so as they would bee throughly aduised, if thou haddest asked thine owne heart these questions; Canst thou take vp thy crosse and follow Christ? Canst thou suffer aduersity with the righteous? Canst thou professe Christ admidst the different opinions of multitudes of men? Canst thou bee content to denie profit and reason, and thy desires, and pleasures, and credit, and all for Christs sake? if not, thou wilt certainely fall away, and therefore better neuer beginne.
2, At mens first setting out they must take heede they bee not sleightly in their reformation and mortification: but doe it throughly, not sparing to afflict their Soules with sensible and sound godly sorrow: for else they will afterward repent of their repentance: whereas if it were done with sound aduice, and serious humiliation, this would be an vnmooueable foundation of
 rest and encouragement to faith and well-doing. It is a great question, whether such will hold out that come in without sorrow for sinnes.
3. Men must at first looke to their kinde of faith: we see many are grossely deceiued: temporary faith maketh such a shew, that vnlesse it be throughly tried it will deceiue many: and there is a maruellous lothnesse in our nature to abide the triall, though wee know it be plainly here required2 Cor. 13.5.; whereas if wee did get a continuing faith at first, wee might haue the more assurance of holding out.
4. It would much further perseuerance, if wee did at first endeuour, that knowledge and affection might be inseparable twinnes: not to bee much proud of knowledge without affection, nor to trust much to zeale without knowledge: either of these may be alone in men that will fall away shamefully.
5. When men goe about reformation, they should doe it throughly, and be sure their hearts are renewed: for the old heart will not hold out long to endure the hardship of a reformed life: and if some sinnes haue beene fauoured and spared, though they lie still for a time, yet afterwards they will reuiue and shew themselues. Wee see in some, what a doe there is to leaue some corruptions and faults; they are seauen yeeres many times before they can bee perswaded to forgoe them, resting in the reformation of other faults: whereas there is no assurance that they walke with a right foot in the Gospell, till they make conscience of a ready reformation of euery knowne sinne; and till they reforme throughly they are like to fall away, whatsoeuer faire shew of zeale and forwardnesse they make.
6. In particular diuers men are to be warned of passion and violent affections; if thou meane to prosper in thy perswasion of reformation, then speedily cease from anger, and leaue off wrath, else there will be little hope that thou wilt not returne to doe euillPsal. 37.8.9.: the promise of constant protection is with such as are sheepeIoh. 10.28., and are so farre humbled, as they haue left their wooluish qualities and passions.
7. To make thy standing more sure, acquaint thy selfe with such as feare God, and ioyne thy selfe to them by all engagements of a profitable fellowship in the Gospell: there is a secret tie vnto constancie in the communion of Saints; he is not like to walke long that walketh alone,Ier. 32.39.40. especially if he might walke with good company; and this is a cleere marke of a temporarie faith in such as for many things goe farre, when men see they shunne societie with the godly.
8. It is an excellent helpe also, at first, to striue by all meanes to get the testimonie of Iesus confirmed in vs1 Cor. 1.6. 1 Tim. 2.6.: Christ giues testimonie especially three wayes: 1. By the promise of the word. 2. By the graces of his spirit. 3. By the witnesse of the spirit of adoption. Now if we did studie the promises diligently, especially recording such as we had interest in vpon our conuersion to God, and did withall trie our selues diligently and particularly concerning those sauing graces, which are markes and signes of regeneration and saluation, and did also begge the witnesse of the spirit, waiting for those vnspeakable and glorious ioyes of the holy Ghost, and with all thankfulnesse acknowledging Gods seale for our confirmation, when hee is pleased so to set it to; mee thinkes this threefold coard could neuer be broken. Oh the heauie slumber and sluggishnesse of our natures: how wonderfull rich is God in compassion? how ready is he to forgiue and multiplie pardon? how willingly doth he lift vp the light of his countenance vpon vs? and yet men haue not the heart answerably to wait vpon him, or to be at the labour of this confirmation. How are many that seeme somewhat vnto many, how are they, I say, bewitched with securitie, so as they cannot be fired out of it, but liue at a venture, and neither seeke nor esteeme the testimonie of Iesus?
9. Would we be set in a safe condition, and stablished? then wee must striue for a free spirit, remembring Dauids praier, stablish mee with thy free spiritPsal. 51.12. What a free spirit is.. Now if any aske what a free and ingenuous spirit is: I answer, 1. It is a minde that will not be in bondage to the corruptions of the times, it acknowledgeth no such bonds or relations to any, as to sinne for their sakes. 2. It is a minde that apprehends libertie in Christ, a minde that will not be in bondage to legall perfection, but discernes his release from the rigour and curse of the law: it will not be subiect, neither to a corrupt conscience, nor yet to a conscience erring or ouer-busie, but sees his prerogatiues hee enioyes in Christ, either in the hope of glory, or sense of grace, or vse of outward things, or his libertie in things indifferent; there is a kinde of seruilenesse or spirit of bondage in many, that wonderfully holds them downe, and if they be not better lightned of their daily feares and burdens, the flesh will lighten it selfe by rebellion and apostacie. 3. It is a minde not chained downe to the loue of or lust after earthly things. 4. It is a minde ready prest to doe good, full of incitations to good things, and carefull to preserue it selfe from the occasions of euill: as resolued so to stand vpon the sinceritie of his heart, as rather to lose his life then his integritie: as neither caring for those things which the common sort seeke after, as praise, profits, outward shewes, etc. nor fearing their feares.
10. Men must at first labour to get a sound and heartie loue of the truth, desirous to store and furnish themselues with the treasures of holy knowledge: if the law be written in the hearts and bowelsIer. 31.33. Psal. 37.31. of men, they will hold out to the end.
Lastly, men must be sure that they be good and true in their heartsPsal. 125.1.2.4., as the Psalmist saith, for then they shall be as the mount Sion that cannot be moued, and the Lord will alwayes doe well vnto them.
Signes of a true heart.Now the signes of a good and true heart are such as these: 1. A true heart is a new heart, that must be taken for granted, else in vaine to inquire any further, if there be not a newnesse of the heart to God. 2. It loues God with vnfained and vndiuided loue; though it cannot accomplish all it would, yet it hath holy desires without hypocrisie, after God, aboue all things. 3. It labours for inward holinesse as well as outward, both seeking the graces that should be within, and mourning for inward sinnes as well as outward. 4. It will smite for small sinnes, as well for numbring the people, as for murther and whoredome: hee hath not a good and true heart, that is vexed onely for great euils and offences. 5. A true heart is a constant heart, it is not fickle and mutable, as many are in all their wayes, but that it is once, it desires to be alwayes. 6. It desireth the power of godlinesse more then the shew of it: and is more affected with the praise of God then of men. 7. It quickly findes the absence of Christ, and cannot be at rest till he returne. 8. It constantly pronounceth euill of sinne and sinners, and well of godlinesse and good men.
Now on the other side, the reason why many fall away, was because they were not true in their hearts at first: they set vp a profession of repentance with carnall ends, and through hypocrisie beguiled themselues and others.
Secondly, if men finde that they haue beene rightly formed in the wombe and birth of their change, then there are other directions for them to obserue, throughout their liues, that they might continue in this holy walking with God and his Saints.Rules to bee looked vnto after our calling. Wouldest thou be sure not to fall away? Then looke to these things.
1. Be sure thou continue in the carefull vse of the meanes, as the word, praier, conference and Sacraments, else know that when once thou giuest way to a customarie hardnesse of heart in the vse of the meanes, or neglect of them, thou art neere either some great sinne or temptation, or some great
 iudgment and apostacie; and therefore concerning the meanes principally looke to two things, 1. preserue appetite. 2. practise that thou hearest, without omission or delay.
2. If thou discerne any spirituall weaknesse or decay, or feele any combat with the flesh, or the tentations of Satan, be sure thou complaine betimes, and resist at the first, for then the grace of God will be sufficient, and the weapons of our warfare mightie through God: praier will easily master sinne at the first through the victorie in Iesus Christ.
3. Resolue with thy selfe not to let goe thy assurance, or cast away the confidence of thy hope whatsoeuer befall thee: or at least,Heb. 10.36. not till thou maiest see wonderfull euident reason. It is a maruellous great fault, to call the loue of God into question vpon euery occasion, whereas men cannot glorifie God more then to liue by faith, and to be vnmoueable in it: God takes little delight in a soule that will withdraw it selfe vpon euery occasion by vnbeleefe. Are they not strangely foolish, that will weare their helmets when there is no stirre, and as soone as they see an aduersarie, or any blowes towards, then to cast away their helmet, and doe it so vsually? Such are we and worse, that stand bragging of our faith and hope in prosperitie and ease, and when affliction and temptation comes, then most childishly we cast away both faith and hope, and till reason and sense are satisfied, we will not be perswaded.
4. Set perfection before thine eyes, to striue after it; and to this end acquaint thy selfe with the rules of holy life,Phil. 3. and consider the examples of such as haue walked therein, and the wofull euents that befall the contrary minded, especially thinke much of the great recompence of reward, euen the price of our high calling in Iesus Christ.
5. Take heed of the occasions of falling, such as are spirituall pride, knowne hypocrisie, desire to be rich, discord with the godly, and vaine ianglings, without discretion, neglect of our particular callings, and vngodly company.
Hitherto of pe^seuerance in life. Now in the next verse hee intreateth of perseuerance in faith.



Vers. 7. Rooted and built vp in him, and stablished in the faith, as you haue been taught.

IN these words is both a precept and a rule; a precept, to be rooted, built, stablished: a rule, as ye haue beene taught. The substance of the precept is but to counsell them to increase more and more, that they might be stedfast in the assurance of Gods fauour in Iesus Christ. Of this stedfastnesse I haue at large intreated in the 5. verse. Onely wee may here againe be instructed and informed.
1. Of the necessitie and excellencie of stedfastnesse: The Apostle would not thus often peale vpon it, but that hee knew it to be of singular worth in the life of man, and of great necessitie vnto our consolation; besides it implies that people are for the most part slow-hearted herein, and hardly drawne to the vnfained and diligent labour after the establishing of their faith and assurance.
2. That all this stedfastnesse of assurance is not the worke of a day; a great tree is not growne or rooted but successiuely; a great house is not built all at once; we must be euery day adding something to Gods worke, that the building of grace may be in due time finished: none are so established, but they may grow in faith; none haue such great roots, but they may take root yet more: many men striue hard to make their trees shew in branches and leaues, I meane in outward profession in the world, but alas what should this great bulke, and so many branches and leaues doe, vnlesse there were more roots within? Yea many deare children of God mistake wonderfully; they euery
 day carry together heapes of precepts for life, but alas poore soules so great a building will not stand, vnlesse they lay their foundation sure, I meane that they get their faith in Christ (the only sure foundation) more confirmed and established.

As ye haue beene taught.

Note here the Apostles candor, he doth not arrogate the glory of their establishment to himselfe, but sendeth them to their Minister, and teacheth them to depend vpon him, to wait vpon the blessing of God vpon his labour, and to acknowledge the good they haue, to haue receiued by his ministerie.
Here diuers things may be noted.
1. That the people should labour for a reuerend estimation of the doctrine they receiue from their faithfull teachers.
2. That as faith commeth by hearing, so doth the establishment of faith also.
3. That it is wonderfull dangerous to neglect either the charge of our teachers when they vrge vs to assurance, or the rules by which they guide vs out of the word of God, for the attainment of it; if wee would goe about it when our teachers call vpon vs, the Lord would be with his ordinance to blesse it to vs; wee should be afraid to delay, when we are taught how to confirme our soules in faith and grace.
4. The faithfull Ministers doe greatly labour to establish their hearers in the assurance of Gods fauour, and the duties of holy life.

Abounding therein with thankesgiuing.

In these words the Apostle shuts vp all, wherein his intent is to stirre them vp to thankfulnesse, that as they did thriue in the meanes or matter of faith and holy life, so they should glorifie God by all possible thankfulnesse for it: as he would haue them abound in faith and holinesse, so also in thankfulnesse to God. This may wonderfully smite our hearts: for if we obserue our wretched euill dispositions, wee may finde that wee are wonderfully bent to the very habit of vnthankfulnesse: and therefore it is iust with God many times, that we doe no more thriue in victorie ouer our corruptions, or in the power of diuers graces, or in the progresse of duties, because wee doe not more tenderly and constantly acknowledge the goodnesse of God we haue had experience of. Oh that it were written vpon our hearts, and grauen deepe in our memories, that nothing becomes vs more then to abound in thankfulnesse, no fairer sight then to see the Altar of the Lord couered with the calues of our lips; neuer can the estate of a childe of God be such, but hee hath exceeding great cause of thankfulnesse for his happinesse in Christ.



VERS. 8. Beware lest there be any man that spoile you through philosophie and vaine deceit, through the traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ.

The order of the rest of the chapter.HItherto of the exhortation. From this verse to the end of this chapter is contained the dehortation, wherein the Apostle labours to disswade the Colossians from receiuing any corrupt doctrine, or any vaine obseruations, either borrowed from philosophie, or from humane traditions, or from the abrogated law of Moses.
The dehortation hath three parts.

1. He setteth downe the matter from which he doth dehort, vers. 8.
2. He giues 7. reasons to strengthen the dehortation, to vers. 16.
3. He concludes against the things from which he dehorts, and that seuerally, from vers. 16. to the end.

In this verse he dehorts from three things.
1. From Philosophie, that is, doctrines taken out of the bookes of Philosophers, not agreeing to the word of God, which though it had a shew of wisdome, yet indeed was but very deceit.
2. From traditions, i. obseruations and externall rites and vaine superstitions, concerning either ordinary life, or else Gods seruice, deuised by men, whether learned or vnlearned, and imposed as necessary vpon the consciences of men.
3. From the elements of the world, i. from the ceremonies of Moses now abrogated, and so from Judaisme.
In generall, wee see in the Church of God, men must beare the words of dehortation, as well as of exhortation: men are in a strange case, that loue to eat poison, and yet cannot abide to receiue any antidote.
Againe, from the coherence wee may note, that the best way to be sound against the hurt of corrupt doctrines or traditions, is, so to cleaue to the doctrine of the Gospell, as wee grow settled in the assurance of faith, and experienced in the way of a holy life: he cannot be hurt that mindes holinesse and assurance.
Beware.] When we finde these caueats in the Scripture, we must thinke of them as more then bare notes of attention, for they shew some great euill or deceiuings, and withall it imports, that we of our selues are inclinable to fall; as in this place, this [Beware] imports, that men naturally are inclined to falshood more then truth, to euill more then good, to wise men more then the wise God, to traditions more then the written word, to their owne deuices more then Gods precepts, to false teachers more then the true Apostles, to ceremonies more then the weightie things of the Law.
Any man.] See here the vanitie and leuitie of mans nature: many men either by word or example cannot reduce vnto order or vnto truth, yet any man may seduce vnto sinne and error. All sorts of men may be fountaines of euill, but in case of returning, an obstinate sinner or superstitious person is vsually wiser then seuen men that can giue a reason.
Spoile you.] This word is various in signification;(...). it signifieth as some take it, to make bare, or to prey vpon, or to circumuent, or to deceiue, or to driue away as a prey, or to leade away bond and captiue, or as here, to spoile; it is so to seduce, or to carry away as a spoile: for the matter expressed in this word, wee may note,
1. That a Christian stands in danger of a combat, and if hee looke not to himselfe, may be spoiled and carried captiue: for the word seemes to be a militarie word, and so imports a battell.
2. That there are worse losses may befall vs, then the losse of goods or children: a man is neuer worse spoiled then when his soule suffers spirituall losses. Iobs losses by the Sabaeans was great, yet theirs were greater. 1. That lost the good seed sowne in their heartsMatth. 13.. 2. That had those things taken away that sometimes they had in spirituall thingsMatth. 13.. 3. That lost their first loueReuel. 2. 4. That lost the kingdome of God in losing the meanes of the kingdomeMatth. 21.. 5. That lost what they had wrought2 Joh. 10.. 6. That lost the presence of GodHos. 5 vlt.. 7. That lost vprightnesse and sinceritie. 8. That lost the taste of the powers of the life to comeHeb. 6.. 9. That lost the ioyes of their saluationPsal. 51.. And lastly, much more theirs that lose their crowneReuel. 3.11..
3. We may here see, that corrupt opinions may marre all, and spoile the soule, and make it into a miserable prey to euill men and angels.
4. That matters, that seeme small things and trifles, may spoile the soule, and bring it into a miserable bondage, such as those traditions might seeme to be.
You.] This word noteth the persons spoiled, and so giues vs occasion to obserue 2. things.
1. That we may be in the sheepfold of Christ, and yet not be safe. You, yea you Christians. The Deuill can fetch booties euen out of the Temple of Christ.
2. When he saith you, not yours, it shewes that howsoeuer it be true, that most an end false teachers seeke theirs, not them, that is, seeke gaine, not the soules of the people; yet it sometimes fals out, that euen the most dangerous and damned seducers may be free from seeking great things for themselues. It is not any iustification to the Popish Priests, nor proofe of the goodnesse of their cause, that they can denie their owne preferments and libertie on earth, to winne Proselytes to their religion. There haue alwayes beene some euen in the worst professions of men, that haue at least seemed outwardly to care for nothing but the soules of the people.
Through Philosophie.] This is the first kinde of corruption here condemned.
Quest. Answ.But is Philosophie naught, and here reiected?
It is not simply condemned, but in some respects: namely, as it doth not containe it selfe within his bounds, or is not to the glory of God: or as it is vaine deceit.(...). So that vaine deceit may be here added interpretatiuely: it explaines the sense.
Quest. Answ. How Philosophie becomes vaine deceit.But how became Philosophie to be vaine deceit?
It is vaine deceit foure wayes. 1. When it propoundeth and teacheth deuillish things, as the Philosophie of the Pagans did: As in their Magickes, when they taught the diuers kindes of Southsayings, coniurings, casting of natiuities, and a great part of Iudiciall Astrologie. 2. When the placets and opinions of Philosophers that are false, are iustified as true: As their doctrine of the worlds eternitie, or the soules mortalitie, or the worship of Angels, or their Stoicall fate and destinie, or their vilde opinions about the chiefe good. 3. When the principles of philosophie, that in the ordinary course of nature are in themselues true, are abused to denie things propounded in the Gospell aboue nature: As those maximes, that of nothing nothing is made: And that of a priuation to a habit there is no regression, and that a Virgin cannot conceiue. The first is brought against the creation of God, whereas it is true of the second cause only. So the second is brought against the resurrection, whereas it is true only in the ordinary course of nature. 4. When the truest and best things in philosophie are vrged, as necessary to saluation, and imposed as meet to be ioyned with the Gospell.
Philosophie may yet be vsed, so as she be content to be a seruant, not a mistresse. If when Gods word reueales any thing absurd in her, that then shee will humble her selfe, and acknowledge her blindnesse, and bee admonished by diuine light. And on the other side, men may be corrupted with philosophie,When men are corrupted by philosophie. and that diuers wayes. 1. If men vse any part of philosophie that is deuillish, as too many doe. 2. If men neglect the studie of the Scriptures, and spend their time onely in those humane studies. 3. When men measure all doctrine by humane reason and philosophicall positions. 4. When men depend not vpon God, but vpon second causes. 5. When men striue to yoake mens consciences with the plausible words of mens wisedome. Hence also we may note, that false doctrine may be supported with great appearance of wisdome and learning, as was the corruption of those false teachers. Wee may not thinke that Papists are fooles, and can say nothing for their religion: but if the Lord should let vs fall into their hands to trie vs, wee must expect from diuers of them great shewes of learning and colours of truth.
The diuers acceptation of the word Tradition.Thus of Philosophie.
After the traditions of men.] The word Tradition hath beene vsed 3. wayes Sometimes to expresse the doctrine of Gods seruants by authoritie from God, deliuered to the Church by liuely voice, but afterward committed to Scripture:
 so the doctrine of Christ, and the Apostles, and of the Patriarkes before the Law, was first deliuered by tradition. Sometimes to signifie such opinions as are in Scripture, but not expressed: they are there, but not spoken therein, that is, are drawne but by consequence or impliedly. Sometimes to expresse such obseruations, as were neuer any way written in the word,Not (...), but (...). but altogether vnwritten in the Scripture, as being deuised meerely by men. So it is taken ordinarily, and so traditions are to be condemned.
There is another distinction about traditions, and that is this. 1. Some things are founded vpon Scripture, and did alwaies tend to further godlinesse,A distinction about tradition. and are therefore Apostolicall, and to be obserued: as all the doctrines of the word, and the publike assemblies of praier and preaching. 2. Some things were founded in Scripture, and were sometimes profitable, but now are out of all needfull vse: and therefore though they be Apostolicall, yet they binde not, as the tradition of abstaining from things sacrificed to Idols, and strangled and bloud. 3. Some things haue not foundation in the word, yet may further pietie, if vsed without superstition, and therefore not vnlawfull, as the obseruation of the Feast of the Natiuitie of Christ, and such like. 4. Some things haue no foundation in Scripture, nor doe at all further pietie, but are either light or vnnecessary, or repugnant to the word, those are simply vnlawfull.
Traditions were both in the Church of the Iewes,Traditions in the Church of the Iewes. and in the Churches of the Gentiles; the Iewish traditions were called the traditions of the Elders, not because they were enioyned them by their Sanadrim or Colledge of Elders, but because they were brought in by their fathers after the captiuitie, the most of them after the rising of the sect of the Pharisies. For among them was that distinction, of the Law written, and the Law by word of mouth: this Law by word of mouth is the Cabalisticall Theologie,Cabalisticall Diuinitie. a Diuinitie so greatly in request amongst the Pharisies; but how well our Sauiour Christ liked those traditions may appeare, Matth. 15.
The traditions in the Churches of the GentilesTraditions in the Churches of the Gentiles. may be considered two wayes. 1. As they were in the times of the Primitiue Church. 2. As they were in the times after, vnder Antichrist.
In the Primitiue Church they had by degrees one after another a great number of traditions: such as these; To stand and pray euery Sabboth from Easter to Whitsontide; The signe of the Crosse; to pray towards the East; the anointing of the baptized with oyle; the canonicall houres; Lent and diuers kindes of fasts; the mixing of water with wine; the addition of diuers orders in the Church, as Canons, Exorcists, Ostiaries, etc. Holidaies; to sing Halleluiah at Easter, but not in Lent, and such like.
Now if any aske what we are to thinke of those and the like traditions then in vse, I answer:Quest. Answ. 1. That the Church had power to appoint traditions in indifferent rites, so that the rules of the Apostles for indifferent things were obserued, as that they were not offensiue, nor against order, or decencie, or edification. As to appoint the time and place of publike praier, to set downe the forme of it, to tell how often the Sacraments should bee administred, etc.
2. We must vnderstand that the word Traditions vsed by the Fathers,Traditions in the times of the Fathers in the primitiue Church. did not alwayes signifie these and such like things deuised by men, but sometimes they did meane thereby such things as were warranted by Scripture, though not expressely. As the baptizing of Infants, the obseruation of the Sabboth, etc.
3. There were some Traditions in some Churches, in the first hundred of yeeres, that were directly impious, as the Inuocation of Saints, and Images
4. Some other things were then vsed that were not euery way impious in
 their owne nature, and yet not greatly iustifiable in their vse, and such were diuers of the aforenamed obseruations.
5. That diuers things at the first brought into the Church with good intents and to good purpose, afterwards grew into abuse: as for example; In the Primitiue order of Monkes.
6. The worser traditions were brought in by false teachers, and too pertinaciously obserued by the people, the Fathers bewailing it, and sometimes complaining of it.
7. The Fathers themselues in some things shewed leuitie and vnconstancie of iudgement: sometimes to please the people, approuing things; and againe, sometimes standing vpon the sole perfection of the Scriptures.
Lastly, it cannot well be denied, but that the libertie taken in the Primitiue times to bring in traditions, opened a doore to Antichrist.
Traditions in Poperie.Now concerning the traditions in Popery vnder Antichrist, their doctrine is abominable, for they say that the word of God is either written or vnwritten; and they say their vnwritten verities are necessary as well as Scripture, yea that they are of equall authoritie with Scripture. And those traditions they would thus exalt,Scriptures against traditions. are for number many, for nature childish, vnprofitable, impious and idolatrous. But that we may be fully settled against their impious doctrine of traditions, wee may profitably record in our memories these Scriptures, Deut. 12.32. Reuelat. 22.18. Matth. 15. 1 Pet. 1.18. Galath. 1.9. Isay 8.20. 2 Tim. 3.16. Ier. 19.5. Col. 1.28. Luk. 16.29. 1 Cor. 1.5.6.7.
Ob. But our Sauiour told his Disciples, I haue many things to say vnto you, but yee cannot beare them now, but the spirit when he is come shall leade you into all truthIoh. 16.12.13. Ergo, it seemes there are diuers truths of Christ which were not reuealed in Scripture, but by the spirit vttered by tradition after.
Sol.Sol. This may be vnderstood of the gifts of the Apostles, and of the effects thereof, and not of doctrine: for of doctrine hee had said in the chapter before, All things that I haue heard of my Father, I haue made knowne vnto youIoh. 15.15.. 2. If it were vnderstood of doctrine, yet he doth not promise to leade them into any new truths, but into the old, and those Christ had already opened, which should be brought to their minde, and they made more fully to vnderstand them. For so he saith of the Comforter in the 14. chapter, He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoeuer I haue said vnto youIoh. 14.26.. 3. Be it he had not reuealed all as yet, what did hee therefore neuer reueale it? Why, the very text is against it, for he said, I haue yet many things to say vnto youIoh. 16.12., therefore he did say them, namely after his resurrectionAct. 2.3.. 4. Let it be noted that he saith, ye cannot beare them now: the things he had to say they could not then beare, why should wee thinke that they could not then beare these graue traditions, as the anointing and Christening of bels and such like? Lastly, let them proue it to vs that those toyes are the things Christ promised to reueale, and then they say somewhat.
Ob. But in the 20. of Iohn he saith,Joh. 21. vlt. and 20.30. There were many things which were not written which Iesus did.Sol. Answ. Hee saith that the things which are written are to this end written, that we might beleeue, and beleeuing might haue eternall life, so that what is needfull to faith and eternall life is written. 2. Hee saith there were other things not written, hee saith other things, not things differing from these: other things in number, not in substance or nature, much lesse contrary things.
Ob. But the Thessalonians are charged to hold the traditions they had beene taught. Sol. The Scriptures were not then all written. 2. The Apostle vnderstands not traditions as the Papists doe. For in the same place hee calleth the things written in Scripture, Traditions, as well as those that were not yet written.

To conclude this discourse concerning traditions, we must further vnderstand, that the traditions in any Church though they be things indifferent in their owne nature, become vnlawfull, if they be such as be taxed in these eight rules.
1. If they be contrary to the rules of the Apostles concerning such things ecclesiastically indifferent. 2. If they bee vrged and vsed with superstition.8. Wayes any tradition grovves euill. 3. Or as any parts of Gods worship. 4. Or with opinion of merit. 5. Or as necessary to saluation. 6. Or if they be equalled with the Law of God, or the weightie things of the Law, neglected, and those more vrged. 7. If they be light and childish. Lastly, if by their multitude they darken and obscure the glory of Christ in his ordinances. Thus of the second thing.
The third thing from which hee doth dehort is the Rudiments of the world.

The Rudiments of the world.]

By the Rudiments of the world he meaneth the lawes of Moses,What hee meanes by rudiments. especially concerning meats, washings, holidayes, garments, and such like ceremoniall obseruations.
Those lawes were called Rudiments or Elements, as some thinke,Why called rudiments. because the Iewes and false Apostles held them as needfull as the foure elements of the world: or else because in their first institution they did signifie the most choice and fundamentall principles of the Gospell, that were necessary for all to know that would be saued; but it is most likely they are called so by a Grammaticall relation to the Abcedaries, that as little children beginne at the Alphabet, and so goe on to higher studies, so did the Lord giue those lawes, as the A. B. C. of the Iewes, to be their Paedagogie, in the infancie of the Church.
Now they might be said to be of the world,Why of the world. because they were externall rites and subiect to the sight and sense; and because they consisted of a glory that was more worldly then spirituall, and because worldly men doe most stand vpon that which is externall.
Tis the drift of the Apostle to disswade from the obseruation of those rites, because now the Law of Moses was abrogated. Abrogation is a plausible doctrine in popular estates. Proclamation concerning immunities from tributes and taxations, or concerning Isonomie, that is, indifferent libertie for all to be competitors for honors, or free for profits of a common-wealth, those were wont to be wonderfull gratefull to the multitude: and such is the doctrine of abrogation in Diuinitie: yet because it may be abused by Epicures, it is to be more carefully opened.
The Law may be said to be abrogated diuers wayes.The law abrogated 4. wayes. 1. When it is antiquated or obsolete, so as men are neither bound to dutie nor punishment: and thus the ceremonies are abrogated. 2. When the punishment is changed, onely the obedience still remaining in force, as in the law of stealth. 3. It is abrogated to the guiltie, when the punishment is transferred on another, so as the law cannot exercise herforce vpon the guiltie person. 4. It is abrogated, when it is weakened and eneruated by transgressors: to breake the Law is to loose or dissolue the Law; thus wicked men by their liues abrogate it.
Quest. But is the whole Law of Moses abrogated? Answ. No; for though Moses be said to giue place to Christ, that doth not import a change of the Law, but of the Law-giuer. Moses gaue three kindes of Lawes, Morall, Iudiciall, Ceremoniall.
For the Morall Law, it may in some sort be said to be abrogated,How the morall law is abrogated. Rom. 8.1.2. as 1. In respect of the curse and malediction, as it did worke anger and made execrable: for so there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Iesus, in as much
 as the law of the spirit of life hath freed them from the law of sinne and death.Rom. 6.14. 2. In respect of the inexorable rigour and perfection of it: for wee are not now vnder the law, but vnder grace. 3. In some sense it is abrogated in respect of iustification: for now it is no more required of the godly, that they should seeke iustification by the law, but by Iesus Christ. Againe, we must distinguish of the persons: for the law still lieth on the necke of the vnregenerate, but in the former respects is abrogated to the faithfull,Gal. 5.23. 1 Tim. 1.9. How the Iudiciall Lawes are abrogated for against them there is no law, but the law is giuen to the vnrighteous.
Now for the Iudiciall lawes of Moses, they were as it were ciuill lawes, concerning Magistrates, Inheritance, order and processe of Iudgements, contracts, mariage, bondage, diuorce, vowes, vsurie, and trespasse betweene man and man.
These Iudiciall lawes must be considered two wayes. 1. As they binde the Iewes as they were men, that is, in a common and generall right, and so those lawes are perpetuall in the nature and equitie of them. 2. As they bound the Iewes as they were Iewes, in a personall, nationall, or singular right: and thus where the reason of a law is particular, there the law is so, and bindes not other people, but as it may fit their Common-wealths.
The Ceremoniall lawes did concerne sacrifices, and sacraments, and other holy things, and rituall obseruations. Diuines haue a saying, that the Iudicials are dead, but the Ceremonials are deadly. That the Ceremonies are abrogated, was signified by the renting of the vaile of the Temple, yea the Temple it selfe is destroied, as will more fully appeare when I come to the 15. verse.
And thus of the rudiments of the world. Hitherunto also of the matter of the dehortation. The reasons follow.

And not after Christ.]

These words containe the first reason against philosophie, traditions and ceremonies: they are not after Christ, and therefore to be auoided, lest our soules be spoiled. These things were not after Christ, 1. because they no way tended to the furtherance of heauen and reconciliation with God, which in Christ we should principally looke to. 2. Because they were no way warranted, or approued, or commanded by Christ: Christ when he came imposed no such things. 3. Because they doe now no way leade vs after Christ, but from him rather, inasmuch as we rest in those workes done, and neglect the commandement of God. Lastly, they feed the humours of carnall men, and draw away mens mindes from the spirituall worship of God in Christ.
Hence we may note an answer to that question, whether the Gentiles may not be saued without Christ by philosophie? The Apostle determines that the soule is spoiled by philosophie, if it be not after Christ.
Againe, hence we may learne a note of triall concerning the truth of religions: that religion which is not after Christ, is a false religion: for this is a foundation, that euerlasting happinesse must be expected from Christ alone.
Lastly, here we may note, that sinnes against Christ will be accounted for, though they were not forbidden in the morall law. We haue now another law in the Gospell, so as whatsoeuer is not after Christ is a great transgression: neither may we thinke that we sinne not against Christ but only by traditions and ceremonies; for there are many other wayes of offending against him, as, To liue without Christ and communion with himEphes. 2.12.. To be an enemie to the crosse of ChristPhil. 3.18.. To make the doctrine of redemption an occasion of libertie to the flesh1 Pet. 2.16.. To liue after the lusts of men, and not after the will of Christ1 Pet. 4.1.2.. To harden our hearts against the doctrine of reconciliation2 Cor. 5.20.. To hold false opinions concerning the person or office of Christ. To peruert the Gospell of Iesus ChristGal. 1.7.. To persecute or despight Christ in his membersMatth.. To trust in the merit of our owne workesRom. 10.3.4.. To denie him before menMatt. 10.33.. To
 reproach the seruants of ChristHeb. 11.26.. Not to beleeue the report of his messengersEsay 53.1. Rom. 10.16.. Not to imitate his gracesMat. 11.29.. To offend one of Christs little onesMark. 9.42.. To make diuision or schisme1 Cor. 1.12.. Not to discerne his body in the Sacrament1 Cor. 11.28. To build againe things destroyedGal. 2.17.18.19.. To breake our vowes1 Tim. 5.11.12.. To fall away from the doctrine of Christ2 Ioh. 9.. To grieue the spirit of ChristEphes. 4.30.. To be beguiled from the simplicitie that is in Christ Iesus2 Cor. 11.3.. To cast away their confidenceHebr. 10.. Or to fashion our selues to the lusts of our ignorance1 Pet. 1.14..
Thus of the first reason.



VERS. 9. For in him dwelleth all the fulnesse of the Godhead bodily.

THese words containe the second reason: and it stands thus; If in Christ there be all diuine fulnes and sufficiencie, then there needs no supply from humane inuentions, either for doctrine, or worship, or manners: but in Christ there dwels all fulnesse euen from the ocean of all perfection, and therefore let no man spoile you through philosophie, traditions or ceremonies, etc.
For the explication of the Minor, wee may conceiue of the words of the text thus; There is in Christ all fulnesse of wisdome as the Prophet of the Church, therefore there needs no philosophie. 2. There is all fulnesse of merit in Christs satisfaction as Priest of the Church, therefore there needs no expiating ceremonies. 3. There is all fulnesse of power and efficacie in Christ as King of the Church, therefore there is no need that wee should helpe him with inuenting traditions to vphold the liues or godlinesse of Christians, or any way to further the ordinances of Christ.
This verse containes in it selfe an excellent proposition concerning Christ, viz. That the Godhead is in the body, that is, in the humane nature of Christ; and this is amplified, 1. by the manner of presence, hee dwelleth there. 2. by the measure, in all fulnesse.
The word Corporally hath beene diuersly interpreted. Corporally, that is, truly and indeed. Corporally, that is, not in shew or shadow onely, but compleatly, in comparison of the shadowes of the law, or prefiguring signes. He dwelleth not in Christ as he did in the Temple. Corporally, that is, according to the flesh. Corporally, in respect of the manner of his presence, not as hee is in all creatures by efficacie or power, nor as hee is in the Saints by his grace, nor as he is in the blessed by glory, but corporally, that is, by vnion with the person of the word: but I thinke it is safest and plainest, to take it in the third sense, viz. corporally, that is, in his humane nature.
Christ is commended in the praise of his relation 1. to the Godhead, in this verse, 2. to Saints and Angels, vers. 10.
In him, notes his person; Godhead, expresseth his diuine nature; corporally, imports his humane nature; and dwels, tels vs of the vnion of the natures.
The summe of all is, that in as much as the Lord hath saued vs by so wonderfull saluation in Christ, and in that our Sauiour was true God as well as man, as being the second person in Trinitie,Why our Sauiour vvas the second person in the Trinitie, and no other. therefore we should wholly rest vpon him, and not distract our thoughts, or faith, or seruices, with either philosophie, or traditions, or ceremonies, as supposing that our saluation should be any wayes furthered by those. Now in that the holy Ghost is so carefull to teach the diuinitie of Christ, wee should also learne to be affected with the wisdome of God, that hath designed the second person in Trinitie to be our mediator: Thinke of it often, and weigh with your selfe the glory of Gods wisdome herein; who is fitter to restore the world then he that made itJoh. 1.1. Col. 1.15.? Incarnation is a mission; now it was not fit he should be sent by another, that was not of another, as the Father was not. It is wonderfull sutable that the naturall sonne should make sonnes by adoptionIoh. 1.12.. Who fitter to restore the image
 of the Father lost in vs, then hee that was the eternall image of the FatherCol. 1.15. Heb. 1.3.? Who was fitter to breake open the fountaine of Gods loue, then hee that was the sonne of his loueCol. 1.13.? The personall word became the enunciatiue word, to declare vnto vs his Fathers nature and will: he that is the middle person in the Trinitie, is fittest to be the middle man, or mediatour betweene God and man.
Is our Sauiour God then? then he is eternallReuel. 1.7., omnipresentMatt. 28.21., omniscientReuel. 2.23., and omnipotentPhil. 3.21..
The consideration of the diuinitie of Christ, may and ought wonderfully to comfort vs against the greatnesse of our sinnes and Gods wrath, remembring that the Lord Iehouah is he that is our righteousnesseJerem. 23.6. Matth. 1.21., and iustification from all our sinnes: as also against the greatnesse of the enemies and aduersaries of our soules, and the truth or true grace of Christ in vs. Our Sauiour is the mightie GodEsay 9.6.7., and therefore can and will easily subdue all our enemies vnder our feet: besides, hereby we are assured of the supply of all our wants, seeing he that hath all the fulnesse of God in him, hath vndertaken to fill all things in the ChurchEphes 1. vlt.. And as this may comfort, so it should instruct: why should we not come willingly at the time of assembliePsal. 110.3, seeing we serue the God of heauen, and haue all our seruice done in the name of the Sonne of God, and presented by his mediation to the Father? And further shall wee not account vnbeleefe to be a monstrous sinne, considering how little cause wee haue to feare or doubt? But especially shall we not learne humilitie of him, that being in the forme of God humbled himselfe for our sakes to take vpon him the forme of a man, and to be subiect to the very deathPsal. 2. Matt. 11.29.? Lastly, shall wee not learne hence the hatefulnesse of sinne, and the odious filth of it? Wee may commit sinne, but God must remit it, and become a sufficient propitiation for sinne.

Corporally.]

How the diuine nature can be in the humane.Quest. How can the whole diuine nature be said to be in the humane, seeing the one is infinite, the other finite?
Answ. 1. It is no more then to affirme, that the humane nature is vnited to the diuine in the fulnesse of it. Or 2. That it is incorporate, or made flesh incarnate, or hath a body ioyned to it. Or else 3. Let it be granted of the inhabitation in the flesh of Christ: yet it followeth not that therefore it is there included. For it is so in the flesh whole, that without the flesh it is euery where. For the diuinitie is not only immense that it can be euery where, but also most simple, that it can be and be euery where whole, as the soule in the body, and the light is in the Sunne, and yet not included there, yet truly and whole there.
Quest. But since this text plainly affirmes that Christ had a body, and so by Synecdoche, a true humane nature, it may be here enquired whether his humane nature was like ours, and the rather since the Godhead did dwell in him bodily.
How Christ was like vs, and how vnlike.Answ. That this may be cleerely resolued, wee must know that what is said in this verse notwithstanding, Christ in his humane nature was like vnto vs. But for euidence, I shew briefly in what he was like, and then in what he was not like. He was like 1. in that he tooke a true body, not fantasticall. 2. He tooke a true humane body, and not a celestiall body, and he was endued with a reasonable soule. 3. Hee had the essentiall faculties of both. 4. He had the very infirmities of our nature, I meane such as were not sinfull. Now Christ was vnlike vs in body, in soule, in both: In body: 1. In his conception there was a difference; for we are of Adam, and by Adam, but he was of Adam, and not by Adam, for he was not begotten, but made: and so originall sinne was auoided, and some thinke his very body had all the parts at the first conception
 formed. 2. His body was not corruptible, it saw no corruption. In soule he differed two waies. 1. In that it was without sinne. 2. In that it was indued with gifts aboue men and Angels. In both there was difference. For 1. They subsisted from the beginning in the diuine nature, and did not make a person of themselues. 2. They are admitted vnto the grace of adoration, so as now Christ-man is worshipped though not properly as he is man.
Thus of the natures of Christ: the vnion of them followes, in a double consideration. 1. Of the manner, in the word dwell. 2. Of the measure in all fulnesse.
Dwell] There are two kindes of vnions in Christ. 1. Of the soule and body. 2. Of both those with the person of the word, the latter is here meant.
There are 2. questions about vnion in Theologie,Distinctions of vnions. that are wonderfull full of difficultie. 1. The vnion of three persons in one nature. 2. The vnion of two natures in one person. This latter is in Christ, he is begotten as God, created in respect of his soule, and borne in respect of his body.
There are diuers vnions. 1. Substantiall in the Trinitie. 2. Naturall in soule and body. 3. Carnall in man and wife. 4. Mysticall in Christ and the Church. 5. Personall in Christ, for in him as soule and body are one man, so God and man are one Christ.
It is much easier to tell how this vnion in Christ is not then to tell how it is. Negatiuely thus.
Things are vnited three waies; Some things are compounded and made one, yet the things vnited are not changed, mingled, or confounded, but remaine perfect: as many stones vnited in one building. 2. Some things vnited are perfect, but yet changed and not what they were: as the body of a man made of the vnion of the foure elements. 3. Some things remaine whole and not changed but vnperfect of themselues, as the soule and body of themselues apart. Now this vnion of Christ is not after any of these waies. Againe this vnion in Christ is. 1. Not by bare assistance or presence(...).. 2. Not by habituall vnion(...)., either by affection, as friends are one, or by grace(...)., as the Saints are one with God. 3. Not by worthinesse(...)., or authoritie. 4. Not by harmonie or consent of will(...). or opinion: as the Angels are one with God, and as the Saints shall. 5. Not by ioint authoritie(...). as two Consuls are one. 6. Not by homonumie or giuing of the same name to each nature. 7 Not of pleasure only(...)., as if it were so only because God would haue it so. Lastly, Not by bare inhabitation, for the word is made flesh. And therefore though the holy Ghost vse the similitude of dwelling heere, to note the continuall residence of the diuine nature in the humane, yet that similitude doth not expresse this vnion cleerely. For the housholder and the house cannot be fitly called one.
The effects of this vnion may be considered either as they are in Christ or to vs ward.
In Christ, from this vnion slowes.
1. The predication of the things of each nature, to the person and that truely and really, as when his bloud is said to be the bloud of the Sonne of GodAct. 20., etc.
2. The inriching of the humane nature with admirable gifts, as great as could possibly be in a created nature; In respect of which he came the neerest vnto God of any that euer was or could be. Nay if all the goodnes of man and Angels were conferred on one creature, yet it were not comparable to that that is in one Christ.
These gifts in Christ they were either naturall or supernaturall,Gifts naturall* and supernaturall in Christ. by naturall gifts I meane such as these; in the minde, the best wit or memorie and such like faculties, better then euer were in any man, I except not Adam himselfe.
 In the body, most faire forme and a diuine face: his very countenance did expresse a diuinitie in him. The very temperament also of his body was such as nothing could be better tempered or more excellent, as being formed by the holy Ghost.
His supernaturall gifts were either in body or minde: in body, as that hee could with his eye pierce the heauens and see there what he would: for Stephen could see into heauen as is recorded Act. 7. much more must we belieue of our Sauiour, for in Stephen there was but a small parcell of diuine light. Now I say, those gifts were aboue nature in Christ, but yet not against nature(...) non (...)., In minde there was in him exceeding holines, goodnesse, wisedome, and all the gifts of the spirit.
But all these supernaturall gifts both in soule and body must be considered in Christ two waies. 1. In the state of humiliation. 2. In the state of exaltation. Such gifts as he receiued in the state of humiliation, were properly the effects of this vnion, the other were giuen in respect of his obedience vnto death.
Of the first sort I propound these, 1. In the whole soule so great holines as can be imagined to befall a creature. 2. In the minde, most exquisite wisedome. 3. In the heart, such bowels of charitie, loue, and compassion, as was neuer in any man or Angell; in the whole man, wonderfull power.
Now amongst all these I only consider of his wisedome and power.
A twofold wisedome in Christ.There was a twofold wisedome in Christ. Increate, and that was onely in his diuine nature; and create, and that was in his humane. This created wisedome in Christ was threefold.A threefold created wisedom in Christ. 1. Knowledge by immediate visionMat. 11.27.. 2. Knowledge by heauenly habits infusedEsay 11.3.. 3. Knowledge gotten by experienceLuk 2 52.. By the first knowledge he knoweth immediately the word or God, to which his humane nature is vnited, and in God as in a glasse he sees all other things. Thus he sees God face to face, and this is a certaine created light in the soule by participation of diuine light.
Concerning this first sort of knowledge in Christ, strange things are said by Diuines, but the summe of all is this: 1. That the soule of Christ by this created light and vision sees God, and that first, Whole: secondly, Perfectly. 2. That in this vision he sees all things.
Obiect. Then might some one say the knowledge of Christ in his humane nature is made equall to his diuine.
Solut. Not so. For first, though he see God whole yet he seeth him not wholy(...), not (...)., that is, not so much as can be seene by God himselfe, though more then any creature can attaine vnto. 2. Though hee know the thinges that are and shall be, yet, he knowes not such things as shall not be, and yet God can doe them. 3. What he doth know by this finite light, he knowes not so plainely as the word doth. 4. It seeth not things at one view or altogether, but one thing after another. Thus of his immediate or blessed knowledge.
The second kinde of knowledge is habituall or infused knowledge. By this knowledge, he knowes all that can be knowne of man or Angels, yea of all of them together, of this he speakes Esay. 11.3. There are foure wordes to expresse it, wisedome, vnderstanding, knowledge, and counsell; by the first hee vnderstandeth celestiall and diuine things; by the second things separate from matter, as the Angels; by the third things naturall; and by the last things to be done. But this knowledge is much inferiour to the former, for thus hee knowes not the diuine essence. Of experimentall knowledge the holy Ghost spake Luk. 2.52. when he said Iesus increased in wisedome, and that must needs be in such knowledge as he got by obseruation by degrees in the world. Thus of the wisedome of Christ.
Concerning the power of ChristOf the power of Christ. many things are controuerted in other
 Churches: and I haue spoken of it before, more then men of wrangling natures and corrupt and enuious mindes did well take, though no more then what is ordinarie in the writings of learned men: I shall not need therefore to say much of it in this place. The power of Christ is twofold, increate and create. Increated power, is the power of his diuine nature, and so he is omnipotent. Created power is an admirable force in the humane nature of Christ, aboue man or Angels, to accomplish that vnto which it is directed. By his diuine power, Christ worketh diuine things, and by his humane power, hee worketh humane things, thus is hee powerfull aboue all creatures, in vnderstanding, memorie, will, and in acting whatsoeuer the Law of God can will.
Hitherto of the power of Christ: and so of the gifts in the state of humiliation.
In the state of exaltation, there befell Christ 4. things. 1. a wonderfull excellencie of glory. 2. the grace of adoration with the diuine nature. 3. the power of administration of all things in heauen and earthMat. 28.. 4. a iudiciarie power, viz. to be the Iudge of the whole worldActs 17.30..
Thus of the second effect.
The third effect of this vnion in Christ, was his mediatorship, as remaining perfect God he became man; so without any mutation of himselfe, he is by this vnion become perfect mediator betweene God and man, the true high Priest, and the only head of the Church.
The fourth and last effect of this vnion, is the communion of the effects: there are diuers operations of both natures, yet they meet in one work done: the worker is the person; the fountaines of operation, are the two natures according to their properties: the actions are some proper to the diuine nature, some to the humane, yet the outward fact or thing effected is the worke of both natures. Thus of the effects of this vnion in Christ.
Now the effects that flow to vs from hence, are either in Christ for vs, or in vs by Christ. In Christ for vs, there are two effects, expiation and reconciliation to the father. In vs by Christ are three effects, iustification, sanctification and glorification.

In all fulnesse]

The vbiquitaries doe abuse this place, for they alleage that this place proues, that the essentiall properties of the diuine nature are communicated really to the humane, and so they say Christ is in his humane nature omnipotent, euery where present and omniscient: this they fall vpon to establish his reall presence in the sacrament. But that this place cannot fit their turnes, may appeare by these reasons, 1. He saith, in whom, that is, in which person the Godhead dwells etc. now it is not doubted by any, but that the person of Christ is omnipotent, euery where present etc. 2. Be it, in which body the Godhead dwells etc. yet this proues nothing for them, for so hee dwells in the Saints, and yet they doe not say, they are euery where present. 3. When he saith, all fulnes, this fulnes notes the essence as well as the properties: now I hope they will not say the essence is wholly communicated to the body of Christ. 4. All fulnesse imports all attributes as well as some, now all attributes are not communicated: as for example, the body of Christ was not eternall. Lastly, the same was cleared before, the fulnes of the Godhead is there as the light is in the sunne.
From the consideration of all which doctrine,Vses. we may see cause to be abased and confounded in our selues, that we should not more admire the wonderfull glory of the person of Christ: and for the time to come, wee should heartily striue with God by praier, and the vse of all good meanes, that hee would be pleased to reueale his sonne in vs, and shew this rich mysterie of God manifested in the flesh. Lastly, this should confirme vs in the faith of all the
 good things promised in the Messiah, seeing hence wee know how infinitely compleat he is in himselfe. Thus of the 9. verse.



VERS. 10 And yee are compleate in him who is the head of all principalitie and power.

THE third reason of the dehortation is taken from our perfection in Christ: we need not go to traditions, or philosophie, or ceremonies, seeing we are so compleat in our selues as we are in Christ.
Obserue in the first words, 1. the persons, yee. 2. the time, are. 3. the benefit communicated, compleat. 4. the author, Christ. 5. the limitation, in him: In generall we may obserue, that Christ doth deriue of his fulnes to his members, of his fulnesse haue we all receiued grace for graceIoh. 1.16.: out of his fulnesse he filleth all in allEphes. 1.23.: he ascended farre aboue all heauens that he might fill all thingsEphes. 4.10..
Now if any aske wherein Christians are compleat, or what it is Christ doth deriue vnto Christians out of his fulnesse? I answer, hee maketh them compleat, or filleth them out of his fulnes, with knowledgeMath. 11.25. Rom. 15.14., grace and truthIoh. 1.16., peace, power,Act. 6.8., ioy and righteousnesseRom. 14.17., strength against temptations and deathHebr. 2., abundance of blessings in the GospellRom. 15.29., and he supplieth all their necessities out of the riches of his glory, but especially they are compleat in the imputation of his most perfect righteousnesse.
Thus of the Author and the benefit. Where he saith, yee are compleat, hee teacheth them that there must be a particular application of this fulnesse of Christ: Though there be water enough in the sea, or in the riuer or fountaine, yet it helps not vs, vnlesse it be deriued to vs by conduits, etc. though there be foode enough in the market, yet we are not filled with it, vnlesse it be bought and drest and taken by vs.
Now for the time, when he saith, yee are compleat, hee shewes that it is not enough that mens hearts haue beene full of Christ, but they must bee so still.
Quest. How can they be said to be already filled and compleat in Christ, seeing many things for their perfection are not yet giuen, and there is a difference of fulnes in the children of God? Answ. That this point may be more clearely vnderstood, I consider of this compleatnesse more exactly, both in what it is, and what it ought to be, for they may be said to be compleat, in that they ought to labour after it.
The faithfull are compleat or impleat rather, either comparatiuely or positiuely:Christians are compleat both comparatiuely and positiuely. comparatiuely in this sense, because they are in the absolutest estate that any kinde of people are in, and farre more happy then all the world beside, for the earth is cursed to all other men, the felicitie they would desire cannot be had, or if it were, yet the wrath of God for their sinnes, lyeth like fire in the mids of all, and who knowes when it will burne? how can there be any compleatnes in their estate, seeing the vnregenerat heart cannot be filled, and the things they can get, serue but for the flesh and bodily life? thus they are comparatiuely compleat. Now positiuely they are so 4. waies. 1. In respect of the fulnes of the body mysticall, it is a glorious well compacted compleat bodyEphes. 1.23. and 4.16., and so the Church is the fulnesse of Christ. 2. In respect of iustification, and that 2. waies: for euery child of God hath whole Christ giuen him, and his whole righteousnes imputed: and besides he hath forgiuenesse of all sorts of sinnes, originall, actuall, of infirmitie or presumption, etc. 3. In respect of sanctification. 4. In respect of glorification.
Now for glory; we must vnderstand, that though they are not yet in heauen, yet they haue it in respect of promiseHeb. 9.15., and in hopeHeb. 6.14., and in the means2 Tim. 3.16., and in the beginning of itIoh. 17.3.: and for sanctification and grace, it must be considered
 according to the threefold degrees of it. 1. in inchoation. 2. in ripe age. 3. in perfect consummation in heauen.
Now for the first,The compleatnes of the weake Christian. euen the weakest babes and infants in grace are compleat 4. waies. 1. They haue compleat and perfect promises euen of compleatnes it selfeEzek. 36. Ier. 42.39.. 2. They are compleat in respect of the meanes of sanctification, for first they haue full libertie to vse them as they haue oportunitie, and they may make their best profit of them: besides the respect of the efficacie of the meanes, their God is the holy one of Israel, Christ is the head in all fulnes of vertue etc. they may pray for what they will and be heard, and the word is the arme and power of God to saluation. 3. They are compleat in respect of the parts sanctified, they haue grace in euery part though not in euery degree. 4. They are compleat in their desire and respect to all Gods commandements.
Thus of weake Christians and their compleatnesse.
Now the strong Christians compleatnesse may be considered negatiuely:The compleatnesse of strong Christians. and so they are not compleat, that are not full of knowledge, that cannot beare hard sayings, that hath not a plerophorie of assurance, that is not filled with contentation, that cannot liue by faith, or is not filled with the fruits of righteousnesse.
The last thing is the limitation, in him.
In him] Nothing will be had by Christ till we be in Christ, 1 Ioh. 5.20. Things are said to be in Christ 1. in respect of creation, all things were created in himCol. 1.16.. 2. In respect of preseruation, all things consist in himCol. 1.17.. 3. In respect of the mysticall vnion, and so the Church onely is in him.
In him we are electedEph. 1.4., in him the righteousnesse of God is reuealed from heauenRom. 1.17. 1 Cor. 5.21.. in him all promises are yea and amen2 Cor. 1.20.. in him we are made rich1 Cor. 1.5.. in him Iewes and Gentiles are made oneEphes. 2.6.. in him the building is coupled together and growesEph. 2.20.. in him we haue life1 Ioh. 5.11..
Now men may know whether they be in Christ, if they examine themselues wether they bee new creatures2 Cor. 5.17. or no, and whether they haue the spirit of ChristRom. 8.9., and whether they loue the appearing of Christ2 Tim. 4.8. 2 Thes. 3.5. 2 Pet. 3.12., whether the world hate them, whether they loue the brethren1 Ioh. 3.14. Eph. 4.16.17.; and whether they walke in the light in all desire of holy conuersation1 Ioh. 1.6. Heb. 9.14. 1 Ioh. 3.6..
Who is the head of all principalitie and power] It is true that Magistrates be in great place on earth and haue principalitie and power,Ioh. 15.18.20. and may be so called iustly, but that is not meant here. These principalities and powers are the Angells, and so these words containe the fourth reason: Christ is the head of Angells, therefore whatsoeuer they haue they haue it from Christ, and therefore, what should we doe to go to Angells to helpe vs, when Christ the head is giuen to be our Mediator?
The Angells are diuersly called in Scripture: they are called spirits to expresse their nature, and Angells to expresse their office, as messengers sent of God: they are called sonnes of GodIob. 38.: they are called CherubymsGenes. 3. from the forme they appeared, viz. like youthes: they are called SeraphimsEsay 6. for their order and fiercenesse in the execution of God anger: they be called starres of the morningIob. 38.7. from their brightnesse of nature: they are called watchmenDan. 4.10., they are in heauen as a watch tower, and they keep the world: they are called flaming firePsal. 104., because God vseth their helpe to destroy the wicked: here they be called principalities and powers, which are words of greatest excellencie amongst men, and are vsed here to shadow out the glory of those heauenly creatures. Angells are most spirituall creatures without bodies: they moue like the winde vnresistably, easily without molestation, and in an vnperceiuable time: and for their number, I am not of their fond opinion that thinke they are meant in the parable of the 99. sheep, as if they were so infinite beyond the number of mankinde: yet without question, their number is exceeding
 great and almost incomprehensible, and cannot be knowne of vs in this worldDan. 7.10. Hosea 12.24. Math. 26.53.. They wonderfully excell in knowledge, and that naturall, and supernaturall, and experimentall. But to speake a little more expresly, I consider in the Angels, 1. What they are in themselues, here called principalities and powers. 2. What they are in relation to Christ, who is said here to bee their head. 3. What they be in reference to the body of Christ.
The Angels in themselues are principalities, for their excellencie of nature and estate. They are called powers for their wonderfull force they haue ouer other creatures at Gods appointment. The words doe not import any hierarchie among the Angels, for howsoeuer we are not to thinke there is any Ataxie among those glorious creatures; so it hath beene bold presumption in those either Iewes or Scholemen or Papists that haue trauelled in it to describe a fantasticall number of orders amongst them. For their excellencie of nature, as they are here called principalities, so else where they are called, starres of the morning, sonnes of God, yea GodsElohim.. And for their power it is exceeding great ouer the creatures: as when an Angell could destroy all the first borne of Egypt, and to ouerthrowe so many thousand in Senacharibs armie: an Angell set Peter out of prison, an Angell caried Philip in an instant, they can strangely winde themselues into mens imaginations, so as they can appeare to men in their dreamesMath. 1.. As euill Angels can suggest tentations, so do good Angels holy motions. They haue power ouer the Deuils to restrain them, but worke miracles they cannot but by the power of God; the Angell in the 8. of Iohn could moue the waters, but hee could not of himselfe cure the sicke. Thus of Angels in themselues.
In relation to Christ so they are implied to be of the body, and Christ to be their head. Now we may not maruell at it that Christ should be the head of Angels, for there be diuers distinct benefits which Angels from thence do receiue,The benefits Angels haue by Christ. which by naturall creation they had not. It is a benefit that they are vouchsafed a place in the mysticall body vnder Christ that they might be receiued, as it were into the new order in Christ. 2. A peace is made betweene them and man in Christ. 3. The roomes of Angels falne are supplied by the elect, the society of Angels being much maimed by their fall. 4. They are refreshed with singular ioy for the conuersion of the elect,; besides the inlarging of their knowledge, that they are vouchsafed the vnderstanding of the secrets of the Gospell. 5. They receiue from Christ confirming grace, and so assurance that they shall neuer fall: which is their cheife benefit. 6. Their obedience in it owne nature is vnperfectIob. 4., though not sinfull, and therefore may need to be couered by Christs perfections.
Thus of the relation to Christ. Now if any aske what relation they haue to the body of Christ,What the angels doe for the body of Christ. and what they doe vnto it: I answere, by propounding both what seruice they do to the body, and in what manner. For the first, they are like Masters and Tutors to whom the great King of heauen sends out his children to nurse. God out of the rabble of best men doth adopt ch^ldren to himselfe and after commit them to be kept by those most noble citizens of heauenPsal. 34.; Besides they execute iudgement vpon the enemies of the Church. They attend vs at the houre of death and carry our soules to heauenLuk. 16.. They shall gather our bodies together at the last dayMath. 24. Lastly for the accomplishment of all designments for our good they stand alwaies looking on the face of God to receiue commandementsMath. 18.10.. Now for the manner in the old Testament they are reported to haue sometimes appeared vnto men, somtimes in their dreames, sometimes in visions, the Prophets being rauished, into an extasie, without true bodies, but not without the forme of bodies. Sometimes they appeared in true bodies, either such as were for the time created of nothing, or else formed for the seruice of some preexisting matter, or else
 they vsed the bodies of some liuing creatures: for if the Deuill could speake in the Serpent, why might not some good Angell vse other Creatures: as some thinke the Angell spake in Balaams Asse. But for this kinde of declaring themselues to men in the new Testament it is ceased, especially since the primitiue times, so as now we cannot describe how the Angels doe performe their seruice to the Church.
Now for the vse of the whole, in as much Christ is the head of principalities and powers, we may comfort our selues diuers waies. If Christ fill the Angels, how much more can he out of his fulnesse fill vs, in the supplie of all our wants? againe, shall we not reioyce in the grace here is done to vs, in that wee are vnited into communion with Angels vnder our head? yea and that such glorious creatures, are appointed to be our attendants, why should wee feare when Christ and his Angels will be so ready about vs? further this may also instruct vs, we neede not be ashamed of Christs seruice, seeing the very Angels follow him and depend vpon him. A prince that kept great princes to be his domesticall seruants, were like to be much sought to for preferment of such as would follow him? Oh how should we long after Christ who is head ouer such glorious creatures as the Angels are?



VERS. 11. In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sinnes of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ.

HEere is the fifth reason, and is peculiarly addressed against those Christians of the Iewes which ioyned the Law with the Gospell as necessarie to saluation. By circumcision they were initiated to the Law of Moses: and if circumcision can adde nothing to vs nor perfect vs any way in Christ, then neither can the Law it selfe. We haue that in Christ of which circumcision, and the law were signes, we are circumcised in the spirit and therefore neede not to be circumcised in the flesh, and in Christ we haue the accomplishment of what was shadowed in the law.
Might some one say the consequence is strange:Ob. we are circumcised in spirit therefore we need not be circumcised in the flesh. Why Abraham was circumcised in spirit as well as we, yet he needed to be circumcised also in the flesh. For answere hereunto,Sol. we must know that in the time of the old Testament this consequence was of no force: yet now in the new it is exceeding strong. For now we haue not onely accomplished what was signified by circumcision, but Christ hath appointed another signe in steed of it, viz. Baptisme, especially this is cleare amongst the Gentiles, which neuer were circumcised in the flesh.
There is imported vnto vs in this verse a twofold circumcision.A twofold circumcision. 1. The circumcision made with hands(...).. 2. The circumcision made without hands(...). of circumcision in the flesh.. The one externall, in the flesh, by Moses. The other internall, in the spirit, by Christ.
Concerning circumcision made in the flesh, there is an obseruation of a fourefold time. 1. There was a time wherein it was not, viz. from the creation till Abrahams daies. 2. There was a time wherein it was necessary, viz. from Abraham till Christ. 3. There was a time wherein it was tolerable, viz. for some few yeeres after Christ. 4. There was a time wherein it was in tollerable, and vtterly vnlawfull, viz. since the Apostles times to the end of the worldGal. 5.2. What circumcision signified..
Circumcision had a double signification, for partly it looked to Christ, and partly to the members of Christ. As it looked to Christ it signified 1. That they should haue a Sauiour that was circumcised, that is free from all sinne.
 2. That he should come of the seede of Abraham. 3. That he should satisfie for sinne by effusion of bloud, for all bloud in the old Testament was tipicall. Now as it looked to man, it signified. 1. That by carnall generation we were vncleane, and out of couenant with God. 2. That the faithfull haue interest in the blessed seed. 3. That our hearts must be circumcised, by the painefull mortification of sinne, and the painefull casting away of sin, as a wretched fore-skin: and that wee should suffer affliction of spirit for sin, till our hearts were as sore, as were the Shecchemites bodies. 4. That wee are adopted into Gods fauour and communion with Saints, and distinguished from all other men. 5. That all holinesse of life and forgiuenesse of sinne must be had in societie with the seed of Abraham. 6. That through bearing the crosse the first fruites of our bloud should be ready to be offered for him that died for vs.
The end of circumcision.The ends why circumcision was appointed were, 1. To teach them by signification the things before mentioned. 2. To be as a sacrament initiatorie to let them into the Church. 3. To be a partition wall between them and the Gentiles, and as fetters to restraine them from society with them. 4. To binde them to keepe the whole LawGal 5.3.. 5. To be a seale both of the righteousnesse of faithRom. 4.11. and of their right and possession of the Land of Canaan as a type of heauenGen. 17.7..
There were three sorts of citizens in the old Church of the Iewes, Isralites, proselites and religious men. Isralites were of the seede of Abraham, those were bound to circumcision necessarilyGen. 17.12.14.. Proselites, were Gentiles conuerted to the Iewish religion, those for the strengthning of their faith did subiect themselues also to circumcision and the ceremoniall law. Now there were certaine religious men of the Gentiles conuerted, and embraced the couenant of God, but were not subiect to circumcision: such were Naaman, and the Eunuch and others.
Why it vvas abolished.Now this circumcision after the comming of Christ was abolished. 1. Because all effusion of bloud must cease when Christs bloud was shed. 2. The partition wall was now taken downe, and therefore there needed no signe of difference. 3. The priesthood was changed, and therefore the rites belonging to it also. Obiect. But Christ himselfe is said to be the Minister of circumcisionRom. 15.. Solut. That was true. 1. As hee was giuen to the Iewes by expiation to performe what was promised to their fathers. 2. Hee was a minister not of the Law (which he abolished and fulfilled in his comming) but of the Iewes among whom he was conuersant: for he preached not to the Gentiles. He was a minister of circumcision, that is, he was a Preacher among the Iewes, as Peter was the Apostle of circumcision. Thus of circumcision made with hands.
Now concerning circumcision made without hands, 5. things in this verse may be noted. 1. The persons circumcised, ye. 2. The time are. 3. The manner negatiuely set downe, without hands. 4. The forme of it, putting off the body of sinnes of the flesh. 5. The efficient cause, the circumcision of Christ.
Note.In generall we may note that the case of the Gentiles is not worse then the Iewes, we want sacrifices, types, oracles, circumcision etc. but wee haue the thing signified;8. Reasons why there be such hard phrases and kindes of speech in Scripture. before the law they had the shadow, vnder the Law they had the Image, after the law we haue the body.
Quest. But what should bee the reason that the holy Ghost in this place and in diuers others vseth such hard phrases and darke kindes of speech?
Answ. The Lord of himselfe in many places of Scripture doth vse allegories or darke sayings. 1. Thereby to execute vpon wicked men a strange and secret curse: He speaks to them in parablesMath. 13. Esay 6.. 2. The maiestie of the matter sometimes denieth to be exprest in more ordinarie termes. 3. In allegories
 the holy Ghost doth not only tell the thing, but explicate it by comparisons, as here. 4. The hard places of Scripture are Gods chests, wherein he hides his treasure from wicked men. 5. God hereby prouides for the constant nourishment of the faithfull, that though now they finde a sweet rellish in the word, yet if they come againe to the same word, there is such depths in it, they may finde more food in it. 6. God somewhat aimes at the humbling of the proud heart of man, and will hereby make him see his wants, and many waies buffet him. 7. To excite in vs so much the more diligence. 8. Some parts of Scripture are for an appointed timeHeb. 2.3., and till then they are sealed vp. So a vaile is yet drawne ouer some parts of the Reuelation in things not yet accomplished; so it was in Daniels timeDan. 12.8.. Thus in generall.
Circumcision without hands is a wonderfull worke of the spirit of grace,What circumcision vvithout hands is. wrought by the word vpon the members of Christ, vpon their receiuing into the mysticall body, by which corruption of nature is wounded, beloued sins cast away with sorrow, and the sinner receiued into an euerlasting communion with God and his Saints. Now that there is such a worke as this in euery childe of God, is apparant by these places of Scripture, Deut. 10.16. and 30.6. Ier. 4.4. Rom. 2.26. and this text.
The first thing here to be considered is the persons both in themselues, ye, and in their relation to Christ, in whom, and to other gifts mentioned before, and imported in the word also.
Ye] What graces we heare to be in Christs members, we must looke to it, that they be in vs: it was no comfort to the Colossians that others were circumcised with circumcision without hands, vnlesse it might be truely so said of them also. Which serues for great reproofe of many that neglect the power of all doctrine, which is the application of it to themselues. but this comes to passe either for want of faithHeb. 2.1., or through preiudicePsal. 2.3. 2 King. 9.11. Ier. 29.26., or the slumbring of the spirit, or the loue of secret sinne; yea many lose the power of the doctrine, by wandring obseruation how it may sute vnto others.
In whom] Circumcision without hands is onely found in such as are actually in Christ, they only wound corruption of nature, and cast away beloued sinnes with sorrow, this is the difference betweene temporarie faith and iustifying faith. There are three sorts of hearers in the Citie, Some wholly prophane, such as will mend nothing, nor like to heare of mending. Some openly sincere, professing constantly this circumcision without hands. A third sort, partaking of the properties of both the former: for they agree with the best in these things: 1. In the loue of the ministerie and Ministers that preach faithfully. 2. In the taste of the powers of the life to come, finding the word often of singular power, so as they receiue it with ioy and great admiration. 3. In the defence of the truth they seeme as forward as any: these are neere the kingdom of God, as the Scribe was; these are more then halfe perswaded, as Agrippa was; these are fired with desire many times to know what to doe to be saued, as the young man in the Gospell was; but alas all this brings them within the compasse of none of Gods promises: and if they looke not to it, fearefull apostacie will be the end of all this, and they may proue most spitefull aduersaries of the same ministerie they admired, and proud contemners of the same remorse, with which themselues were often smitten, and so their latter end be ten times worse then their beginning.
Quest. But what doe these men want, or what are their defects, that they should not be right for all this, hauing such great affection to the word, yea euen when it is most sincerely taught?
Answ. Alas there are diuers things too apparant in their estate. For first, they ioyne not themselues with such as feare God in fellowship in the Gospel. 2. They shunne by all meanes the crosse for righteousnesse sake. 3. They respect
 not all Gods commandements: there are some sinnes they will not leaue: there are some corruptions they are so engaged vnto, that they will at no hand leaue them. 4. Some of them forsake not the very sinnes they seem to detest and sometimes to cry out against; they cry out vpon swearing, and yet (vile beasts as they are) they will sweare still, yea and that most fearefully, yea after many remorses of conscience for it. 5. They will not be perswaded to vse all Gods ordinances: indeed they heare constantly, and to any mans thinking, with great attention, but they pray not in their families, they will not vse the helpe of conference, they read not the Scriptures with any order or conscience, etc. 6. You see they are not carefull of their companie, they neither shunne the appearance nor the occasions of euill, they giue not ouer their going, nor their resort vnto vngodly companie. They haue not beene truely humbled by godly sorrow for their sinne. Lastly, they haue sinceritie in respect of persons; in some they like it, in others they doe not like it. They loue not all the Saints.
Also] This also leads vs to the former priuiledges in Christ, and imports that the circumcision without hands here mentioned is to bee accounted a maruellous grace of God* and worthily; for our iudging of our selues, frees vs from the condemnation of the world; and our daies of mortification, are as it were the wedding daies of the soule; and godly sorrow is accompanied with the spirit of prayer; and a fountaine of grace is opened, when our hearts are opened with true contrition. Thus of the persons.
Are] This word designes the time of this spirituall circumcision; the time for the putting away and cutting off of our beloued sinnes is in this life, it must be now done or neuer done. besides till this be done, we can feele no profit or benefit for Christ.
Quest. The Iewes in the Law did know directly when they should be circumcised in the flesh: may not we also gesse at the time of the circumcision without hands,The time of circumcision without hands. when God would haue vs go about it, beyond which time it may not be deferred without singular danger? Answ. There is a time and it may be knowne, and it is wonderfull dangerous to stand out that time: in generall, the time to humble our selues by mortification for our sinnes, and so to set about this spirituall circumcision, is, when God grants vs the meanes of saluationLuk. 14.17.: more specially when we are pressed with Gods iudgementsIoel. 2.12.: or when the mouthes of Gods seruants are in a speciall manner opened vnto vs, and their hearts made large2 Cor. 6.2.: or when God dispenseth other graces, as temporarie faith, loue to the word, and ioy2 Cor. 6.2. etc. or when we are smitten with the axe of Gods word, and remorse for sinne is wrought in vsMath. 3.10.: or when hearing hath kindled in vs a desire and thirst after the best thingsEsay 55.1.6.: or lastly, when we first set out to make profession of our being in ChristIoh. 15.2..
Quest. But may not any man repent at any time. Answ. No. 1. A man may tarrie so long till he commit the sinne against the holy Ghost. 2. Men that go not so farre, may yet by obstinate impenitencie prouoke God to cast them into a reprobate senseRom. 1 and 11.8.9.10. Esay. 6. Math. 13.13.. We see by experience that the most men that pretend to mend afterwards, yet doe not, but troops of men that forget God go into hellPsal. 9..
Obiect. But the Scripture saith, At what time soeuer a sinner repenteth him of his sinne from the bottome of his heart, God will forgiue him, etc. Solut. 1. Marke the words, they haue a limitation, thou must repent from the bottome of thy heart, or else they comfort not thee. 2. For the extent of the time, in so many precise words; the text in Ezekiel is not at what time soeuer, but in the day that a sinner repenteth, which is not so vniuersall, but that it may admit the exceptions before, and though some men may and do repent at their latter end, yet neither all nor the most.

Obiect. But yet the Theefe repented on the crosse. Sol. Shall one example make thee presume? why thou maist know that worlds of people when they came to die did not repent as he did, why shouldest not thou more feare the example of so many not repenting: what is one to thousands? 2. Thou readest that the other Theefe vpon the same crosse died without repentance 3. Thou must know that an ordinarie rule cannot be drawne from an extraordinarie instance: his conuersion was miraculous, one of the 7. wonders wrought by Christ in his death. Christ made Peter walke on the sea, will he make thee doe so to? will he for thy pleasure darken the sunne, or shake the earth, or cleaue the rockes? etc. Thus of the time.
Without hands] 2. Things may here be noted.
1. That, that is not circumcision which is outward, made with the hands of man, but that is true circumcision which is inward. Hence there is two sorts of Israelites: the one is a carnall Isralite, one outward; the other is a true Isralite, for he is one inward in his spirit. As it was then so it is now, the carnall Isralite hath the name of Israell, and the signe of true circumcision; as then the circumcision in the flesh, so now baptisme: and besides they professe to be the seede of Abraham, and they speake faire of God and heauen. Q. But what are the principall defects of the carnall Isralite?The defects of the carnall Isralite. Answ. 1. Hee rests in the worke done, he beares himselfe vpon the externall worke of holines: he serued God, for he was at Church: he is regenerated, for he was baptised; he hath praied to God, for he stretched out his hands. 2. His praise is of men and not of God. 3. He wholly neglects the power of godlinesse and the exercises thereof. 4. He is disordered in his life laden with iniquitie. 5. He is senselesse or incorrigible vnder publicke iudgements. 6. He vsually opposeth and persueth him that is borne after the spirit.
2. We may note here that God is not tied to meanes, hee can worke without hands. What is then the estate of wicked men? no hands of men or Angels can make them happie, it is a worke done without hands. Oh how honourable is the worke of mortification of a sinner? it was a glorious worke to make those huge heauens, and this mightie earth without hands: such is the glorie of our spirituall circumcision: we see also here how little beholding the kingdome of Christ is to this world: their hands will not be gotten to set it vp, God must doe it without hands. Lastly wee should learne in all estates to liue by faith and rest vpon God, whether in affliction or tentation or mortification of sinne, though we see not meanes, yet let this comfort vs God can helpe vs without hands. And thus of the instrument of circumcision, as it is here set downe negatiuely.
Putting off the body of the sinnes of the flesh] Here is the forme of this circumcision without hands: it lies in the mortification of the body of sinnes that are in the flesh. Where note 1. the matter to be mortified, the body of sinnes. 2. The manner, it must be put off.

The flesh]

The flesh is one of the three great enemies of God and mans saluation, it is a trecherous domesticall enemie. As it is trecherous, so it is tyrannicall,The practises of the flesh. it will not be pleased vnlesse it raigne. A most secret enemie for she sits at the fountaine and poisoneth all: most falsly she lets the Deuill, and permits him to set vp his holds and fortifications in the mindes of men: and is neuer quiet till it bring the soule into actuall high treason againg God. It is the flesh that causeth whoredomes, murder, drunkenesse, and all disorders. She opposeth all the waies of goodnes, both by obiecting against them, and by making euill present, she sauours not the things of God, nor can vnderstand them. It is shee that makes the Law vnpossible to vs: what with her vaile of ignorance, and the slownesse and hardnesse she diffuseth vpon our hearts and spirits, she makes the seruice
 of God to seeme almost alwaies euill vnto vs. Yea if shee get into her throne she dare exalt herselfe against God, and iudge euen God himselfe, and his will, counsell, prouidence, and people; her very wisedome is enmitie against God. And so infectiously vile is she, that she diffuseth her poison to our very posteritie, so as we beget a very race of rebels: and in all this, she fortifies her selfe by all aduantages, from euill example, or by riches, and worldly greatnesse, or carnall wisedome, or successe in sinning, yea rather then she will be subdued or much pursued, she will entrench her selfe vnder the very colours of Christ, making her pretence of following him in words, that she may the more securely follow her owne lusts in deed. This she doth, and thus spoiles the image of God in vs, and makes vs most filthy and lothsome, and so opens the doore of our soule vnto Sathan, that our hearts are made a very stie for vncleane spirits to dwell in, and thus she will doe if she be not mortified, till she bring men to hell and eternall condemnation there.
Courses for taming the flesh. Esay 40.6. 1 Pet. 1.2.4. 1 Cor 1.Now for the taming of the flesh God hath taken diuers excellent courses, 1. He hath laid a necessitie of mortalitie vpon it, all flesh must know it is but grasse. 2. To crosse the glory of the fleshly, the Lord of purpose when hee chuseth heires of saluation, will not take many of those the flesh commends for mightinesse, or noblenesse, or wisedome, or the like. 3. God hath set a standing curse vpon the chiefe things desired by the flesh, so as they cannot be vsed, but with a kinde of experience of their vanitie, and loathing, and vexa^ion of the spirit.Eccles. 4. He hath enacted terrible decrees against such as walk after the flesh, and giues proclamation that he will certainely iudge men for all the practises of the flesh.2 Pet. 2.9.10. Eccles. 11.9. 5. He placeth his spirit within vs to lust against the flesh. 6. He sent his sonne to take the similitude of sinnefull flesh, that in the flesh he might subdue the flesh. Lastly, he hath shewed vs waies, what we must doe that we might tame and subdue the flesh: as when he telleth vs, first,Rom. 8.3. that we must be sober, that is, moderate in meate and drink, and recreation and apparell, and what else may hamper the flesh. 2. That we must put no confidence in the flesh. 3. That we must mortifie it, by confession of sinne, and godly sorrow, with strong cries calling vpon God for helpe against it. 4. That we must search the records of Gods promises, and by faith lay hold vpon him. For till we can shew a better draught of happinesse then the flesh doth, we doe in vaine go about to charme it. 5. We must silence it: not suffer it to obiect; or excuse, or extenuate, or denie.
Hitherto in generall of the flesh and the mortification of it. Now more specially we must consider here, 1. the matter to be mortified, viz. the body of sinnes. 2. The manner, in the words put off.
Sinnes] Two things may be here noted; the one is implied, the other is exprest: that which is implied is, that God doth not require this circumcision in other things but only in sinnes. 1. Regeneration doth not oppose the flesh in the substance of it: we are not required to cut off any parts of the body, nor to destroy any faculties of the soule; and the same I say of the complexion or constitution of the body, it doth not require the melancholy man should be made sanguine. 2. This circumcision reacheth not to the naturall desires of the flesh, I meane such as are needfull to the being of nature, as to eate, sleepe etc. 3. Nor to the morrall proiects. 4. Nor to the remainders of spirituall light, as sparkles of Gods Image. 5. Nor to the outward necessary helpes of life, as horse, land, friends, etc. onely it restraines those when they are hinderances to godlinesse. The vse is therefore wisely to discerne between the meere naturall defects arising from the constitution of our bodies, and the sinnes and disorders of our soules: for this spirituall circumcision will not cure mens bodies, but only sanctifies mens mindes.
Againe, we should learne of God here how to deale with our enemies: he
 distinguisheth betweene nature and the sinne of nature: so should we; wee should oppose their sinnes, but loue their persons.
The second thing here to be noted, is, that our sinnes are from the flesh: yea if the flesh did not by defect, action, approbation or consent, giue way to sinne, the Deuill and the world could fasten no sinne vpon vs. Diuers persons should be informed herein: when they fall into grieuous euill, they cry out of their ill lucke, or of ill counsell, or ill company, or of the Deuill; but they should indeed cry out of their owne ill nature, for the rest could not haue hurt them, but by the wickednesse of their owne disposition: and we should all grow suspitious of the flesh and his motions, reasons, desires, etc: and in time to mortifie her with all her lusts.
Bodie of sinnes] He saith not onely that there are sinnes in the flesh, but a body of sinnes: that is, a huge masse or lumpe of sinnes, linked together as the members of our bodie are. The sins of the fleshly may be called a body in diuers respects.
1. In respect of that harmonie and vnion of sinnes one with another in practise, so as if one sinne be practised, many will accompanie it: as in Adams sinne, the sinne was to eat the forbidden fruit; but that would not be alone, but was attended with doubting of Gods word, with faith in the deuill, with most inordinate pride or desire to be like God, with discontentment with their present condition, with vile ingratitude, with apostacie from all righteousnesse, with prophanation of the sacrament, with wilfull murther of all their posteritie, and euill concupiscence. Cain was angry that God did not accept his prophane sacrifice: but would this sinne be alone? no, for there followes it the hatred of his brother, the falling of his countenance, the reiecting of Gods admonition, coloured hypocrisie, murther, and blasphemie. When desire of gaine infects the hearts of Trades-men, we see by experience, it will not be alone, a number of transgressions growes with it, as loue of the world more then God, neglect of sinceritie in the vse of Gods ordinances, swearing, breach of Sabboth, rigorous dealing with inferiours, vnmercifulnes to the poore, selling by false weights and measures, vsurie, if not otherwise yet in selling time, deceit, lying, oppression by ingrossing of wares or incroaching vpon the trades of others.
2. In respect of vnion in continuance after they are committed, thy sinnes committed vanish not, but by adding sinne vnto sinne, thou makest vp a very body of sinne, and so in Gods sight they stand compacted together as the very limbes of a monster.
3. These sinnes may be called a body, because they are committed by the body, as the externall meanes of them.
4. The masse of sinne in the fleshly man may be called a body of sinnes, for that it hath many things like vnto the body of man: or many comparisons may be taken from the body of a man to expresse the sinnes of the flesh. As the body of man is a faire substance made of base matter: so sinne in it selfe is most vile,Similes. though it be coloured ouer by the deuill or the world with the faire proportion of profit or pleasure. And as there be many members in the body, so there are in the sinne of the fleshly man: as some members in the body are outward, some inward, so are our sins. As men would be ashamed of their bodies, were it not for their clothing, especially if there be any deformitie: so would men of their sinnes, were it not for their great places, or faire excuses, and wretched shifts they haue to hide their deformities. And as the body of the prisoner in a dungeon is alike a true body, with his that sitteth on the throne: so sinnes that are secret, that are neuer so closely committed, are sinnes, as well as such as are openly done. As his body is a true body, that yet wants a legge or an arme: so it is in some, though they be not murtherers
 or adulterers, yet they may haue a bodie of sinne in them. As the naturall bodie cannot liue, if you take away foode and clothing: so neither would sinne, if we did not loue it, approue it, defend it, excuse it, and if wee take away carnall reason, and ill companie. And as the bodie of Princes is better clad, then the bodies of poore men, yet it is alike, a bodie of clay and corruption: so are the sinnes of great men, though men doe not speake so openly of them.
Vses.Now for vse of all. First, here we may see a difference between the sinnes of the regenerate, and the sinnes of the vnregenerate: in the godly after calling, there is not a bodie of sinnes, the nest of sinne is scattered, sinne is not in his full strength, he doth not giue his members as seruants to vnrighteousnes.
Secondly, here men may try the truth of their repentance, that is not true repentance, that mortifies some one or few sinnes, but that which mortifieth a whole bodie of sinnes.
Thirdly, this shewes the greatnes of Gods mercies, that can forgiue or take away a whole body of sinnes and transgressions.
Lastly, this may be a great comfort to afflicted consciences, that cry out of the multitude of their sinnes: if thy sinnes were as many as the ioynts of thy body, and as strong as the body of Goliah, yet the Lord can forgiue, and true repentance will pull them downe. This is the matter to be mortified, the manner followes.
How sinne must be put off.Put off] Sinne must be put off as the begger puts off his raggs, and as the Master puts off his false seruant, and as the porter puts off his burden, and as the husband puts off his vitious wife, and as the serpent puts off his skin.
4. Things in mortification.There are foure things in mortification distinct. The first is the dislike of sinne: the second is the confession of sinne: the third is the godly sorrow for sinne: the fourth is forsaking of sinne, this last is here meant, by putting off of sinne: and this the Lord stands vpon, as a thing he will neuer dispense with the want of it: as these places shew, Prou. 28.13. Esay 55.8. Ier. 7.3, 4. Esay 1.16.17. Psal. 199.9. Ephes. 4.22. etc. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. Ezech. 18.33. and there are exceeding comfortable promises made to such as are vpright in the desire and indeuour hereof, Prou. 28.13. Esay 55.8, and 27.9. Ioel 2.12, 13. Esay 1.18.
What the flesh doth in the godly.Quest. But can the flesh be so mortified, and sinne so put off, that it shall cease to be any more in this life? Answ. No, for euen in the children of God, the flesh will raise infirmities, it will let the vnderstanding, it will be framing euill thoughts, it will lust against the spirit, it will not alwaies allow what good is done, or to be done; it will present euill, when good is to be done; it will rebell against the law of the minde; yea sometimes the soule of the poore sinner is led captiue for a time, by his imperious flesh.
When sinne is put off.Q. But how can it then be said to be put away? Answ. Sinne is put away, first if it reigne not, not hold a constant dominion ouer vs: it may be put away euen when it leads vs captiue, if it be an vnwilling captiuitie, if the power of it seeme vnto vs, as a most base seruitude. It is put away, if men take no care to fulfill the lusts of it. Secondly, if there bee a constant cumbat in some degree against it: if we finde a striuing, and constant fighting against the corruptions of our nature: if we pray against it, iudge our selues for it, and mourne ouer it, with an vnfeined desire to forsake it: this desire to be put off, is one true degree of forsaking of sinne.
Sinne is put off fiue waies.That this may yet be better vnderstood, we must know that sinne is put off fiue waies euen in this life. 1. Sacramentally, in the signe, couenant, and seale, that is in baptisme. 2. In the guilt of it, though not in the act of it; thus God puts off, by not imputing. 3. In act too, by inchoation, though not perfectly. 4. Perfectly, though not in vs, yet in Christ our head it is already put away, in
 his person, though not in ours. 5. It is put away in hope, in that we do by hope waite for an absolute and full redemption from all sinne and miserie. Thus of the forme of this circumcision: the efficient cause followes.
By the circumcision of Christ] There is a twofold circumcision of Christ.A twofold circumcision of Christ. First, that which he suffered in himselfe. Secondly, that which he works in vs; the vertue of the first is a great cause of the second.
Quest. But why was Christ circumcised,Why Christ was circumcised. seeing there was no cause of circumcision in Christ: for nothing could be signified by it, seeing he was the Messias himselfe, perfect God and man, nor was there any impuritie in him, the amputation whereof should thereby be signified, he was a Lambe without spot, a high Priest separate from sinners, the couenant of the promised seede was in him fulfilled, and he came to abolish circumcision: and lastly, tis he that circumciseth the hearts of others?
Answ. 1. Christ was circumcised, thereby to shew himselfe to be true man. 2. Thereby to honour the institution of circumcision, as he had done other parts of the Law. 3. That the Iewes might not cauill, and say, they would not receiue an vncircumcised Christ. 4. To commend the vertue of obedience by his example. 5. That he might beare the burthens of them, that being vnder the law, were not able to beare the burthens of the law: God by this signe as by an initiating rite, did subiect him to the law, he hereby professing himselfe a seruant to the Law to make vs free. 6. Hee was circumcised and baptized to signifie his vnion with both Churches, both of the old and new Testament, and that he came of twaine to make one. 7. To ratifie and sanctifie the circumcision of the Fathers, as his baptisme now sanctifieth ours. 8. To signifie the cleansing of our nature, especially by bearing of the imputation of our impurities. 9. He did in his circumcision begin to satisfie God, by those first fruits of his bloud, it was as an earnest or pledge of his bloud, to be more plentifully powred out: it was a part of his humiliation, and of the price of our sinnes. Lastly, he was circumcised, that our hearts, by the vertue of it, might be circumcised: for as his death killeth sinne in vs, and his resurrection raiseth vs vp to newnesse of life, so doth his circumcision, circumcise our hearts.
Hence we may gather comfort against the difficulties of mortification, for Christ will be pleased to deriue vertue from his owne circumcision: yea it is a pledge to assure vs, that as certainly as he was circumcised himselfe, so he will see to it, that our hearts be circumcised: if we will cast our selues vpon him, and by faith come vnto him, there is no sinne so linked, but in Christ we may haue some deliuerance from it. On the other side, it shewes the miserie of all such, as liue in the loue of their sinnes, and minde not mortification: this shewes they are not in Christ yet, for they cannot be in Christ, except they be circumcised. Lastly, it may serue for instruction at once to all that hope for freedom in Iesus Christ, to shew the proofe of their interest by their circumcision spiritually; and to speake distinctly of it, we must vnderstand that the Lord, that requires this circumcision of vs, extends his precept, both to the heartJerem. 4.4., and the earesIerem. 6.10. and 7.51., and the tongue: and contrariwise complaineth of vncircumcised both heart, and eares, and lipsExod. 6. The sinnes in the heart to be circumcised. Sinnes in the eares to be circumcised. Sinnes in the tongue to be circumcised.: in the heart we must especially looke to the circumcision, or mortification, 1. of ignorance. 2. of wicked thought. 3. immoderate care. 4. prophanenes in Gods seruice, in a wretched securitie, or a neglect of inward worship. 5. disordered affections, as lust, anger, suspition. 6. discontent with our estate. 7. vnbeleefe. Now for our eares, they must be circumcised, 1. in the vnpreparednes, or want of attention in hearing the word. 2. in receiuing tales. 3. incommunicating with the sinnes of others, by a willing hearing of their wickednesse. Lastly, looke to the circumcision of the tongue, and that in the care to auoide, 1. the polluting of
 Gods name, either by swearing or blasphemie. 2. rash censuring. 3. rotten speech. 4. lying. 5. bitter and furious words, and the spirit of contradiction. 6. flattery. 7. tale-bearing. 8. idle and vaine words. And thus much now of the spirituall circumcision, and of the 11. verse.



VERS. 12. In that yee are buried with him through baptisme, in whom yee are also raised vp together through the faith of the operation of God, which raised him from the dead.

IN the former verse the Apostle hath laid downe the first reason, and directed it principally against Iudaisme: we haue spirituall circumcision in Christ, and therefore we neede not carnall circumcision, and so by consequent none of the ceremoniall law. Now in this verse he meeteth with obiections.
Ob: 1. The reason seemeth not to follow, they were spiritually circumcised, therefore needed not the outward, for so was Abraham, yet he receiued outward circumcision. Answ. The reason is of no force now in the new Testament, because Christ hath appointed another sacrament in stead of it, for we are buried with Christ by baptisme.
Ob: 2. But was not Circumcision a more liuely signe? Answ. It was not; which he sheweth to be true, both in respect of mortification, and in respect of viuification, baptisme liuely representing and sealing vnto both.
Quest. But haue all that are baptised, these things signified by baptisme?
Answ. They are offered to all, but they are inioyed onely by such as haue faith in the operation of God.
Quest. But how may our faith be supported in beleeuing those things shadowed out in baptisme? Answ. Two waies: First, if we consider Gods operation: Secondly, if we consider Christs resurrection. This is the briefe order and dependance of this verse; so that here he intreats of baptisme, both by the effects, and by the causes: the effects are spirituall buriall, and spirituall resurrection: the causes are three, faith, the operation of God, and the resurrection of Iesus Christ.
Buried together with him] Three things may be here noted: 1. the buriall of Christ. 2. the buriall of the Christian. 3. the vnion of both. For the first, that Christ was buried, was storied by the EuangelistIoh. 19., and fore-signified by Ionas as a typeMat. 12.39, 40, and fore-prophecied of by Esay the ProphetEsay 53.9.: he was buried in Ierusalem, the place where the dying sacrifices had giuen warning of his death, but it was without the Citie, both to answer the type, Leuit. 16. and to signifie that his sufferings belonged to Gentiles, as well as to Iewes: He was buried in Caluarie, the place commonly appointed for condemned men (and not in Hebron, where some thinke Adam was buried) to note that his death was to be auaileable for the condemned men of Adam, as well as for Adam himselfe. He was buried in another mans graue, to signifie that he died for other mens sinnes.
Now for the second, viz. the buriall of Christians; they may be said to be buried euen whiles they liue (for the buriall of the body he cannot meane here) in diuers respects.
1. In respect of disgrace and reproch: the throats of wicked men are often an open sepulchrePsal. 5., into which if the names of the godly fall, they are buried for the extremitie of disgrace and reproch with which they couer them.
2. In respect of abnegation, or the deniall of the loue and care for earthly things: and so we are buried to the world, when like dead men we care not for it, but deuote our selues to the contemplation of heauenly things.
3. In respect of mortification of our sinnes: the scripture by diuers metaphors expresseth the diuers degrees of mortification. For first there is the
 wounding of sinne, when the sinner is pricked with remorse by the law. Secondly, the condemning of sinne, when the sinner keeping a spirituall assise, doth examine, confesse, and iudge himselfe guilty before the Lord. Thirdly, the crucifying of sinnes, when the sinner racks his owne soule by godly sorrow, driuing in the nailes of Gods threatnings, with acknowledgment of his owne deserts, and restraining his flesh through a spirituall reuenge, not caring to expose himselfe to the shame of the world, so that in Christ he may finde atonement for his sinnes. Fourthly, the killing of sinne, when the sinner puts off the bodie of sinnes, and forsaketh his euill waies. Now then after this followeth the last degree, and that is here the buriall of sinnes.Of the buriall of sinne. Certainely there remaines euen after true repentance in the very godly, a great deale of hidden corruption of nature, inward wandrings, and distractio^s after the world, sudden euill propositions against God, or his word, or prouidence, or presence, or promises, or people, impatience, secret pride, and somtimes hypocrisie; a frequent rebellion within against good duties, vnthankfulnes, frequent omissions, either of holy duties, or the care of the power of them, hastines, or anger, impure desires, thoughts of reuenge, besides a great deale of disorder, he may finde in himselfe both at home and abroad. Now it is not enough, nor may he rest in the former repentance, but he must proceed euen to the remouing of these remainders of corruption: death commonly ariseth out of the disease of some one part, but buriall couers all. The worke of reformation and repentance, many times begins at the care of some few principall sinnes: but we must neuer be quiet, till we burie the whole old man with his works; so that in one sense, the buriall of sinnes, is nothing else, but the progresfe of mortification. Againe, after we haue forsaken our sinnes, to burie them, is to keep a diligent watch ouer our nature, and to take downe our flesh, yea sometimes with refraining of lawfull delights or pleasures. Further the buriall of sinne, it may import our care, after we haue left our sinnes, to remoue them out of sight; both out of Gods sight, by suing out our pardon, and out of the sight of our consciences, by quieting them in the application of the bloud of Christ, and the promises of grace, and out of the sight of others (so farre as our sinnes were scandalous also) by shewing forth our repentance, and care to auoide all appearance and occasions of like sinning.Their priuiledges that haue attained to the buriall of sinne. Great is the glory and happinesse of Christians, that haue attained to this buriall of sinne, for these serue God in a neere acquaintance with him, these haue ouercome the world, these can stand before death and iudgement vnapalled, these are mighty in the power of Gods ordinance, these know the secrets of the kingdome of God, these are without the reach of the Law, and feele not the sting of crosses, these are had in singular honour with God, and the holy Angels of heauen, and the prouidence of God is vsually eminent towards these. Now for the third, might some one say, what hath the Christians buriall to doe with Christ,How our spirituall buriall depends vpon Christ. how is there any relation betweene them? Ans. Our spirituall buriall in the progresse of mortification depends vpon Christ diuers waies. 1. In that he hath required and made gracious promises to it. 2. In that the efficacie of the meanes by which it is wrought, comes from Christ. 3. In that it is accepted of God onely for Christ and through his intercession. 4. In respect of example, he was buried as well as we. But chiefly in respect of vertue, our buriall of sinne is wrought by a vertue arising from Christs buriall in the graue.
The Vses of all this followes. First for information; here we may see how God stands vpon mortification:Vses. The state of such as neglect mortification. and that men must not thinke alwaies they haue done inough, when they haue left their faults; and withall we may see how dangerous a course they take, that so soone giue ouer the exercises of mortification: for by this meanes we cause the old sinnes many times to breake out againe, and their consolations are small, and seldom; crosses daily
 trouble them, and the heart is often grieued and griped with feare and terrible doubts, or else they are quickly ouergrowne with a spirit of slumber.
Secondly, for instruction, to be carefull to burie our sinnes: but here take heede of the dissimilitude,Dissimilitude in tvvo things. for in some things the comparison cannot hold: as here in two things; for first when we burie the bodies of our friends, we burie them in hope they shal rise againe. And secondly, we mourne because we must part with them: but both these must be denied here. It is the propertie of the wicked, to part with their sinnes with sorrow, because they must leaue them: or else with hope that at length they may returne to them againe.Note this rule But let all such as feare God be otherwise minded: especially let vs learne from this comparison of buriall to aduantage our selues in what we may in mortification:Similitudes. if the master be buried, we know all his seruants will attend the funerall: so is it with vs in the mortification of sinnes, if we light vpon the master sins and drag them to the graue, we shall be sure of all the attendants, they will follow to the funerall. The Iewes manner was to burie with odours: so should we, our odours and sweet smelling prayers offered vp in the mediation of Christ. And howsoeuer this worke may seeme difficult, yet God many times strangely relieues our infirmities. After Iezabel was cast downe and dead, they had not been long within, but sending out to burie her, they found nothing but the skull and her feet, and the palmes of her hands: so many times would it be with vs, if we cast downe the Iezabels our sinnes, when we come to finish our mortification, we may by the strange helpe of God finde the bodie of the master gone we know not how, so as we shall not be troubled, vnlesse it be with some skull or feete, or palme of sinne. But certainely though this kinde of buriall be somewhat difficult, yet it is the true buriall place of Kings: the most noble funerall that can be.
Thus of the first effect. The second is in the next words.
How many vvaies Christ raiseth men vp.In whom ye are raised vp together] Christ is said to raise men vp diuers waies. 1. When he awaketh men out of their naturall Lithargie, or spirituall sleepinesse and securitie in matters of religion, thus Ephes. 5.14. 2. When hee brings forth the minde of man out of the dungeons of ignorance, and shewes them the light, Esay 60.1, 2. 3. When he cures men of discouragements and discomforts vnder their crosses, Psal. 41.10.6. 4. When he recouers the Church from securitie or relapses either ordinarie or extraordinarie, Cant. 2.10.11. etc. and 5.3.5. Prou. 24.15, 16. 5. When he incourageth men to holy duties,A fourefold resurrection. Cant. 7.12. but principally there is a fourefold resurrection. The first is out of desperate crosses, Esay 26.19. The second is the lifting of men vp to some speciall callings in the Church, Matth. 11. The third is the resurrection of our bodies at the last day. And the last is the resurrection of the soule vnto holy graces and duties: this is called the first resurrection, and is meant here in this place, and Rom. 6.4. but most vsually we say there is a twofold resurrection: the one from the corruption of the flesh, the other from the corruption of sinne; this latter is here meant, and this belongeth to viuification.
Now this first resurrection must be considered, either in it selfe, or in the vnion or relation of it. In it selfe, and so there is a double resurrection. First, the resurrection of graces:The resurrection of graces secondly, the resurrection of duties. For the first, there are certaine graces, which are not in the heart of man by nature, which by the mighty power of Christ, are wrought in the hearts of such as are truly conuerted,A resurrection of 13 graces in a childe of God. and are actually the members of Christ: As first a holy inquirie after God, Hos. 3.5. Ier. 50.4. Secondly, a holy wisdome in spirituall things, Iam. 3.17. Thirdly, a liuely faith in the fauour of God in Christ. Fourthly, a holy delight, and meditation in the word of God, Psal. 119.10, 11.128. and 27.4. Fiftly, a liuely hope of an eternall inheritance, 1 Pet 1.3. Sixtly,
 a holy loue of Gods children, 1 Ioh. 3.14. such as is required Ro. 12.9, 10, 11. Seuenthly, godly sorrow for sinne, 2 Cor. 7.10. Eightly, vnspeakable and glorious ioy euen in affliction, Rom. 5.2. 1 Pet. 1.7, 8. Ninthly, a holy contentempt of the world, and sinne, and sinnefull persons, Psal. 15.4. 1 Ioh. 2.19. Tenthly, a holy reuerence and feare of God and his goodnes, Hos. 3.5. Eleuenthly, a holy zeale and feruencie of affections, especially in the seruice and worship of God. Twelfthly, a holy loue euen of enemies. And lastly, a holy desire to be dissolued, and to be with Christ. Now for the effecting of these the spirit of Christ is called in respect of his wonderfull working, the spirit of God, and of glory1 Pet. 4.14., the spirit of power, of loue, and of a sound minde2 Tim. 1.7.. The spirit of praier or deprecationsZach. 12.12.. And the spirit of reuelationEphes. 1.18. The resurrection of duties in a childe of God of diuers sorts, in vvhich he differs from the vvicked.. Thus of resurrection of graces. Now concerning resurrection of duties.
We must know that there are diuers duties which the naturall man will neuer be brought vnto, in which lieth the very power of godlinesse, and the experience of all sound and sauing consolation. Now these duties may be three waies considered. 1. As they respect holy life in generall. 2. As they respect piety to God. 3. As they respect righteousnesse to men. For the first, there are foure things wherein the liues of Gods children differ from all others. 1. In the manner. 2. In the matter. 3. In the meanes. 4. In the ends of holy life. For the manner, three things are eminent. 1. That they are deuoted and consecrated to holinesReuel. 12.1.. 2. That they delight and loue to be Gods seruantsEsay 56.. 3. That they haue their conuersation in simplicitie and godly purenesse2 Cor. 1.12. and 11.3..
For the matter, they haue respect to all Gods commandementsPsal. 119.31., and do indeuour after inward holinesseMatth. 5.6., as well as outward: besides they liue by faithRom. 1.16. in some measure, which is a way of holinesse altogether vnknowne in the practise of wicked men. And for the meanes of holinesse, the godly haue a recourse to a threefold fountaine of sanctitie with such a sinceritie and constancie, as no wicked man can attaine it: viz the wordPsal. 1.2. Luc. 8.15., prayerGal. 4.6., and the SabbothEsay 56.. And for the end of their obedience, their praise is of God, and not of men; hauing a maine respect alwaies to exercise themselues, so as they may haue a conscience voide of offence, towards God, or towards menAct. 24.16..Rom. 2.26. Thus of holinesse of life in generall.
Now in respect of piety to God, it is a very resurrection through the power of Christ, to bring a man to acknowledge God, and his truth, and glory, against reason, profit, or pleasure: to make a man walke with God, setting the Lord alwaies before him: to bring the will of man to a holy subiection to Gods will, in crosses, temptations, wants, etc: but especially to create in man that sinceritie of worshipping God in spirit and truth without hypocrisie.
And as for righteousnesse, in that part of it, that concernes either mens owne soules, or the soules of others, how is all the vnregenerate mankinde dead? It is the worke of a godly man only to serue the brethren by loue: onely the members of Christ, can in their calling denie profit and pleasure, and make the particular calling serue the generall: but especially in the combat against concupiscence, onely the godly doe make conscience of it.
And howsoeuer in the matter of holy duties, there are strange imperfections in the very godly, yet their desire, prayer, purpose, and indeuour, is to approue themselues to God herein, and they do attaine to it, in some comfortable beginnings, and they go on with a holy increase, both of strength and desire. Whereas it is euident by diuers Scriptures, that wicked men are dead men in the former respects, as would appeare if we should examine particularly: for they seeke not GodPsal. 14.1.. They respect not the word of God arightIer. 6.10.: nor can they loue the brethrenJoh. 15.19.. Though they be smitten, yet they will not sorrow after GodIer. 5.2.. And for the most part, they are lukewarme without true zealeReuel. 3.. Their
 mindes are couered with a vaileEsay 25.8.. They are without hopeEphes. 2.12.. Neither haue all these men faith2 Thess. 3.2.. And for the want of holy duties, it vsually seems euill vnto them to serue the Lord. They are strangers from the life of GodEphes. 4.17.. They call not vpon the name of GodPsal. 14.4. with a pure heart: neither take they heede of Gods sabbaths. But it were too long to runne to particulars in matters of dutie, seeing the scripture euery where paints out the ill liues of all wicked men.
In whom] Doctr. The vertue by which Christians are raised is from Christ.
Quest. But what is therein Christ which distinctly causeth this resurrection in the Christian, or plucketh vp his heart to the care of holy graces or duties?
Answ. 1. The vertue of Christ. 2. The spirit of Christ. 3. The example of Christ. 4. The intercession of Christ. 5. The louing inuitations and allurements of Christ. And 6. The resurrection of Christ. And lastly, the second comming of Christ is like a loadstone to plucke vp the desires and affections of Christians vnto the studie of heauenly things.
Thus of the doctrine of the Christians resurrection.
Vse. For terror.1. Hence may presumptuous secure wilfull sinners gather secret terror and anguish: where is thy spirituall buriall in this life? where is the first resurrection? It is most certaine, if this worke, this strange worke, be not wrought in thee, thou art in the power of the second death, without God, without Christ, without hope. And here thou maiest see the vanitie of all thy shifts: for dost thou say, thou seest no such wretchednesse in thy sinnefull course? why this doctrine tels thou art dead whiles thou liuest, and how canst thou discerne thine owne wretchednesse? dost thou thinke that this will serue thy turne, that thou intendest to mend hereafter? consider what is here implied, the worke of true amendment, is a true, but spirituall resurrection. Tis then like that resurrection, that shall be of our bodies: and thou knowest when God shall raise our bodies, at the last day, when the trump shall blow, it will be a silly pretence to say, Oh let me alone now, I will rise hereafter. So is it with thee; the trumpet of grace now bloweth, Christ is now comming in the spirit, the dead in sinne must now be raised, Christs voice still reacheth vnto thee, now if thou confirme thy selfe in that spirituall graue of sinne, dost thou thinke thou hast reason to beleeue, that Christ will tarry thy leisure, and to put off till ^hou appoint the time?
For comfort to afflicted consciences.2. Here is singular comfort for such of Gods children as are afflicted in spirit, especially about the greatnesse of the power of sinne, and the difficulties of well-doing: they should here consider, not onely that it is Christs worke to make them holy, but that he is pleased to resemble it to the resurrection of the bodie: and can it be a harder thing to put downe thy sinne, or to quicken thee in all well-doing, then to raise thy body out of the dust of the earth? Neither ought their terrors to amaze them: for it is Christs manner, to bring vs downe to the graue, that he may raise vs vp: the feare of hell now afflicteth thee, that thou maist not be hurt hereafter. Besides, sinne doth so cleaue to vs, that it will almost kill vs, before we kill it. Obiect. But I doe not see, either the graces, or duties mentioned, to be wrought in this resurrection. Answ. 1. There may be grace, though thou see it not. 2. If one sauing grace be in a mans heart, it is a signe the rest be there, though not so easily discerned. 3. The spirituall age of a Christian must be distinguished, thou must not think that the graces of Gods spirit, or the power of holy duties, will appeare so freshly, or so strongly in thee, whiles thou art but an infant in grace, as they will doe when thou commest to be of riper yeares. Lastly, thy indeuour in Christ and desire, is accepted and taken for the deede: what graces thou vnfeinedly desirest, and constantly vsest the meanes to attaine, thou hast; so the sinne thou striuest against, thou hast not.

Thus of these effects, as they are in themselues: now as they are in their signe, which is here called baptisme.
By baptisme] Baptisme is a holy memoriall of Christ baptised in the seas of Gods wrath for vs. It is a badge of distinction from vnbeleeuers.The ends of baptisme. It is a certaine initiating rite by which we enter into the visible Church. It is a seale of the righteousnes of faith. It is a signe to teach vs by representation, both our deliuerance and sanctification.
Quest. But what hath baptisme to doe here with our mortification,Three vvaies baptisme respecteth mortification, and viuification. and viuification, or spirituall buriall and resurrection? Answ. Baptisme stands in a threefold relation, or respect vnto them. 1. In signification, baptisme doth represent them vnto vs, setting out our dying to sinne, and rising to newnesse of life. 2. By seale, for baptisme is a seale of Gods couenant, assuring vs that in Christ, we shall be buried to our sinnes, and raised vp with him. 3. It is a band, it ties vs to the desires and indeuours, after the beginning and finishing of these.
There are many other benefits signified and assured vnto vs by baptisme,The benefits signified in baptisme. then these here mentioned: for baptisme doth signifie and seale vnto vs, 1. Our deliuerance from the seas of Gods wrathMat. 3.8. 1 Pet. 3.21.. 2. The resurrection of our bodies1 Cor. 15.. 3. Our communion with the whole TrinitieMatth. 28.. 4. Our adoptionGal. 3.27.. 5. Our communion with the Saints1 Cor. 12.13.. 6. Remission of all sinnesAct. 2.38.39.
Baptisme is auaileable for these respects; when we amend our liues, and confesse our sinnesMath. 3.38., and gladly receiue the wordCant. 2.41., and lay hold vpon the promises of graceMar. 16.16., especially when the conscience maketh request vnto God1 Pet. 3.21., for the application and fruition of the things signified by baptisme. Hitherto of the effects. The causes follow. 1. Faith. 2. The operation of God. 3. Christs resurrection.
Through the faith of the operation of God] The faith that is mighty through God, to make baptisme effectuall, and to raise vs vp after the buriall of sinne, is neither historicall, nor temporary, nor of miracles, but that which is in scriptures called the faith of Gods elect, and by Diuines iustifying faith. Nor is it enough to bring hither the perswasion of Gods mercy in Christ, which is the first and chiefe act of iustifying faith: but we must beleeue the power of God in the particular successe of the meanes for effecting both of mortification and viuification, which as I suppose is here meant,What faith doth in baptisme. where he calleth it the faith of the operation of God. Quest. But shew vs how faith hath to doe in baptisme or in sanctification. Answ. In baptisme faith is needfull, not onely the faith of explication, but also the faith of application: for we are bound not onely to beleeue that those things there shadowed out, are so as they import, but that also they are fulfilled, not onely to the faithfull in generall, but to my owne soule in particular.
And for sanctification, faith must needs be of great vse; for without faith,The vse of faith about sanctification. nothing we do can please GodHeb. 11.6.. And by faith Christ liues in vsGal. 5.20.. It quencheth the fiery darts of the deuillEphes. 6.16.. It lightneth our darknesIoh. 12.46.. It purifieth the heartAct. 15.9.. It ouercomes the world1 Ioh. 5.4.. It breeds ioy and consolationRom. 5.2.. And loue to Gods childrenGal. 6.. It maketh the Scripture auaileable to saluation2 Tim. 3.15.. And lastly, our prayers to be such, as God cannot denieMat. 21.22. Hovv vve may come to beleeue the effects of baptisme.. Quest. How may we attaine to it, to beleeue that baptisme doth signifie and assure these things to vs?
Answ. 1. Labour to expresse that which on thy part is required, that is, set vp the confession of thy sinnes and amendment of thy life. 2. Then goe vnto God, and let thy conscience make request for the answer of the spirit of adoption, by which the Lord may assure thee, that in the mediation of Iesus Christ thy baptisme is giuen to thee, as a particular seale of Gods couenant and grace.
Quest. But how may I doe to be assured, that my sinnes shall be subdued,
 and that I shall be raised vp in holy graces and duties? Answ. 1. Acquaint thy selfe with Gods promises of this kinde, and grow skilfull in them. 2. Cry strongly to God for the testimonie of Iesus in thy heart, that by his spirit hee would settle thee in this perswasion. 3. Waite vpon the word and prayer till God doe effect it. 4. Strengthen thy selfe, both by the experience of others, as also with due obseruation of successe in the subduing of any sinne, or the exercise of any graces or duties.
Vses.The vses may be diuers. First for information; we may here see how vaine the common faith of the common Protestant is: shew me thy faith by thy fruits; how canst thou beleeue aright, and yet thy sinnes not mortified, and thy heart and life vnsanctified? Againe, we see we haue not comfort of our baptisme, till the power of holinesse in some measure appeare in our liues.
Secondly, for instruction: we should all examine our selues whether we haue faith or no; and whiles we haue meanes of assurance, make vse of all aduantages to settle our hearts in the faith: and to this end we should deliuer vp our soules to be nursed vp in the words of faith and wholesome doctrine.
Lastly, we might here be greatly comforted, if we had true faith: we see God can denie nothing vnto faith: it should be to vs, in the sacraments, in mortification,Three rules if vve vvould reason from Gods povver to the effect. and in graces and duties, according to our faith.
Of the operation of God] The doctrine of Gods power and working, is of singular vse in the Church; great is the interest of Gods seruants in his power, and therefore great cause they haue to rest vpon it. The elect onely can reason from Gods power to the effect: he is able to doe it, therefore he will do it: but then these three things must be noted.
1. They must be beleeuers, that looke for this priuiledge. 2. They must bring a particular faith, to draw out this power of God into operation. 3. It will not be set a worke about euery thing, but such things for which there is promise or meete examples in the scriptures.
In vvhat things vvee may beare our selues vpon Gods povver.Now it is a matter of singular weight, to know in what things we may haue warrant to beare our selues vpon the power of God. The power of God is engaged for operation in foure things for the benefit of the faithfull. First, in their afflictions. Secondly, in their temptations. Thirdly, in the difficulties of holy life. Fourthly, in his ordinances.
In afflictions, God hath bound himselfe to shew his power, 1. In giuing strength to endure themPhil. 4.13. Esay 41.10.. 2. In moderating the afflictions to their strengthEsay 27.7.. 3. In guiding them to the right endsJob. 36.22. Esay 27.11. Zach. 13.9.. 4. In deliuerance out of themPsal. 71.20. Esay 43.. If we looke vpon the enemies of the godly in particular, God shewes his power, 1. In restraining or disappointing themIob 12.16. Esay 54.16, 17.. 2. In rewarding and ouerthrowing themExo. 15.6, 7 Esay 42.13. and 41.15..
So likewise in temptations, the power of God though it be secret, yet it is wonderfull in dissoluing the works of the deuill, and in vpholding his seruants, and destroying the strong holds, and fortifications of Satan1 Cor. 10.12. 2 Cor. 12.9. Esay 27.1..
Thirdly, in the difficulties of holy life, the Lord vseth his power, 1. In making his seruants able to walke in his waies, both by giuing them power and strengthEze 36.28. Esay 26.12., and by relieuing and reuiuing their strength daily, and renewing itEsay 40.29. vlt. etc. Esay 57.15.. 2. In keeping them from euill2 Tim. 4.18.. 3. In establishing them that they may perseuere and hold outPhil. 1.6. Iude 24. 1 Pet. 1.5. 1 Sam. 2 9..
Lastly, Gods operation is wonderfull in the vse of his ordinances; and this is that is meant in this place. In respect of this the Psalmist saith, God is greatly to be reuerenced in the assembly, by all them that are round about him: O Lord God of hostes, who is a strong God like vnto theePsal. 89.7, 8.? Thus the Lord is mighty through the ministerie of his seruantsGalat. 2.8. Col. 1. vlt.. Thus the Lord performeth the counsell of his messengersEsay 44.26., his word returneth not to him in vaineEsay 55.11.: yea his ordinances are his power vnto saluationRom. 1.16. 1 Cor. 1.18.: they are all mighty through God2 Cor. 10.4.. Thus
 it is in particular in the sacraments: though for their outward shew they doe not promise much, yet by the maruellous operation of God, they are auaileable in effect for all that is promised in them, onely if we could get this faith in this operation of God here mentioned.
The vse of all is; First for information:Vses. we may here take notice of the difference betweene hypocrites and the godly: in matter of godlinesse, they can know nothing but the forme of it, the other haue experience of the singular power of God in all the passages of holy life, both in the vse of the meanes, and in his preseruation.
Secondly, for instruction, we should obserue and seeke out the working of the LordPsal. 111.2.: and daily ascribe power vnto God, and pray for the experience of it, and that he would establish that which he hath wrought in vsPsal. 68.28.33.45..
Againe, it may teach vs not to despise the weake Christian, for the Lord is able through his operation to make him stand. And it should incourage vs all to the works of righteousnesHeb. 11.35., seeing Gods operation is so ready to be found, and for hereafter in the vse of all the meanes our faith should be in the power of God1 Cor. 2.5.. Thus of the operation of God.
Through the resurrection of Iesus Christ] Many are the benefits which we reape from the resurrection of Iesus Christ. As first, the resurrection of our bodies1 Cor. 15.16.20.. Secondly, the accomplishment of the promises made vnto the FathersAct. 13.33.. Thirdly, iustification and forgiuenesse of sinnesRom. 4. vlt.. Fourthly, a secret vertue vnto the ordinances of God1 Pet. 3.21.. Fifthly, regeneration. Sixtly, liuely hope of an immortall inheritance1 Cor. 15.14. 1 Pet. 1.34.. Seuenthly, the power of viuification and raising of vs vp to new obedience. And this last is acknowledged in this place.



VERS. 13. And you being dead in your sinnes, and the vncircumcision of the flesh, hath he quickned together with him, forgiuing you all your trespasses.

THe sixt reason of the dehortation is conteined in this verse, and it stands thus: That which cannot helpe vs when we are in miserie, nor further vs to happines when we want it, is not to be followed nor rested vpon; but such things are philosophy, traditions, and ceremonies, they cannot heale the corruption of our natures, nor raise vs out of the graues of sinne, nor any way procure vs the pardon of our transgressions: or thus, If in Christ we be deliuered from the power of our sinnes by his quickning grace, and from the guilt of them, by the free pardon which is to be had by his meanes, then we need not goe any whither else, neither to philosophie nor traditions, etc. but so it is, and so the very Colossians found it in their case, as the words of the text expresse, Ergo.
The words in themselues expresse the twofold estate of Christians in this world, what they are by nature in their vnregenerate estate, and what they are by grace in the state of grace.
In the state of corruption two things are true of them, and are true of all men. 1. They were dead in actuall sinnes. 2. They were then in the vncircumcision of the flesh, and likewise dead in it. In their estate of grace he puts them in minde of two benefits, 1. Regeneration. 2. Remission of sinnes.
Thus of the coherence and order of the words.
Diuers things may be noted in the generall.
1. We may from hence be informed of the fruitlesnes of philosophie, traditions, or ceremonies of Moses, they cannot make a miserable man happy, they cannot infuse the least sparke of spirituall life into any.
2. We see the Apostle thinks it meet to put men often in minde of their
 miserie by nature, and great reason, for it exalts the praise of the riches of Gods grace in Christ: And it may serue to humble men for their falls after calling, and to keep them still suspitious and watchfull ouer a nature, that hath been so prone to sinne and securitie in sinning; it may serue to eat down the pronenesse of our nature to vaine boasting, and confidence in the flesh; and it should much excite men to the loue and care of godlinesse and pietie, with all life and power, seeing they haue been so long slaues to sinne.
And lastly, the Apostle rips vp this matter of purpose to withdraw their mindes from traditions, and philosophicall dreames.
Dead in sinnes] They were dead in sinnes, both if you respected their publike estate, or each particular person. If you looke vpon publike states before they are framed and reformed by the word, what are they but heaps of men dead in the graues of sinne, and senselesse in their sinfull courses? and thus it is with euery particular person, the words import that he is guilty of many sinnes,The svvarmes of sinnes in vnregenerate men. and he is dead in them also. Naturally euery man is guilty of secret atheisticall conceits, of vnbeleefe, of ignorance, of hardnes of heart, of swarms of euill thoughts and affections, of hurtfull passions and lusts, besides his defects of the knowledge of God, and that warmth of the holy affections of loue, feare, trust, and ioy in God. Who can sufficiently rip open the vnthankfulnes, lukewarmenes, hypocrisie, inconstancie, and presumptuous profanenesse, that is in our hearts by nature, in matters of Gods seruice? how do men daily offend, either by not calling vpon the name of God, or by taking it vp in vaine? who can number the othes, lyes, reproches, curses, flatteries, and filthy communication hath and did daily infect the mouths of men? Oh the world of sinnes we are actually guilty of against God, or men, or our owne selues, publike, priuate, secret, open, inward, outward, in prosperitie and aduersitie, in the Church or familie, or abroad in mens conuersation. Alas we can discerne but a glimpse of that sinne and guiltinesse that is in vs by nature, and this is the increase of their misery in all their sinnes, they are dead in them.
Dead] There is a fourefold death;A fourefold death* temporall, corporall, spirituall, eternall: The state of man being in misery, he is dead temporallyEsay 26.19.: The body of man being in the graue, he is dead corporally: The soule of man lying in sinne, is dead spiritually: And both soule and body being cast into hell, are dead eternally.
Death to sin, for sinne, and in sinne.The Colossians were dead spiritually: there is a death to sinne, and a death for sinne, and a death in sinne: a death to sinne, and so the godly die by mortification: a death for sinne, and so malefactors die by execution: and a death in sinne, and so euery naturall man kills himselfe by enliuing his sinne.
What spiritual death in sin is.The spirituall death in sinne is an vnutterable losse of the life of God, by which the sinner is senselesse, and carelesse in extremitie of misery, vnto his owne euerlasting ruine, if the Lord preuent it not by regeneration. Now that men are in this case by nature, these Scriptures proue, Eph. 2.1, 2. Math. 8.22. Ioh. 8.25. Rom. 8.10. Luk. 15.32. Reuel. 3.2. Iud. 12. 1 Tim. 5.6. Neither let any deceiue themselues, about their estate, for a man may be dead in sinne, and yet be aliue in the flesh: yea thou maiest be a wise man in the fleshRom. 8.7., or a prince of this world1 Cor. 2 9.14.; yea thou maiest haue a name that thou liuest spirituallyReuel. 3.2., and yet be starke dead.
Now this spirituall senselesnes is called a death, because it is a priuation of spirituall life from the soule, as the naturall death is from the body. 2. because it tends to eternall death.
The vse may be fourefold. 1. For information: No wonder wicked men can come and goe from the word of God, and not be touched, alas they are dead men: and so is it with them in respect of the iudgements of God; alas if thou couldest rowle a mountaine vpon a dead man, he would not feele, so
 is it with a man dead in sinne; and further we may heere obserue, that to liue yea to die quietly, is no signe of a man in a happy case: for if this death in sin be not cured, thousands of people may die quietly, because they die senselesly; they feele no more of the feare of hell, or iudgement, or Gods anger, then if they were already dead in their bodies, they would feele outward extremities: I know that God many times can lay terror vpon the flesh of wicked men, and make their spirits drinke in, of the bitter anguish arising from the feruencie of Gods burning displeasure; but I say if God let them alone, vsually the most would die in a wretched senselesnes, and inconsideration, being neither able nor willing to entertaine the thoughts of what must presently and necessarily befall them.
2. This may serue for confutation; and so 1. of the Papists about their freewill. How can there be this free will in a dead soule? we are dead in sinne, and therefore of our selues mooue not vnto life, till God quicken vs by his word and spirit. 2. Of the carnall Protestant, that beares himselfe so strongly vpon his supposed couenant with death and hell, his agreement must be disanulled, nay his very securitie imports his vnauoidable destruction, if it be not remooued by the power of Christ.
3. For instruction; art thou a man that hearest this* that hast liued all thy time without remorse for thy sinnes, and neuer yet entertained the care of reformation of thy life, be heere warned of thy miserie, let it bee enough thou hast been dead in sinne, doe not lie still rotting in the graues of iniquitie, but rise so soone as thou hearest the trumpet of the Gospell, the voice of Christ sounding in thine eares, and piercing thy heart.
4. Lastly, here is consolation implied vnto weake Christians; If thou canst feele thy miserie, and struggle in any measure, of true constancie, against the corruption of nature, and the transgressions of thy heart and life, thou art not dead: there is some breath of life in thee, there is motion and therefore life.
Thus of their actuall sinnes.
Their miserie in respect of originall sinne, is exprest in these words,

And in the vncircumcision of the flesh.]

These words be diuersly interpreted; some thus, In the vncircumcision of the flesh, that is, in the flesh which is vncircumcision, that is a thing hatefull vnto God. Some make these words to bee the signe of their death in sinne: as if hee would say, your very vncircumcision that is in your flesh (which are Gentiles) is a token that you are strangers from the life of God. Some thus; And you hath hee quickned, which were dead in respect of your sinnes and carnall life, which ye liue in the vncircumcision, that is, in your estate of Gentilisme. Some make these words expresse the cause of their death in sinne: Thus in the vncircumcision of the flesh, that is, for your fleshly vices which caused that death in sinne. But I thinke with those that vnderstand by the flesh originall sinne, and by the vncircumcision, their miserie in respect of it, implied in the allusion to the circumcision literally taken.
Originall sinne is called flesh,Why original sinne is called flesh. because the flesh is the instrument by which it is propagated. 2. Because it is the subiect in which it is. 3. Because it is the end it driues vs to, viz. to satisfie the flesh and to seeke fleshly things.
This originall sinne heere called flesh, is a spirituall kinde of disease, gall,What originall sinne is. leauen and poyson, which daily diffuseth it selfe throughout the whole man, and still infecteth it: though this bee not the whole nature of the sinne; for to speake distinctly, in originall sinne there are three things. 1.3. Things in originall sin. The guiltinesse of Adams fact, deriued vnto vs by iust imputation. 2. The want of that originall iustice was in vs in the creation. 3. The deprauation and corrupt disposition of our natures.Our misery in respect of originall sin.
Here the word vncircumcision imports our miserie in respect of our very
 corruption of nature, for it imports 1. That we are hatefull to God, children of wrath. 2. That we haue no portion in the heauenly Canaan. 3. That wee haue no fellowship in the communion of Saints. 4. That wee haue no part in the promised Messias, for all these were shadowed out by the want of circumcision in the time of the Law.
Vses.The vses follow; First, from hence wee may enforme our selues in diuers things; as first we may see, why the faire works of wicked men, as their almes, prayers, teares, sacrifices, prophecyings, preaching, fasting, and professing, are not accepted of God: for the fountaine is poysoned, the flesh infects all; it puts to, either ill ends, or ill effects, or ill meanes, besides that, it keeps the person still loathsome to God. Oh what cause haue ciuill honest men to know, that though they come to Church, and pay euery man his owne, and bee no drunkards nor adulterers etc. yet their case cannot be good, for though they liued neuer so honestly outwardly, yet the very vncircumcision of the flesh, makes them miserable; the inward corruption of nature is an abomination to God, who searcheth the heart and reines: yea, what cause haue all men to be humbled and abased in themselues, considering how vncleane a beginning they haue? how can men bee so quiet, and yet be so diseased, with so filthy a leprosie, as is originall sinne? if this disease were in the body as it is in the soule, how would men lament their distresse?
Hence also may we see what a wofull estate all wicked men are in, that take care for the lusts of this leprous flesh, and sow to it. What should I say? may we not see hence the necessitie of regeneration? assuredly except wee be borne againe, we can neuer enter into the kingdome of heauen: this impure poysoned nature of ours, may not enter into Gods holy place.
Secondly, we may here discerne the fountaine of all actuall transgressions: when we fall into euill courses, wee must not cry out of our ill fortune, or of ill company, or of the Deuill only, but especially we must lay the fault vpon our ill natures, twas thy wicked disposition made thee so to sinne.
Lastly, from hence we may learne to know our selues, and accordingly to keep a narrow watch ouer our wretched natures, and daily striue and struggle against this infectious corruption and disease that hangs so fast vpon vsHeb. 12.1.: yea, we should by confession and contrition endeuour the daily crucifying of our wicked flesh, with the lusts thereofGal. 5., condemning our selues by a daily verdict and sentence, as wee are men according to the flesh1 Pet. 4.6., so suffering in the flesh that wee may cease from sinne1 Pet 4.1.: yea, wee should learne constantly to denie our selues, and not to giue way to the reasons, or obiections, or desires, or excuses, or delayes of the flesh: yea, and to this end wee should be willing to suffer afflictions, and to endure any hardship rather then the flesh should preuaile in vs.
You hath hee quickned] Hitherto of mans miserie and the state of corruption: now of Gods mercy in the state of grace. In two things is their happinesse heere described. 1. In their quickning. 2. In their forgiuenesse.
We are three wayes quickned.We are quickned two waies. 1. In Christ. 2. In our selues; when our head Christ Iesus was raised from the graue, we were quickned in him. In our selues we were quickned three wayes. 1. Sacramentally, in baptisme. 2. By inchoation in our conuersion. 3, Perfectly, by hope of perfection in heauen; by baptisme, by conuersion, by hope. The quickning he heere speaketh of, is the quickning of conuersion, when we are begotten to God.
This life is called, the life of GodEph. 4.17., the life of grace, the life of Iesus1 Cor. 4.16., the life of immortalitie.
It is begotten in vs by the whole Trinity; the Father calleth vp these generationsIsay 41.; the Sonne giueth this lifeHeb. 7.16., so doth the Spirit quicken alsoIoh. 6..
The author, meanes, necessitie, titles, and priuiledges of spirituall quickning.The meanes by which we are quickned is ordinarily onely the word, and that preached also, which is therefore called the word of life, Psal. 19.8. 1 Pet. 1.22. Phil. 2.15. Ioh. 5.

The necessity of this quickning is such as without it wee cannot possibly enter into the kingdome of heauen, Ioh. 3.5.
They that are thus quickned and conuerted, are stiled by diuers names or titles, they are called the holy seedeEsay 6., the called of IesusRom. 1.6., the children of the most highLuk. 6., the brood of immortalitie, they that follow Christ in the regenerationMatt^. 19., and the heires of eternall lifeTit* 3.7..
Many are the singular prerogatiues of such as are conuerted and quickned in Iesus Christ; godlinesse in generall hath the promises of this life and the life to come. In speciall, first, great is the honour of their birth,11. Prerogatiues. greater then if they were borne of the greatest blouds of menIoh. 1.13.. These prolong the dayes of Christ vpon earth, being begotten by the trauell of his souleEsay 53.. 2. They are sweetely comforted and tenderly vsed in the healing of all their sorrowes, Ier. 31.25. Hos. 14.5. Esay 57.15.16. and 61.1.2.3. Micha. 7.18. Ezech. 11.19. Esay 50.4. Act. 3.19. 3. All their sinnes are forgiuen, as the coherence shewes, and these Scriptures further confirme, Esay. 44.22. Ephes 1.7.6. Rom. 3.25. 1 Cor. 6.11. Heb. 8.12. 1 Ioh. 1.7. 4. They are in great account with GodEsay 43.4. Rom. 1.7.. 5. They are deliuered from this present euill worldGal. 1.4.: euen from bondage vnder the custome of it; from the practise of the vices of it, from the fellowship with the men of it, and from the plagues that belong vnto it. 6. They are blessed with the seedes of all spirituall blessings in heauenly thingsEphes. 1.3. Esay 61.10.. 7. They are happy in their heauenly relations, to God, to Iesus the mediator, to the Angels of God, to the spirits of the iust, and to the faithfull euery whereHebr. 12.22.. 8. They are assured of the successe of all the meanes of saluation, Esay 12.3. and 65.15.23. and 56. 1 Cor. 3.21.22.23. Esay 55.6. 9. They haue great promises of comfort, audience, protection, and deliuerance out of all their troubles, Esay 4.5.6. Rom. 8.17. etc. 2 Cor. 1.3.4. Esay 41.12. and 42.13. and 49.14. 10. The spirit of God is powred vpon them, to assure them of Gods louing presenceEzec. 39. vlt.. To bring them foorth into libertie2 Cor. 3 1.. To enlighten them2 Cor. 3.18.. To sanctifie themR^m. 1.3.. To make intercession, and that by making them prayGal. 4.6.. And by producing mighty successe in prayerRom. 8.26. Hos. 12.5 6.. And to make them fruitfull both in graces and dutiesEzech. 36.27. And to bee their seale, and earnest of the inheritance purchased2 Cor. 1.22. Ephes. 1.14 15.. Lastly, they haue an assurance of a most glorious inheritance, reserued for them in heauen,Gal. 5.22. prepared from the foundation of the world1 Pet. 1.3.4. Signes of the new birth..
Now if any enamoured with these priuiledges aske how we may know whether we be conuerted and quickned or not? I answer, it may bee knowen by diuers signes: of these signes some agree to the weake Christian, and some to the strong Christian. The first signe, that vsually breaks out in a conuert is affliction of conscience, which is such an inward pricking in the heartActs 2.41., as causeth him voluntarily to remember his euill wayesEze. 20.43., and iudge himselfe daily for itEsay 4.4, mourning for his sinful lifeEsay 61.2 3., and confounded in himselfe for his waies, which were not good. The second is, affection to the word; such an affection it is as esteemeth the word aboue all treasureMatth. 13., and longs daily after itIob 23.: it makes them flie as the doue to Gods house, and as doues to the windowesEsay 60.8.: yea, their affections to it are such as heauen suffers violenceMatth. 11.. They feele a sauour of life in the word2 Cor. 2.14.. Christs words to them are spirit and lifeIoh. 6.. Yea, such is their affection to the word, they can be content to receiue it with patience, and much afflictions1 Thess. 1.6.. And if they obtaine a sanctuary of God, they will endeauour their owne daily sanctification by itEzec. 37. vlt.. They will practise the word and be exercised by it.
The third signe that discouers it selfe in them, is their loue to such as feare God1 Ioh. 3.14., which they shew by their admiration of themIsay 61.7., and by their delight in their fellowshipPhil 1.5., and by a willing communicating to them in all ready seruice,Acts 16.14.15. Heb. 6.9.10. Esay 23. vlt. and well-doing.
The fourth signe is their ceasing from sinne, euen their daily endeauour to
 subdue and forsake all sorts of sinnes, inward aswell as outward, secret aswell as open, lesser aswell as greater; yea not sparing their most pleasing, gainfull or beloued sinnes2 Tim. 2.19. Psal. 14.6.4. Esay 55.8. Matth. 18.8.. The fift signe is a holy constant desireEsay 55.1. Matth. 5.6. after Gods fauour and remission of sinnes, as the greatest happinesse, reioycing in all the hopes and signes of it. The sixt, is that they can loue and forgiue their enemies e.
Now there are other signes in stronger Christians, such as these. 1. A full assurance of faith in Iesus Christ. 2. A longing and constant desire of death, and loue to the appearing of Iesus Christ, in a sensible and ardent measure, and that in prosperitie. 3. A greate conquest and victorie in ouercomming the world and the flesh. 4. The spirit of prayer, and such like.
Vses.The vse of this point concerning the quickning of the godly, by true conuersion to God, is diuers: First, since this is the first and common worke, without which we can neuer get out of our naturall miserie, here may the cursed and damnable waiwardnesse of the most be reproued, who liue snorting in sinne, as if they needed no conuersion to God. How hath a very spirit of spirituall fornication intoxicated men, and besotted them that they cannot minde to returneHos. 5.4.?
Three sorts of men greeuously transgresse against this doctrine.
1. The carelesse that freeze in their dregges, and consider not whether God will doe good or euill. 2. The inconstant, whose righteousnesse is as the morning dew, that by flashes and fits only thinke of turning to God. 3. The profane scoffer, that speakes euill of the good way of God, and reprocheth by consequent the very bloud of Christ, without which he can neuer be saued.
Note.2. Heere is an excellent comfort to weake Christians; note that the text saith quickned, not borne: to assure the weake; that though their strength be but as the childs when it lieth in the wombe, and is first quickened, and not so much as the strength of a childe new borne, yet they are accepted with God. The first springings in the wombe of grace, is precious before God, though euery thing be not yet so cleerely performed, yet if grace be but conceiued in them, God knowes them, and owes them, and will not denie his owne workes, but annexeth heere forgiuenesse of sinnes, euen to this first sprouting and forming of true grace.
3. How should the consideration of this work and the glorious priuiledges belonging to it, euen compell all men to awake and stand vp from the dead, and neuer giue ouer till Christ bee formed in them? labouring aboue all things to be made new creatures; resoluing to begge this quickning at Gods hands, till by his word he be pleased to beget it in them.
Lastly, how should they walke in newnesse of life that are borne againe of God? there is a path and it is called holy and they must walke in itEsay 35.8., seeing this grace hath appeared, how should they deny vngodlinesse and worldly lusts, for euer resoluing to liue soberly, and godly, and righteously in this present worldTit. 2.12.. And they should giue all diligence to make vp their assurance of their holy calling and election2 Pet. 1.10. Heb. 6.12., Girding vp the loynes of their mindes, that they might trust perfectly on the grace that is brought vnto them, in the reuelation of Iesus Christ1 Pet. 1.13..
And since they are in so happie an estate, they should alwaies reioyce, and let their moderation of minde be knowen to all men, being in nothing carefull, but in all things making request vnto God, with prayers and supplications, and giuing of thanks; so should the peace of God that passeth all vnderstanding keepe their hearts and mindesPhil 4.6.4.7..
And for our carriage towards others; first, we should for euer in all places, acknowledge such as are borne againe of God1 Cor. 16.10. 2 Cor. 1.14.. Secondly, we should exhort one another, and prouoke one another to loue and good workes, and not forsake the fellowship of the SaintsHeb. 10.24.25.26.: praying one for another, that God would fulfill the
 good pleasure of his will, and the worke of our faith with power, that we might abound in loue, and be established in holinesse before God, in the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ with all the Saints1 Thes. 3.12.13..
Thus of our quickning; only we may obserue, that he saith, we are quickned together with him; which is true diuers waies: men are quickned together with Christ, 1. Because we are quickned aswell as he. 2. Because being quickned we are vnited vnto him. 3. Because we are quickned by the same spirit, and power, that raised him from the dead. All which may increase our consolation in this gratious worke, and confirme vs vnto the end.

Forgiuing you all your trespasses.

First for the meaning of the words;(...). the word forgiuing as it is in the originall, signifieth to acquit them gratis, and as a free gift of his grace, to send them the newes of their pardon: the word rendred trespasses,(...). vsually is vnderstood of actuall sins. But yet we must not thinke that originall sin is not forgiuen, for either it is a Synecdoche, and so one sort of sinnes is named in steede of all; or else he speakes according to the feeling of many of the godly, who euen after forgiuenes are maruellously troubled with the flesh, and the wicked proanesse to daily sinnes.
But for the matter it selfe, we may here note.
1. That God doth certainly forgiue men their sinnes, when he giues them repentance, and conuerts them by his word.
2. That where God forgiues our sinnes, he heales our natures too, therefore quickning and forgiuing are here ioyned together; and herein Gods pardons differs from all the pardons of Kings. Men may forgiue the treason or fellony, but they cannot giue a nature that will offend no more, but now if God forgiue a man, he will certainely giue his good spirit to mend his nature, and cleanse him from his sin.
3. That howsoeuer iustification go before sanctification, yet it is sanctification first appeares, therefore quickning first named.
4. That it is a singular happinesse to obtaine of God the forgiuenesse of our sinnes.
5. That if we were vsed according to our deserts, God must neuer forgiue vs, it is his free grace.
The vse of all may be first for great reproofe of the generall carelessenes of the most men, that will take no paines at all to get the pardon of their sinnes, but wholly neglect the seeking of the assurance of it. Now this monstrous neglect of so admirable a benefit comes first from ignorance: men know not their wofull miserie in respect of their sinnes. 2. From the hardnes of mans heart, and their hearts in this point of neglect of remission of sinnes are hardened both by the effectuall working of Satan, and by the example of the carelesse multitude, and by the entertainement of false opinions about it, as that it need not be sought, or cannot be knowne, or hereafter will be time inough to inquire: or else men are conceited in false acquitances; either they rest in this, that Christ died for them, or that God makes promises of forgiuenesse in Scripture, or that their ciuill course of life, or their works of mercie, or piety, will make God amends etc. Againe, this neglect ariseth from the forgetfulnesse of mans latter end, if men knew the time of the day of the Lord, they would get their pardon confirmed if it were possible, least it should come vpon them vnawares. Lastly, this comes from the loue of sinne, men are loath to leaue their sinnes, and therefore not carefull to seeke forgiuenesse of them.
2. Here is a confutation of merit of workes, for if we pay the debt, then it is not forgiuen vs; and if it be forgiuen vs, then certainely we pay it not: be sides the word notes that it is freely done, as hath been shewed before.
3. Shall we not be stirred vp to seeke forgiuenes of sinnes? Quest. What should we doe that we might be confirmed in the assurance to obtaine forgiuenesse of sinnes?What wee must doe to obtaine forgiuenesse of sinnes. Answ. 1. Thou must forgiue men their trespassesMath. 6 16.. 2. Thou must acknowledge thy sinnes1 Ioh. 1.9.. 3. Thou must pray, and get others to pray for the forgiuenesse of thy sinnesIam 5.16.. 4. Thou must often receiue the sacrament of the Lords supper, for this is Gods seale of forgiuenesse of sinsMath. 26.. 5. Thou must bewaile thy sinnesZach. 12.12.13. and 13.1., and begge the witnesse of the spirit of adoption in the intercession of Iesus Christ, till those vnspeakable ioyes of the holy Ghost fall vpon thee, and seale thee vp vnto the day of redemption.
And thus farre of the thirtenth verse.



VERS. 14. Blotting out the hand-writing of ordinances, that was against vs, which was contrarie to vs and tooke it out of the way, nailing it to his crosse.

THis verse and the next containe the seuenth reason of the dehortation, it is laid down in this verse and amplified in the next. The argument may stand thus: If the ceremonies were a Chyrographe or hand-writing against vs, when they were in force, and if now Christ haue cancelled that writing, then we ought not to vse them againe; but such they were, for they were a hand-writing against vs, and Christ hath remoued them by fastening them vpon the crosse, therefore we ought not to reuiue them againe: or thus, if the debt be paid and the obligation cancelled, then is it a fond course to cause the obligation wilfully to be of force againe.
Hand-writing] This hand-writing is by diuers diuersly referred, for some thinke it is to be referred to the couenant with Adam; all mankinde in him was bound to God, this obligation he brake and so the forfeiture, lay still vpon our neckes till Christ paid the debt, and cancelled the obligation. Some referre it to the law of Moses in generall, and say the people did binde themselues vnto it, Exod. 14. by the rites there vsed. This bond was forfeited by the Iewes and lay vpon them. Some referre it to the morrall law in speciall, and therein we did enter into bond which was called the couenant of works: the rigor and curse of this law lieth vpon all mankinde, and when God sues out this bond men are carried to prison, euen to the prison of hell. Some referre it to the conscience of men, and say that an euill conscience is a Chyrographe, a bill of debt, and it accuseth by ordinances, that is, it taketh conclusions from the law of God to arrest, or condemne the sinner. But most vsually it is referred to the ceremoniall law, by some of them men did enter into bond, as by circumcision, so faith the Apostle, he that is circumcised is bound to keepe the whole law, Gal. 5.5. By others of them men made bils of debt, circumcision confesseth corruption of nature by propagation. The washings were open confessions of the foulenes of our liues x; in the sacrifices men subscribed to their owne death and damnation: for they confessed they had deserued to die in steed of the beast.
The words may be true of all, but most principally of the ceremoniall law In generall he here intreateth of deliuerance from the ceremonies of Moses, then, two things may in particular be noted, 1. What the ceremonies were in themselues. 2. The manner or meanes how the Church was discharged of them. For the first, if we require what they were? They were 1. for honor, ordinances of God. 2. for vse, hand-writings. 3. for effect they were against vs, or contrarie to vs.
Ordinances] Some read for ordinances, some read by ordinances, some with ordinances, and some of ordinances. They that read for ordinances, say the hand-writing was for ordinances, that is, either in fauor of the decrees that were against
 vs, or for the better assuring of the keeping of the ordinances; it was by ordinances viz euangelicall, for they say the decrees of Christ did euacuate the lawes of Moses. They that read with ordinances, say that the hand-writing was the debt of death which Christ tooke away with the ordinance; that is the externall rites and rudiments of Moses. But I thinke the sense is cleare as it is here rendred of ordinances.
And so the point to be obserued is, that the ceremonies imposed vpon the Iewes were Gods ordinances, which may shew vs that God did take vpon him the right to binde the conscience, of men, by ceremonies. 2. Seeing Christians are freed from them by God himselfe, therefore the Apostle would haue them stand to their libertie. 3. This should exalt the praise of the morrall law; if they were bound to obserue the very ceremonies because they were Gods ordinances, then much more should wee bee carefull to keepe the morrall.
Hand-writings] This word notes their vse, because men are by nature wonderfull slow to acknowledge their misery, therefore the Lord in all ages did driue men vnder their hands as it were openly to make profession of their owne sin guiltinesse and fall, that so Gods iustice might be cleared: Therfore were the sacrifices required presently after the fall; and baptisme now is of like nature to shew vs our naturall vncleannesse, that need to be washed.
Against vs] In effect they were against vs. The ceremonies were against vs, that is against the Iewes 4. waieas, 1. As they were bills of debt. 2. As they told the longing wife that her husband was long after to come. 3. As they proclaimed God infinitely hating sinne, so as he must haue attonement in bloud and that daily. 4. As they were transgressed in respect of the right manner of obseruing them.
Now though these ceremonies belong not to vs Christians, yet we are in the same debt by nature, that they were, though wee haue not that way of expressing our debt.
Quest. But how could that which God commanded them to do be against them? Answ. Many waies, 1. When they failed in the matter, as when they offered strange fire or sacrificed their sonnes. 2 When they did anger God by omissions, or delaies, as when Moses trisled out the circumcision of his sonne. 3. When they did it for wrong ends, as when the whore would sacrifice to colour her whoredomes, Pro. 5. or when men did thinke thereby to make amends for their sinnes, Ier. 7. or when they vsed them for the hurt of Gods children, as Balaam vsed his sacrifice. 4. When they mingle their owne inuentions with Gods ordinances; and their feare towards God was taught by the precepts of men. 5. When they did vse them, as a burthen, and it was a wearinesse to them. Lastly, when they that vsed them were wicked men, and did vse them without knowledge, or faith, or repentance for their sinnes, or the care of the due manner, as many places of Scripture shew. And thus may the very law of God be against vs still, aswell as against them.
The vse of all this chiefly may be to shew, the misery of euery impenitent sinner, his sinnes are vpon record, there is the hand-writing against him, let him looke vpon sacrificing Iewes, and there he may behold man daily in effect saying thus. Thus must it be done to the man that repenteth not of his sins, the obligation lies forfeited, and the Lord may call vpon him for his debt of 10000. talents when he hath not a farthing to pay, and then he will be cast into prison.
Againe when he saith [vs] he shewes that this is the estate of all men by nature, there was a hand-writing against the very Apostle himselfe, and such as were in the visible Church, therefore he saith against vs. Thus of what the
 ceremonies were in themselues. Now of the discharge from them, there two things may be noted, 1. The manner, Christ put them out, tooke them away, fastned them. 2. The meanes, viz. the Crosse. The summe is, that Christ Iesus by his sufferings on the Crosse, paid our debt, and freed vs from the hand-writing that was against vs; the anger of God conceiued against vs, for the forfeiture, was thereon by the bloud of Christ appeasedRom. 5.9., and forgiuenesse of sinnes and debts, therein merited1 Ioh. 2.7.; And by the bloud of Iesus, the faithfull ouercome the deuillReuel. 12.11 Heb. 11.28., that had power to destroy, by reason of the forfeiture; and because none of the former agreements would serue by reason of mans weaknesse, therefore God makes a new couenant, and seales it by the bloud of Christ vpon the CrosseZach. 9.11. Heb. 9.18.; and if we would bee assured of our release, in particular, First, for the forfeiture in Paradice, we receiue an attonement in the bloud of ChristRom. 5.11.12.17; And he that from the curse in Paradice had power ouer death, was now by Christ destroyedHeb. 2.15.. And for the law of Moses, we are by Christ deliuered both from the rigor of it, and from the curse of it, his owne sacrifice being the propitiatorie, to still the crie of the Law, and to hide it from the eyes of Gods iustice h; and as for the writing of the conscience, the bloud of Christ cleanseth it from dead workesHeb. 9.14., and quieteth it in the declaration of forgiuenesEphes. 1.7.8., and it maketh intercession for sinneHeb. 12.14. after calling to keep it quiet; and as for the ceremoniall hand-writings they were both fulfilledCol. 2.17. and abolished in the sacrifice of Christ on the crosse, hee himselfe saying, It was finished. And the more to assure vs, of our safetie, from these forfeitures, he vseth those diuers phrases, of putting out, taking out of the way, and fastning it to the crosse.
Vses.The vse of all is, 1. For information; wee may see what a case sinne sets vs in by nature, and how hatefull the nature of sinne is: if wee haue any thing to doe with God, why our sinnes lie like so many blocks in our way, and Christ Iesus only can lift them out of the way; and can our wretched hearts delight in sinne, seeing they nailed Christ to the Crosse? It is an easie thing to rent an obligation amongst men, but it was not so easie, to get ours cancelled, it could be rent in no place, but on the Crosse, Christ Iesus himselfe must be fastned to the tree, that he might fasten our cancelled hand-writing therto: and if God spared not his owne Sonne, when hee came about this businesse of cancelling the hand-writing, what thinke we shall be the case of all wicked men, that die in their sinnes, and must suffer the whole forfeiture to fall on their neckes? if what Christ endured on the Crosse were so painefull, they must not thinke to escape. Hence also we may see what wonderfull cause wee haue to loue the Lord Iesus, that hath done all this for vs, Oh how precious should his memorie be amongst vs? Finally, here the faithfull should gather singular comfort against the law, sinne, death and hell, seeing here they may be informed all these were nailed vpon the crosse, and Christ hath openly declared that he hath cancelled whatsoeuer might be to shew against vs, for any forfeiture or debt of ours whatsoeuer; And shall not wee take heede of running in debt againe, by sinning, after the sprinkling of the bloud of Iesus Christ? or shall wee wretchedly binde our selues to the law againe, by pleading our iustification before God by the workes of the law?



VERS. 15. And hauing spoiled principalities and powers, hee made a shew of them openly, triumphing ouer them in it.

THese words are an amplification of the former, wherin he sheweth that not only the Bill in which we were made infinitely indebted, was cancelled; but the deuills also (who had power to serue executions vpon vs, and proofe
 from the ceremoniall Law, as is before declared) mightily conquered by Christ; and therefore to reuiue againe the ceremonies, was to renue the bond, and to stand still in danger of the Diuels executions.
The words are a most portly and deep allegorie, and they carrie newes of a remakable victorie: the battell was fierce, cruell, prodigiously difficult, bloudie on the best side, and if Christ had beene a iot lesse then he was, there had been no remedie, nor hope. The battell was first fought between Sathan and man, with a depth of fraud and crueltie, and hellish inuisible spight:Newes of a strange victorie. the day was lost, man with the wofull issues of the conquest, was either cast downe wallowing in bloud, or scattered with pursuing crueltie: no sooner sprouting in the life of nature, but smitten with the venome of spirituall infection, plagued with the bondage of more then cruell seruitude, not pittied, not helped: more forfeitures laid vpon him then hee could finde words to acknowledge. Now one man commeth into the field in the right of millions, (that could not stand in their owne quarrell) challengeth the victors, with singular compassion calleth backe the scattered, raiseth a mighty expectation, exposeth himselfe to the danger, with incredible fury is encountred, one with millions or legions of Diuels, of incomprehensible rage, and long beaten experience, and the infinite anger of God was kindled against this one man as a suretie for the rest.
Now in this text is a report of the happie successe of the battell; newes of a most victorious conquest: the Diuels spoyled, the Elect restored, with vnutterable hymnes attend the conquest; the wretched spirits are in chaines, exposed to infinite shame, and dragged after the chariot of triumph, as hee ascended into the new Ierusalem.
In generall two things may be obserued: First, that Christ is God; he was brought in before, quickning pardoning, filling, circumcising the heart, now heere spoyling the Diuels, and triumphing ouer them.
2. We may heere comfort our selues with this, that the Diuell shall neuer haue successe against Christ, and his kingdom, God hath cursed all his wayes: and yet we finde by experience, the Diuell will not giue ouer, though he hath neuer so ill successe from day to day: which may awaken many wicked men, who are herein like the Diuell, no ill successe can make them giue ouer their ill courses. Againe, would wee not bee spoyled and crossed in the successe of that we take in hand, and be made like the Diuel in ill successe, then let vs take heed of his qualities, be not like him in cruelty, in fraud, in lying, in accusing, or enuying the children of God: for if thou be, thou art sure with the Diuell, to be accursed and rebuked of God.
Now for the particular opening of these words, wee must vnderstand that they haue beene three wayes interpreted. First, some Papists say this battell was fought in hell, when Christ fetched the Fathers out of Limbus: This interpretation I reiect, not onely as a fond conceit obtruded vpon the world, but because the most popish writers could see no such thing in this place, but expound it otherwise.
Secondly, some Orthodox writers say this battell and triumph was both begun and ended before Christs death. The Deuils encountred Christ two wayes vpon the crosse: visibly and inuisibly. Visibly, by inspiring wicked men with vile prouocations to vex him, and molest him; as the impenitent theefeLuk. 23.38., the Rulers of the IewesLuk. 33 38., and the souldiersLuk. 23.37.. Inuisibly, the Deuils themselues, with all might, fury, malice, and sleight encountred him vpon the crosse, in the sight of God and the holy Angels.
The victorie is described in this verse, and it is sayd first hee spoyled them, which is diuersly read and referred; For some vnderstand it, hee spoyled the Deuils: some of the Fathers put in a word, and read it, after hee had spoyled
 himselfe of his flesh, and so it is a comparison borrowed from wrestlers, or runners, that first put off all might hinder them; and so Christ that hee might ouercome, first layd downe his flesh vpon the crosse. And where the text saith, he made a shew of them openly, the Holy Ghost alludeth to the trophies of great Victors: their manner was, in the place where they did ouercome, either to cut downe the armes of great trees, and thereupon hanged the spoyles or weapons of the vanquished: or else they built some stately pillars, and there painted or wrote vpon, the conquest with other monuments of victorie; So did Christ openly serue the Diuels, openly before God, Angels, and the world hee defeateth them, and by a new way, by suffering, gaue occasion to all to see the shaking of the hellish kingdome; where he is sayd to triumph ouer them, therein is an allusion to the third degree of victorie, they were wont to lead their captiues after the chariot of triumph into the Citie with great pompe: thus did Christ to the wicked spirits, either vpon the crosse, or in his resurrection.
Quest. But might some one say, what appearance was there of any victorie,Christs victorie. when Christ suffered? Answ. Great euery way: for if wee obserue it in euery branch of the processe, there is euident signes of victorie; For doe they attach him? why first the officers are smitten to the ground with a very word,1. In his attachment. and Iudas the cheefe leader is made to goe and hang himselfe: the eare of Malchus was miraculously cured, and they are suffered to doe no iot more then will fulfill the ScripturesMat. 26.26. 2. In his arraignment.. Will they arraigne him in the Consistorie? why there sits a high Priest that was made whether hee would or no to prophesie of Christs death for the peopleIoh. 11.50. vvith 18.4.; and Christ casts a spirit of giddinesse vpon the witnesses, so as their testimonies could not agree: yea, he there foretels them of his most glorious and terrible second comming in the clowds of heauen, and then miraculously recouers Peter a lapsed sinner. Will they arraigne him in the common hall? why there he ouercomes by patience, no indignities could stir him, and the Iudges wife from a dreame giues warning that hee was a iust man, yea the Iudge himselfe was compelled to pronounce him innocent.3. Vpon the crosse. Will they haue him to the crosse? there are wonders of victorie, a theefe without meanes saued, the vaile of the Temple rent, signes in heauen and earth, and a title of victorie superscribed by his very aduersaries, This is the King of the Iewes; besides his incorruption in the graue, and glorious resurrection, and visible ascension to heauen.
All this being considered, where is the ignominie of the crosse, seeing the Deuils erected a crosse for themselues, when they plotted to crucifie Christ? And why should we be afraid of suffrings, seeing the crosse is Christs triumph? and let vs resolue also to ouercome by suffringsRom. 8.34.; Tis an excellent and loftie praise to ouercome by suffring.
Lastly, let vs neuer iudge of Christ or Christians by their outward shew: great things may be done in the kingdom of Christ, which are not discerned by carnall reason; Here we see a great adoe, trophies, triumphs, yet the world tooke no notice of it: so is there incomparable glory euen in this world in the soules and liues of Christians, which the blinde multitude neuer takes notice of. And thus much of the second interpretation.
The third and last interpretation, is of those that limit not the time of this victorie to the crosse, but consider it generally, and in steede of the words [vpon the same crosse] read [in himselfe] and thus doe the most Interpreters new and old read it; And so this victorie is vnderstood not so much of what Christ did attaine in his person, as what he doth in vs: by the conuersion of sinners, by the Gospell, hee daily spoyles principalities and powers, and triumphs ouer them, etc. and so these words are a consequent of the putting out of the hand-writing mentioned in the former verse.

Foure things are in these words to bee considered: who, whom, what, and by what meanes. For the first, it is the second Adam that vndertakes this battel, he that is God and man, he of whom the prophesies ranne, he that by a voice from heauen at his baptisme was acknowledged the only champion, twas he that sent the challenge by his fore-runner Iohn Baptist, he it is that foyled Sathan in many Monomachies, this is he that now comes forth in the Gospell in the seuerall ages of the Church to spoyle these principalities and powers.
Now for the second, the spoyled are called principalities and powers.
Principalities and Powers] These termes are giuen to the good Angels, Eph. 3.10. and to great Magistrates and Princes on earth, Eph. 1.23. In effect they are giuen to Christ, Esay 9.6.7. but vsually they are restrained to euill angels, and so they are called either considering them as they were before their fall, or as it is vsually conceiued, it notes their estate euen since their fall.
The two words note two things in the euill Angels, Excellencie and Abilitie; Excellencie, so they are principalities; Abilitie, so they are powers. Their excellencie is two waies to be considered, 1. in themselues. 2. their soueraignty ouer the world. In themselues and their owne nature, euer since their horrible fall, they are creatures of wonderfull knowledge, swiftnesse, discerning, and such like.
An in respect of the vnregenerate world they haue a principality: hence called worldly rulersEph. 6., the prince of this worldIoh. 1 2., yea and the god of this world2 Cor. 4.4.. We may obserue here in the holy Ghost a wonderfull patterne of candor, he praiseth what is praise-worthy euen in his enemies; and it may wonderfully comfort Gods children in their acceptation with God, for if God can yeelde these titles and acknowledge that is yet good in the very Deuils, sure then it cannot be he should not like what he findes good in his owne Saints, though they haue many wants and sinnes, seeing they sinne not of malicious wickednes, as the Deuils doe.
As they are called principalities, so for their abilitie and force of working,The povver of the Deuils both in the vvorld and in the Church. they are called powers. The wonderfull power the diuels haue may be considered either in the world or in the Church.
In the first race of men before the floud, how soone had they drawne away Cains race into apostasie, and not long after Sethes, till they had chased the light of sincerity within the walles of one house, and not all sound there neither? After the floud, the world is no sooner filled againe, but together with the building of Babel, a most dreadfull confusion was wrought by the Deuils, euen the beginning of a generall falling away into gentilisme and idolatrie (which will neuer bee vtterly recouered againe while the world stands) all the families making apostasie in the beginning of the Babylonish Monarchie, and such an apostacie, as they continued in for many hundred yeeres in the generalitie of them: so as there was onely a little light left in the race of Sem.
Now leauing the whole world lying vnder this powerfull wickednesse, come to Abraham, (a brand taken out of the fire of the Chaldeans) in whom the light shined with great glory, see the power of these wicked spirits ouer his race: the Ismalites went quickely off to gentilisme: then the Edomites were easily gained after: then in Aegypt the light that did remaine was almost put out, the bondage of the Israelites being as great in souleEzech. 20., as it was in bodie.
In Moses time the light was diffused in that people all abroad againe, and a kingdom of Priests was raised vp to God: this light held with various encreases and decreases, till the captiuitie, after which time it waxed dimmer and dimmer, till Christ the Day-starre arose, and filled heauen and earth with the brightnesse of his comming.
After in the very first hundreds of yeeres, these cursed spirits not onely persecuted
 religion by incredible tyranny, but infected it with the tares of strange errors, and prodigious superstitions and heresies, till all grew together in one body in Antichrist.
Vnder Antichrist all sincerity was againe almost vniuersally put out, the face of religion corrupted, and idolatry brought into the Churches 1260, yeeres. Lastly, in our owne dayes when the prophesies were accomplished, and the euerlasting Gospell published againe, alas yet consider the state of the world; one part of the world lieth in Paganisme, another in Turcisme, another in Iudaisme, another in Papisme; and in all these foure these wicked spirits raigne, and hold the world captiue at their pleasure.
Come we to the visible assemblies, of the true Churches of Iesus Christ, and consider there their power, how mightily it extends, for there they haue secret Atheists, Church-papists, persons excommunicate, witches, and such like diabolicall practisers, Hypocrites, Apostataes, the vnmercifull, troopes of the ignorant, besides the swarmes of vicious liuers, and prophane persons, such as are swearers, drunkards, filthy persons of all kindes, liers, vsurers, raylers, and such like workers of iniquitie.
Why Sathans vvorking is not perceiued by vvicked men.It is true, worlds of men feele not this power of theirs: but alas this warre is spirituall, these enemies are inuisible, their sleights are of infinite depth, their soules are already in their possession, and all is couered with grosse darknesse, and done in a spirituall night, and wicked men are like dead men in their sinnefull courses, senselesse and secure.
Vses.The vse is to shew the miserie of all impenitent sinners, though they go in braue clothes, dwell in faire houses, possessed of large reuenues, abound in all pleasures of life etc. yet alas, alas, for their wofull estate with all this: Oh the Diuels, the Diuels, are their masters, and rule ouer them as effectually, as euer did tyrant ouer his slaue: Oh if men haue eares let them heare, and awake and stand vp from the dead, and not dare to continue in so wofull a condition, and let the righteous leape and sing for true ioy of heart, whatsoeuer their outward estate bee in the world; Oh let them praise the rich grace of God, that hath translated them out of this kingdome of darknesse, and giuen them a lot among the Saints.
The third thing is the victory, expressed in three degrees.
He spoyled them] This is to be vnderstood in the behalfe of the faithfull, for whose sake, he hath and doth daily smite them with his great swordEsay 27.1.. Hee reproueth them and rebuketh themZach. 3.1.2.3.: hee casteth them downe like lightningLuk. 10.20.: He breakes their headGen. 3 15.: yea and sometimes treades them downe vnder the feete of his SaintsRom. 16.20.: making them in many tentations and tribulations more then conquerorsR^m. 8.34.: pulling downe their strong holds, which they had within2 Cor. 10.4., when they compasse the righteous with their tentations, hee euer openeth a doore for issue, and deliuereth the righteous2 Pet. 2.9., sending succoursHeb. 2.18., and making his seruants often to lead Sathan captiue.
He spoyled them by taking from them the soulesActs 26.18. of the righteous, which they possessed as their booty: he spoiled them by loosing the workes of Satan1 Ioh. 3.8.: he spoiled them by taking from them altogether the power they had ouer deathHeb. 2.14, so farre as concernes the righteous. He hath so farre spoiled them, that they are not only iudged by the word of the Saints in this lifeIoh. 16.11., but the Saints shall also sit vpon them, to iudge them at the last day1 Cor. 6.3..
Vses.And all this may serue for constant comfort vnto all the godly, each word being a well of consolation if we wisely apply it. And withall it may encourage them against the remainder of the power of euill spirits; it is true, they accuse still, they hinder the word what they can still, they will steale the seede still, they will raise trouble and oppositions still, they sow tares still, they will bee casting their snares still, they buffet them by tentations still: but yet the
 same God and our Lord Iesus Christ that hath thus farre subdued them, will prosper his owne worke, and make vs stand in all the euill dayes, so as wee will put on the whole armour of God.
Now whereas he saith he hath spoiled him, it is true of the time past, 1. In the person of Christ himselfe. 2. In the merit of our victorie. 3. In our iustification, hee is perfectly foiled. 4. In our sanctification, hee is spoiled by inchoation.
And made a shew of them openly.] These words containe the second degree of victorie, and are true in a double sense: For first hee hath made a shew of them, in that he hath discouered them and made them known to the Church. This is a dragging of them out of their cels of darknesse in the light of obseruation, by shewing their natures and practises, by vnmasking them to the view of the soule: thus are they displaied in the doctrine of the Gospell, and the soules of the righteous behold this detection of Sathan from day to day by the word, with as much admiration as euer the Romans did behold any great rebell, or barbarous rebell or monster, subdued, and in triumph brought into Rome. Neither may this detection of Sathan seeme to be the least part of Christs victorie: for it is certaine it is a worke that euill men or euill angels neuer beare but vanquished. There is a hot opposition in all places before Sathan will abide this.
Secondly, he made a shew of them, that is, as some thinke,(...). he made them to be for examples, and that three wayes. 1. In shame, making detestation to be their portion. 2. In confusion, and an inexplicable kinde of astonishment, and benummednes, and blindnes. 3. In torments and punishments, 2 Pet. 4.5. Iud. 9.
The vse may be for increase of consolation:Vse. wee see Christ will neuer cease till he hath finished this victorie. Why should wee then faile through vnbeleefe, or faint in the resisting of the deuill? The Lord will more and more make a shew of them, and giue vs increase of experience of the power of his word and presence herein. Here also mens waywardnesse may be reproued, that cannot abide to heare talke of the deuill or his courses: this is but a worke of Sathan in them to hinder their saluation, for to make an open shew of them is one part of Christs victorie.
The word rendred openly signifieth sometimes eminentlyJoh. 7.4., sometimes without authoritieAct. 4.29, sometimes with confidence, and vndaunted resolution, with assurance or plerophorie1 Ioh. 5.14., sometimes with plainenesse and euidenceIoh 16 25.29., sometimes with libertie^ Tim. 3.13.. But I rest in the word openly here vsed.
And triumphed ouer them.] Here is the third part of the victorie. This triumph was first begunne in the resurrection and ascension of ChristEph. 4.7.. 2. It was continued in the publication of the Gospell2 Cor. 2.14., (which is newes of victorie) and in the life of Christians; for what is the life of euery Christian, but the shew of a brand taken out of the fire, or of a soule preserued out of darknesse? The soule is mounted in the chariot of the word, praier and holy liuing; this chariot is followed with the applause of Angels, and the approbation of the Saints; the place is in the new Ierusalem on earth, in the temple of their God. The chariot is drawne with white steeds, sincere teachers; it is prouoked and driuen on by the spirit of God: and the effect of all is a heart inspired with heauenly ioyes and refreshings. 3. As it begun in Christ, and is continued in the life of a Christian, so this triumph shall be perfected in death, and consummate in the resurrection to the eternall dissolution and confusion of all wicked men and deuils.
Now for vse of this;Vse. what iust cause is there to take vp bitter lamentations for the wonderfull frowardnesse of the natures of the most men, who had rather be miserable and serue the deuill still, then be made glorious by conquest
 in repentance for their sinnes: they had rather be his prisoners, then such princes: rather slaues to Sathan, then sonnes to God: rather dragged into captiuitie with the deuill, then carried in the chariot of triumph with the Saints.
2. If such honors be done to Christians, and such ioyes had in a Christian estate, oh then let it be the praier of euery godly man daily to God, as Psal. 106.4. Remember me, O Lord, with the fauour of thy people, visit me with thy saluation, etc.
Lastly, how should it excite in vs a desire to walke worthy of such a victorie? yea how should it inspire vs with spirituall magnanimitie to resist Sathan, and with a holy scorne to disdaine his filthy tentations, and in all estates to demeane our selues so as might become men that know and beleeue that Christ hath spoiled principalities and powers for vs? etc.
4. For the meanes of this victorie, it is added in these words,
In himselfe.] So it is read in the Greeke, and in the most Interpreters; and this in himselfe, either it notes his mysticall body, or else it notes Christ himselfe alone, and in this latter sense it is continually taken: and so we may here learne, that it is the Lord Iesus Christ alone, euen himselfe alone that hath wrought this victorie for vs; there was none other able to stand in the field against the aduersarie: there is no name else vnder heauen by which wee can be saued; and therefore we should giue all the glory to Christ alone, and not to any man or Angels, for they neuer fought for vs, nor were they able to stand in this battell of our redemption.




VERS. 16. Let no man therefore condemne you in meat or drinke, or in respect of an holiday, or of the new Moone, or of the Sabboth dayes.
17. Which are but a shadow of things to come, but the body is in Christ.


HItherto of the seuen reasons of the dehortation. The conclusion followes in these words and the rest to the end of the chapter: and it hath three branches. For 1. he concludes against Iudaisme in these words. 2. Against philosophie, vers. 18.19. 3. Against traditions, vers. 20. to the end.
In these words is contained both the conclusion it selfe, vers. 16. and the reason, vers. 17. and the drift is to shew that the ceremonies of Moses are abolished, and therefore they should not receiue them, or hold themselues bound vnto them. This was foretold Dan. 9.17. it was signified by the renting of the vaile; and these ceremonies were solemnly and publikely laid downe, in the first Councell which was held by the Apostles at Ierusalem, Act. 15. And they were then so laid downe, that the Apostle after giues order to the Church that those ceremonies should neuer be vsed, nor any other deuices, but such as might be to edification, order and decencie, and were without offence.
The ceremonies named in the text, are the difference of meats and drinkes, and the obseruation of times, concerning which hee writes more sharply, Gal. 3.1.3. and 4.10. and 5.9. and 6.12.
In the Law there were three sorts of meats that legally were required: 1. The meat offerings. 2. The shew bread. 3. The cleane beasts. The meat offering was a type of Christ our nourishment. The shew bread was a type of the Church in her mysticall vnion. And the cleane beasts (knowne by chewing the cud, and diuiding the hoofe) were types of the Christians both meditation and discretion, in the meanes of his holy conuersation. And for the confirmation of this place, the Apostle
 elsewhere shewes euidently that the difference of meats is taken away, 1 Tim. 4.1.2.3.4.
The difference of times in the Law is here said to be threefold; of dayes, of moneths, of Sabbaths.
In respect of an holy day.] The originall and most translations word for word haue it thus, in part of an holiday; but in diuers senses: some say in part of an holiday, that is, in partition of a festiuall day from a not festiuall day, as well in dayes, as in moneths, or Sabboths. Some say, in part, for they could not obserue all ceremonies, being absent from Ierusalem. Therefore the Apostle would haue them to receiue none at all, seeing they could not receiue them all. Some say in part of an holiday, that is, in that part of them which concernes dayes, etc. But it is more plainly as it is here rendred.
Or of the new moone.] They did obserue the Calends, or first dayes of euery moneth.
Or of Sabboth dayes.] There were diuers sorts of Sabboths, of dayes, of yeeres, or seuens of yeeres. The Sabboths of dayes were either morall, viz. the seuenth day, which God did chuse; or ceremoniall: the ceremoniall Sabboths were either more solemne, such as were the three great feasts, Passeouer, Pentecost, and tabernacles; or lesse solemne, such as were the feasts of blowing the trumpetsLeuit. 23.24., and the feast of expiationLeuit. 16.32 33.34.. The Sabboth of yeeres was euery seuenth yeereLeuit. 25.4.5.6. to 11.. The Sabboth of seuens of yeeres was the Iubile, which returned euery fiftie yeeres. We see here then that the Apostle shewes that wee are deliuered from the bondage of the obseruation as before of meats, so now of Sabboths.
Obiect. But is the Sabboth day that was morall abrogated? Sol. No, the Apostle speakes here of the ceremoniall Law, not of the morall; and of ceremoniall Sabboths, not of the morall Sabboth; the word is in the plurall number.
The manner of propounding the conclusion is to be obserued.
Let no man condemne you.] These words may be referred either to Gods children, or to false teachers. In the first sense it is thus: Let none condemne you, that is, doe not shew such loue to these ceremonies hereafter, that thereby you incurre iustly the blame and censure of Gods children. And if they bee referred to false teachers, then it is thus: let no man whatsoeuer perswade you that you are condemned, or iudged of God for omitting the obseruation of the ceremonies; care not for their censures, neuer trouble your consciences about it.
Which are shadowes of things to come.] Here the Apostle with full saile driues into the hauen, by shutting vp with this vnauoidable argument. These ceremonies are but shadowes of that substance which now we haue, and therefore it is a foolish thing to striue about the shadow when we haue the substance.
Ceremonies were shadowes in diuers respects. 1.Ceremonies vvere shadovves in diuers respects. In respect of certaintie of signification: the shadow is a sure signe of the body; so was this of Christ to come. 2. In respect of causation; the body causeth the shadow, so is Christ the cause of all ceremonies. 3. In respect of the obscuritie of signification: a shadow is darke, so were the ceremonies. 4. In respect of cessation: a shadow is quickly gone, so were the ceremonies, they were not to last for any long time. Lastly, they were shadowes as they were types; so the lambe was a shadow of Christ, and the Arke of the Church, etc. They were shadowes not giuen to iustifie, but to shew iustification by Christ.
It is added, of things to come] to keepe off the blow from our Sacraments, which are no shadowes of things to come, but of things past.
But the body is in Christ.] The words are diuersly interpreted: some referre the words to the next verse, but without reason: some supplie a word body, and reade, but the body is the body of Christ: but the plaine meaning is, that
 the truth and substance of all the ceremonies is now enioyed by the Church in and by Christ, in whom all is now fulfilled, and therefore heauen should now suffer violence, and the children of Sion should now reioice in their King; and Christians should stand fast in the libertie that is brought vnto them in Christ Iesus.




VERS. 18. Let no man beare rule ouer you by humblenesse of minde, and worshipping of Angels; aduancing himselfe in those things he neuer saw; rashly puft vp with his fleshly minde.
19. And holdeth not the head, whereof all the body furnished and knit together by ioynts and bands, increaseth with the increasing of God.


IN these two verses hee concludes against philosophie, and therein specially against Angell-worship, a deuice like the old doctrine of the Platonists, concerning their daemones tutelares. The Diuines also that first broached this apostaticall doctrine in the Primitiue Church were Philosophers: and if the Papists will persist in Angell-worship, they must beare it to be accounted better Philosophers then Diuines.
The Apostle makes foure obseruations vpon these that bring in this worship of Angels. 1. That they attribute that to themselues, which is proper to God, namely to beare rule ouer the consciences of men in matters of religion, though they pretend to bring in those things, because they would haue men thinke humbly of themselues. 2. That they thrust in for oracles, not things they haue seene and heard, but deuised of themselues. 3. That those things were founded on no other foundation then the opinions of men immoderately pleasing themselues in their owne deuices. 4. That this course tends to the high derogation of the honour of Christ, who only deserues all glory, and by whom alone all the suits of the Church are dispatched. The men then that vrge these things are, 1. Hypocrites, they pretend one thing, and intend another. 2. They are ignorant persons. 3. They are proud and insolent in selfe-conceit. 4. They are prophane without Christ.
(...).Let no man beare rule ouer you.] The originall word hath troubled Interpreters, but is for the most part rendred, either beare rule ouer you, and so play the part of a Iudge or rector; or else, defraud you of your prize: it is granted by all, to be a word taken from the manners, in the olympiads or other-where, who runne for prizes: among whom there was one they caled Brabeutes, that is, one that by appointment did sit as iudge, and gaue the prize to the winner.
If it be taken in the first sense, viz. let no man beare rule ouer you; then the Apostels meaning is to warne them for the reasons aboue rehearsed, and herewith adioyned, not to suffer their teachers to lord it ouer them in their consciences; as before he had charged them, not to let them carrie away their soules as a prey vers. 18. or to condenme them vers. 19. This may teach the Ministers of the Gospell, to know and keepe their bounds, and the people likewise, not to suffer any to beare rule ouer their consciences, with their owne deuices. It condemnes also the hellish pride and imperiousnesse of the popish clergie, in playing the Iudges ouer mens consciences at their owne pleasures: seeing we haue no Iudge nor Law-giuer but only Iesus Christ to whom the Father hath giuen all power.
Quest. But haue not the Ministers of the Gospell power vpon obseruation of the runners to be as Iudges to assigne the crowne to them that runne well?
Answ. They haue, and therefore are called the disposers of Gods secrets, and watch-men, and ouerseers: but yet they must be true Ministers, and they must giue iudgement by warrant from the word.

Let no man defraude you of your prize] That is seeing you haue begunne to runne so well, and haue runne so long, let no man now beguile you of your prize, the crowne of glorie.
The Church is like a field, the race is Christian religion, the runners are Christians: the feete are faith and loue; the goall or marke is death in Christ, the brabium or prize is the possession of eternall life. Now the doctrine hence implied is.
Doct. That men may runne and come neere the goall, and yet loose the prize. Many runne yet one obtaineth1 Cor. 9.24.. Many receiue the grace of God in vaine1 Cor. 6.1.. Many come neere the kingdome of God with the Scribe, and yet looseMark. 12.34. Many loose what they haue wrought2 Ioh. 10.. Hence that exhortation, Let no man take away your crowneReuel. 3.11..
The Vse may be first for reproofe of such as doe wronge (either the iudges or standers by) by a wrong applause, such as giue away the honours of Gods children to such as neuer ranne in the race,, or not aright, and giue the titles of the Church and Christianity to wicked men: but especially this reprooueth those men that hauing runne wellGal. 5.7. for a time, suffer themselues to be hindred, and so loose the prize. Many are the waies the Deuill hath to hinder men in running; sometimes by raising vp aduersariesPhil. 1.29., and outward molestationsReuel. 2.10.;Lets in running. sometimes he casts shame in their way, and names of reproach1 Thess. 2.2. Act. 18.; sometimes he iniects tentationsJam. 1.12.; sometimes he leaues themGal. 5.7.9. by keeping them in bondage, to the defence or loue of some lesser superstitions or smaller sins, as the world accounts; sometimes he hinders them by the domesticall enemie the sinne that hangeth so fast onHeb. 12.1. vvhat vve must shun in running.; sometimes he casts men into a dead sleepe, and they lie all along in the middle of the race.
2. This may serue for instruction to teach vs with all heedfulnes to looke to our selues after we set out in the race of Christian profession, that no man take our crowne; and to this end we must consider, both what to shunne, and what to follow. If we would not loose our crowne, wee must shunne, 1. The sinne that hangs on so fastHeb. 12.1.. 2. Prophane bablings and oppositions of science falslie so called1 Tim. 6.20.. 3. ScandallPhil. 2.15.16. 4. The profits and pleasures of the world, so as our hearts be not set vpon them1 Cor. 9.25. 1 Tim. 6.11.12. 5. Selfe-loue and trust in our owne iudgement, when we thinke our selues wise enough to order our race without aduiceGal. 2.2.. 6. Vncertaine running1 Cor. 9.26 Where vvee must obserue.. Now for the second, that wee may runne successefully, diuers rules must be obserued, 1. We must watchfully stop the beginnings of sinne, and when we feele our selues beginne to halt, wee must seeke an healing, least we be turned out of the wayHeb. 12.13.. 2. We must follow peace with all men, so farre as may stand with godlinesse.Heb. 12.14. 3. Wee must keepe the faith. 4. We must labour for the loue of the appearing of Christ. 5. Wee must continue and resolue not to giue ouer till we haue finished our course. These three rules may be gathered out of 2 Tim. 4.8.9. 6. Wee must pray that the Gospell may runne more freely2 Thes. 3.1.; for that like a mighty winde helpes wonderfully in the race. 7. Wee must order riches so as they bee no hinderances2 Tim. 6.18.. 8. We must vse the aduise of the best that can be had for skill or experienceGal. 2.2.. 9. We must faithfully discharge the duties of our calling1 Pet. 5.4.. Wee must so resolue vpon the race, that we labour to be vndaunted and euery way resolued against all afflictions and trials whatsoeuer, that may befall vs, accounting it all happinesse to fulfill our course with ioyAct. 20.24., arming our selues with this minde that we will take vp our crosse, and endure any hardship2 Tim. 2.5. Iam. 1.11. (...)..
At their pleasures] This is added as an aggrauation; the word notes they did it not ignorantly, or by frailtie, but they did wrong the conscience of men, with desire, willingly, wilfully; it doth greatly increase the guilt of sinne, when men doe it willingly and wilfully, where men do it because they will do it. So some men go to law because they will go to lawMath. 5.40.; so some will be greatMath. 20.26;
 Some will doe the lusts of their father the DeuillIoh. 8.44.. Thus are men daily doing the wills of the fleshEphes. 2.3.. The like waywardnesse may be obserued in the negatiue. Men will not be gatheredMat. 23.37.. Men will not come to the weddingMath. 22.3.. In some things they willingly knew them not2 Pet. 3.5.; and it is charged vpon the idle they will not worke2 Thes. 3.10.. Hence those conditionall speeches, if yee will receiue itMat. 11.14.; and if any man will saue his souleMat. 16.15..
The vse may be for terror to stubborne offenders, God takes notice of it that they sinne at their pleasures, they sinne because they will sinne, and therefore let them be assured he will be froward with the frowardPsal. 18., and therefore he will haue his will vpon them vnresistably. Hence these threatnings, hee will take accountMat. 15.23., he will quicken whom he willJoh. 5.21., he will giue to the last as to the firstMat. 20.14.; It shall not bee after the wils of the fleshIoh. 1.13., the spirit shall blow where he willIoh. 3.8., the mysterie shall be made knowne to whom hee willCol. 1.27., and he will not haue sacrificeHeb. 10.5..
Secondly, comfort is here implied; for if there be so much infection in a will to sinne, then there is hope God will accept a will to bee and doe good, he will accept of the will in prayerIoh. 15.7., and the will to resist corruption of natureRom. 7.15.16.17., and of the will to liue honestlyHeb. 13.18. Ioh. 7.17..
Hitherto the Apostle hath charged them generally, now in the words that follow, he inforceth his speech more particularly, both for matter, pointing out Angell-worship, as the doctrine he would conclude against, and for manner noting foure things in those that brought in that worshippe. 1. That they brought it in hypocritically, pretending humblenesse of minde. 2. That they did it ignorantly, aduancing themselues in things they neuer saw. 3. That they did it proudly, rashly puffed vp etc. 4. That they did it dangerously, not holding the head, etc.
Worshipping of Angells] The maine matter the Apostle striues to beate downe, is the worshippe of Angels: as a philosophicall dreame, as a superstition that defrauds men of heauen, as an hypocriticall and ignorant worship, charging them to be proud and fleshly persons that vse it; yea he auoucheth they cannot hold the head which is Christ, if they mainetaine or practise such a worship. All these reasons are in the text and coherence against it.
Which may serue for confutation of Papists, who at this day still maintaine it, not only without commandement or any approued example in scripture, but directly against the prohibition of the Scriptures, as in this place, and so Reuel. 19. the Angell forbids Iohn to doe it.
The Papists offend three vvaies about their Saints and Angels.The Papists offend in their doctrine about Saints and Angells three waies. 1. In giuing vnto them what may be attributed onely to Christ and to God, 2. In adoring them. 3. In inuocating and praying to them; and all three contrarie to Scripture.
For the first, they attribute vnto them, 1. Intercession. 2. The knowledge of all things that concerne vs; they rob Christ of his intercession, and God of his omniscience; now in all this wee haue a sure word of God to trust to For, for intercession it is plaine, we haue none in heauen with himPsal. 73.25.; there is one mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ1 Tim. 2.; we offer vp spirituall sacrifices acceptable to God by Iesus Christ1 Pet. 2.5.; Let vs therefore, saith the Apostle, by him offer the sacrifices of praise alwaiesHeb. 13.15.. Note the words, by him and alwaies. And whereas they obiect the Angell, Reuel. 8. that offred the prayers of the Saints; we answer, that Angell was Christ, who onely hath the golden censer, and who onely is meete to bring incense to offer vpon the golden altar; the indeauour of Peter for their good after his decease, was performed while he liued, as is apparant by comparing the 13. verse, with the 15. of 2. Pet. 1.
And whereas they giue the knowledge of all things vnto them, they rob God of his glory, who onely is the knower of the hearts of men, 2. Chron. 6.30.
 and it is granted Isay 63.16. that Abraham knew them not, and Israel was ignorant of them. And whereas they obiect that Abraham in the 16. of Luke, is said to know that they had Moses and the Prophets bookes, we answer that that is spoken parabolically not historically; they may as well say that Lazarus had fingers, and Diues a tongue, etc. but were that granted, yet it followeth not, that because the doctrine of the Church was reuealed vnto him, therefore he knew all things.
The second thing they giue is adoration, contrary to the flat prohibition of the Angell himselfe, in the Reuelation, who chargeth worship me not, Reuel. 19.10. and without all example in Scripture, or the least sillable of warrant for it; besides we see here Angell-worship in expresse words condemned.
The third thing is inuocation, praying to them, which likewise is contrary to scripture, for how shall we call on them on whom we haue not beleeuedRom. 10.14.; and we are exhorted to go boldly to the throne of grace, with the help of our high Priest, to obteine mercie and finde grace to helpe in time of needHeb. 4.16.; for Christ is the propitiation for the sinnes of the whole world1 Ioh. 2.2., why then should wee giue his glory to any other? and inuocation is a part of the forbidden worship of Angells, as well as adoration.
In humblenes of minde] It was the practise of Satan and pretence of false Teachers, to thrust in this corruption of Angell-worship vnder this colour, that it tended to keepe men in humilitie, and to make men to know their duties to the great maiesty of God, and to acknowledge their gratitude to the Angels for their seruice: this hath beene the Deuils wont to hide soule sins vnder faire pretences, and vice vnder the colours of vertue.
This may serue notably for the confutation of the Papists, about their Saint and Angell-worship; for is not this their smoothest pretence, to tell vs by comparison, that men will not go to great Princes directly with their suites, but will vse the mediation of some Courtiers, and so they say they must doe to God. This you see was the old deceit in the primitiue Church, and therefore worthily we may say to the people, let none of the popish rabble defraud you, through humblenesse of minde.
Againe, is the Deuill ashamed to shew sinne in his owne colours? doth hee maske it vnder the colour of vertue? Then where shall those monsters appeare that declare their sinnes as Sodome, and are not ashamed of open villanies and filthinesse? Such are they that will constantly to the alehouse, and neuer be ashamed of it: such are our damned Swearers: such are those filthy persons, that know they are knowne to liue in whoredome, and yet neuer blush at it, nor learne to repent: such are these in this Citie that liue in open contention, who care not against apparant right to maintaine continuall suits and wranglings, though they know all men detest almost the very sight of them for their wicked prophanesse, and vniust contentions: yea though the hand of God be apparantly vpon them, and they know not how soone the Lord may turne them into hell. Such also are the open and wilfull Sabbath breakers, and many more of all sorts of presumptuous offenders.
Againe, if vice masked in vertues colours can so please, and allure men, how much should vertue it selfe rauish vs? If counterfeit humilitie can be so plausible, how should true humilitie winne to the admiration and imitation of it?
Lastly, this may warne men to auoide counterfeit gestures, and all pretended insinuating shewes of deuotion, such as are open lifting vp of the eyes to heauen, sighing and all pretended tricks that are vsed onely to pretend what is not. And thus of their hypocrisie, their ignorance followes.
Aduancing themselues in things they neuer saw] Two things are here to bee noted. First, Their ignorance in things they neuer saw. And secondly,
 vaine-glorious selfe-liking, which the word (...) expresseth.
For the first, there are some things cannot be seene with mortall eyes, while we are on earth; as the nature of God, Angells, and what is done in heauen. 2. There are some things, we ought not to see though we might: and therefore he praied, Lord turne away mine eyes from seeing vanitie. 3. There are somethings wee may and ought to see, as the glory of God in his workes. 4. There are some things we may and so ought to see, as it is a great curse if we see them not, as the fauour of God and spirituall things: in respect of which to be blinded in heart is a miserable iudgement;Esay 6.10. of the first sort are the things done in heauen.
There is a contrarie waywardnesse in the nature of wicked men; somtimes, men are wilfull and will not be perswaded, euen in the things which yet they see; sometimes, men are stiffe hearted and will not bee remoued in opinions about things which they neuer saw, and so here.
Ignorance is of diuers kindes. There is a naturall ignorance, and that is of two sorts. For there is an ignorance of meere negation, and so Christ knew not the day of iudgement, so it is no sinne in an Husbandman, if hee be ignorant of Astronomie or Phisicke, etc. There is a naturall ignorance which is of corrupt disposition: as to be blinde in our iudgement in spirituall things from our birth; this is sinnefull, but not here meant.
There is a profitable ignorance, and that is likewise of two sorts. For it is either profitable absolutely and simply, or but only in some respects. It had beene simply profitable and good for the Iewes, if they had neuer knowne the fashions of the Gentiles; so it had beene good for Sampson if he had neuer knowne Dalilah. But it had beene profitable for the Pharisies but in some respects, not to haue seene or to haue had so much knowledge.Ioh. 9.41. 2 Pet. 2.21. So the Apostle Peter saith it had beene good for Apostataes if they had neuer knowne the way of truth, etc.
There is a willing ignorance, and that is of two sorts; of frailtie, or of presumption. Of frailtie, when men neglect the meanes by which they should know, either in part or in some respects. Thus men faile that see a wide doore set open for comfort and direction, and yet through carelesnes, or willing slacknesse, neglect great riches of knowledge, which might haue beene attained if they had made vse of oportunities. Presumptuous ignorance, is when men not wittingly only but wilfully contemne true knowledge, They will none of the knowledge of Gods waies.
Iob 21.14*Presumptuous ignorance, is likewise of two sorts. 1. When men refuse to know Gods reuealed will needfull to their saluationPro. 29.30. Luk. 19.41.. 2. When men wilfully imbrace fancies, and superstitions in opinion, especially in such things as they neither doe nor can vnderstand; and such is the ignorance here condemned.
Doct.But the maine doctrine is, That it is a great sinne and a hatefull vice to be rash and aduenturous, to venture vpon opinions in matters of Religion, either that concerne worship or practice, where men are not first well informed in iudgment by true grounds of knowledge. Hence men are aduiced to take heed how they heare, and to trie the spirits, and to be wise to sobrietieRom. 12.3., and to beware of fables2 Tim. 2.16.23. and 4 3.4. 1 Tim. 1.4. and 4.6.7. and 6.20. Tit. 1.14. and 3.9. 2 Pet. 1.16.. This condemnes the strange coyning of opinions without all warrant of the word, in the Papists, that so confidently tell vs of the roomes in hell, and of the Queene of heauen, and how many orders there be of Angels, etc. And withall it may restraine such as professe the feare of God, and reformation of life, to be well aduised in their opinions, and not pitch resolutely vpon opinions, in things the word doth not warrant. Blinde zeale hath no more allowance then superstition hath to coine opinions to tye mens consciences withall.
(...).Aduancing himselfe] The word signifieth to take possession, and to go
 proudly, and to search hidden things with deepe insight: as it is here applied, it may note in their sinne three things. 1. A deepe insight or out-reaching into a thing beyond ordinary knowledge. 2. A mighty approbation, or very possessing of a mans selfe in a peculiar content arising from his owne inuention. 3. An externall aduancing or vaine-glorious priding of a mans selfe in his fancie. There is a strange corruption in the nature of all sorts of men, a secret inclination to deuices, and reaches both in opinion and life: the Scripture giues warning of the doctrines of menMatth. 15.9., of opposition of science1 Tim. 6.20., of the deepnesse of SatanReu. 2.24., of transformation in euill Ministers, into Ministers of light2 Cor. 11.14., etc. And thus are men in their practise: though they commit the same foule euils they condemne in others, yet they haue such deuices with which they please themselues, that they are called counselsPsal. 5.10., and they are said to seeke deepe to hide their counsels, etc. They haue their turning of deuicesEsay 29.15.. Euery man almost thinkes he hath some conceit which others haue not, etc. such as these: Either they may doe it though others might not, or the manner is different, or the issues will not be alike, or he will repent at such a time when he hath tried so farre, or he will make amends, or it shall not be knowne, or God is mercifull, or his fault is not so great as others, or the Scripture doth not condemne it in expresse words. These and such like conceits in themselues are dull and sillie. But where the loue of sinne hath warmed the heart, and the deuill hath put life into them, it is incredible to conceiue, how miserably pertinacious men will shew themselues to be; and so doe men approue of their owne deuices, that vsually there is no error or sinne so vile, but men can blesse themselues against any terror or threatning: and if men finde their deuices to haue any entertainment, they will aduance themselues wonderfully, and not only swell in great thoughts of themselues, but outwardly vaine-glory will ouer-spreade their carriage, words, and actions.
The consideration hereof should teach vs to trust more in God, and lesse in menPsal. 92.8.9., and to labour for plainenesse of heart and simplicitieProu. 12.5. and 21.8., and to long to heare God speake, and shew vs the secrets of his wisdomeIob 11.5.6., and to suspect our selues when wee feele a selfe-liking or an inclination to boast of our deuice: especially wee should pray that the Lord would keepe vs from desire of vaine-glory t, and accordingly we should endeuour to doe nothing through strife or vaine-glory u, but rather set our glory and boasting in knowing God *, and in the crosse of Christ x, and in the hope of the glory of the sonnes of God y, daily examining our selues, and prouing our owne workes, lest we thinke our selues something when we are nothing z. Thus of their ignorance.
Rashly puffed vp.] These words are a taxation of their swelling pride, described 1. by the nature of it, puffed vp. 2. by the effect, in vaine, or rashly. 3. by the cause, in the minde of their flesh.
Puffed vp.] What is pride but a winde? a winde to fill, and a winde to torment. Men may bee spiritually swelled both in life and opinion. There is a swelling for abundance of riches a, there is a swelling behauiour in mens carriages b, there is a swelling in sinne, but here is a swelling for opinions c. Oh that we could learne to abhorre pride and swelling, by considering how much the Lord abhorres it, as many Scriptures shew, Prouerb. 8 13. and 16.5.19. Iob 40 6. Hab. 2.5. Mal. 4.1. and many such like. Oh that we could be in loue with a meeke and quiet spirit in the hid man of the heart. But let vs obserue the effects of pride.
Rashly.] The word is (...), and it signifies either rashly, or in vaine. Sure it is a great fault to be rash, light, sudden, in opinion or practise. It is a great fault to be rash in reprouing, in praising, in dispraising, or taking or mistaking doctrine, in iudging or censuring; and we should pray that the Lord would giue vs a staied spirit, and a minde not easily hurried into distemper.

Pride is in vaine in three respe^ts.If we reade it in vaine, it notes fitly that pride alwayes is in vaine. In vaine I say, first, in respect of God who resisteth it, Iam. 4.7. Luk. 1.51. Secondly, in respect of other men who will not regard it, Prou. 11.2. Psal. 101.5. Thirdly, in respect of themselues, who inherit nothing by it but follie, Prouerb. 14.18. 1 Tim. 6.4. Our hearts desire then should be that the Lord would hide our pride, and mortifie our naturall corruption herein.
In the minde of the flesh.] Here hee shewes whence all this stuffe and swelling comes, it came from the minde of the flesh, euen from the fairest part of the soule. The minde of the flesh is that acumen, that sharpnesse of wit, that perspicacie that is in men, and so we may see that wit, sharpnes of vnderstanding, carnall reason, is in vaine, (whatsoeuer men sauour of themselues) a meere puffe of winde, a very vanitie, whether it be in opinion or in life; the very wisdome of the flesh is enmitie with God, our owne very mindes are so defiled and corrupt. Which should teach vs to gird vp the loynes of our mindes, and restraine that selfe-conceit might arise from the pride of our owne mindes or carnall reason, we should (as the Apostle shewes) become fooles, that wee might be truly wise1 Cor. 3.18.. Againe, it should teach vs not to rest vpon the wisdome of men, nor to thinke of any aboue what is written, or be puffed vp one against another e.
Thus of the third thing.



VERS. 19. And not holding the head whereof all the body furnished and knit together by ioynts and bands, increaseth with the increase of God.

THese words note the fourth thing, viz. their danger; they did it not only hypocritically, and ignorantly, and proudly, but also dangerously. Their danger is both laid downe and amplified in this verse; it is laid downe in these words, not holding the head; and amplified by a digression into the praises of the mysticall body of Iesus Christ for the vnion and increase thereof.
Not holding the head.] These words shew that they that beleeue and practise such things, are themselues out of Christ, and by this kinde of worship they draw men from Christ. Foure things may from hence be obserued.
1. That Angell-worship razeth the foundation, so that the Churches that practise it fall from Christ, and are not the true Churches of Christ; and this euidently proues the Church of Rome to be no true Church, because besides many other heresies and idolatries, they maintaine the worshipping of Saints and Angels.
2. That hypocrisie, ignorance, and pride, are inseparable companions of apostacie from Christ.
3. That there is a difference betweene sinne and sinne, error and error: euery sinne or euery error doth not cut vs off from Christ; there be some sins be sinnes of infirmitieGal. 6.1.; some sinnes be such as there remaines no more sacrifice for themHeb. 6.; there bee some ceremonies may bee borne withallRom. 14.; some ceremonies that abolish from ChristGal. 5.3.; there be some errors of meere frailtie and ignorancePsal. 19.; some errors that altogether corrupt the minde, and make men destitute of the truth1 Tim. 6.4.. And therefore we should learne with all discerning to put a difference.Iud. 24.
4. That it is an vtter miserie not to be ioyned vnto Christ; which imports a singular feeblenes in the hearts of men, that cannot be stirred with all heedfulnesse to make sure their vnion with Christ.
Head.] The dreame of Catharinus, that the Pope should be here meant, is to bee scorned, not confuted. The words note the relation that is betweene Christ and the Church.

The creature stands in relation to Christ: 1. More generally in existence,Note. and so all things are in him, Col. 1.16. More specially in vnion, and so man only is ioyned to Christ: but this vnion is threefold, for it is either naturall, or sacramentall, or mysticall. In the vnion of nature all men are ioyned to Christ: In the vnion of Sacrament or signe all in the visible Church are ioyned to Christ: In the mysticall vnion in one body, only the faithfull are ioyned to Christ. And this is here meant.
And so wee haue here occasion againe to take notice of this truth, that the Church of Christ is ioyned vnto Christ in a most neere vnion, euen to Christ as her head. The doctrine hath beene largely handled in the former chapter: only from the renewing of the meditation of it, we may gather both comfort and instruction; comfort, if we consider the loue, presence, sympathie, influence, and communication of dignitie with which Christ doth honor vs as our head: instruction also, for this may teach vs to be carefull to obey Christ willingly, as the member doth the head, and to carry our selues so godly and discreetly, that we dishonor not our head.
From which all the body etc.] Hitherto of the danger as it is laid downe: now followeth the aggrauation by a digression into the praises of the Church the mysticall body of Christ. In generall three things may be obserued.
1. That by nature we are wonderfull blinde in the contemplation of the glory of the mysticall body of Christ, and therefore wee had need to be often put in minde of it.
2. That one way to set out the fearefulnesse of sinne, is by the fairenesse of the blessings lost by it; the fairenesse of the body of Christ shewes the foulenesse of lumpes of prophanenesse and apostacie.
3. Digressions are not alwaies and absolutely vnlawfull:Note. Gods spirit sometimes drawes aside the doctrine, to satisfie some soule which the teacher knoweth not; and sparingly vsed it quickneth attention. But I forbeare to pleade much for it, because though God may force it, yet man should not frame it: and it is a most happy abilitie to speake punctually, directly to the point.
But in particular in these words the Church which is the body of Christ is praised fo foure things. 1. For her originall or dependance vpon Christ, of whom. 2. For ornament, furnished. 3. For vnion, which is amplified, 1. by the parts, knit together, 2. by the meanes, ioynts and bands. 4. For her growth, increasing with the increase of God.
Of whom.] Doct. All the praise of the Church is from her head, for of her selfe she is blackeCant. 1., she is but the daughter of PharoePsal. 45., she was in her bloud when Christ first found herEzech. 16., she needed to be washed from her spots and wrinklesEph. 5., and therefore wee should denie our selues, and doe all in the name of Christ, who is our praise.
All the body.] Doct. The care of Christ extends it selfe to euery member as well as any: obserue these phrases in Scripture, Euery one that askethMatth. 7.8., euery one that heareth these wordsMatth. 7.24., euery one that confesseth ChristMatt. 10.32., euery one that is wearie and heauie ladenMatt. 11.29., euery one that the Father hath giuen himIoh. 6.36., euery one that calleth on the name of God1 Cor. 1.2., and the like.
Vse is first for comfort: let not the Eunuch say, I am a drie tree, or the stranger say, The Lord hath separated me from his peopleEsay 56.. Nor let the foot say, I am not the eye1 Cor. 12., etc. And secondly, wee must learne of Christ to extend our loue also to all Saints.
Body.] It were to no purpose to tell that there are diuers bodies, terrestriall, celestiall, naturall, spirituall, a body of sinne, a body of death: it is Christs body is here spoken of: Christ hath a body naturall, and a body sacramentall, and a body mysticall; tis the mysticall body is here meant. The mysticall bodie
 of Christ is the company of faithfull men, who by an vnutterable vnion are euerlastingly ioyned to Christ, though they are dispersed vp and downe the world, yet in a spirituall relation they are as neere together as the members of the body are; if we be faithfull, there can be no separation from Christ and Christians, whatsoeuer become of vs in our outward estate.
This body of Christ is commended for three things, ornament, vnion, and growth: and well are all put together, for not one can bee without the other, especially the first and the third cannot be without the second. It is no wonder Christians cannot grow nor be furnished, if they bee not knit to Christ; they may be neere the body, but not of the body. There is great difference betweene our best garments, and our meanest members: the worst member of the body will grow, yet the best raiment though it sit neuer so neere will not: so is it betweene wicked men professing Christ, and the godly that are members of Christ indeed.
Of these three, vnion is of the essence of the body, the other two are adiuncts; the one needfull to the being, the other to the well-being of the Church. First therefore of this vnion.
This vnion is two wayes here set forth: 1. That it is, in these words, knit together. 2. How it is, in these words, by ioynts and bands.
Knit together.] The faithfull are knit together, 1. with Christ, 2. with Christians.
The priuiledges flovving from our vnion vvith Christ.Great is the glory of Christians knit to Christ, for from that vnion with him flow many excellent priuiledges: such are these.
1. The communication of names: the body is called sometimes by the name of the head, viz. Christ1 Cor. 12.: and the head by the name of the body, viz. IsraelEsay 49.. 2. The influence of the vertue of the death and resurrection of ChristRom. 6.. 3. The inhabitation of the spirit of ChristRom. 8.. 4. Intercession1 Joh. 2.2.. 5. The communication of the secrets of Christ1 Cor. 2.16.. 6. The testimonie of Iesus1 Cor. 1.5.. 7. Expiation as he is the sacrifice, and passeouer offered for vs1 Cor. 5.7.. 8. Consolation in affliction2 Cor. 1.5.. 9. Power against tentations2 Cor. 11 9.. 10. The anointing or power of office to bee Prophets, Kings, and Priests, vnto God2 Cor. 1.2^.. 11. Vniuersall grace, not in respect of persons, that it reacheth to all the members onely, but in respect of parts, that hee being the fulnesse that filleth all in all thingsEph. 1.27.. 12. Sympathie* all miseriesHeb 2.15.. 13. The sanctification of all occurrents in life or deathPhil 1.21.. 14 The resurrection of the body, both for matterRom. 8.11., and prioritie1 Thes. 4 16.. Lastly, the opening of heauenHeb. 10.24., a lease whereof is granted and sealed and earnest giuen in this lifeEph. 1.14.. Thus of vnion with Christ.
From their knitting with Christians also arise excellent aduantages and prerogatiues; for hereby they haue right to the externall priuiledges of Sion: they stand in relation to all Saints, they receiue the benefit of the praiers of the whole body, and from the knowne Saints they haue the light of example, fellowship in the Gospell, outward blessings for their sakes, assistance in the fight against the world, sympathie in afflictions, the profit of spirituall mercy, counsell, consolation, admonition, etc. and lastly a part in their lot.
By ioynts and bonds.] The meaning is, that Gods seruants are tied together by as neere, certaine, and sure meanes, as any member in the body can bee ioyned to the rest by ioynts and bands.
Wee are tied to Christ both by his spirit, and by faith, and hope, and holy d^sires; we are tied to the Church, in one spirit, in one head, in the freedome and vse of his ordinances, the word and Sacraments, in affection, in subordination of callings, and in the couenant of grace, and in the same lot of inheritance.
The vses of all follow. First, if wee bee thus tied to Christ by ioynts and bands, then they are to bee reproued that like it so well to be still chained in
 the bonds of iniquitie, and seeke not this holy vnion, let them take heede they be not reserued vnto euerlasting bonds. But especially the meditation hereof should worke in vs a hatred of fornication, and that filthy coupling with an harlot1 Cor. 6.15., and we should take heede of offending, wounding or wronging the brethren, for thereby men sinne against Christ himselfe to whom they are vnited1 Co. 8.11.12., and it should separate vs from sinners2 Cor. 6.15., and cause vs to striue to shew our selues new creatures2 Cor. 5.17., and to seeke those things that are aboue where our head and Sauiour isColos. 3.1.. Here also is great comfort, for our vnion with Christ may assure vs that we shall not be destitute of any heauenly gift, needfull for this life or the appearing of Christ, for present sanctification or future preseruation, for God is faithfull who hath called vs to this fellowship with his sonne. And seeing we are tied with such ioynts and bands, who shall separate vs from the loue of ChristRom. 8..
Againe, are we vnited to Christians and knit together as fellow members? then we should be faithfull in the vse of our owne gifts, and diligent in our callings for the common goodRom. 12.6, 7, 8., to all well-doing, to doe it with loue, sinceritie, and brotherly affectionv. 9, 10., yeelding honour to the places and gifts of othersv. 10., with all vprightnesse, diligence, and respect of Gods gloryv. 11., with hope, patience, prayerv. 12., with mercy, sympathie and humilitie. Thus of vnion: ornament followes.
Furnished] The Church is furnished with vnsearchable richesEph. 3.9.,v. 13.15.16. with all sorts of spirituall blessings in heauenly thingsEph. 1.3., she is cleansed by the bloud of ChristHeb. 9.14., Christ is her wisedome, righteousnesse, and sanctification, and redemption1 Cor. 1.3., shee is not destitute of any heauenly gift2 Cor. 1.6., and this he tooke order for when he ascended on high, and led captiuitie captiueEph. 4.7.. Oh then that the loue of Christ could constraine vs, and that the spirit of Christ would inlighten vs to see the riches of our calling, and the glorious inheritance of the Saints? Thus of ornament: growth followeth.
Increasing with the increase of God] Growth is a marueilous glory to Christians.
The body of Christ groweth, 1. In the number of parts or members,Wherein the Church groweth. men being added daily to the Church. 2. In the powerfull vse of the meanes of saluation. 3. In grace2 Pet. 3. vlt., as knowledge, and the like. 4. In practise of holy dutiesPhil. 1.11.. 5. In the strength of ChristEph. 3.16. Lets of grovvth..Col. 1.9, 10, 11.
There are many lets of the growth of grace and holinesse in Christians; some are secret, some open: the secret are, 1. Want of the true grace. 2. A profession aduanced for ill ends, inward hypocrisie. 3. Errors and wicked opinions, either concerning the doctrine of godlinesse, or the practise of it2 Pet. 3.17, 18.. 4. Want of knowledge how to performe holy duties, and faith to beleeue Gods acceptation. 5. Strong affections1 Cor. 3.3. Eph. 4.30, 31.. 6. Spirituall pride2 Cor. 12.6, 7.. 7. Loue of ease, or loathnesse to indure, either the labour or the trouble of the power of godlinesse. 8. Want of internall order, in digesting the comforts or directions of God, and vnsetlednesse in assurance. And lastly, some secret corruptions which they fauour and will not forgo.
The open and externall lets are, 1. Want of publike powerfull meanesEph. 4.12. etc.. 2. Discord with the members of ChristEph. 4.16.. 3. Neglect of priuate meanes. 4. Want of order of lifeCol. 2.65.. 5. Vnfaithfulnesse in other bonds1 Pet. 3.7.. 6. Secret detractors and backbiters. 7. Vngodly company. 8. Liuing without a particular calling, or not diligently in it. 9. Worldlinesse, as in Demas. Lastly, resisting of counsell and admonition.
There are diuers motiues euen in this text which may perswade vs to striue after increase. 1. It will be a signe thou art farre from fundamentall errors, in opinion or worship, and from pride and hypocrisie. 2. Thou shouldest do it for thine heads sake, dishonor not thine head by thy not increasing. 3. Increase
 for the good and glory of the body.It is the increasing of God in foure respects. Lastly, it is the increasing of God, and so it is foure waies. 1. In respect of kinde, it is not a thriuing in estate or temporall things, but in the things of God. 2. As he is the efficient cause of it, God only is the author of all holy increase. 3. In regard of the worth of the matter, it is a diuine thing to increase. 4. In respect of the end, it tends to Gods glory.
Three things that make men grovv.That we may increase we must looke to three things, 1. That wee often purge our hearts by godly sorrow, and humiliation for our sinnes. 2. That we loue brotherly fellowship. 3. That we willingly resigne our selues to the ministery of the Gospell, to be subiect, and obey it in all things.
And thus farre of the conclusion against Philosophie, the last branch of the conclusion followes.




VERS. 20. Wherefore if wee be dead with Christ from the ordinances of the world, why as though yee liued in the world are ye burthened with traditions.
21. As touch not, taste not handle not.
22. Which all perish with the vsing, and are after the commandments and doctrines of men.
23. Which things indeed haue a shew of wisdome in voluntarie religion, and humblenesse of minde, and not sparing the bodie, which are things of no value, sith they appertaine to filling of the flesh.


IN these words is conteined the third branch of the conclusion, and it is inforced against traditions: here I obserue both the manner of propounding, and the matter. For the first, it is to be obserued, that whereas he condemned the former by way of aduise, he condemnes these by bitter and tart expostulation, why are ye burthened with traditions, as if he should say, were there not a singulare pronesse of nature to corruption, could they be so blinded, as to suffer false Teachers, to impose traditions vpon them?
In the matter consider first what he condemnes, viz. traditions explicated in the kindes, v. 21. 2. The reasons why he condemnes them and these, are six. First, yee are dead with Christ, and therefore yee ought not to be subiect to traditions, of the force of this reason afterwards. 2. You are dead from the rudiments of the world, that is, from the ceremoniall lawes of Moses, which yet were as rudiments or wayes of instructing the world in the principles of the kingdome of God, and therfore much more should you now giue ouer traditions. 3. They are burthens, and the greater by how much the lesse sense you haue of them. 4. The matter of them is light, and vaine, and idle, ver. 21. 5. They are all corruptible, and perish with the vsing. 6. They are after the counts and doctrines of men, ver. 22. Ob. But there seemeth to be a depth in these traditions. Sol. v. 23. He confesseth that they haue a shew of wisdome, and that in three things. 1. In voluntarie religion(...).. 2. In humblenesse of minde(...).. 3. In not sparing the bodie(...)., which hee censures two wayes.
1. It is but a shew or flourish, no true substance, either of worship or sanctitie. 2. It with-holds the honour due to the body.
Now that the whole may be better vnderstood, we must distinctly consider what he meaneth by tradition, which will appeare if it be considered negatiuely, with comparison with the two former.
1. They are not things required by Scripture any way: For all such were condemned vnder the first kinde, viz. ceremonies, which though now abrogated, were once required.
2. They are not such rites besides Scripture, as are practised with opinion
 of worship, for they are condemned vnder the second kinde, viz. philosophy.
So then the traditions here condemned, are such rites, customes, or obseruations, as men binde their consciences to, to obserue or practise in the ciuill life of man. Besides the instances in the text, such are the obseruation of euill daies, or houres to be borne in, or to marry in, or to set out on a iourney in; the rules obserued about infants vnbaptized, as that they must not be washed, or they must lye in a sieue, or such like about women that lye in. Such is the not marrying with kinred at the font, as they call it; such are the obseruation of signes of ill lucke, or of death gathered from the crying of birds, or the running of beasts; such is praying at the lighting vp of candles, and the burning of candles ouer the dead corps, or the naming of children with names that agree to men and women, to make them liue the longer; such is, not burying on the north side of the Church, and the like silly trash, with which simple people abound more then is ordinarily obserued.
Thus of the generall.
Wherefore if yee be dead with Christ] In these words diuers things may be obserued.
1. Here we see the necessitie of our vnion with Christ, the Apostle will not a done with it, he remembreth it still.
2. When he saith, if yee be dead, it implies that men may make a faire shew, and professe long, and liue in true visible Churches, and yet it is a question whether they be in Christ or no, If yee be dead with Christ.
3. Note here the praise of a mortified life, for when he saith, if yee be dead in Christ, it imports that to be so, is an excellent condition: to be truly mortified with Christ, is a rare happinesse; to die with Christ, is better then to liue with the world.
4. Penitent sinners haue life and death, ioyes and sorrowes etc, common with Christ.
5. In speciall they haue death common with Christ. They die with Christ, 1. Because Christs death was theirs: when Christ died they died, because his death was for their sakes, and for their benefit. 2. Because when their bodies die they die in vnion with Christ. 3. Because the vertue of Christs death is deriued to their soules: whence flowes, death to the law, that is, a release from the rigour and curse of it. 2. Death to sinne, that is, a power to mortifie sinne, conueyed in the ordinances of Christ, and applied by the spirit of Christ. 3. The presence of Christ in all the duties of mortification, though they be done neuer so secretly, yet Christ is with them.
The vse may be both for tryall and comfort. For tryall, art thou not dead with Christ in respect of the mortification of thy corruptions? then art thou not in Christ. For comfort to the mortified, thou art in Christ, and he will neuer leaue thee nor forsake thee, till he hath raised thy body and cured thy soule. Thus of the words in themselues; they are also to be considered as they are here vsed against traditions, and so they are two waies.
Christ is dead, and in his death yee are freed from all bondage of soule to any thing but the will of God, and therefore 'tis a dishonour to Christs death and the freedome purchased in it, to make our selues seruants to traditions.
2. You are dead with Christ, that is, you are mortified persons, and these things are too light for any graue and penitent persons, to take vp his thoughts or cares about them; fleshly persons are onely capable of this trash, mortified persons without teaching suspect them.
Thus of the first reason.
From the rudiments of the world] The second reason stands thus; if by the death of Christ yee be freed from the ceremonies of Moses, which were then rudiments, or as it were the first grounds of instruction, then much more are
 you freed from traditions, which are but beggerly obseruations, that no body can tell whence they came, or what good they doe. This should be of force to preuaile with vs against the multitudes of idle traditions that raigne amongst the people.

Why as though yee liued in the world are yee burthened etc.]

Quest. Doe not the faithfull liue in the world, that he saith with such a salt interrogation, as though yee liued in the world?
Answ. They liue in the world corporally, yet not in the world in respect of their profession of spirituall and celestiall life: so Christs kingdome was not of this world. 2. In respect of subiection to all the frame of rites and obseruations of the world: they liue not as men that are tyed and vowed to the seruice of the world in whatsoeuer obseruations it shall propound.
Burthened] Traditions are a grieuous burthen to the soule, and the worse, the lesse they are felt: Men will not willingly suffer vniust impositions in their free holds in the world, nor should men suffer the world to impose burthens vpon their soules.
The word also notes the audacious liberty of the imposers; before they pestred the Church with the ceremonies of Moses, then they corrupted Gods worship with philosophicall dreames, such as was the worship of Angels, now they proceed further, they clogge the ciuill life of man and his priuate affaires with imperious obseruations.
Thus of the third reason.
As touch not, taste not, handle not] These words must be vnderstood to be vtterd mimeticos, in a kind of scorne; see the wicked subtiltie of the Deuill, he turnes himselfe into all formes to ruine vs: Once he destroyed the world by tempting man to eat, now he goeth about to poyson mens soules with restraining them from eating.
Some obserue that the haste of the words without copulatiues, notes their eagernesse in pressing these things, and perswading men to the care of them; sure it is, men of corrupt mindes are more eager about these then about weightier matters.
Some learned, render touch not, by eat not, and so note a gradation. First, they would not haue them eat, then not so much as taste, and when they had gotten them to that, then not so much as to handle: Ambrose runnes against the streame of all Interpreters, to vnderstand these words to be the commandement of the Apostle. Thus of the fourth reason.
Which all perish with the vsing] These words are two waies interpreted.
1. They bring destruction to the vsers, they are a doctrine of diuels, and make men the children of hell. This is true, but not the truth of this place.
2. They are of a perishable nature, and therefore men ought not to load their consciences with necessitie of obseruing them.
This is the nature of all outward things, they perish with the vsing, all is vanitie, the glory of the flesh is but as the flower of the fieldEsay. 40., rust or moth doth corrupt themMatth. 6., euen crownes are corruptible1 Cor. 4.24.. Here we see a cleare difference between earthly things, and spirituall: Earthly things not onely in the abuse, but in the very vse, are either worne out or lesse regarded, or haue lesse vigor, fairenesse, power, etc, but cleane contrary with spirituall things: why should we not then moderate our loue to these outward things? why should we not striue to vse this world as if we vsed it not, no more trusting in vncertaine riches? This should also stir vs vp to the care of spirituall graces and duties, that neuer perish, that we may attaine that vncorruptible crowne of righteousnes, which God will giue to all that loue his appearing: The very daily perishing of foode and rayment, are types of thine owne perishing also. Thus of the fifth reason.
And are after the commandements and doctrines of men] The reason stands
 thus, whatsoeuer hath no better warrant then the commandement and doctrines of men, is to be reiected as a burthensome tradition: But these things are such, therefore why are yee burthened? See the wretched disposition of mens natures, how ready men are to prescribe, and how easie men are to be led on in these foolish vanities. But are the commandments of God so easily obeyed? Are the doctrines of Gods word so willingly imbraced? Alas, alas, mens examples, or counsell will easily passe for lawes, but the Lord is as if he were not worthy to be heard in the practise of the most.
Thus of the six reasons.
Now followes the obiections. Though these things were not commanded in the word, yet they were wisely deuised by our fathers, and therefore are to be obserued. Sol. v. 23. The Apostle grants that there were three things alledged to approue the discretion of the founders of these things, and instanceth in one kinde, viz. abstinence or fasting, for that he confesseth that had a shew of voluntary, not coacted or forced religion. 2. Of humblenesse of minde. 3. Of the taming of the body; but when he hath granted this, he doth dash all as it were with thunder and lightning, when he saith: 1. This was but a shew of wisdome. 2. This sparing did with hold the honour due vnto the body.
Obserue here that it is a faire propertie to vse candor and ingenious inquiry after the truth, and willingly to acknowledge what they see in the reasons of the aduersaries, we see the Apostle fairely yeelds the full of the reasons, not mangling them, but setting them out distinctly, and then confutes them. It were happy if there were this faire dealing in all reasonings publike and priuate, in print or by word of mouth, in all that professe to loue the truth especially.
Shew of wisdome] There is a wisdome only in appearance, and in mens account in name onely. Some men haue wisdome, other haue the praise of wisdome. But in matters of conscience and religion, it is dangerous for man to lift vp himselfe in his wisdome, or to admit the varnish of carnall reason. The wisest worldly men are not alwaies the holiest, and most religious men, Oh that there were an heart in vs, indeed to acknowledge and to seeke the true wisdome that is from aboue.
The colours cast vpon their traditions were three. 1. Voluntarie religion. 2. Humblenesse of minde. 3. The taming of the body: All these as base varnish, to smeire ouer mens insolent wickednesse, are here reiected. Which may confirme vs in the detestation of popery, euen in that wherein it makes the greatest shew: What are their workes of supererogation, their vowes of single life, their canonicall obedience, their wilfull pouerty, and the like, what can be said or shewed in their praise, which was not pretended for these traditions? The Apostle here giues warning, let not men be deceiued, these faire pretences of our Papists, are but the old obiections of the false Apostles, new varnished ouer againe by the Pope, and his vassals: Oh that our seduced multitude would consider this? then would they not be thus led to hell with their faire shewes.
The last thing in this verse is the Apostles reason against these colours.
They haue it not in estimation to satisfie the bodie or flesh] That is,The body is to be honored for many reasons. they yeeld not due honour to the body: the body of man is to be honoured, for first the sonne of God (as the Fathers say) made it with his owne hand, in the likenesse of the body he assumed. 2. The soule a diuine thing is kept in it, and helped by it in great imployments. 3. The sonne of God tooke the body of a man into the vnitie of his person. 4. He redeemed the body by his bloud, and feedes it with the sacramentall body. 5. The body is the temple of the Holy Ghost. 6. It is consecrate to God in baptisme. 7. It is a part of the mysticall body of Christ. Lastly, it shall be gloriously raised at the last day.
 Then let men know, they must giue account that dishonor their bodies, and if these superstitious persons must reckon for it, that punish their bodies without commandement from God, where shall these beasts appeare that sinne against their bodies by gluttony, and drunkennesse, and lust, and whoredome, and cruelty, and murther? Oh the condemnation that abides these impenitent men, that glory in their shame, and minde onely to fulfill the lusts of the flesh.
Thus of the dehortation.
Thus also of matters of faith.

Thus also of the second Chapter.



THE LOGICALL ANALYSIS OF the third CHAPTER.
HItherto the Apostle hath intreated of matters of faith: now hee intreateth in these two Chapters of matters of life: prescribing rules for conuersation,
These rules are either generall or particular. The generall are from verse 1. to 18. The particular are from v. 18. of this Chapter to v, 2. of the fourth Chapter.
The generall rules concerne, first, the meditation of heauenly things, v. 1. to 5. secondly, the mortification of vice, vers. 5. to 10. thirdly, the renouation of life, v. 10. to 18.
The exhortation to the care and study of heauenly things is propounded, v. 1. illustrated, v. 2. confirmed by reasons. vers. 3.4.Verse 1.
In the proposition of this exhortation to the studie of heauenly things, two things are to be obserued: 1. the duty required, seeke those things that are aboue. 2. the reasons, which are foure. 1. Ye are risen with Christ. 2. These things are aboue. 3. Christ is aboue. 4. Christ is exalted there and sits at Gods right hand.
This exhortation is illustrated, v. 2.Verse 2. First by repitition in these words, set your affections on things which are aboue. Secondly, by the contrarie, and not on things that are on earth.
The confirmation is set downe by two motiues: the one from the condition of the faithfull in this world: the other from their glorie in the end of the world.
In this world two things should incite them. 1. Their distresse, they are dead. 2, Their hiding of the happinesse they haue, their life is hid with Christ in God, v. 3.Verse 3.
In the end of the world: they shall appeare in glory when Christ shall appeare, v. 4.Verse 4. Thus of the meditation of heauenly things.
The mortification of euill followes; and so he intreates, first of the mortification of vices that concerne our selues most, vers. 5.6.7.Verse 5.6.7. Secondly, of the mortification of iniuries, v. 8.9.Verse 8.9.
In the first there is both the matter to be mortified, and the reasons.
In the first there is two things: 1. the proposition of mortification,
 Mortifie therefore your members that are on earth. 2. The catalogue of vices to be mortified, which are either against the seuenth Commandement, fornication, vncleanesse, inordinate affection: or against the tenth Commandement, euill concupiscence: or against the first Commandement, couetousnesse which is Idolatrie.
The reasons are taken, first from the euill effect, which is the wrath of God, amplified by the persons on whom it falls, the children of disobedience, v. 6.Verse 6. Secondly, from experience, in which yee also walked when ye liued in them, v. 7.Verse 7.
Thus of the mortification of vices.
The mortification of iniuries followes: where obserue, 1. the exhortation it selfe. 2. the reasons of it.
In the exhortation there is two things: 1. The charge in generall, put away all these things. 2. The catalogue of iniuries to be put away, are either the sinnes of the heart, or the sinnes of the tongue: the sinnes of the heart, are anger, wrath, malice: the sinnes of the tongue, are cursed speaking, filthy speaking, lying.
The reasons are three: First, Ye haue put off the old man and his workes, v. 9.Verse 9. Secondly, Ye are renued: which is explicated by shewing that this new birth is in generall, the putting on of the new man: in particular, it is the renuing of the minde with knowledge, and of the whole man, with the image of Christ, v. 10.Verse 10. Thirdly, God is no accepter of persons, without grace he will respect none, and with it he will disregard none, for with him there is neither Graecian nor Iew, circumcision nor vncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond, free. Christ is all in all things, v. 11.Verse 11.
Hitherto of the second thing needfull to holy life: viz. the mortification of vices. The third followes, viz. the exercise of holy graces and duties, from v. 12. to 18. and here the rules concerne either 1. the matter of holinesse, v. 12. to 16. or the meanes of holinesse, v. 16. or the end of holinesse, v. 17.
For the first he giues in charge nine graces: but first proposeth three motiues. 1. the election of God, as the elect of God. 2. their sanctification, holy. 3. the loue of God to them, and beloued.
The graces are of three sorts: some of them haue their greatest praise in prosperitie, viz. mercy, kindnesse, meeknes, humblenes of minde: some of them concerne the times of aduersitie principally, viz. long-suffering and clemencie in forbearing and forgiuing, v. 12.13.Verse 12.13.
Some of these graces ought to raigne at all times, and these are three.
First, Loue, which is set out both by the dignitie of it, aboue all put on loue: and by the vse of it, it is the bond of perfectnesse, v. 14.Verse 14.
Secondly, Peace, amplified by the author, of God: by the power of it, let it rule: and by the seat of it, in your hearts. to which he exhorts by two reasons: 1. from their vocation, to which ye are called: 2. from their mutuall relation, as members of one body, v. 15.Verse 15.
The third is thankfulnes or amiablenesse, v. 15.
Thus of the matter of holinesse.
The meanes followes, which is the word.

The exhortation to the vse of the word, 1. concernes the word in generall. 2. the Psalmes in speciall. For the first he propounds three things: 1. the author of it, the word of Christ. 2. the manner of entertaining the word, let it dwell in you plenteously in all wisedome. 3. the end or vse it should be put to, viz. to teach in what we know not, and to admonish in what we doe not.
The second part concernes the Psalmes in particular, where he sets downe the sorts, Psalmes, Hymnes, and spirituall songs: and the right manner of singing of Psalmes, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. Thus of the meanes of holines, v. 16.Verse 16.
The third thing is the end, which is considered two waies: First,Verse 17. as the end of intention, that wee aime at, and so hee exhorts to it in these words, whatsoeuer yee doe in word or deed, doe all in the name of the Lord Iesus. 2. as the end of consummation, that finisheth our workes, and so they must giue thankes to God euen the Father by him.
And thus of the rules of holy life, that concerne all men as they are Christians.
Now follow particular rules fitted for particular callings, and that in the familie. In the familie there are three couples: Wiues and Husbands, Children and Parents, Seruants and Masters, and to these he giueth rules distinctly.
First, the Wiues dutie is laid downe and inlarged: laid downe in these words, Wiues be subiect to your Husbands: inlarged, first by a reason, it is comely. 2. a limitation, in the Lord, v. 18.Verse 18.
Secondly, The Husbands duty is propounded, 1. by exhortation, Husbands loue your Wiues. 2. by dehortation, be not bitter to them, v. 19.Verse 19.
Thirdly, The dutie of children, is laid downe, in these words, Children obey your Parents: and amplified, 1. by the extent, in all things. 2. by reason, for this is well pleasing to the Lord, v. 20.Verse 20.
Fourthly, The duty of Parents is exprest by dehortation,Verse 21. in these words, Parents prouoke not your children to anger: and confirmed by a reason taken from the ill effect, lest they be discouraged.
Fifthly, In setting downe the duty of Seruants, there is first the exhortation, v. 22.23. the reasons, v. 24.25.Verse 22.23.24.25. The exhortation is both briefly laid downe in these words, Seruants be obedient to them that are your Masters: and explicated, 1. by prouisoes about their obedience. 2. the manner how they must obey.
The prouisoes are two: one restraines Masters, they are their seruants but according to the flesh: the other extends the dutie of seruants, they must obey in all things.
The manner how they must obey is set downe, first negatiuely, not with eye-seruice, not as men-pleasers: secondly, affirmatiuely, and so they must obey, 1. With singlenes of heart. 2. With feare of God. 3. Heartily as to the Lord.
The reasons are two: first, from the certaine hope of reward from God, v. 24. Secondly, from the certaine vengeance of God vpon them that doe wrong.



THE METAPHRASE vpon the third CHAPTER.
VERSE I. IF ye then be risen vvith CHRIST, seeke those things that are aboue, vvhere CHRIST sits at the right hand of GOD.HItherto you haue beene taught, exhorted, and dehorted in matters that concerne faith and opinions. Now it followeth that I should stirre you in such things as concerne your carriage both generall as you are Christians, and particular as you are of seuerall conditions of life. And the first thing you should be carefull of in the right order of your liues, is to raise vp your thoughts and affections to the studie and contemplation of heauenly things; for hereby you doe effectually proue that you are risen vp in the first resurrection with IESVS CHRIST. And heauenly things are aboue, and therefore for their worthinesse fitting your contemplation; and for their difficultie, they cannot be reached without seeking, and diligent studie, and inquirie. Besides is not CHRIST aboue, your Head and Sauiour, and where should your hearts be, but where your treasure is? yea where CRIST is there in singular glorie, aduanced aboue all men and Angells; next in glory and power to GOD himselfe: o then how should your mindes runne vpon him; and to contemplate of these things is to ascend after him.
Verse 2. Set your affections on things vvhich are aboue, and not on things vvch are on the earth.And when I exhort you to seeke the things that are aboue, my meaning is that you should studie about them, and with all wisedome raise vp not your thoughts onely, but your affections also to the loue of heauenly things; and this you cannot doe vnlesse you withdraw your affections from things on earth, whether they bee traditions, or worldly things, or the workes of the flesh.
Verse 3. For ye are dead and your life is hid vvith CHRIST in GOD.Now there are excellent reasons by which I may briefly stir you vp hereunto; both from the consideration of your present estate in this world, and from the meditation of your future condition in the day of CHRIST. In this world two things should much moue you. First, that yee are but dead men; for both you professe the forsaking of the world, and the world accounts of you but as dead men: and your affections drowne and ouerwhelme you many times. Secondly, the spirituall happinesse which you haue, which is the life of your life, is hid alwaies from wicked men, who haue no iudgement in or discerning in spirituall things: and sometimes by the violence of tentation,Verse 4. When CHRIST, vvho is our life, shall appeare, then shall yee also appeare vvith him in glory. your selues discerne not your owne happinesse. Yet be not discouraged, it was so with CHRIST while he liued; and though it be hid, yet is it hid with GOD, it is in him, it is in his power, and he will preserue it.
But especially if you thinke of the comming of IESVS CRIST you should be stirred to the loue and study of heauenly things: for then shall there
 be an end of all earthly felicities, then shall men make accounts of all their actions and studies, then will not riches auaile in that day of wrath, then will the incomparable gaine and glory of godlinesse be discouered: Oh the invaluable dignitie of heauenly minded Christians in that day! And thus of the meditation of heauenly things.
The second maine part of my exhortation shall concerne the mortification both of vices and crimes. First,Verse 5. Mortifie therefore your members vvhich are on earth, fornication, vncleannesse, the inordinate affection, euill concupiscence, and couetousnesse, wc is idolatry. I would hence obserue those speciall sinnes which are most hatefull to GOD in your former course of life, and then haue beene most prone to. When I say, mortifie, I meane that you should vse all the meanes indefinitely that serue to kill the power and practise of those sinnes, neuer giuing ouer confession and godly sorrow till you finde the power of them abated and deaded. And this I would haue you doe not onely in outward sinnes, but any sinne, though they were as deare to you as the very members of your bodies, yet you must cut them off. Now some of the sinnes that I would haue you studious to auoide or mortifie are these: first, looke to the filthinesse condemned in the seuenth Commandement, not onely auoide whoredome, but all kindes of wicked fleshly filthines and vncleannes; yea look to that internall burning or the flames of lust within, that habituall effeminatenesse, and passions of lust: and more then all this see that you make conscience of euill thoughts, and that contemplatiue wickednes, which may be in your mindes without consent of the will to practise it: for euen those thoughts are filthy in GODS sight. Now the last sinne I will name is couetousnes, which is a kinde of vile idolatry in GODS sight.
For these and such like sinnes,Verse 6. For the vvhich things sake the vvrath of GOD commeth vpon the children of disobedience. bring downe the fearefull iudgements of GOD vpon the offenders; and they wonderfully vex GOD: and besides to liue in these sins, and loue them, and continue in them, is a manifest signe, that they are but wicked men, children of disobedience, whatsoeuer they seeme to be, or what shewes or profession soeuer they make.
And the rather should you be for euer carefull to keepe your selues from these euils, and the like, or speedily to subdue them, and forsake them,Verse 7. In vvhich yee also vvalked sometime when ye liued in them. seeing you haue felt by experience in your vnregenerate estate what it is to haue sinne like a monster to liue and reigne in the heart or life.
You must also make conscience of iniurious dealing with others,Verse 8. But novv put ye avvay euen all these things, anger, vvrath, malice, cursed speaking, filthy speaking out of your mouth. Verse 9. Lie not one to another, seeing that yee haue put off the old man vvith his workes. Verse 10. And haue put on the nevv man, vvhich is renevved in knovvledge after the image of him that created him. and that not onely of the grosse acts of iniuries, but of doing wrong in your very words, yea in the passions of your heart: yea to approue that now ye walke not in sinne, shew your vprightnes, by putting away euen euery thing that might tend to the iniurie of others. To expresse my meaning I will instance in diuers sins, the vnregenerate would make no conscience of. And first in the heart there is inward fretting, and that passion that discouers it selfe by outward signes, and that inveterate anger called malice: these you must make conscience of. Besides in the tongue there are three vices you must also auoide, viz. cursed speaking, filthy speaking, and lying.
There are three weighty considerations should moue you thereunto. First, when you repent of sin, you professe to put off the old man and his works; this old man is the old Tempter of your natures, and his workes are such as these fore-mentioned passions, and distempers in the tongue.
Secondly, you are now in the state of grace, you are new men, and therefore
 must not liue after the old manner: you are renewed in knowledge to discerne these things to be euill, and therefore ought to shew it in your practise: and you are renewed after the image of CHRIST, now there was no guile found in his mouth, nor any of these wretched perturbations in his heart, and therefore how sutable soeuer they be to the harmony of the most men, yet for that reason you must keepe your selues farre from them.
Verse 11. Where is neither Graecian nor Iew, circumcision nor vncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythiar, bond, free, but CHRIST is all in all things.Thirdly, GOD is vnpartially righteous and iust; if men will not be reformed of those old corruptions he cares not for them, though they were Iewes, circumcised, free; and contrariwise if men striue after that holilinesse they see in CHRIST, and mortifie these corruptions that abound in the world, he will accept them though they were Graecians, Scythians, bounden. Thus of the second maine thing needfull to holy life, viz: the mortification of vices and iniuries.
Verse 12. Therefore as the elect of GOD holy and beloued, put on bovvels of mercy, kindnesse, humblenes of minde, meeknesse, long-suffering.The third thing you must be carefull of is the exercise of holy graces and duties; and here I shall put you in minde of three things: the matter, the meanes, and the end. For the first there are nine graces should principally be remembred in your practise: and that you may be quickned thereunto, be much in the meditation of three things, 1. GODS election. 2. Your owne sanctification. 3. The loue of GOD to you.
The graces are, 1. Tendernesse in all sorts of iniuries. 2. Curtesie. 3. True and hearty humilitie and lowlinesse. 4. Quietnesse and meeknes, and tranquillitie of heart. 5. Long-suffering in respect of crosses.
Verse 13. Forbearing one another, and forgiuing one another, if any haue a quarrell to another, euen as CHRIST forgaue you, euen so doe yee. Verse 14. And aboue all these put on Loue, vvhich is the bond of perfectnesse. Verse 15. And let the peace of God rule in your harts to the vvhich also yee are called in one body: and be thankfull.And sixtly, Clemencie, which stands in two things, in forbearing, and forgiuing. Forbearing in respect of wrongs and infirmities, and forgiuing freely one another. And this forgiuing must be extended to euery man, and it must be as Christ forgaue vs, and that is though they be our inferiors, and though they haue done vs great wrong, and so as we forget aswel as forgiue.
But seuenthly, aboue all other be sure you cloth your selues with loue, for this will knit vs together perfectly, and by this all the Saints, and all the graces of the Saints tend vnto perfection.
Eightly, Get the peace, that peace I meane that GOD only giues, and let it rule and preuaile with you, and if you cannot be at peace in your life, yet let it be in your hearts still, how vnreasonable soeuer men be, and the rather should you be carefull hereof, both because you are called of GOD to it, and besides you are all members of the same body. Lastly, adde vnto all these, amiablenes and thankfulnes one to another. And thus of the matter of holinesse.
Now I must also stirre you vp to a due respect of the meanes of holines, which is the word.Verse 16. Let the vvord of CHRIST dvvel in you richly in all vvisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymmes, and spirituall songs, singing vvith grace in your hearts to the LORD. And so both the word in generall, and the Psalmes in speciall. For the word in generall, you must remember it is the word of CHRIST, both as the subiect, and the cause of it: and you should neuer be satisfied till you grow familiar and plentifull in it, through the daily vse of it, both in your hearts and houses also, and that with all iudgement and discretion; not seeking or vsing it, coldly, peruersly, carnally, or indiscreetly: and this word you must imploy both to teach you and one another, what you know not, and to admonish you and other for what you doe not. And in speciall be carefull of the Psalmes, remembring that they also are the word of CHRIST, and the rather considering the exquisite
 variety of sweet matter in them, but in singing obserue these rules: First, exercise the graces of the heart according to the matter of the Psalme. Secondly, doe it with attention and vnderstanding. Thirdly, respect GODS glory in it and his holy presence.
Lastly, be carefull of the end of all your actions,Verse 17. And vvhatsoeuer yee shall doe in vvord or deede, doe all in the name of the LORD IESVS: giuing thanks to GOD euen the Father by him. Verse 18. Wiues submit your selues to your Husbands as it is comely, in the LORD. Verse 19. Husbands loue your Wiues, and be not bitter vnto them. Verse 20. Children, obey your Parents in all things, for this is vvell-pleasing to the LORD. Verse 21. Fathers prouoke not your children to anger, lest they be discouraged. Verse 22. Seruants be obedient vnto them that are your Masters according to the flesh, in all things, not vvith eye-seruice as men pleasers, but in singlenesse of heart, fearing GOD. Verse 23. And vvhatsoeuer yee do, do it heartily, as to the LORD, and not vnto men. Verse 24. Knovving that of the Lord ye shall receiue the revvard of the inherita^ce: for ye serue the Lord Christ. Verse 25. But he that doth vvrong, shall receiue for the vvrong that he hath done: and there is no respect of persons. both that all be done to the glory of GOD in CHRIST, (all I say both in word and deed) beginning with calling on the name of CHRIST, and ending with the sacrifice of thanksgiuing, which must be offered vnto GOD in the mediation of CHRIST aswell as your prayers. Thus I haue briefly laid before you the rules that concerne holinesse as you are Christians in the generall.
Now I thinke it meete to propound some duties that are more particular: and I will onely instance in the familie: and there I begin with Wiues, whose word is, be subiect, an epitome of their duty, and a thing GOD most stands vpon, and which Women most faile in. And great reason, for here lieth the true comelinesse and beauty of a Wife, tis not in her face and garments, but in her subiection to her Husband. And the rather should you be subiect, because GOD hath prouided, you shall not be pressed, but in the LORD, not in any thing against the word.
Now for Husbands their word is loue, as that GOD most stands vpon and they most faile in. And in particular I giue them warning to looke to one vice aboue many, and that is, that they be not bitter to their Wiues.
And for children their word is obedience, and they must know that GOD so inioynes it, that he will haue it done throughly, they must obey in all things, and submit their wills and desires to their Parents. For this is a thing that will not only keepe and increase their Parents loue to them, but it is also wondrous well-pleasing to GOD himselfe.
Parents also must take heed they sin not against their children, not only by too much indulgence, but also by prouoking them, and that not onely to sin, but to passion, by vniust precepts, or contumelies and disgraces, or hard vsage, or immoderate correction: and that as for other reasons so lest they be discouraged either from loue of well-doing, or of obeying them.
You that are Seruants must also with great care attend your duties, your word also is obedience: and the rather because your Masters haue authoritie but onely ouer your flesh, not ouer your consciences; but in your obedience see to it, it be in all things that concerne the subiection of the outward man. But let not your seruice be onely when your Masters looke on, or fitted onely to please men, but obey euen in the singlenesse of your hearts, as in GODS presence, where you should feare to displease.
Neither let what you do be done out of a slauish feare, but from the heart with all willingnes, as doing therein seruice to GOD, and not to men only.
Knowing infallibly that if men would not reward you for your paines and faithfulnes, yet GOD will, who will not vse you as seruants, but prouide for you as sons and heires to him. For in all this labor GOD accounts you as the seruants of Christ, and will reward all as if all had bin done to him.
And contrariwise he that doth wrong be he Master or Seruant shall receiue of the LORD for the wrong that he hath done: for GOD is no accepter of persons.



CERTAINE OF THE choisest and chiefest points handled in the third CHAPTER.

A Threefold resurrection. fol. 2.
How a man may know whether he be risen with Christ. fol. 3.
Tis as easie to reuiue a dead man, as perswade a carnall man. fol. 4
Eight sorts of things that are aboue. fol. 4
A fourefold presence of Christ. fol. 6
Of Christs sitting at the right hand of the Father. fol. 6
Three benefits come by tender affections. fol. 8
Three sorts of things called things on earth. fol. 8
Eight reasons in generall to disswade from affecting earthly things. fol. 9
Salomons reasons against the loue of earthly things. fol. 10. 11
Christs reasons. fol. 12
The faithfull are dead three waies. fol. 13
The life of Christians is hid in diuers respects. fol. 14
Who may say Christ is their life. fol. 16
Of the appearing of Christ. fol. 16
Six appearings of Christ. fol. 16
Threefold iudgement. fol. 16
Who shall iudge, who shall be iudged, where the iudgement shall be, and when. fol. 17
The signes of the second comming of Christ. fol. 18
The forme of the last iudgement: the preparation of the Iudge: the citation, resurrection, collection, and separation of the iudged: the law and euidence by which men shall be iudged: and the sentence, and the fiue consequents of the iudgment, with the vses. fol. 19. to 22
What we must doe that we might be assured of the glory of heauen. fol. 26
How long we must continue our sorrowes in mortification. fol. 29
Why sinnes are called members. fol. 30
Reasons against whoredome. fol. 31
Seuen kindes of vncleannesse besides whoredome. fol. 33
Remedies against vncleannesse. fol. 34
The causes and occasions of lust. fol. 35
What couetousnes is, and the effects of it. 36. 37. the signes of it. 38. remedies against it. fol. 39
Gods wrath vpon vncleane persons. fol. 41
Iustice in God considered foure waies. fol. 42
The fearefulnesse of Gods wrath set out. fol. 43
The signes of Gods wrath: the meanes to pacifie Gods anger: and how we may know that God is pacified. fol. 44. 45. 46
The markes of a childe of disobedience. fol. 47
Difference betweene Gods anger towards the godly and the wicked. fol. 48
The profit of remembring our naturall miserie. fol. 49

A fourefold life. fol. 51
How we may know when sinne is aliue, and when it is dead. fol. 51
A man neuer truely repents till he indeuour to be rid of all sinne, and motiues. fol. 53
Anger, indifferent, laudable, vitious. 54. Degrees of vicious anger: reasons and remedies against it. fol. 55. 56
Malice, and the degrees and kindes of it. 57. Reasons and remedies against it. fol. 57. 58
Of blasphemie: the kindes of it: and reasons against it. fol. 59. 60
Against filthy speaking. fol. 61
Of lying: reasons against it, and questions answered. fol. 61. 62
What the old man signifieth: and why corruption is called the man, and why the old man. 63. 64. and what the workes of the old man are* the old man is put off six waies. fol. 64
The necessitie of the new birth. fol. 66
Of the renouation of the creature in foure things: and of the obedience in three things. fol. 66
Rules for attaining of true knowledge. fol. 67
Of the image of God in Christ, in the Angels, and in man. 68. with their difference at large. fol. 68. 69
How Christ is all in all, and the comfort of it. fol. 72. 73
The kindes and signes of election. fol. 74
How many waies the elect are holy. fol. 75
Fiue properties of Gods loue. fol. 76
The kindes of mercy. fol. 77
Motiues to mercy. Rules how to shew mercy. fol. 78
True Christian curtesie. fol. 79
What humblenesse of minde is negatiuely and affirmatiuely. fol. 80
Motiues to humblenesse of minde, and of diuers sorts of pride. fol. 80. 81
Of Christian meeknesse. fol. 81
Of Long-suffering. fol. 81. 82
Of forbearance, the kindes, and motiues, and rules for the practise of it. fol. 82. 83
Of forgiuing: diuers questions. fol. 84
To forgiue as Christ forgiues, hath fiue things in it. fol. 85
How loue is aboue all vertues. fol. 85
The sorts and signes of loue. fol. 86
Loue is the bond of perfection three waies. fol. 87
Of Peace: it is threefold. fol. 87
How it is of God: and when it rules: and what we must doe to get it. fol. 88
What is required in performing thankefulnes to men, and what in receiuing it. fol. 90
The Scripture is the word of Christ in foure respects. fol. 92
Men sinne against the word six waies. fol. 92
Women must seeke knowledge as well as men. fol. 94
The vse of Scripture in our houses. fol. 94
Of the wise vse of the word. fol. 95
What we must doe that the word may dwell plenteously in vs: and how we may know it doth. fol. 98
Who may admonish or be admonished 99. Rules to be obserued in admonition. fol. 100.
What meant by Psalmes, hymnes, and spirituall songs: and rules in singing of Psalms. fol. 101
Vnto the goodnes of the action, the goodnes of the end is required. fol. 102
Things are done in the name of Christ foure waies. fol. 103
Six reasons why Gods children should be more carefull of their words and deeds then others. fol. 104
Of giuing thanks to God. fol. 105

Of the gouernment of a familie, the authoritie, antiquitie, and vtilitie of it. fol. 107. 108
Foure things in a holy liuing together in a familie. fol. 108
Six things in houshold piety. fol. 108
Fiue things required in the labours of a familie. fol. 109
The dutie of Wiues. fol. 110. 111. 112. 113
Why subiection is rather named in the Wiues dutie. fol. 111
Fiue things in the Wiues subiection. fol. 111
Six waies Wiues must honour their Husbands. fol. 111
Foure waies Wiues shame their Husbands. fol. 112
Fiue waies Wiues shew faithfulnesse. fol. 112
Six waies Wiues shew feare. fol. 112
Six rules for Wiues workes. fol. 112. 113
What Wiues are not bound to. fol. 113
What they must doe that they may performe subiection. fol. 113
The Wiues comelinesse in three things. fol. 114
Husbands shew their loue foure waies. fol. 116
Six waies Husbands honor their Wiues. fol. 116
Seauen reasons why men must loue their Wiues. fol. 117
Husbands obiections answered. fol. 117
Causes why men loue not their Wiues. fol. 117
Of bitter Husbands. fol. 118
Foure rules for curing this bitternesse. fol. 118
The dutie of children. fol. 121
Childrens obiections answered. fol. 122
Reasons of their obedience. fol. 123
The dutie of Parents. fol. 124. 125
How Parents prouoke their Children. fol. 126
Seruants dutie. fol. 128. 129. 130. etc.
Fiue faults in Seruants. fol. 128
Foure things in the manner of Seruants obedience. fol. 129
Six waies to know singlenesse of heart. fol. 132
Twelue signes of a single hearted man. fol. 133
Eight signes of a single hearted Seruant. fol. 133
Of the feare of God in Seruants. fol. 134
What Masters must doe to get the feare of God into their Seruants. fol. 134
Eight obiections of Seruants answered. fol. 135




CHAPTER III.




VERSE I.

If yee then be risen with Christ, seeke those things that are aboue, where Christ sits at the right hand of God.


HITHERTO of Christian doctrine,The Coherence. now followeth Christian life. The Apostle hath before discoursed of matters of faith: now hee intends to entreat of matters of life:The diuision of the Chapter. and to prescribe rules of conuersation. And these rules belong either to our generall calling as wee are Christians, or to our patticular callings, as wee are people of such or such condition or state of life.
The generall rules are set downe from the first verse of this Chapter to the eighteenth, and the particular rules begin at the eighteenth verse, and continue to the second verse of the next Chapter.
The rules of the first kinde may be referred to three heads, for either they concerne, first the meditation of heauenly things, or secondly,The subdiuisions. the mortification of vice, or thirdly, the renouation of life. The meditation of heauenly things ir vrged from v. 1. to the fift, the mortification of vice is vrged from v. 5. to the tenth. Renouation of life is generally layd down v. 10.11. and more specially opened v. 12. to the eighteenth.
The exhortation to the care and study of heauenly things is thus digested. First it is expounded v. 1. Secondly it is illustrated v. 2. Thirdly, it is confirmed by motiues and reason, v. 3.4. And thus for the order of the whole Chapter, and the generall frame of this first part.
Before I open the words more particularly there are diuerse things may be noted from the coherence and dependance of these words,4 Doctrine from coherence vvith former chapters. with the Chapter before, and the matter following in this Chapter.
From the coherence with the former Chapter, I obserue these things. First, that there can bee no holinesse of life without faith: and therefore the Apostle first instructeth them in matters of faith. It is a true rule, whatsoeuer is not of faith, is sinne, and may be extended further then things indifferent, while we are out of Gods fauour,Rom. 14.23. and know not our reconciliation and iustification in Christ, our best actions are but faire sinnes. For without faith it is vnpossible to please GodHeb. 11.6..
Secondly, that the terrestriall blessednesse of man is in respect of sinne, two wayes principally assaulted. First, with errors in opinion. Secondly, with corruptions in manners. And against both, wee should learne from the Apostle in the latter part of the former Chapter, and the first part of this, to bee
 armed and furnished with holy directions and meditations.
Thirdly, that these men that are so superstitiously earnest, and so zealously forward for ceremonies, and the traditions, and obseruations of men, whatsoeuer they protest, or pretend, or seeme to be, are indeed voyd of true deuotion, and feruent affection to heauenly things c.
 Fourthly, that hee that is by faith made a new creature, must resolue to be at Gods appoyntment for his whole carriage in his generall and particular callingEphes. 2.10. Doctrines fro^ the coherence in this Chapter..
Thus of the coherence with the former Chapters. From the order of doctrine in this Chapter two things may be noted.
First, that before a man can be good in his particular calling, hee must first be good in his generall: thou mayst bee painefull and diligent, but thou canst not be euery way a faithfull and sound hearted husband, wife, seruant, childe, etc. till thou bee a good man or good woman, in respect of grace and godlinesse. And therefore wee should first seeke the righteousnesse of Gods Kingdome, and it may serue for direction, vnto such as chuse wiues, or seruants, or the like: if they bee not faithfull to God, how canst thou bee assured they will prooue faithfull to thee? moreouer, wouldst thou haue thy seruants or children to bee amended, then bring them to the powerfull preaching of the word, and call vpon them to get into the fellowship of the godly, that they may learne to bee good abroad in matters of religion, and then thou mayst hope to finde them by proofe and daily experience, trusty and faithfull in thy  businesse. Finally, this reproues both the sinfulnesse and folly of many carnall parents and masters, they neuer care so their seruants doe their worke, though they altogether neglect Gods worke. And many times they restraine their seruants and children, and will not let them heare sermons, or come into godly companie, as if that were the way to make them idle and carelesse: whereas we see the cleane contrary to be true.
Secondly, that men are neuer likely to hold out and prooue sound in the reformation and new obedience of their liues, till they fall in loue with heauenly things, and grow in some measure weary of the world and the things thereof.
(...).Thus of the generall obseruations from the twofold coherence. Now followeth the particular opening of the words.
In the proposition of the exhortation to the studie of heauenly things, layed downe in this verse, two things are to bee considered; first, what: or the dutie required, viz. seeke those things which are aboue? secondly, why: or the reasons to enforce the dutie, and they are foure. First, ye are risen with Christ in the first resurrection. Secondly, these things are aboue, and not attained without seeking or studie. Thirdly, Christ is aboue in his bodily presence. Fourthly, Christ sits at the right hand of God, exalted in the glory of his father, each of these strongly conclude the exhortation, as will further appeare in the particular handling of them.

If yee be risen with Christ.]

A threefold resurrection.There may bee conceiued to bee a threefold resurrection of a Christian. The first is sacramentall. And thus we rise againe in baptisme. The second is corporall,R^uel 2.9. What the first resurrection is and so wee shall rise againe in the day of Iesus Christ, in our bodies out of the dust of the earth. The third is spirituall, and so wee must rise in this life, in soule, from the death of sinne, or else we shall neuer bee deliuered from the second death of this spirituall resurrection, (called elsewhere the first resurrection) he heere entreats. And it is a worke of the spirit of grace, deliuering vs from the power of sinne, by which wee are quickned to the heauenly desires and endeauours of holy life, by the vertue of the resurrection of Iesus Christ, applyed vnto vs by faith, in the effectuall vse of Gods ordinances. It
 is a worke by which wee grow conformable to Christ being risen againeRom. 6.4.5., by which also wee taste of the powers of the life to come, and are borne againe to a liuely hope of an eternall and incorruptible inheritance1 Pet. 1.3.4., the earnest of which wee haue receiued, and shall shortly receiue the whole possession purchasedEph. 1.14., though for a time we be absent from the Lord. This first resurrection carieth with it a similitude or resemblance of Christ rising againe, so as euery Christian in this work beares the Image of Christ, and in him Christ riseth before our eyes, not onely because the Lord Iesus doth in this gracious worke giue vs a daily and fresh remembrance of his resurrection, by renewing such fruits of it, but also because he imprinteth a secret kinde of heauenly mindednesse, the Christian in some weake measure, liuing as Christ did in the interim betweene his resurrection and ascension, waiting alwayes for his exaltation into heauen.
Now the consideration of this worke is heere vsed by the Apostle to perswade vnto the meditation of heauenly things: and that fitly: for if wee bee risen as Christ was, then we must bee minded as hee was: now wee know that after hee was risen againe, hee was not encumbred with this world, nor did he conuerse with the men of this world, but liued with the Lord as it were immediately, in a heauenly manner, waiting for Heauen: so should a Christian doe: he should euery day bee striuing to get vp his heart, by faith and prayer and meditation, and voluntary abnegation, by all meanes begging and seeking the vertue of Christs resurrection, that being enabled to forsake the world and the vnnecessary society with worldly men, he might haue his heart and conuersation in heauen, euery day waiting when the time of his changing should come.
Quest. How may a man know whether he be risen with Christ? Ans.Hovv a man may knovv vvhether he be risen vvith Christ. Who are not risen vvith Christ. This question may bee resolued both negatiuely and affirmatiuely. For first, they are not risen with Christ, that are in bondage to traditions, as the coherence with the latter end of the former chapter shewes: nor they that are drowned and made sencelesse with the cares of this life, or the pleasures of voluptuous liuingLuk. 21.34., nor they that confirming themselues in a dead presumptuous common hope, plead the abounding of Gods grace, to auouch their continuance in sinneRom. 6.1.4.5 1 Pet. 1.3.. For the Apostle in the Epistle to the Romans vseth a reason taken from our conformity to the resurrection of Christ, to confute this vicious and prophane plea of carelesse men. Further, they that worship the Beast (the great Antichrist of Rome) and receiue his marke vpon their foreheads or their hands, are reckoned among the dead men, that haue not their part in this first resurrectionReu. 20.4.5.6. Also the Prophet Esay seemes to say, that such men as will not see Gods high hand of Iudgement, nor will learne to doe vprightly in the land of vprightnesse, nor can bee allured to godlinesse, though mercy be shewed them, are to bee accounted among the dead men that shall not liueEsa. 26.9.10.14.. Lastly, they are not risen with Christ that doe not beleeue in ChristJoh. 11.25.. Now for the affirmatiue. They may haue comfort in the first resurrection, that haue felt a diuine power in the voyce of Christ, quickning their hearts with effectuall desire and endeauour to rise out of the graues of sinneIoh. 5.25., and to stand vp from the world of the deadEph. 5.14.. 2. That are constantly affected with an holy estimation of the knowledge of Christ crucified and risen againe (an effectuall knowledge I meane) valuing the meanes and signes of it, aboue all earthly thingsPhil. 3.9.10.. 3. That finde their hearts changed from the cares and delights of this life, to a constant desire of the second comming of Christ, to translate them to the presence of glory in heauen. 4. That shew a daily care to walke in newnesse of life, yeelding their members as weapons of righteousnesse, striuing to crucifie the olde man, and destroy the body of sinne, as they that are aliue vnto GodRom. 6.4 5.6.13..
2. Againe, in that the Apostle saith, if yee bee risen againe with Christ seeke those things that are aboue, wee may note, that it is as hard a thing to get vp the
 heart of men to the study of heauenly things, as to lift vp a massie corps out of the graue and to inspire it with the desire of life:As easie to reuiue a dead man as persvvade a carnall man. there is neede of the spirit and power of Iesus to doe it. And therefore wee should not wonder to see naturall men so heartlesse: nor should we attribute it to any inefficacy in the meanes, if carnall men bee not perswaded: for a man may long perswade a dead man to rise before he will get vp: and it should touch vs with all thankfulnesse to acknowledge Gods mercy if he haue giuen vs a minde to heauenly things, to desire them and delight in them.
 Thirdly, in that he saith, if yee bee risen, speaking not onely conditionally but doubtfully, it imports that one should bee exceeding carefull to search and trie whether they haue their part as yet in this first resurrection: and withall implyes, that many a man may seeme to himselfe and others to bee deliuered from the kingdome of darknesse, and yet lie buried still in the graues of sinne.
Seeke th^se things which are aboue] Heere the Apostle enters vpon the proposition of the first maine exhortation, or rule of new life. Now before I bring in the Apostle vrging this duty, imagine with thy selfe, how farre the Christian (thus now to bee instructed for order of life) hath already proceeded by faith; for before a man can bee truely capable of direction of life, there bee diuers things requisite in the preparations of faith.The preparations of faith before a man can be capable of directions of life. And these things are necessarily to be presupposed. 1. That faith hath plucked him out of the world of sinners or dead men: so that hee is already withdrawen from the society of the wicked. 2. It hath shewed him Gods fauour and ioyned him to Christ. 3. It hath shewed him in some measure such things in the Kingdome  of Christ, as his naturall eare neuer heard, nor his naturall eye neuer  saw, nor his naturall heart neuer conceiued1 Cor. 2.9.. 4. It hath ioyned him to the liuing  Saints: so as he now with great desire and delight conuerseth with them. 5. It hath made him to suffer in the flesh for his sins, and withall hath refreshed  his spirit, and cured him of his distrustfull and solitary sorrowes. 6. It hath  garnished his soule with new budding graces, and opened for him a fountaine  and spring of grace within him, euen in his bowelsIoh. 7.38.39.. 7. It hath raised  in him a true and constant desire of new obedience of life, with a secret resolution not to depart from any thing the Lord shall command, all the dayes of his life.
Now presupposing the Christian to bee thus farre proceeded: the Apostle comes in, and to beginne his institutions of manners, hee first chargeth him with this rule.Doct. Seeke those that are aboue; teaching vs, that the first maine thing to be laboured after in the reducing of our liues into a holy order,Matt. 6.33. Eight sorts of things that are aboue. is to striue by all meanes to get vp our hearts to a constant seeking and minding of heauenly things: according to that serious charge of our Sauiour Christ, first seeke the Kingdome of God and the righteousnesse thereof.
That this rule may bee more cleerely vnderstood, and more carefully practised, it will bee profitable to consider distinctly, what things are aboue, and how they are to be sought. And so the things that are aboue may bee distinguished into eight sorts. First, God is aboue: for hee dwels in the high and holy placesEsa. 57.15., and he must be soughtHos. 3.5., and if you aske what we must seeke in God, I answer, wee must seeke the true knowledge of his naturePsal. 14.1.2.. Wee must seeke his fauour, and the pacification of his iust anger for our sinnesZeph. 2.3.. Wee must seeke his face,Hos. 5. vlt. and presencePsal. 24.6. Psal. 27.8.. We must seeke his honour and gloryIoh 5.44.. And wee must seeke his saluationPsal. 105.4. and 70.4.. And if you aske how wee must seeke God; I answer, wee must seeke God, with acknowledgement of our faults, with weeping and repenpentance for our sinnesIer. 50.4. Isay 21.12., with the desire of our heartsEsay 26.7., with prayer and supplicationMatt. 7.7., with feare of his merciesHos. 3.1., with meeknesseZeph. 2.2.3., and in the way of holy life.
Secondly,Psal. 24.4.5. Christ is aboue: for so he sayth to the Iewes, yee are from beneath,
 I am from aboue,(...). yee are of this world, I am not of this worldIoh. 8.23., and he is the Lord whom euery Christian ought to seekeMal. 3.1., now Christ is two wayes sought principally, First, in the sincere and constant vse of all his ordinances both publike and priuate, that by them we might finde his presence of grace on earth. And thus the Church sought him in the CanticlesCant. 3.1. etc.. Secondly, in the desires, prayers, and preparations for our owne dissolution and his appearingPhil. 1.21. Reu. 21.20. 2 Tim. 4.8. 2 Pet. 3.12..
Thirdly, the new Ierusalem is aboue: for so the Apostle to the Galathians expressely saithGal. 4* 26.. Euen that heauenly society of glorious spirits in illustrious splendor. And these are to be sought two wayes. 1. By the constant desire of their presence and to bee gathered to them. 2. By the imitation of their graces and vertues which they shewed when thy were on earth.
Fourthly, Heauen is aboue. For it is the price of our calling that is aboue(...). Phil. 3.14., and  the glory of that eternall and immortall honour is to bee soughtRom. 2.7., and that fiue wayes. 1. By prayer for preparation and that daily: for so our Sauiour hath taught vs in the second petition of his prayerMatth. 6.10.. 2. By seeking the assurance of faith and hope, and the pledges and earnest of itHeb. 11.1. Eph. 1.14.. 3. By meditation and contemplation striuing to expresse our desires and sighes after it2 Cor. 5.2.. 4. By carrying our selues, as strangers and pilgrimes in this world, weaning our hearts and retiring our liues from the world, confessing and professing our trauailes towards a better countrie that is aboueHebr. 11.13.14.16.. 5. By continuing in welldoingRom. 2.7., striuing to liue a Citizen-like life heere(...). Phil. 3.20., in all things prouident, to send our workes and prayers to Heauen before vs, as our prouision and treasureMatth. 6.14..
Fiftly, holy graces are aboue: for S. Iames saith, Euery good giuing and euerie perfect gift is from aboue, and commeth downe from the father of lightsIam. 1.17.. And it  is apparent, that they are a part of the Kingdome of Heauen, and they tend to Heauen, and therefore the Prophet Esay cals grace by the name of gloryEsay 4.5., and they come downe from Heauen, which will also appeare in the particulars. Wisdome is from aboueIam. 3.17., so is zeale, for it is the zeale of Gods housePsal. 69.9., so is lowlinesse, so is faith, so is peace and ioy, and all the rest. And that these are to bee sought, many Scriptures euidently proue1 Cor. 14.1. Zeph. 2.3. 2 Cor. 13.5. Rom. 14.17.18., and if you aske how they are to be sought it is shortly answered, by prayer and the vse of the meanes, which the Lord hath appoynted as holy vessels and instruments, and as it were wombes, to conceiue, conuey, and deriue grace vnto vs.
Sixtly, the meanes of saluation themselues are things aboue, for they are called  the Kingdome of HeauenMatth. 3.2.: and the Kingdome of Heauen is sayd to bee taken away when the meanes is taken awayMat. 21.43., and these we must seekeEsay 41.17.18., though it cost vs much trauaile, if there be a famineAmos 8., or much cost, if the Lord giue vs to finde such pearles of instruction or comfort, in the field of any Church or congregation.Mat. 13.45.
Seuenthly, holy duties are many of them from aboue, for the Wise man saith,  the way of life is on high to the prudent, to auoyde from hell beneathPro. 15.24., and that because both the will that enioynes them, and the power to doe them, and the successe or effects of them, are all from God aboue. And therfore the Author to the Hebrews, when he would discourse of doing of Gods will, quoting the place in the Psalmes, seemes to intimate that the true speech of such duties, is to speake from aboue(...). Heb. 10.8.9., and these good things are to bee soughtProu. 11.27., wee must seeke the old and good wayIer. 6.17., we must seeke Iudgement and RighteousnesseEsay 1.17..
Eightly, many of the priuiledges of Christians are from aboue, as the righteousnesse of Gods KingdomeMatt. 6.33., forgiuenesse of sinnes1 Ioh. 1.7., deliuerance from this present euill worldGal. 1.4. (both in respect of the contagions and punishments of the same) all spirituall blessings in heauenly thingsEphes. 1.3., the reuelation of hid mysteries1 Cor. 2.9. Col. 1.26., the spirit of the sonneGal. 4.6.7., the influence of Christs death and resurrectionPhil. 3.9.10., the word with all the treasure of itPsal. 119.94, and the honour which is aboueIoh. 5.44., and all these are to bee
 sought. Thus of the particular things that are aboue and we must seeke.
Vse.The consideration of all this, may much abase and humble vs, for our deadnesse of spirit, and egregious slownesse of heart, in these things that so greatly concerne vs. The Diuell takes more paines in seeking to destroy vs1 Pet. 5.8., then we either doe take, or are willing to take to saue our owne soules, by seeking these things, all of them so worthy to hee sought. The worldly man is more industrious to seek riches, and the ambitious man more to seeke honor, and the luxurious man to seeke his sport, lust or pleasure, then Christians are to seeke those things that are aboue, though neuer any truly sought but did finde,Matt. 7.7. and neuer lesse was found, then either the euidence or the possession of a kingdomeLuk. 12.32., and that of God. Nay, nay, how haue euery one of vs sought out all wayes and all inuentions, while we liued in the seruice of the flesh, and had no fruit or wages, but that of which we are now ashamed,Rom. 6.21. and yet are seldome or neuer weary of such vnprofitable and shamefull labour. But I referre the vrging of motiues till I come to the next verse: it followeth.
Where Christ sitteth at the right hand of God] These words containe the latter reasons, and comprehend a principall part of Christs exaltation: the meditation whereof is here vsed, to excite vs to the loue of heauenly things, seeing our Sauiour Christ that so entirely loues vs, not onely is in heauen, but is therein great fauour, and honour, and maiesty, and power.
A fourefold presence of Christ.There is a foure-folde presence of Christ, For first, hee is euery where as God. Secondly, he is in the hearts of the faithfull only, by his spirit of grace and regeneration. Thirdly, he is by representation in the Sacrament. Fourthly, he is bodily in heauen.
Quest.Quest. But is not Christ with his Church on earth still. Ans.Answ. He is as God but not as man. I say not as man locally, for else hee is present in his members that beare the image of his true humane nature, and his very body is present sacramentally: he is present by the imputation of righteousnesse, and by mysticall vnion:
The acceptations of the words.The right hand of God, hath diuerse significations in Scripture: sometimes it signifieth the power and helpe of GodPsal. 44.3. Acts 2.33.. Sometimes the place of eternall rest in heauenPsal. 16.11.. Sometimes it notes the Maiesty, and authority, and soueraignty of GodPsal. 110.1. Heb. 1.3.. To sit, signifieth to abide or dwellLuk. 14.49., and to gouerne1 King. 1.30. Prou. 20.8. Isay 16.5.. Here to sit at Gods right hand comprehends three things. First, an exceeding glory aboue all creatures, euen the very AngelsHeb. 1.13. Acts 7.55.. Secondly, full power of gouernmentEph. 1.20.. Thirdly, an equality in maiesty and soueraignty, euen with God the father, in his personPhil. 2.6.7 9..
Ob. But Stephen (saith he) saw him standing at Gods right handActs 7.75.. Sol.Sol. Diuers gestures for our capacity are attributed for diuerse ends. First, hee stands, to shew his watchfull eagernesse and readinesse to take notice of wrongs to his members, to come to their succours. Secondly, He sits, to note maiestie and soueraignty.
Ob. But to sit at Gods right hand, seemes to import the reall communication of diuine attributes to the humane nature: so as in his very body hee is euerie where, etc. Sol. It doth not. Christs human nature is here reckoned vnder the name of things aboue. And besides in the Epistle to the Ephesians, the Apostle saith expresly, he sits at Gods right hand in heauenly placesEph. 1.20..
 The vse of Christs sitting at Gods right hand follow. And first it may bee a notable terror to wicked men if they doe but consider that hee whom they daily pierce by their sinnesReuel. 1.7., and despise, by contemning his ordinances, by which he would rule themLuk 19.14., is exalted to such glory, that hee hath all power to subdue his enemies vnder his feet.Psal. 110.1. But sure it is if they will not now feare and repent, the time shall come, when all they that sayd, this man shall not rule ouer vs, shall see him sitting at the right hand of the power of GodMatt. 26.64, and comming in the
 clouds to render vengeance on all those his aduersaries, that would not obey his Gospell2 Thess. 1.8., but striue to breake his yoake, and east his c^rd^ from themPsal. 2.2.3..
Secondly, it may serue for singular comfort to all Gods seruants. F^r from his session at Gods right hand, flow vnto them many singular blessings, (...) the  places of Scripture quoted in the margent will shew. First, the casting out of all accusations of SathanRom. 8.34. Eph. 1 20.. Secondly, the filling of the Church with all needfull fulnesse of grace and blessingsHeb. 1.13.14.. Thirdly, the seruice of Angels ministring to the heires of saluation. Fourthly, speed in all suits1 Pet. 3.22.. Fiftly, the prouiding of a place for vsIoh. 14.2.. Sixtly, IntercessionHeb. 7.26.. Seuenthly, power to subdue our enemiesPsal. 110.1.. As the consideration of the seuerall places of Scripture alledged will manifestly shew. Yea his exaltation may be our comfort, because in a sort wee sit together with himEph. 2.6., not only because this honour is done to our nature in his flesh, but also because by our mysticall vnion, it is done to our head; and moreouer, he doth in part communicate this honour to vs, for as Christ is at the right hand of the father, so is the Church at the right hand of ChristPsal. 45.10.. Finally, in the second comming of Christ this glory shall bee more fully and openly communicated, when all the faithfull shall bee set on his right handMat. 25.33., to heare that most gracious sentence, Come yee blessed of my father, inherit the kingdome prepared for you before the foundations of the world.
Thirdly, the session of Christ at Gods right hand, may teach vs: first, to minde a spirituall worship, seeing hee hath taken his body out of the way. Secondly, to goe boldly to the throne of grace to seeke helpe in time of needHeb. 4. vlt., seeing we haue so sure a friend, to procure both audience, acceptance, and successe: thirdly, to waite with patience, vnder all sorts of wrongs, for it is sure that hee that shall come will come in his due time and will not tarry, and then hee will make all his enemies to be his footstooleHeb. 10.12.13.. Lastly, the Apostle here vseth the consideration of this doctrine as a motiue to stirre vs vp to mind heauenly things. And surely if wee doe seriously waigh it, it should continually draw vp our thoughts to thinke of heauen, whither so louing and so glorious a Sauiour is gone before. Yea, it should doe vs good to looke vp towards these visible heauens, remembring that one day we shall be carried to that blessed place of rest and holy ioyes, that is aboue them, euen to the heauen of heauens, to raigne with Christ for euermore. And thus of the proposition.



VERS. 2. Set your affections on things which are aboue, and not on things which are on the earth.

THe exhortation in the former verse propounded, is in this verse illustrated and expounded; first, by repetition; seconly, by the contrary. The repetition is in these words; Set your affections on things which are aboue. The contrarie from which he doth dehort, is in these words, and not on things which are on earth.
Repetitions in Scripture are not without their vse.The vse of repetitions in Scripture. For thereby the holy Ghost vsually imports our slownesse and dulnesse of capacity in conceiuing, and backwardnesse in practise, and besides thereby enforceth both the necessity and the excellency of the matter so repeated. And surely, all three may be applyed to this repetition. For the contemplation and desire after heauenly things is a most gracious ornament to a religious life, and without some measure of holy affections, it is vnpossible to get rid of the power of sinne, or to practise with any successe or acceptation the duty of a renued life: and if in any thing we are backward, or wanting, or decaying, or languishing, it is in this rule here giuen by the Apostle.
Set your affections] The originall word varieth in signification.(...). Sometimes it is rendred, to studie: and it is (out of question) our dutie to study and contemplate
 of heauenly things. Sometimes it signifieth, to trie by tasting, and it is sure that if carnall people had but once tasted of the sweetnesse of godlinesse and religious duties, they would not so securely neglect the prouision for eternity: but especially they would see, that they haue spoken euill of what they knew not. Sometimes it is translated, to bee wise about a thing, and certainely, a Christian should bee wise in the matters of his religion and profession, and shew it, by forecast and diligence to compasse what may bee gotten of this true treasure, and by serpentine discretion in the manner and circumstances of welldoing, and by staydnesse in a Christian course, voyd of passion, rash zeale, and fickle inconstancie, growing more and more skilfull and cunning in the soundnesse of knowledge, how with more power and spirituall aduantage to practise euery dutie, or exercise euery grace. Sometimes it signifieth, to sauour of a thing, and it is true that all the carriage and dealings of Christians should sauour of the things aboue; but I take it as it is heere rendred. Set your affections] and so it manifestly teacheth vs that wee  must get not mindes or thoughts onely, but sound affections to heauenly things, which may both serue for reproofe and comfort: for reproofe, I say, both of the loathsome lukewarmensse of the mostReu. 3.19., and of the dangerous  losse of first loue in the better sortReuel. 2.. For comfort, for it is certaine, if thou canst finde thy heart vpright in affections and constant desire after heauenly things,Three benefits of tender affections. thou mayst bee assured of three things. 1. That God will accept thy  will for the deed. He will beare with many wants and weaknesses, where hee  sees a man or woman come to his seruice with hearts desirous to doe their best, and tenderly affected. 2. That thou art not in danger of falling away: for Apostasie neuer discouers it selfe to hurt vs, or endanger vs, till it hath  stollen away our hearts and the care of affections in holy duties. 3. That to that thou hast,Matth. 13. more is and shall bee giuen: as thy affections grow and continue, so doth true knowledge, grace and godlinesse grow also. And thus of the repetition.
And not on the things that are on earth] from the coherence and generall consideration of these words three things may be obserued.
 1. That a man cannot both at once seeke and affect earth and heauen: for they are heere disioyned and opposed,Matth. 6. a man cannot serue God and mammon, the loue of the world is the enmitie of God: but this is thus to bee vnderstood,Lam. 4.4. if the world be sought in the first place, and with cheefe affection and care.
 2. Nay more, this dehortation implies, that it is hard for a man to deale with the world, but a mans affection will too much runne after it: it is hard to bee much employed about profits and recreations, but a man shall loue them too much.Note. Not that it is simply vnlawfull to vse the world, but that wee should be very iealous of our selues to watch our owne hearts, that our affections be not set on the world.
 3. To be crucified vnto the world, able to neglect and contemne the glory and pleasure of it, is a notable signe, that one is risen with Christ.
Thus in generall.
Three sorts of things on earth.The things on earth] The things on earth heere meant by the Apostle, are either traditions, mentioned in the former Chapter, or worldly things in themselues lawfull, or the workes of the flesh, simply in themselues vnlawfull.
Traditions are for three reasons called things on earth.Traditions and mans inuentions which the Apostle hath before taxed, may well bee called things on earth. 1. Because they spring from the earth and earthly minded men, they were neuer inspired from God, nor deuised by heauenly minded men. 2. Because they hinder them that are deuoted to them, from looking vp, or attaining any insight in things that are aboue.
 3. Because these by effect make men more earthly and sensuall: but of these in the former chapter.
The workes of the flesh, and the corruptions of life to bee auoyded, and not affected, are the third sort of things on earth: but of that also afterwards in the second part of the generall duties; especially in the fifth verse. So that the second sort of things on earth remaineth to bee more largely considered, those are profits, honours, pleasures, friends, health, and long life.
There be eight reasons to perswade not to affect earthly things.Eight generall reasons to disswade from affecting things on earth.
The first may bee taken from the condition of man on earth. For wee are heere but pilgrims and strangersHeb. 11.13., and therefore being but in a strange place, to what purpose should wee trouble our selues with more then what will serue our present need, and the rather knowing that when wee come into our owne countrey, these things will serue vs for no vse. Besides, our present lot lyeth not in those things: but the Kingdome of God and righteousnesse is our portion, euen in this life, all other things are but cast vpon vs, as additaments.
The second may bee taken from the disability of earthly things. For first,  they cannot so much as fill or satisfie a mans heart. 2. They cannot fence a man against any of the trials of God, when the houre of tentation comesReu. 3.10.. 3. They cannot all of them redeeme one soulePsal. 49..
The third reason may bee taken from the inconueniences that follow the  loue of earthly things. For, first the cares of the world choake the word, that it can neuer prosperMatth. 13.. 2. They breede excuses and shifts in mans mindes and alienate by degrees a mans heart from the vse of the meanesLuk 14.17.. 3. To seeke after the world is to sorrow after the world: for to the most the world is a cause of much sorrow and vexation. 4. The amity of the world, as the Apostle saith, is the enmitie of GodIam. 4.4. 1 Ioh. 2.15., and that both actiuely and passiuely: for it both makes vs hate God, and it makes God hate vs. Fiftly, the lust after worldly things fils the world with corruptions and sinnes2 Pet. 1.4.. Sixtly, these earthly things thus sinisterly affected, may one day witnesse against vsIam. 5.1. etc.. Seuenthly, many a man is damned and gone to hell, for minding earthly thingsPhil. 3.18..
The fourth reason may bee taken from the soueraignty that God hath ouer  all earthly things: and the power hee hath giuen to Christ ouer themPsal. 24.1. Matt. 28.18., now why should wee turmoyle our selues with care about these, seeing they are in Gods hand in Christ, to haue them and dispose of them as may bee for his glory and our good.
The fifth reason may be taken from the basenesse of the nature of all these  things: for they are not onely on the earth, but of the earth: and if they bee compared vnto the soule of man, for which wee ought cheefely to prouide, the whole world is not worth one soule: which may appeare both by the price of a soule, and the disproportion betweene the gaines of the world and the losse of one soule:Matth. 16. it is no profit to winne the whole world and lose a mans owne soule: and besides, if the whole world layd on one heape would haue beene a sufficient sacrifice for the redemption of the soule, the Lord Iesus would neuer haue abased himselfe to such a suretiship. But because there could not be found, neither in heauen nor earth, any other name or nature by which wee could be saued, therefore hee humbled himselfe,Phil. 2. and tooke vpon him the forme of a seruant, and was obedient vnto the death, euen the death of the crosse.
The sixt reason may bee taken from the example of the Lords Worthies,  who in all ages haue beene tried with all kinde of trials:Heb. 11. and wandred vp and downe in sheepe-skinnes and goat-skinnes, being destitute, afflicted and tormented, wandring vp and downe in wildernesses, mountaines, and dennes, and caues of the earth, whom the world was not worthy of: all these seeking another country, and willingly professing that they expected no abiding place heere.
Seuenthly, it is somewhat to perswade vs, that our Sauiour Christ professeth, 
 of purpose to hinder and interrupt our rest and ease in the vse of those things: when hee saith, that hee came not to send peace, as knowing that much peace and liking of earthly things was vnprofitable for vs.
Lastly, we may bee mooued by the consideration of the fleeting condition of all earthly things: riches haue wingsProu., and the fashion of this world passeth away1 Cor. 7.31. 1 Joh. 2.17., yea, heauen and earth shall passe, the earth with the workes therof shall be burnt vp2 Pet. 3.10..
But that we may be the more deepely affected with the contempt of the world, I will further adde these reasons,
1. Of Salomon, the wisest of all sinfull men.2. Of Christ, the wisest of all men.
Salomon in his booke of Ecclesiastes is exceeding plentifull, and indeede not without cause:Salomons reasons against the loue of earthly things. for such is the strength of the rooted loue of earthly things in many men, that they had neede to bee encountred with an armie of reasons, and if I single out some of the cheefest out of diuers chapters, I hope it will appeare tedious to none, but such as will heare no reason.
In the first chapter, among other things these may bee noted. 1. That after a man hath trauelled to get what hee can, how small a portion in comparison of the whole hath hee atchieued? so as hee may say to himselfe when hee hath done, What now remaineth to mee of all my trauell which I haue suffered vnder the sunne?Eccl. 1.3. 2. If a man could get neuer so much, yet hee cannot liue to enioy it long. For the elements of which man was made, are more durable then man himselfe: for, one generation passeth and another commeth, but the earth remaineth stillv. 4.5.6.. The like may be shewed of the aire and water. 3. All things are full of labour no man can vtter itv. 8.. And certainly, many times earthly things gained, answer not the labor spent about them. 4. Earthly things possessed, will not satisfie, The eye will not bee satisfied with seeing, nor the eare with hearingv. 8.. 5. A man can compasse nothing that is new, for there is nothing new vnder the sunnev. 9 10.. Is there any thing of which one may say, behold this is new, and neuer was before? they haue beene already in the olde time that was before vs. 6. The Lord in wonderfull wisdome and righteousnesse, permits in the nature of man, those cares that they may bee trauels to humble and breake the heart of manv. 13.. 7. The best of these will not make a crooked thing straightv. 15.: they wil not mend the peruerse manners of men, a man may bee and continue vicious for all these things, or for ought they will doe vnto him.
In the second chapter wee may obserue these reasons. First, let a man procure vnto himselfe the fullest and fairest vse of all sorts of earthly things: pleasure,Ch. 2.1. and 12. laughter, great houses, gardens, orchards, waters, fruit-trees, woods, seruants, cattell, siluer and gold, treasures and musicke, yet all these will not deliuer a man from satiety, loathing and vexation of spirit. So as hee may truely say, there is no profit in them. 2. In these things there is one condition to all: it befalleth to the wise man as it doth to the foolev. 14.15.. 3. Let a man excell neuer so much, yet within a short time all will bee forgotten. For all that, that now is, in the dayes to come shall all bee forgottenv. 16.. Fourthly, when thou hast gotten all thou canst together, thou knowest not whether hee shall bee a wise man or a foole, that shall enioy them after theev. 19.. Fiftly, to attaine those things men vsually spend their dayes in sorrow, trauaile and greefe, and their hearts take no rest in the nightv. 23..
In the third chapter these further reasons may bee noted. First, all things are swayed with the swinge of their seasons and times.Ch. 3. v. 1. and 9. So as nothing is steady, though bee borne, and now plant and build, and laugh, and daunce, and embrace, and sow, and loue, and liue in peace: yet there will bee a time to plucke vp, and breake downe, and weepe, and mourne, and cast away, and
 hate, and mourne, and die too. Secondly, though the Lord should set the world in a mans heart, yet hee might spend all his dayes and neuer know the full nature of these thingsv. 11.. Thirdly, all things are subiect to Gods vnauoidable disposing. Let man get what hee can, yet God will haue the disposing of it: and whatsoeuer God shall doe, it shall abide, to it can no man adde, and from it can none diminish. And this God will doe that man may feare himv. 14.. Fourthly, such is the state of the children of men, that they may lose all they haue at the very place of iudgementv. 16.. Fiftly, yea the verie state of mortified men, in the reason of carnall men, because of these oppressions and vncertainties, seemes little better then the state of beastsv. 18..
In the fourth Chapter note,Ch. 4.1.2.3. first that when a man hath set his heart vpon these earthly things, if euer hee lose them, he is filled almost with vnmedicinable teares and sorrow, so as hee would praise the dead aboue the liuing, and wish he had neuer been borne. Secondly, they are occasions of a mans enuiev. 4.. Thirdly, the eying of these things infatuats many a mans heart: so as wee may see many a man that hath neither sonne nor daughter, nor brother, and yet there is no end of his trauell, and he hath not the iudgement, to say with himselfe, for whom doe I trauaile, and defraud my selfe of pleasurev. 8.. Fourthly, a man may get much with sore trauaile, and liue to see himselfe despised of him for whom he prouideth them: so as they that shall come after him will not reioyce in him.v. 15.16.
In the fift chapter there are also seauen other reasons. First,Chap. 5.8. these earthly things leade the greatest men into bondage, by dependance. For the King cannot consist without the tilling of the field. Secondly, hee that loueth siluer shall not bee satisfied with siluer, and hee that loueth riches shall bee without the fruit thereofv. 9.. Thirdly, when goods encrease, they are encreased also that eate them, and what good commeth to the owners thereof, but the beholding of them with their eyesv. 10.. Fourthly, many times the seruant sleepeth, when the master can get no sleepev. 11.. Fiftly, there is an euill sicknesse often seene vnder the sunne, that riches are kept for the owners ruinev. 12.. Sixtly, or else they will perish while the master looketh onv. 13. v. 13.14.15.. Seuenthly, but certaine it is, he can carrie nothing out of the world when hee goeth, but must leaue them where hee found them.
In the sixt Chapter there are these reasons. First,Chap. 6.1. to 7. a man may haue all abundance and yet not haue a heart to vse them, and so bee worse then an vntimely fruit. Secondly, what needs all this adoe: for all is but for the mouth, and nature is content with a little. And therefore to haue a soule so vnsatiably greedy of hauing, is a prodigious madnessev 7.. Thirdly, the hauing of all these things makes not a wise man better then a foole: and what wants a poore man, if hee know how to carry himselfe with the wise. Fourthly, all cannot make thee cease to be mortall. For it is knowen man cannot striue with him that is stronger than hev. vlt..
In the seuenth Chapter there is this reason. A man may spend all his dayes before hee can come soundly to know (after many trialls) what is the best vse to put these earthly things to.
And for honour, in the eighth Chapter three things are worthy noting. First, a man is not Lord of his owne spirit, to keepe himselfe aliue in his honourChap. 8 8.. Secondly, many men rule to their owne ruinev. 9.. Thirdly, men after death are quickely forgotten. They that come backe from the holy place remembreth them not long. Yea, a man may be quickly forgotten in the City where he hath done rightv. 10. Chap. 9.1..
And in the ninth Chapter, two reasons more are added. First, no man can know the loue or hatred of God by these things. Secondly, they are not gotten alwayes, by helpe of meanes. For the race is not alwayes to the swift,
 nor the battell to the strong, nor riches to men of vnderstanding, nor fauour to the wise: which makes the Atheist and Epicure conclude, that time and chance commeth to all things.
The summe of all that Salomon can say is, vanity of vanities all is vanity. And now that wee haue heard Salomon, let vs in the next place heare a greater than Salomon.
Our Sauiours reasons.Our Sauiour Christ in the sixt of Matthew, diuides the care of earthly things into two sorts. For either men are greedily transported with the desire of getting treasures, that is, abundance and superfluities: or else they toyle their hearts with distrustfull and distracting cares, about necessaries, as what they shall eat, and what they shall put on. From the first kinde of care, he disswades with foure reasons.Foure reasons against the care for superfluities. First, all treasures are subiect either to vanitie or violence. Either the moth will eat them, or the theefe will steale themMat. 6.19.20. Secondly, these things bewitch and steale away mens heartsv. 21.. Thirdly, the minding of these things, darkneth the eye of the soule, with greater darknesse then can be exprestv. 22.23.. Fourthly, a man cannot serue God and richesv. 24. Eight reasons against distracting cares for necessaries.
From the second kinde of care he dehorts with eight reasons. First, the life is more worth then meat, and the body than raymentv. 25.. And if the Lord haue giuen the greater, why should he not be trusted for the lesse? Secondly, God prouideth for the very foules that haue not such meanes as man hath: and will he not prouide for manv. 26.? Thirdly, all thy care will not adde one cubit to thy staturev. 27., but if thou wouldest swelt thy heart out, tis God only must increase thy strength or health. Fourthly, this care is a signe of little faithv. 30.. Fiftly, tis for Gentiles that know not God nor the couenant of his grace and mercy in Christ, to seeke after these thingsv. 32.. Tis a grosse shame for any Christian to be so heathenish. Sixtly, doth not your heauenly father know all that you needv. 32.? If he be a father, hath he not will? and if he be in heauen, hath he not power to helpe? Seuenthly, you haue a flat promise, that if you seek the kingdome of heauen and the righteousnesse thereof (which should take vp your cheefest care) all these things without such carking, so farre as is needfull shall be cast vpon youv. 33.. Lastly, hath not euerie day his euill? and is not the griefe of the day great enough?v. vlt. why then dost thou distract thy selfe for to morrow, assure thy selfe the time to come will afford thee matter of griefe and trouble enough, thou needst not disquiet thy selfe before hand.
Vse.The consideration of all this, as it may bee a comfort against all wants and crosses about these base earthly things: so it may greatly reprooue those that burie their talents in the earth, that is, spend all their gifts about earthly matters. But especially wee may hence learne diuers lessons. And first since wee haue heard Salomons opinion after long discourse, that all is vanity, wee should learne of the same Salomon therefore, to feare God and keepe his commandements for this is the whole of man, and the end of allEccles. 12.13. Secondly, let the place of the sanctuarieIer. 17.11.12 (where we may get the best things for our soules) be as a glorious throne exalted. Thirdly, let vs vse this world as if we vsed it not. Let them that reioyce bee as if they reioyced not, and they that weepe as if they wept not, and they that buy as though they possessed not1 Cor. 7.30.31.. Fourthly, if the Lord giue vs but a little portion in these things, let vs esteeme his mercy and liue with contentednesse, resoluing that better is a handfull with quietnesse, then two handfulls with labour and vexation of spiritEccles. 4.6.. And fifthly, we may hence be confirmed to take the more liberty to vse these earthly things for our owne ioy and refreshing, they are none of the things the Lord would haue vs with such a doe keepe: but hee allowes vs to eat and drinke, and delight our selues with the profit of our laboursEccles. 2.24. Eccles. 3.12.. Lastly, we should improoue them, and vse them as meanes to doe what good wee can with them in this life. I know (saith the wise man) there is nothing good in them, but to reioyce and do good in his life. And to this end we shold
 cast our bread euen vpon the waters, for after many dayes wee may finde it:Eccles. 11.1.2. and giue our portion to seauen and also to eight. The best vse of these riches, is to be rich in doing good with them.
Thus of the illustration. The confirmation followes.



VERS. 3. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.

IN this verse and the next the exhortation is confirmed by two motiues: the one taken from the condition of the faithfull in this world; the other taken from the confideration of their estate in the reuelation of the glory of Christ in the last day. The first is in this verse, the latter in the next.
There are two things in the condition of the faithfull on earth which should make them little to minde earthly things, or desire to continue long in the world.
First, that in respect of distresses, they are as dead men while they liue. Secondly, that the happinesse they haue (which is the life of their liues) doth not appeare, but is hid with God in Christ.
For yee are dead.] The faithfull are dead three wayes while they liue:The faithfull dead three vvayes. For first they are dead to sinne in respect of mortification. Secondly, they are dead to the Law, by the body of ChristRom. 7.4. Gal. 2.19., in respect of iustification: so as now the faithfull doe no longer wait vpon the Law for righteousnesse, but vpon a second mariage they haue it from him that was raised from the dead for them.
They are dead to the world, and that in three respects. First, in respect of their owne voluntary forsaking of the world, and their mortifying of earthly desires, ioyned with a sense of their owne mortalitie: so was Paul as a man crucified to the worldGal. 6.14.. Secondly, in respect of the worlds account of them. For so soone as men get any true grace, and retire themselues from the excesses of the time, they are neglected and forgotten as dead men out of minde. Thirdly, in respect of the multitude of afflictions which doe many times ouerwhelme and drowne Christians. It is not vnusuall in Scripture to say of men in desperate crosses they are dead men. The Prophet Esay cals the people in captiuitie dead men, when he saith, Thy dead men shall liueEsay 26.19.. The Apostle Paul saith thus: If we be dead with him, we shall liue with him2 Tim. 2.11.. Which hee seemes to explaine in the next verse thus: If wee suffer with him, wee shall also raigne with him. Thus Dauid saith, He was as a broken vessell, forgotten as a dead man out of mindePsal. 31.12.. And in another place he saith, He was brought to the dust of the earthPsal. 22.15.. And in the 88. Psalme hee saith, his soule was full of euills, hee was counted among them that goe downe to the pit, free among the dead, like the slaine lying in the graue, yea he was laid in the lowest pit, in the darknesse, in the graue etc.Ps. 88.4.5.6. I spare to alleadge other scriptures.
The vse may be,Vses. to teach vs as to obserue hence what may befall the best man, so in the consideration of our owne estate, to say within our selues as Iob did, If I haue done wickedlie, woe vnto me, and if I haue done righteouslie, I will not lift vp my head, being full of confusion, because I see mine afflictionJob 10.15.. For though the Lord hath not yet thus ouerwhelmed thee with distresse, yet in asmuch as he may doe it to thee, as well as to others his deare seruants, it should cause thee to walke humblie before God, and to learne to die to the world, before the world be dead to thee.
Againe, hath misery broken in vpon thee, and preuailed ouer thee, so as thou seemest to be laid in darknesse, as they that haue beene dead long agoe? let not thy spirit be in perplexity in thee: no strange thing is befallen thee:Psal. 143. Gods children are but dead men in this world. Remember the time past, and meditate of Gods works of old: stretch foorth thy hand vnto God, and let thy soule desire after
 him: if he shew thee his louing kindnesse, thou hast enough: hide thee with the Lord by daily and secret praier, and he will teach thee his will, and his spirit shall leade thee, and if he see it meet, he will bring thy soule out of aduersitie, and execute his righteous iudgement vpon all those that haue oppressed thee. Tis the Lord that quickneth the dead,Rom. 4. and calleth things that are not as if they were. Lastly, hath the Lord deliuered thee out of desperate and deadly crosses? Then let the vowes of God be vpon thee, and render thou his praise, and confesse his name before the sonnes of menPs. 56.12.13..

Your life is hid.]

Doct.The happinesse and spirituall felicitie of Christians is hid; and that vsually from the men of the world, and many times from the faithfull.
First, the life of Christians is hid from the world.Their life is hid from the men of this world: First, because God (who is their lifeDeut. 30. vlt.) is hid from them. Secondly, because the glory of their naturall life is many times buried in the gulfe of outward trouble2 Cor. 6.9.. Thirdly, because the life of grace (which is only brought to light by the Gospell2 Tim. 1.10) is hid from the perceiuing of the naturall man, whom the God of this world hath blinded2 Cor. 4.4.. Fourthly, because the way of holy conuersation is hid from them: for carnall men are all strangers from the life of GodEph. 4.17.. It is a narrow way, and few there bee that finde itMat. 7.14.. Fiftly, because many of the priuiledges of a gracious life are hid from them: As first, the inrolling of a Christian in the booke of lifeEsay 4.4. Phil. 4.3.. Secondly, the seale of the spirit of promise2 Cor. 1.22.. Thirdly, pardon of sinne. Wicked men perhaps know the faults of Gods children, but not the forgiuenesse of those faults. Fourthly, the power of the meanes. The word is a sauour of life2 Cor. 2.14., and hath spirit and life in itIoh. 6.. Yet it is as a treasure hid in the field, or a little leauen hid in three peckes of mealeMatt. 13.. Fiftly, comfort in their affliction. Wicked men know their afflictions, but not their consolations2 Cor. 2.9., they seldome or neuer marke the glorious issue, and how God compasseth them about with ioyfull deliuerance. And generally we may burst out with the Psalmist, and say, How great is the goodnesse thou hast laid vp for them that trust in theePsal. 31.19.? It is great goodnesse, but yet note that hee saith it is laid vp. Lastly, in respect of the life of glory the world knowes not Christians: for it doth not yet appeare what they shall be1 Ioh. 3.12..
Seeing this is so, that the life of Christians is hid from the world; as it should inferre the Apostles former exhortation, so it should further teach vs, not to respect nor care for the iudgement, counsell, censures, etc. of carnall men, in the whole or any part of Christian life: for it is hid from them, and they know not of what they speake.
Yea the life of Christians is hid many times from themselues.Nay in the second place, sometimes the life of a Christian may bee hid from Christians also themselues, so as they cannot discerne their owne happinesse, especially in some fits of tentation, and seldome or neuer doe they fully discerne in this world so much as the glory of their present estate. Dauid thought he was cast out of Gods sightPsal. 31.22. Psal. 77.. And hee most mournfully makes his mone in the 77. Psalme, as if hee were almost resolued that the Lord would not be mercifull to him. Iacob cries out, My way is hid from the LordEsay 40.27., and the people somewhat vehemently say, Verily thou O God hidest they selfe, O God the Sauiour of IsraelEsay 45.15.. Which should comfort afflicted Christians, since they may here see that it hath beene an vsuall distresse of Gods deare seruants, to haue their life hid in God.Vse. And withall it may warne vs, let him that now standeth in the refreshings of the comforts of Gods presence, take heed lest he fall. But especially it should quicken vs to a desire to be gone, and to be in heauen, that we might be past all danger.
But lest Christians should be discouraged, he addeth two comforts: First, it is with Christ.Christs life was hid, and in what respects. Secondly, it is in God.
With Christ.] The life of Christ also was hid while hee liued. For first the glory of his diuinitie was couered as it were with a vaile in his flesh. Secondly,
 his outward glory of his life amongst men, was obscured by the many crosses he sustained for our sinnesEsa. 53.7., so as the world did not owne him, and hee was without forme, and despised among men. Thirdly, his life was hid in the graue. Fourthly, it was hid in respect of the horrors he felt in his soule, the Lord as it were hiding his louing countenance from him for the time. Fiftly, his glory in heauen is hid from the world, and the Saints on earth haue but a glimpse of it. All this may comfort vs, seeing nothing can befall vs but what hath befallen our head: and if the world will not acknowledge our glory, and the beautie of the profession of sinceritie, it matters not, it could not see the excellencie of Christ when he was on earth.
In God.] Our life is hid in God either in respect of obiect,Obiectiue. Causaliter. because it principally consists in the vision of God, or causally as God is the first cause to beget it, and still to preserue it: or else with Christ in God, that is, with Christ who incomprehensibly rests in the bosome of the Father: or lastly, in God, that is, apud Deum, in the power of God, to dispose of it at his pleasure. Which should comfort vs, seeing none hath power ouer our life but God, and teach vs to commend our spirits into his hands.



VERS. 4. When Christ, who is our life, shall appeare, then shall yee also appeare with him in glory.

THese words containe the second motiue to perswade to the meditation of heauenly things.The second motiue is taken from the consideration of the appearance of Christ and the glory of heauenly minded Christians, at the day of Iudgement. If men would consider of the certaine and glorious appearance of the Lord Iesus Christ, when he shall come to take account of all the actions of all men, and put an end to all the earthly felicities which man hath with so many inuentions sought; and withall but thinke how vnauailable all earthly things will be at that day, either to deliuer from the terror of the iudgement, or the horror of the euerlasting miserie will certainly follow (if men be not more carefull to prouide for their soules before-hand, by following the studie of better things) but especially if men would consider the great gaine and profit that godlinesse at that day will bring, and the incomparable glory that all heauenly minded Christians shall then bee exalted vnto. The thought of these things daily and truly laid vnto mens hearts would much excite and stirre vp to a constant care of preparing our selues against that day; and would greatly weane vs from the cares and delights in these transitorie and earthly things here below, that will so little auaile the owners in the day of death, and will bee of so little vse in that immortall estate vnto which after this iudgement the godly shall be translated. So that these words offer two things to be intreated of. First, the glorious appearance of Christ. Secondly, the glorious appearance of the Christian in the day of Christ.
But before I enter vpon the particular and full discourse of those two glorious appearances, some things may be briefly and generally noted.
1. That the knowledge of those last things is not a curious or vnprofitable  knowledge, but contrariwise ought to be searched after, as exceeding vsefull in the life of man.
2. That the doctrine of the glory of Christ and Christians in that last day  is now but little knowne or discerned; and that the word appeare imports:The Deuill, sensualitie and guiltinesse, make many men haue little minde to thinke of the day of iudgement. so as the fulnesse of Christs maiestie, or of the Christians glory will not appeare till the very iudgement day. The better sort know but in part: and the worser sort are so blinded by the deuill, and besotted with sensualitie and the loue of earthly things, and withall are so conscious to themselues of the euils they are guiltie of, that they haue no desire to discerne, or to be taught to know the doctrine of Christs comming.
 3. Those words (which is our life) are not to be altogether passed ouer, they plainly affirme that Christ is our life,Christ is our life. and this is an honor that the Lord challengeth to himselfe: and therefore as hee would be acknowledged to be the way and the truth, so also he addeth, I am the lifeIoh. 14.6., and to this end he came, that men in him might haue lifeJoh. 10.10.. And with great reason is Christ said to be our life, for he formed vs at first when we were not, and quickened vs when wee were dead, and hath prouided a better life for vs, and doth preserue vs vnto eternall life, and daily renew life and power in the hearts of his people, and will raise our bodies at the last day.Vses. The consideration hereof may both teach vs and trie vs; it may teach vs, as to acknowledge that wee haue receiued life from Christ, so to dedicate what remaineth of our life to the honour and seruice of him, that is the author and sole Lord of our liues; and withall to runne vnto him for the daily preseruation and renewing of life and louelinesse in vs. And it may trie too: for till we can truly say out of feeling and experience, Christ is the life of our liues, we shall hardly finde reason of comfortable hope in our appearance before him at the last day.Who may truly say and professe, that Christ is their life. And they only may truly professe that Christ is their life, that first can liue by the faith of Christ, accounting themselues to haue enough if they may see comfort in Gods promises made in Christ, and feele the ioyfull fruits of Christs fauour and presence, howsoeuer  it goe with them for outward things. Secondly, that doe continually sacrifice  and deuote vnto Christ their best desires and endeuours, and that with resolution  to cleaue to his seruice all the dayes of their life. And thirdly, that can bewaile his absence, or displeasure, as the most bitter crosse: so as they could feele, and out of affection say of such times and such a condition, that the true life of their life was absent or remoued from them.
Now I come to the appearance of Christ. I haue not here to doe with the appearance of Christ as it is considered in the fore-ordination of God before the foundation of the world1 Pet. 1.20. Six appearances of Christ.; but of the accomplishment of it, and so Christs appearance is of diuers kindes. For first, hee hath appeared vnto the whole world, as the true light that made the world, and lightneth euery man that commeth into the worldIoh. 19.10.: and thus he appeared in the light of nature. Secondly, he appeares to the whole Church, consisting both of good and bad, by the generall light of doctrine and Scripture, but many receiue not his testimonieIoh. 3.31.32.. Thirdly, he hath appeared corporally, in the dayes of his flesh, once in the end of the world, to put away sinne by the sacrifice of himselfeHeb. 9.26. 1 Ioh. 3.5., and to dissolue the worke of the deuill1 Ioh. 3.8.. Then was fulfilled that great mysterie, God was manifested in the flesh1 Tim. 3.16.. Fourthly, he hath and doth daily appeare in the hearts of all the faithfull, by the manifestation of the spirit of grace1 Cor. 12.7., whereby hee doth not onely shine, but also dwell in themEph. 3.16.17. Fiftly, he hath and doth appeare in the day of death, by the ministerie of his Angels, to translate the blessed soules to their place of peace, rest, and ioy. And lastly, hee shall appeare in the end of the world in glorious maiestie, to iudge all men and Angels, and this is the appearance here mentioned.Threefold iudgement. The doctrine of the last iudgement hath beene alwayes vrged.
There is noted to be a threefold iudgement. The first iudgement, and that was accomplished on man and Angels at their first fall. Then there is a middle iudgement, and so God iudgeth the wicked and the righteous euery day. And there is a last iudgement, and that is this iudgement about which Christ is here said to appeare.
The doctrine of the last iudgement is in a manner onely to bee found in the Church. They were darke and vncertaine things, the Philosopher could see by the light of nature. And the Lords messengers haue in all ages from the first beginning till now, mightily vrged the terror of this day, to awaken the secure world. Henoch prophesied of itJud. 15., so did MosesDeut. 32., and DauidPsal. 50., and SalomonEccl. 11.9., and DanielDan. 7.13., and IoelJoel 3., and MalachieMal. 4., so did Christ himselfeMatt. 24.,
 and Paul2 Thess. 1., and Peter2 Pet. 3., and IohnReuel., and IudeIud. 6.. Neither is the assurance of the Iudgement to come warranted by the words of Gods seruants onely, but the Lord hath left many works of his owne, as pledges that he will once at length for all iudge the whole world for sinne. The drowning of the old world, the burning of Sodome, the destruction of IerusalemMatt. 24., were assured fore-tokens that the Lord would not put vp the infinite iniquities of the world, but will most seuerely punish for sinne. The pleading of the conscienceRom. 2.15.16 foretels a iudgement to come. The sentence of death pronounced in Paradise, and renewed with such terror on Sinay, did euidently assure that God meant to call men to an account. The lesser iudgements in this life are but fore-types of that last and greatest iudgement to come. And lastly, the dragging of men out of the world by death is nothing else but an Alarum to Iudgement.
Yet as there is a necessary vse of the knowledge of this dreadfull and glorious doctrine, so there is a restraint to be laid vpon vs.Be vvise to sobrietie. This is one of the things wherein we must be wise to sobrietieRom 12.3.. We must represse the itching of our eares, and be content to be ignorant of what is not reuealed: this is a doctrine to be inquired into more for vse of life, then to feed the curiositie of contemplation.
Concerning the Iudgement to come, if any aske, Who shall iudge?Who shall iudge. I answer, that in respect of authoritie, the whole Trinitie shall iudge; but in respect of the execution of that authoritie, Christ onely shall iudge, and that as manAct. 17 31.. It is true that the Apostles and the Saints are said to iudge the tribes of Israel, and the world: but they only iudge as assessors, that is, they shall sit as it were on the bench with our Sauiour Christ when he iudgeth.
And if any aske in the second place, Whom Christ shall iudge: I answer,Who shall be iudged. he shall iudge the euill Angels; for they are reserued in euerlasting chaines vnder darknesse, vnto the iudgement of the great day. Hee shall iudge also the man of sinne,Iud. 6. 2 Pet. 2.4. euen the great Antichrist, that hath made such hauocke in the Church, and seduced the nations with the wine of his fornications: euen him shall he consume with the brightnesse of his comming2 Thess. 2.8.. He shall iudge also all reprobates, men, women and children, of all ages, nations and conditions: for though he shall not know themMatt. 7.22. and 25.12. in respect of approbation, yet he shall iudge them, and make them vnderstand he knew their transgressions. Further, he shall iudge the very elect, though it shall be with a different iudgement: for we must all appeare before the tribunall seat of Christ, that euery one may receiue the things which are done in his body2 Cor. 5.10.. Lastly, in some sense it may be said he shall iudge the whole world: for the heauens and the earth that now are, are kept (by the word of God) and reserued vnto fire against the day of condemnation, and of the destruction of vngodly men2 Pet. 3.. And the Apostle Paul saith, that the feruent desire of the creature (made subiect to vanitie by man) waiteth for this reuelation of the sonnes of God at the last iudgement: for they are subdued vnder hope, and shall at that day by the sentence of Christ be deliuered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious libertie of the sonnes of GodRom 8.19.20.21. Where shall it be..
Thirdly, if any aske where this iudgement shall bee, I answer, that seeing the Lord hath not determined it, it is curious to enquire, and more curious to assigne the very place: as some haue, that wrote it should be in the valley of Iehoshaphat; or as others would haue it, on Mount Sion, whence he ascended. This wee know, it shall be neere the earth, in the clouds of heauen,1 Thess. 4.17. where Christs throne shall be set: and further then this we need not enquire.
There haue beene also many opinions about the time when it should bee.When shall the day of Iudgement be. Some thought, that as the world was six dayes in creating, and then the Sabboth of rest came; so the world should last 6000. yeeres (reckoning a 1000. yeeres as one day) and then should come the eternall Sabboth. Others distribute the times thus, 2000. yeeres before the Law, 2000. yeeres vnder
 the Law, and 2000. yeeres after the Law, and then comes the iudgement. Others thought the world would last after Christ so long as it was to the floud from the creation, and that was as they say, 1656. yeeres. Others thought it should be as long to the iudgement after Christ, as it was from Moses to Christ, and that should be 1582. yeeres. This experience hath proued false. Other say Christ liued 33. yeeres, and the world should continue for 33. Iubilies after Christ. What can be said of all or the most of these opinions and such like, but euen this, that they are the blinde fancies of men? For is there not a plaine restraint laid vpon men, in this question, when the Lord Iesus said, It is not for you to know the times and seasons, which the Father hath put in his owne powerAct. 1.7.. And of that day and houre knoweth no man, no not the Angels of heauen, but my Father onlyMatt. 24.36 Mark 13.32.. And the Euangelist S. Marke addeth, that the sonne of man himselfe knoweth not the day and houre.Hovv it is that the sonne is said to be ignorant of the day of ^^^gement. Not that simply Christ is ignorant of the time of the last iudgement; but he was said not to know, because hee kept it from our knowledge. Or else he knew it not as he was man, or rather in his estate of humiliation, and in his humane nature he did not precisely know it. But that hinders not but that in his estate of exaltation, as he is now in heauen, and hath all power and iudgement committed vnto him, he may and doth fully vnderstand it.
But letting these things passe, the principall things for vs to be informed in as concerning the day of iudgement, and this last appearance of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, are these three: first, the signes of his comming. Secondly, how or the forme of the iudgement it selfe, when he doth come. And lastly, the vse we should in the meane while make of the doctrine of the last iudgement.
The signes of the day of iudgement.For our better remembrance, the signes of Christs comming to iudgement may be briefly reduced into this Catalogue.
Some signes goe before, and are fulfilled before he appeare. Some signes are conioyned with his appearing. The signes going before, are more remote, or more neere. The more remote signes are these: First, the vniuersall preaching of the Gospell to all nations, Gentiles as well as Iewes. Before the end come, saith our Sauiour, This Gospell of the kingdome shall be preached throughout the whole world for a witnesse to all nationsMatt. 24.14.. Secondly, most cruell persecution: Euen such tribulation as was not from the beginning of the worldMatt. 24.9.10.21.29.. Thirdly, a generall falling away or apostasie of the Churches in Antichrist2 The. 2.2.3.. Fourthly, warres and rumors of warres, famine, pestilence, and earth-quakes in diuers places. Fiftly, false Prophets and false Christs, which shall deceiue manyMatt. 24.11.24., The signes more neere, are, First the preaching againe of the euerlasting GospellReuel. 14.6.. Secondly, the detection and fall of Antichrist, and the spirituall BabellReuel 14.8.. Thirdly, the calling of the Iewes, after the fulnesse of the Gentiles is come inRo. 11 25.26.. Fourthly, coldnesse and securitie in the world, as in the dayes of NoahMatt. 24.37.. Fiftly, the shaking of the powers of heauen, the darkening of the Sunne and Moone, and the falling of the starres, etc.Mark 13.14 The signes conioyned are especially two: First, the wailing of all the kindreds of the earth. Secondly, the signe of the sonne of manMatt. 24.30. Which what it shall be I cannot describe.
And thus wee are come to the very time and execution of the iudgement. And therein consider,The forme of the iudgment. The preparation of the Iudge. first the preparation: secondly, the iudgement it selfe: thirdly, the consequents of the iudgement.
The preparation is two-fold: First, of the Iudge: secondly, of the iudged. Vnto the preparation of the Iudge may bee referred these things: First, his commission, or that singular power giuen him of the Father to execute iudgement vpon all the worldJ^h. 5.22. Matt. 24.30.: and this shall be then made manifest to all men. Secondly, the cloathing of the humane nature with a most peculiar and vnsearchable maiestie and glory, most liuely expressing and resembling the forme and brightnesse of the FatherMat. 16. v^t.. Thirdly, the attendance of thousand thousands
 of holy Angels, in the perfections of their splendorDan. 7.10. Matt 25.31. Reuel. 20.11.. Fourthly, the choice of a place in the clouds of heauen where he will sit. Fiftly, the erecting of a most glorious white throne: which what it shall be who can vtter? yet without question it shall visibly then appeare. And thus of the preparation of the Iudge.
The iudged shall be prepared foure wayes. First, by citation. Secondly,The preparation of the iudged. First, by citation. by resurrection. Thirdly, by collection. Fourthly, by separation. First, they shall be cited to appeare. The world is three times cited: First, by the Prophets and Fathers before Christ. Secondly, by the Apostles and Ministers of the Gospell since Christ. And the last summons is this here meant, which shall be performed by a shout from heauen, and the voice of the last trumpe: and this shall be the voice of Christ the Archangell of God, and ministred by Angels. For that it shall be Christ voice, is plaine: The dead shall heare his voice, as hee saith in IohnIoh. 5.28.. And the Lord himselfe shall descend from heauen with a shout, with the voice of the Archangell, and with the trumpe of God1 Thes. 4.16.. That the ministerie of Angels shall be vsed, is manifest by the Euangelist S. Matthew, who reporteth Christs words thus: And he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpetMatt. 24.31 Secondly, by resurrection..
Secondly, vpon this voice shall a resurrection follow, which may be two wayes considered: First, euery man in his owne body, whether hee hath done good or euill, shall reuiue, and rise vp out of the graue, or other places of the earth, or sea, or aireReuel. 20.13, without any losse of any part, that so euery man may in his very body receiue what hee hath done, whether good or euill. Secondly,2 Cor. 5.13. the liuing shall be all changed in a moment, in the twinckling of an eye, at the last trumpet1 Cor. 15.52.. And this change shall be in stead of death, and a kinde of resurrection. Not a change of substance, but of qualities. Our corruptible shall put on incorruption.
Thirdly, then shall the Angels gather and collect, and bring into one place,1 Cor. 15.53. Thirdly, by collection. from the foure windes of heauen, that is, from all the foure parts of the world, all that are quicke or dead, now raised or changed, electMatt. 24.31 or reprobateMatt. 25.32.: and such is their power, that they will be able to driue in the mightiest, wickedest, vnwillingest, yea though they were neuer so many millions of them.
Lastly, when they are thus brought together,Fourthly, by separation. there shall be made a separation: for the sheepe, Gods elect, shall all be put on Christs right hand; and the reprobate or goats, shall be compelled to his left handMatt. 25.32.. And thus of the preparation. The iudgement it selfe followeth.
In the iudgement it selfe I consider three things. First,The iudgement it selfe. by what law man shall be tried and iudged. Secondly, by what euidence. Thirdly, what the sentence shall be.
For the first, the Gentiles shall be iudged by the law of nature.First, by vvhat lavv man shall be tried. The vnbeleeuing Christians in the visible Church shall be iudged by the word or Law, writ or preached to them: according to that of the Apostle, They that haue sinned without the law, shall perish without the law; and they that haue sinned vnder the law, shall be iudged by the lawRom. 2.12.. And our Sauiour saith, He that refuseth mee, and receiueth not my words, hath one that iudgeth him: the word that I haue spoken, it shall iudge him in the last dayIoh. 12.48.. And the faithfull shall be iudged by the Gospell, euen by all those comforts and promises contained in, or belonging to the couenant of grace, applied to them in this life, and must fully then be confirmed and accomplished. For the sentence at the last day shall bee but a more manifest declaration of that iudgement the Lord in this life most an end by his word hath past vpon man.Secondly, by vvhat eu^d^nce man ^^^lb^ iudged.
For the second, the euidence shall be giuen in principally by the opening of three bookes. The one is the booke of conscience, and the other the booke of life^euel. 20.12., and the third the booke of Gods remembranceM^^ 3.16.. The booke of conscience(...). 20 12., is that word which is kept within euery man, of all sorts of actions. And that
 conscience may at that day giue in fuller euidence, it is certaine that after the resurrection, it shall be almost infinitely extended by the power of God to expresse this last testimony both in the good and in the euill. The booke of life is Gods sacred and eternall record of all those persons that were fore ordained into life, of all ages and nations. The booke of remembrance will exactly expresse without all failing or mistaking, all the inclinations, thoughts, affections, words and deeds, with all circumstances, or occasions and whatsoeuer else may illustrate either the goodnesse of good men, or the transgression of the wicked.
What the sentence vvill containe.For the third. The sentence will bee vpon either the godly or the wicked. The sentence vpon the godly will containe, first, the opening of Gods eternall counsell, and his vnsearchable loue, wherein he hath resolued and begunne to declare his will, to blesse euery one of the ElectMatt. 25.34. Secondly, a manifestation of all the righteousnes, desired, thought vpon, spoken or done, by the godly2 Cor. 5.10., and that with such feruency of affection in Christ, that he will see and remember nothing but goodnesse in good menMatt 5.34. to 41.. Thirdly, a finall and generall absoluing and redeeming of them, from the guilt and power of all sinne, from the beginning of the world,1 Cor. 1.30. in Adam or themselues. So as there shall neuer be either sinne in them, or accusation of sinne against them. Fourthly, ordination to glory, by appointing euery one of them to inherit the kingdome prepared for them before the foundation of the world. Contrariwise, the sentence of the wicked shall containe, first, a declaration of Gods eternall and iust hatred of themMatt. 25.41. Secondly, a full manifestation and ripping vp, before all men and Angels, of all their sinnes both of nature and action, both against God or men, or their owne bodies and soules, secret and open, of what kinde soeuerRom. 2.15.. Thirdly, a most terrible denunciation of Gods eternall curse and horrible ordination to those eternall torments prepared for them,2 Cor. 5.10. together with the deuill and his Angels.
Hitherto of the iudgement it selfe. The consequents of the iudgement follow; and they are fiue: first, the firing of the world, that is, the dissolution of the world by a wonderfull fire that shall inclose all, so as the world shall not appeare, till it be renewed againe, and come out of that fire as out of a fornace: for as the Apostle Peter saith, The heauens being on fire shall passe away and be dissolued with a noise, and the elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works thereof shall be burnt vp2 Pet. 3.10.12.. And there shall be then new heauens, and new earth, that is, as it were a new refined. And the Apostle Iohn saith, the heauens and the earth shall flie away from the face of him that sitteth on the throneReuel. 20.11. and 21.1..
The second consequent shall be the chasing of the wicked to hell: execution being speedily and fearefully done vpon them, with all horror and haste by the Angells.
Rom. 8.19. to 23.The third shall be the libertie of the creatures, I meane the rest of the creatures besides men and Angels. But because this is a point somewhat obscure, I will  endeauour in a few words to resolue a doubt or two. Que. First, how are the creatures now in bondage that they shall need then any liberty. Ans.Answ. They are in bondage in diuers respects.The creatures in bondage in seuen respects For first they are fraile and corruptible, and so in bondage to corruption. Secondly, they are subiect to confusions  and inconstancy: as may appeare by the almost infinit mutations, in the ayre,  earth, seas, fire. Thirdly, they are now forced to serue wicked men. The sunne  shines vpon the vniust as well as the iust. The heauen makes fruitfull with her shewers and influence, the field of the wicked as well as the iust. The earth is driuen to feed and to receiue into her bosome, the vngodly as well as the godly:  and this is a bondage. Fourthly, the visible creatures are Gods greate booke to proclaime the inuisible things of God: now they stand alwaies ready and reading too, and men will not learne by them. And so these good masters lose
 all their labour, and this is a bondage to bee tied to teach such as will not learne. Fiftly, the creature is made not only the instrument, but many times the subiect of mans punishment for his sinnes. As the earth is made iron, and the heauens brasse for mans sake, and this is a great bondage. Sixtly, the creature intends immortalitie, which while it failes of in the dying or expiring of the particulars of euery sort, it would supply for the preseruation at least of the kindes, by a perenniall substitution of new particulars in euery kinde: and yet loseth all this labour, because all things must be dissolued, and must be restored by another way knowne to God, and not now to nature. But especially the creatures may be said to be in bondage, because since the fall, the more illustrious instincts and vigors of the most of the creatures are darkned, decaied, dulled and distempered in them. Oh but might some one say,Ob. how can this bondage be ascribed vnto the heauens? Sol.Sol. The heauens are not so perfect, but they may admit enlargement of their excellencie. Besides, they serue now promiscuously to the vse of bad as well as good, neither are the very heauens without their feeblenesse, and the manifest effects of fainting old age. And therefore by a prosopopoeia they may be said to groane together with the rest of the creatures vnder the common burden and vanitie vnto which they are subdued. It is obserued, that since the dayes of Ptolomy the Sunne runnes neerer the earth by 9976. Germane miles, and therefore the heauens haue not kept their first perfection.
Ob.Ob. But how can this vanitie or bondage bee in any sense ascribed to the Angels? Sol.Sol. There is no necessitie to include the Angels in the number of the groaning creatures: and yet it will bee easie to shew that they sustaine a kinde of bondage; for they are now made to serue earthly things, men haue their Angels to attend on them. And it is thought they haue a kinde of regencie or presidencie either ouer nations, or in mouing the orbes of heauen. Besides, they are put to inflict punishments on wicked men, as on Sodome. Further, they performe seruice sometimes not attaining their owne ends. And lastly comparatiuely, at least their felicitie in the creation was not so absolute as it shall be in Christ: for if his comming adde not vnto them a more excellent condition of nature, yet out of all question it addes a fuller measure both of knowledge and ioy.
Qu. 2. But what shall the creatures haue in the day of Christ they haue  not now? Answ.Answ. First, they shall haue freedome from all the former bondage and vanitie. Secondly, they shall bee deliuered into the libertie of the sonnes of God, that is, they shall haue a most excellent estate, when the children of God are glorified. Wherein the Lord shewes his iustice, in that the creature shall haue restitution for what is lost by man. Ob.Ob. But shall there bee a resurrection of creatures as well as men? Sol.Sol. No, for this restitution shall be made in specie, not in indiuiduo. 1. Not to euery particular of euery kinde or sort, but to the sort or kinde of all creatures: and that shall be done to the creatures then found in their seuerall sorts.
The fourth consequent of the iudgement shall be the possession of the glory of Christians appointed by the sentence of the Iudge. But of this afterwards in the end of this verse.
The fift consequent of iudgement shall be the deliuering vp of the kingdome to the Father, and so the laying downe of Christs office: for when Christ hath finally and fully subdued Sathan, death and wicked men, and hath fully reconciled the elect to God, then will there be no word of any such gouernment in heauen as was on earth. Hee shall not neede any longer to rule them, either by ciuill Magistrates, or by his need and discipline, or by any other way, which onely did agree to the times of the Churches warfare and pilgrimage: but he shall neuer cease to liue and triumph with them, in all
 perfections of happy contentment and glory. Thus of the consequents of Iudgement. And thus also of the doctrine of Christs last appearance. The vses follow.
The Vses.The consideration of the doctrine of the last Iudgement, may serue for three principall vses. First, for terror. Secondly, for comfort. Thirdly, for instruction.
First, this is iustly a wonderfull terrible doctrine to wicked men, that heape vp wrath against this day of wrath, and by their wilfull impenitencie prouoke this glorious Iudge. How can it but be terrible, when the holy Ghost giues warning that the Lord Iesus will then shew himselfe from heauen, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, to render vengeance on all those that know not God, and haue not obeyed the Gospell? How can it bee but terrible, when wicked men shall be punished with euerlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power? How can it but be terrible, when they shall feele their conscience exquisitly griping them, and gnawing vpon them, and when they shall see the deuils to torment them, and hell to deuoure them; when they shall see the world burning about them, and the good Angels forcing them away, and all both men and Angels applauding their Iudgement, and knowing all their sinnes: they must not thinke that the Iudge will deale then as he doth now. Now he iudgeth them secretly euery day, but it is many times insensibly, or with lesser plagues: but then he will most openly poure vpon them the full vials of his wrath. Heere they are iudged that they may be amended, but there their iudgement shall be that they may be confounded: for there will be no place of repentance. Deceiue not thy selfe, Christ will not come the second time as he came the first: hee came then to be iudged, but now to iudge; hee shall then be seene with terror, that was before looked vpon with contempt: hee shewed his patience in his first comming, but now he will shew his power: he appeared then in the forme of a seruant, but now he will appeare in the forme of a King, greater then all Kings. Then hee professed not to iudge any man, but now he proclaimeth hee will iudge all men. It was commonly thought if any man saw God he should die: alas, alas, how then shall these wofull wretches doe that must see him in the vnutterable fiercenes of his irefull indignation? If the powers of heauen shall be shaken at his pleasure, oh how shall the miserable heart of the guiltie sinner be rent into 1000. peeces, with vnmedicinable sorrowes? If Foelix tremble to heare tell of iudgement, what will poore Foelix doe when he must feele iudgement, both in the sentence and execution? If the word of Christ on earth had such power as it had in the garden, to strike stubborne hearted men to the earth, what power (thinke wee) will it haue when be speakes as the Lord from heauen? When Ezechiel, Daniel, and the Apostle Iohn, and others saw but one Angell, in a lesser manifestation of his glory, comming as a Messenger of good tidings, they fall downe, and are full of singular feare: if the sight of one Angell bee so terrible, what will the sight of all the thousand thousands of Angels be? especially when they come cloathed with all their brightnesse of glory? And if good men that had good consciences were so frighted, what shall become of euill men with their euill consciences? And if the messengers of good tidings doe so amaze, how shall the executioners of a most terrible sentence compasse them about with confusion both of face and heart? If the drowning of the old world, the burning of Sodome, the opening of the earth to swallow vp Dathan and Abiram, and such like iudgments, haue so much horrour in them; how then can any tongue expresse, or heart now conceiue the horror of this day, when all the millions of wicked men shall be deliuered vp to those eternall and remedilesse torments? If it be such a shame to doe penance for one fault, in one congregation, where men will
 pray for the offender. What a shame will it be when all thy faults shall be discouered before all the whole world, without all hope of pittie or helpe?
Nor is it possible for them to escape this fearfull iudgement; the Iudge will not be vnconstant, nor will he take reward, he will not be ouerlaid with confusion of businesses, he will no way be corrupted in iudgement. Not to appeare is impossible, and to appeare is intolerable: here will be no respect of persons, nor will the Iudge care how it be taken, nor will he be deceiued with colours and circumstances. Hee hath tarried so long, hee cannot be charged with rashnesse, nor can there be a hiding of any particulars from him. Euery inclination, thought, desire, word and worke, shall surely come to iudgement. And lastly, there can be no impediment to hinder execution.
But here a question may arise, viz. Who are they that are in danger hereof?  I answer: All impenitent sinners.Answ. But yet there are some kinde of sinners that are expresly named in Scripture, and therefore if thou be any of that number, preuent thine owne ruine by repentance, or else thou shalt certainly perish. I vndertake not to reckon all: it shall suffice to mention some of the chiefe sinners, that Christ will be sure to remember at that day. The Beast, and the false Prophet, and all that worship his image, and renew his marke, shall then bee cast aliue into the lake that burnes with fire and brimstoneReu. 19.20.. False teachers which priuily bring in damnable heresies, or speake euill of the way of truth, haue their condemnation long since determined and agreed vpon2 Pet. 2.1.2.3.. All Atheists that make a mocke of religion and the comming of Christ, shall haue a principall portion of the fierce furie of Christ2 Pet. 3.3. etc.. All couetous worldlings and greedie rich men shall then be in a wofull case: for the very rust of their cankred gold and siluer shall witnesse against them, and shall eat their flesh as it were fireJam. 5.13.. All mercilesse men shall then haue iudgement without mercyJam. 2.13.. All whoremongers and adulterers, and all that defile the flesh, God will be sure to iudgeHeb. 13.4.. A fearfull looking for of iudgement and violent fire shall deuoure all those Apostataes that sinne willingly after they haue receiued and acknowledged the truthHeb. 10.27.. How sure doe yee suppose shall his punishment be, that doth despight the spirit of grace by which hee was sanctifiedHeb. 10.29.? All those that haue troubled Gods seruants shall beare their condemnation whosoeuer they beGal. 5.10.. O man thou art inexcusable that iudgest another man, wherein thou art guiltie thy selfe: for the iudgement of God must needs be in truth against such as commit such thingsRom. 2.1.2.3.. Especially if men grow master-like in censuring, it will increase to greater condemnationIam. 3.1.. All goats, or vnruly Christians, that will not be kept within Gods fence, that is, will not be ruled by Gods ordinances and ministers, shall be separate in that day from Gods sheepe, and as a people accursed to be cast into an vnauoidable fellowship with the deuill and his angelsMat. 25.. All hypocrites, that say and doe not, or doe all their worke to be seene of men, and take Gods couenant into their mouthes, and hate to be reformed, how shall they escape the damnation to comePsal. 50. Mat. 6. and 23.? All wicked men with their scant measure, and deceitfull weights, and wicked ballances, shall neuer be iustified in the day of the LordMich. 6.10.11.. What shall I say? It were too long to proceed to reckon all: and it is a short labour to conclude with the Apostle, No wantons, nor drunkards, nor railers, nor extortioners, nor theeues, nor wrathfull persons, nor gluttons, nor idolaters, nor iesters, nor filthy talkers, nor fearfull persons, nor liers, nor any that loue lies, shall be able to stand in the day of Christ, but shall be shut out of the kingdome of heauen, and cast into the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone. And thus of the vse for terror.
Secondly, vpon the meditation of this last iudgement diuers lessons for  our instruction are inforced. First, it should restraine vncharitable iudging and censuring one of another for lesse matters, especially for things indifferent. Who art thou that iudgest another mans seruant? he standeth or falleth to his owne
 master. Christ is the Lord of quicke and dead. And therefore why doest thou condemne thy brother? or why doest thou despise thy brother? for we shall all appeare before the iudgement seat of Christ. Inasmuch as the Lord Iesus Christ will iudge the secrets of all hearts, and giue a iust triall to the actions of all men, why should wee forestall his iudgement, or in doubtfull matters1 Cor. 4.5. arrogate to our selues this honour of Christ? If wee could consider that we shall then euery one giue accounts vnto God for himselfeRo. 14.12.13, wee should finde worke enough to doe to looke to our owne score. Let vs not therefore brethren iudge one another any more. Secondly, are there any matters of difference amongst vs? Let the Saints iudge them and end them1 Cor. 6 2.: God will be contented to put his cause to them at the last day, (for we know the Saints shall iudge the world) and therefore why should we refuse their arbitration? Thirdly, it should order and moderate our sorrowes for our dead friends. Wee should not sorrow as people without hope, seeing we beleeue that all that sleepe in Iesus, God will bring with him1 Thess 4.13.14.17.18.. Wee shall meet together againe in that day, and afterwards liue with the Lord together for euer. And therefore wee should comfort one another with these words. Fourthly, this summons to iudgement giues a dreadfull warning and admonition to the world, euen to all men euery where to repent. Inasmuch as God hath appointed a day wherein hee will iudge the world in righteousnesse, by the man whom he hath appointed, whereof he hath giuen an assurance in that he raised him from the deadAct. 17.32.: woe will be vnto vs if that day come vpon vs vnawares, before wee haue made our peace, and humbled our selues before God, and by vnfained repentance turned from all our euill wayes. It is an vnsearchable compassion that God shewes, when he offers vs this mercy, that if we will iudge our selues we shall not be iudged of the Lord in that day1 Cor. 11.34.. And it will on the other side excessiuely incense his wrath, when hauing such grace offered, wee neglect it, and death and iudgement finde our sinnes, both vnremitted on Gods part, and vnrepented on ours. Fiftly, seeing all these things must be dissolued, how should it fire vs, and daily quicken our dead and drowsie spirits, to a constant care of all possible holy conuersation and godlines2 Pet. 3.12., vnlesse we would discouer our selues either to be Atheists, that mocke at the iudgement to come, or men giuen to a spirit of slumber, that in soule sleepe it out, and will not consider our latter end?
Seeing wee are all Gods stewards, let vs arme our selues as they that must then giue accounts of our stewardship. And since wee haue all receiued some of Gods talents and gifts in our seuerall places, let vs be carefull to approue our selues to be good seruants and faithfull, such as can returne them with aduantage, lest the portion of the seruant that hid his masters talents in the earth fall vpon vs. Lastly, since the day of iudgement is the day of our full and finall redemption, and since he shall come as a theefe in the night, euen in the houre that we thinke not; let vs therefore watchMat. 24.44., and be ready, alwaies carefull and diligent, sighing and groaning, longing and prayingReuel. 22., hasting to and looking for2 Pet. 3. this glorious appearance and reuelation of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ.
 Thirdly, this may be a singular comfort to all mortified and penitent Christians: they may lift vp their heads, and reioice with ioy vnspeakable and glorious; for the Lord shall then come to be glorified in his Saints, and made maruellous in all them that beleeue2 The. 1.10. Ob.Ob. But the terror of the day may amaze a Christian. Sol.Sol. There is no sparke of terror in this doctrine to a godly minde. For what should he feare, if he either consider the fauour of the Iudge, or the manner of the iudgement? For the Iudge is he that hath beene all this while their aduocate1 Ioh. 2.1., to plead their suits by making intercession for them. And therefore when he comes to sit in iudgement, he cannot goe against his owne pleading. He is their brother, and carries a most brotherly affection; and will hee condemne his owne brethren? He is their head, and hath performed all the offices
 of a head vnto them, and can hee then faile them, when they haue most need of him? nay it is he that hath beene iudged for vs on earth, and will hee iudge against vs in heauen? What shall I say? He died for vs to shew his vndoubted loue, euen that he might redeeme vs as a peculiar people to God, and will hee faile vs in the last act, when he should once for all accomplish his redemption for vs? Besides, he hath already promised to acquit vs in that day, and it hath beene often confirmed both in the word, and the Sacraments, and praier: he hath left many pledges of his loue with vs, and therefore it were shamefull vnbeleefe to doubt his terror. What though he be terrible to wicked men? yet by iudging in seueritie he hath not nor cannot lose the goodnesse of his owne mercy: what should wee feare him iudging in his power, when wee haue felt saluation in his name? Besides, the maner of the iudgement shall be in all righteousnesse and mercy. Thou shalt not be wronged by false witnesses, nor shalt thou be iudged by common fame or outward appearance: the Iudge will not be transported with passion or spleene, nor will hee condemne thee to satisfie the people: and besides there shall bee nothing remembred but what good thou hast sought or done; and not the least goodnesse but it shall be found to thy honour and praise at that day. And if it were such a fauour to a base subiect if the King should take notice of him to loue him, and should in an open Parliament before all the Lords and Commons make a long speech in the particular praises of such a subiect: what shall it be, when the Lord Iesus in a greater assembly then euer was since the world stood, shal particularly declare Gods euerlasting loue to thee, and recite the praises (with his owne mouth) of all that hath beene good, in thy thoughts, affections, words or workes, throughout all thy life, or in thy death? especially if thou adde the singular glory he will then adiudge thee to, by an irreuocable sentence. And so wee come to the second appearance, viz. the appearance of Christians in glory.

Then shall yee also appeare with him in glory.

The glory that shall then be conferred vpon Christians may be considered either in their bodies, or in their soules, or both.The glory of Christians, first in their bodies. The glory of their bodies after the resurrection is threefold: for first they shall be immortall, that is, in such a condition, as they can neuer die againe, or returne to dust; for this mortall then shall put on immortalitie1 Cor. 15.53.. Secondly, they shall be incorruptible, that is, not only free from putrefaction, but also from all weaknesse, both of infirmitie and deformitie: for though it be sowne in weaknesse, yet it shall be raised in power; though it be sowne in dishonour and corruption, yet it shall be raised in honour and incorruption1 Cor. 15.42.43.. Thirdly, they shall be spirituall, not that our bodies shall vanish into ghosts or spirits, but because they shall be at that day so admirably glorified and perfected, that by the mighty working of Gods spirit, they shall bee as able to liue without sleepe, meat, mariage, or the like, as now the Angels in heauen are: and besides, they shall be so admirably light, and agill, and swift, that they shall be able to goe abroad with vnconceiueable speed, in the aire or heauens, as now they can goe surely on the earth1 Cor. 15.44.. The glory vpon the soule, shall bee the wonderfull perfection of Gods image in all the faculties of it. Then shall we know the secrets of heauen and earth. And then shall our memories, will, and affections be after an vnexpresseable manner, made conformable vnto God. The glory vpon both soule and body shall be those riuers of ioyes and pleasures for euermore. And thus shall the man be glorified that feareth the Lord.
The consideration of this glory may serue for diuers vses. First let vs all pray vnto God vpon the knees of our hearts, from day to day, that as hee is the father of glory, so he would giue vnto vs the spirit of reuelation, that the eies of our vnderstanding might be inlightned to know in some comfortable measure, and that we might be able with more life and affection to meditate of the
 exceeding riches of this gloryEph. 1.17.18. and inheritance to come. Our hearts are naturally herein exceeding both dull and blinde, maruellous vnable with delight and constancie to thinke of these eternall felicities: and this comes to passe by the spirituall working of Satan, and the deceitfulnesse of sinne, and too much imployment and care about earthly things. But a Christian that hath so high a calling, and hopes for such a glorious end, should not allow himselfe in that deadnesse of heart; but as he gaineth sense by praier in other gifts of grace, so should he striue with importunitie and constancie, wrastling with God, without intermission, so as no day should passe him, but he would remember this suit vnto God, till he could get some comfortable abilitie to meditate of this excelling estate of endlesse glory. Secondly, this should make vs to be patient in tribulationRom. 5.2.3.4., and without murmuring or grieuing, to endure hardnesse2 Tim. 2.3., and temptations in this world: for they are but for a season1 Pet. 1.6., though they be neuer so manifold or great: and the afflictions of this present life are not worthy of the glory to bee reuealedRom. 8.18.. Though wee might be dismaied while we looke vpon our crosses, and reproaches, and manifold trials, yet if the Lord let vs haue accesse vnto this graceRom. 5.2., to be able soundly to thinke of the glory to come, wee may stand with confidence, vnapalled, and with vnutterable ioy looke vp to the glory wee shall shortly enioy, when the triall of our faith being more pretious then the gold that perisheth, shall be found vnto honour and praise through the reuelation of Iesus Christ1 Pet. 1.7.. Yea what were it to lose (not some of our credits, or our goods, but) euen our liues, seeing wee are sure to finde them againe with more then a hundred fold aduantage,Mat. 16.24. vlt. at the time when Christ shall come in the glory of his Father, to giue vnto all men according to their deeds. Besides, wee must know that there is no talking of sitting at Christs hand in glory, till we haue asked our selues this question, whether wee can drinke of the cup he dranke of, and be baptized with the baptisme he is baptized withMark. 10.^7 etc.. And then if we can suffer with him, we shall raigne with him2 Tim. 2.12., and shall be glad and reioice with exceeding ioy when his glory shall appeare. And in the meane while the spirit of glory and of God resteth on you1 Pet. 4.13.14..
Thirdly, seeing Christ will receiue Christians into such glory, it should teach vs to receiue one anotherRom. 15.7. into both our hearts and houses. Why shouldst thou be ashamed or thinke it much, with all loue and bountie, and bowels of affection, to entertaine and welcome the heires of such eternall glory? Oh if thou couldst but now see but for a moment, how Christ doth vse the soules of the righteous in heauen, or will vse both body and soule at the last day, thou wouldst for euer honour them whom Christ doth so glorifie, and make them now thy only companions, whom thou shouldest see to be appointed to liue in such felicitie for euer.
Fourthly, the thought of this glory should win vs to a care to be such as may be capable of it. Qu. What must we doe that we may haue comfort, that wee are the men shall partake of this glory, and speede well in the day of Iesus Christ?What vvee must doe that vvee may be assured of the glory of heauen. A. First, Euery one that would haue this hope, must purge himselfe as Christ is pure1 Ioh. 3.3.: we must be much in the duties of mortification. For no vncleaue person can enter into the kingdome of glory. And vncleane wee are all, till we be washed in the bloud of Christ by iustification, and bathed in teares of true repentance by mortification. It hath beene obserued before, that if we would not haue the Lord to iudge vs, we must iudge our selues1 Cor. 11.34.. And if we would not haue Christ to take vnto him words against our soules, we must take vnto vs wordsHos. 14.3. against our sinnes, to confesse and bewaile them in secret. Secondly, we must labour for the assurance of faith. Tis faith that is the euidence of the things not seeneHeb. 11.1.. Tis faith that shall be found to honour and praise in the reuelation of Iesus Christ1 Pet. 1 7.. It is faith to which the promise of eternall life is madeIoh. 3.18.. Thirdly, wee should labour to get vnto our selues the benefit of a powerfull preaching ministerie, for thereby our hearts may be wonderfully stirred vp to see the glory of sincerity
 on earth, and it will open a wide doore to behold as in a mirror the glory to come with an open face, changing vs into the same image from glory to glory by the spirit of God. I say not that this is of absolute necessity as the former are, but it is of wonderfull expediency. Fourthly, we must be circumspect and watchful, in speciall manner attending to our owne hearts that wee be not at any time oppressed with the cares of this life, or voluptuous liuingLuk. 21.34.36., if euer wee would be able to stand in the day of iudgement, and escape the fearefull things that are to come: especially we must looke to our selues in these things least that day come vpon vs at vnawares. Fifthly, Doe we looke for the mercy of our Lord Iesus Christ into eternall life? then we must (as the Apostle Iude sheweth) edifie our selues in our most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost, and keepe our selues in the loue of GodIud. 20.21., we must be afraid of whatsoeuer may estrange the Lord from vs, or any way darken the sense of his loue. For we may be assured, if we haue his fauour and walke before him in the sense of it, we shall haue glory when wee die. Likewise, praying in the holy Ghost, with constancie and frequency doth maruellously enrich a Christian, both with the first fruits of glory, euen glorious ioy on earth, and with the assurance of fulnesse of glory in heauen. Sixthly, the Apostle Iohn seemes to say if loue be perfect in vs, wee shall haue boldnesse in the day of iudgement1 Ioh. 4.17.. As if he would import, that to be inwardly and affectionately acquainted with Christians on earth, is a notable meanes to procure vs gracious entertainment with Christ in heauen: especially if we perfect our loue, and grow to some Christian ripenesse in the practise of the duties of loue in a profitable fellowship in the Gospell. It is good discretion, to grow as great as we can with Christians, that so wee may winne the fauour of Christ. Lastly, the Apostle Paul shewes in the second to the Romanes, that they that seeke glory, and honour, and immortalitie, and euerlasting life, must be patient in well doing. For they shall be rewarded according to their workes. And to euery man that doth good, shall be honour and glory, and power, to the Iew first, and also to the GraecianRom. 2.6.7.10.. For all that haue any tydings of saluation in the Gospell, or looke for that blessed hope and appearing of that glory of the mightie God, must liue soberly, righteously and godly in this present worldTit. 2.11.12.13.. Without holinesse no man shall see GodHeb. 12.14.. And therefore we should be abundant in the worke of the Lord, forasmuch as we know, that our labour shall not be in vaine in the Lord1 Cor. 15. vlt.. And thus farre of the glorious appearance both of Christ and Christians. And thus also of the first rule of life, namely the meditation of heauenly things.



VERS. 5. Mortifie therefore your members which are on earth, fornication, vncleanesse, the inordinate affection, euill concupiscence, and couetousnesse, which is idolatrie.

THese words with those that follow to the tenth verse,The diuision of this part of the Chapter. containe the second principall rule of holy life, and that is the mortification of euill. These euills to be mortified are of two sorts, for either they are vices that concerne our selues most, or else they are iniuries, that concerne the hurt of other also. Of the mortification of vices he intreats v. 5.6.7. of the mortification of iniuries he entreats, v. 8.9.
In the first part viz. the exhortation to the mortifying of vices, I consider first, the matter about which he deales, and the reasons. The matter is in verse 5. and the reasons v. 6.7.Diuision of the verse.
In the fifth verse there are 2. things. First the proposition of mortification, in these words mortifie therefore your members that are on earth. Secondly, a catalogue of vices to be mortified, or the enumeration of certaine speciall sinnes a Christian should be carefull to keepe himselfe from, viz. fornication, vncleanesse, etc.

The necessity of mortification.The generall consideration of the whole exhortation to mortification, should imprint this deeply in our hearts, that vnlesse we doe repent of those sinnes haue been in our natures and liues, and be carefull to flee from the corruptions that are in the world, we shall neuer haue comfort that we are accepted with God. We should bring to the particular opening of all the verses, a mind resolued of the generall. And to quicken vs a little the more, to the respect of this doctrine, and to enforce the care of parting with our sins, I will briefly touch by the way some few reasons, why we should bee willing to entertaine  all counsell that might shew vs any course to get rid of sin. First, our vices are the fruits of our corrupted nature. They arise not from any noble or diuine instinct but are the effects of base flesh in vs. And we should carry the thoughts of it in our minds,Gal. 5.19. when wee are inclined or tempted to vice: wee should say within our selues, this euill proceedes not from any thing that might declare greatnesse, or true spirit in a man: what is passion, or lust, or couetousnesse, but the base worke of the filthy degenerated flesh? Secondly,  our vices are the onely things that defile vs, and make vs loathsome before God and men. Tis not meane clothes, nor a deformed body, or a poore house, or homely fare, or any such thing that makes a man truely contemptible: no, no, it is only sin can defileMat. 15.19.: and bring that which is true contempt. Thirdly, the bond and forfeiture of the law or couenant of workes lieth vpon the backe of euery man that liues in sinne without repentance. For the law is giuen to the lawlesse and disobedient (as the Apostle shewes) to vngodly and sinners, to whoremongers, and liers, and to all that liue in any sinne contrary to wholesome doctrine1 Tim. 1.9.10. Fourthly, are not strange punishments to the workers of iniquitie? is not destruction to the wickedIoh. 31.2.3.? what portion can they haue of God from aboue? and what inheritance from the almighty from an high? the hearts of holy men that haue considered the fearefull terrors of God denounced in scripture against the vices of men, haue euen broke within them, and their bones haue shaken, for the presence of the Lord, and for his holy wordIer. 23.9.. Fiftly, Christ will be a swift witnesseMal. 3.7. against all fearelesse and carelesse men, that being guilty of these vices or the like,1 Cor. 6.9. Eph. 5.6. make not speed to breake them off by repentance. Lastly, know yee not that the vnrighteous shall not enter into the kingdome of heauen? be not deceiued for these things the wrath of God commeth vpon the children of disobedience. Now I come to the words particularly.
Therefore] This word caries this exhortation to something before. If it be referred to our rising with Christ, v. 1. then it notes that we can neuer haue our part in Christs resurrection, till we feele the vertue of his death killing sinne in vs. If it be referred to the meditation of heauenly things, then it notes that we can neuer set our affections on things that are aboue, till we haue mortified our members that are on earth. The corruption of our natures and liues are the cause of such disability to contemplate of, or affect heauenly things. And as any are more sinfull they are more vnable thereunto. If the word be referred to the appearance of Christ in the former verse, then it imports that mortification is of great necessity vnto our preparation to the last iudgement, and will be of great request in the day of Christ.
Mortifie] To mortifie is to kill, or to apply that which will make deade. The Lord workes in matters of grace,God vvorkes by contraries. in the iudgement of flesh and bloud by contraries. Men must be poore, if they would haue a kingdom,Mat. 5.3.4. men must sorrow if they would be comforted. Men must serue if they would be freeIoh. 8.. And here, men must die if they would liue. Gods thoughts are not as mans, but his waies are higher then mans waies, as the heauens are higher then the earthEsay 55.10.. Which may teach vs as to liue by faith, so not to trust the iudgement the world or the flesh in the things of God.
But the manifest doctrine from this word is this, that true repentance hath
 in it the mortification of sinne. And so it implies diuers things. First, that we must not let sinne alone till it die it selfe,Note. but we must kill sinne while it might yet liue. It is no repentance to leaue sinne when it leaueth vs: or to giue it ouer when we can commit it no longer. Secondly, that true repentance makes a great alteration in a man. Thirdly, that it hath in it, paine and sorrow, men vse not to die ordinarily without much paine, and sure it is, sinne hath a strong heart, it is not soone killed: it is one thing to sleep, another thing to die:Note. many men with lesse a doe get sinne asleepe, that it doth not so stirre in them, but alas there must be more ado to get it dead, by true mortification. Fourthly, true repentance extinguisheth the power of sinne and the vigour of it. It makes it like a dead corps, that neither it stirs it selfe, nor will be stirred, by occasions, perswa^ions, commandements, or stroaks. It is a wonderfull testimony of sound mortification when we haue gotten our old corruption to this passe: and constancy in prayer and hearing, and daily confession and sorrow for sin will bring it to be thus with vs; especially if we striue with God and be earnest with spirituall importunity, watching the way of our owne hearts, to wound sinne so soone as we see it begin to stirre. Yet I would not bee mistaken, as if I meant that a Christian could attaine such a victory ouer sinne, that it should not be in him at all, nor that hee should neuer be stirred with the temptations or enticements, or occasions of euill. But my meaning is, that in some measure and in the most sinnes a Christian doth finde it so, and in euery sinne his desire and endeuour is daily to haue it so. And his desire is not without some happy successe, so as sinne dyeth or lyeth a dying euerie day.
But heere a question may arise:Quest. Did not the Apostle grant they were dead before, and if they were dead to the world, they were without question dead to sinne also, how then doth he speake to them to mortifie sinne, doth it not imply they had not beene mortified before? I answer,Answ. the Apostle may well vse this exhortation for diuers reasons. First, many of them perhaps were dead but in appearance: they professed mortification but were not mortified. Secondly, it might be some of them had begun to vse some exercises of mortification, but had not finished their mortification: sure it is, and wee may see it by daily experience, that many being wonne by the word, and smitten with remorse, haue sometimes the pangs of sorrow for their sinnes, but quickly are a weary of seeking sorrow in secret for sinne: they giue ouer, before they haue soundly and sufficiently humbled their soules. But may some one say,Quest. how long should we continue our sorrowes, or how long should we iudge our selues in secret for our sins? I answer, thou must not giue ouer thy sorrowes,Answ. We must continue sorrovving till vvee finde foure things. Rom. 6. First, till the body of sinne bee destroyed, that is, till that generall frame of sinfulnesse be dissolued, till I say thou haue set some order in thy heart and life, so as the most sinnes thou diddst before liue in, bee reformed. Secondly, it were expedient thou shouldest still seeke to humble thy soule, till thou couldest get as much tendernesse in bewayling thy sinnes, as thou wert wont to haue in greeuing for crosses, till thou couldst mourne as freshly for piercing Gods sonne, as for losing thsne owne sonneZach. 12.10.. Thirdly, thou must sorrow till thou finde the power of the most beloued and rooted sinnes to bee in some measure weakned and abated. Fourthly, thou doest not well to giue thy sorrowes ouer, till thou finde the testimony of Iesus in thy hart, that is, till God answer thy mournfull requests of pardon, with some ioyes in the holy Ghost, and the deawes of heauenly refreshings. But will some one say, must we lay all aside,Quest. Answ. and do nothing else but sorrow till we can finde all those things? Ans. I meane not that men should neglect their callings all this while, or that they should carrie an outward coun^enance of sorrowing before others, or that they should all this while afflict their hearts with discontentment, or the like. For when the Apostle wils men to pray alwaies, hee meanes not that they should doe nothing
 but pray; but he would haue them to keep a set course of praying euery day; and besides, to watch to all the extraordinary occasions or opportunities of prayer, which being done a Christian may be truely sayd to pray continually, though otherwise he follow his calling diligently. The like I say of sorrowing alwayes. But that I may expresse my meaning distinctly, I thinke, till thou canst attain the former things,What it is to sorrovv continually. thou must obserue these rules. First, thou must lay aside thy recreations and carnall reioycings, for this the Apostle Iames imports, when he saith, Let your laughter be turned into heauinesse, and your ioy into mourningJame. 4.9.. Secondly, thou must beg sorrow at Gods hand euerie day constantly in the times set apart for praier, till the Lord giue thee rest to thy soule by granting the things before mentioned. Thirdly, thou must not neglect the times of speciall fasting and humiliation, if the Lord call thereuntoEsa. 22 12.. Lastly, thou must vse speciall sobrietie in the restraint of thy liberty in earthly things, and be watchfull to make vse of all opportunities of softning thy heart. These things being obserued, thou mayst seeme vnto men not to sorrow, and mayst follow thy calling seriously, and yet be truely sayd to sorrow alwayes. Thus of the second reason why the Apostle exhorts still to mortification.
Thirdly, the dearest and humblest seruants of God, may be called vpon to mortifie their members that are on earth, though they haue truly and soundy repented of sinne before, by reason of the euils of euery day, which daily and afresh, euen after calling, breake out in their hearts and liues: and for which they must still renew their repentance. For their first repentance onely deliuers them from sinnes past: they must renew their mortification, as their corruptions are renewed.
Why sinnes are called members.Members] It is certaine by members on earth, the Apostle meanes sinne, and that fitly. For first, actuall sinnes in relation to originall sinne, are as so many members that grow from it. Secondly, by a Metonimie of the subiect, sinne may bee called our members, because it is brought into action by the help and seruice of our members. Thirdly, if the Apostle had spoken to wicked men, hee might well haue called sinne their members, because they loue sinne as they loue their members; and therefore to take away their sinne, is to pull out their eyes, or to cut off their hands or feet, as our Sauiour shewesMat. 5.29. etc.. Fourthly, sinnes in the Colossians, and so in all the faithfull, may bee heere called members comparatiuely, with the bodie of sinne mentioned Col. 2.12. as if the Apostle should say, the bodie of sinne is already cast off and destroyed in you by your former repentance, but yet there remaines some limbes of sinne,Difference betvveen sin in the godly and in the vvicked. some members of it, these resist: and in this sense wee may heere note a liuely difference betweene sinne in wicked men, and sinne in godly men. For in wicked men there is the whole bodie of sinnes, that is, all their sinnes, vnremitted and vnrepented. But in godly men, the body of sin, euen the greater number of their sinnes, they haue abandoned: onely some few members of their sins remaine, which euery day molest them. But before I passe from these words, two things are further to be noted. First, that he saith, your members. Secondly, he addeth, which are on earth.
Your] The Apostle saith well, your members: for indeede properly our sinnes are our owne, and nothing else.
Which are on earth] They are also well sayd to bee on earth: because they are signes of the earthly man, and because they tend only to earthly pleasures and contentments, and because men with these vnrepented of, are not admitted into Heauen.
Thus of the generall proposition. Now followes the catalogue of sins to be mortified: before I enter vpon the particular consideration of them, some thing may be learned from the Apostles order. First, he teacheth men to reforme their owne personall vices, and then orders them for mortification of iniuries
 to other men: sure it is,Vicious persons vvill be iniurious persons. that euery filthy person will bee an iniurious person: and till men repent of their lusts, and other such like personall corruptions, they will neuer cease to be iniurious to other men. And ordinarily, men that are notable for malice, or blasphemy, that is, cursed speaking, and such like sinnes, as the Apostle after names,Note. they are exceeding vicious persons other wayes. Instance but in such as reproach Gods seruants: marke it both in Citie and Countrey, who are they that raise and vent all slanders and strange reports, concerning such as preach or professe the Gospell of Iesus Christ in the truth and sincerity of it: I say marke them particularly: for my owne part, in my little obseruation, I haue found them alwaies, either to be Papists, or superstitious persons, or drunkards, or notable whore-masters and filthie persons, or people guiltie of other notable crimes; indeed sometimes their abhominations are not so commonly and publikely discoursed of, because either they are men of greater place, or else their vices are more couered ouer and gilded with cunning pretences: yet seldome fals it out, but their wickednesse is commonly knowen: and many times Gods children that are vniustly touched, could vpon sufficient grounds detect strange abhominations in their aduersaries, and this was vnto Dauid vsually a strong argument of comfort, that his aduersaries were men whom he knew to be workers of iniquitie. And thus much from the order of these catalogues.
The sinnes heere reckoned vp, are sinnes either against the seuenth commandement, viz. fornication, vncleannesse, inordinate affections; or against the tenth commandement, euill concupiscence: or against the first commandement, couetousnesse, which is idolatrie.
First of the sinnes against the seuenth commandement: I might heere obserue, in that they are placed in the first, that God would haue Christians to bee especially carefull to preserue their chastitie. For this is one thing principall in the will of God concerning our sanctification, that wee should abstaine from fornications1 Thes. 4.34., and that euery one should know how to possesse his vessell in holinesse and honour. And to this end hath the Lord giuen vs so many precious promises, that wee might resolue to cleanse our selues from all filthinesse both of flesh and spirit2 Cor. 7.1.: now in the handling of these sins against the seuenth commandement here mentioned, I will keep this order. First, I will particularly entreat of the nature and effects of each of these three sinnes, and generally make vse of all together, and therein shew the remedies against all sins of vncleannesse.
Fornication] There is fornication in title only, as when Victualers were called by the name of Harlots. Secondly, there is metaphoricall kinde of fornication, or allegoricall; so wicked men are said to be bastardsHeb. 12., and the Iewes were borne of fornicationHos. 1.. Thirdly, there is spirituall fornication: and so Idolatry is fornication, and so vsually tearmed, both by the Prophet Hosea, and the Apostle in the Reuelation. Lastly, there is corporall fornication: and that sometimes notes whoredome in the generall, and sometimes it notes that filthinesse that is committed actually by vnmarried persons: and this latter kinde of filthinesse was exceeding common among the Gentiles, in all nations, especially where it was committed, with such as professed to be whores: and so it was an effect of that horrible blindnesse into which the nations fell vpon their idolatrie. But I suppose it may be here taken for all adulterie and whoredome. And then I come to the reasons which may be collected against this sinne, out of seuerall Scriptures: and generally it is worthie the noting,Reasons against vvhoredome. that euer the more the world lessens the hatefulnesse of this sinne, the more the holy Ghost aggrauates it: as here it is set in the forefront, that the first and greatest blowes of confession and praier might light vpon it. But I come to the particular reasons against fornication.
1. It defiles a manMat. 15. worse then any leprosie: it is filthinesse in a high degree of hatefulnesse.
2. It makes a man or woman, vnmeet and vnworthy all Christian society, as the Apostle shewes, if any that is called a brother be a fornicator, with such a one eat not.Cor. 5.9.
3. It is one of the manifest workes of the fleshGal. 5..
4. It is so hatefull, that it ought not once to be named among ChristiansEph. 5.4..
5. It brings with it horrible dishonour. If a theefe steale to satisfie his soule, because hee is hungry, men doe not so dispise him: but hee that committeth adulterie with a woman is destitute of vnderstanding: He shall finde a wound and dishonor and his reproach shall neuer be put awayProu. 6.33.. It is better to be buried in a deepe ditch, then to liue with a whoreProu. 23.27..
6. It vtterly makes shipwracke of innocency and honesty. A man may as well take fire in his bosome, and his clothes not bee burnt: or goe vpon coales and his feet not bee burnt, as goe into his neighbours wife, and be innocentPro. 6.27.29, the strange woman, encreaseth transgressors amongst menProu. 23.28.. Tis impossible to bee adulterous and honest.
7. Tis a sinne of which a man or woman can hardly repent, for whoredome and wine, as the Prophet notes, take away their heartHos. 4.11.. The guests of the strange woman are the most of them in hellProu. 9. vlt., for the Wiseman further auoucheth, surely her house tendeth to death, and her paths vnto the deadProu. 18..
8. It will bring Gods curse vpon a mans estate: many a man is brought to a morsell of bread by itProu 6.26.. Yea, it may bring a man into almost all euill in the midst of the congregationProu. 6.26., for fornication is a fire that will deuoure to destruction, and root out all a mans encreaseIob. 31.11.12, and therefore to be accounted a wickednesse and iniquity to be condemned.
9. By this sinne a man may make his house a very stewes: the Lord may iustly plague his filthinesse, in his terrible wrath, suffering his wife, children, or seruants also to defile his house with like abhominations.
10. If it were not otherwise hatefull, yet this is sure, it will destroy a mans souleProu. 6.32..
Lastly, the Apostle Paul in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, and the sixth chapter, hath diuers reasons against this sinne1 Cor. 6.. First, the body was made for the Lord aswell as the soulev. 13.. Secondly, the body shall be raised at the last day to an incorruptible estatev. 14.. Thirdly, our bodies are the members of Christv. 15., Fourthly, he that coupleth himselfe with an Harlot, is one body with an Harlotv. 16.. Fifthly, this is a sin in a speciall sense against our owne bodiesv. 18.. Sixtly, the bodie is the temple of the holy Ghostv. 19.. Finally, the body is bought with a price, and therefore is not our owne.
These reasons should effectually perswade with Christian mindes, to abhorre and auoyde this wretched sinne: and those that are guilty of it, should make haste by sound repentance to seeke forgiuenesse, hauing their soules washed in the bloud of Christ: for howsoeuer for the present they liue securely through the methods of Sathan, and the deceitfulnesse of sinne, yet may they be brought into the midst almost of all euills before they bee awarePro. 5.14.. Let them assure themselues that the end will bee bitter as wormewood, and sharpe as a two-edged swordProu 5.4., for hee that followeth a strange woman, is as an oxe that goeth to the slaughter, and as a foole to the stockes for correction: till a dart strike through his liuer, as a bird hasteth to the snare, not knowing that hee is in dangerPro. 7.22.23, for if the filthy person could escape all manner of iudgement from men, yet it is certaine that whoremongers and adulterers God will iudgeHeb. 13.4., but because God for a time holdeth his tongue, therefore they thinke God is like them: but certainly the time hasteth, when the Lord will set all their filthinesse in order before them, and if they consider not, hee will seaze vpon them when no man shall deliuer themPs. 50.21.22: especially they are assured to lose the Kingdome of Heauen, and to feele the smart of Gods eternall wrath, in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone1 Cor. 6.9. Eph. 5.5. Reuel. 21.8. and 22.15.: neither let
 them applaud themselues in their secrecy, for God can detect them, and bring vpon them the terrors of the shadow of death, when they see they are knowneIob. 24.15.17, the heauens may declare their wickednesse, and the earth rise against themIob. 20.26.. And the fire not blowne may deuoure them.
Neither let any nurse themselues in security in this sinne, vnder pretence that they purpose to repent hereafter: for they that go to a strange woman seldome returne againe: neither take they hold of the way of lifePro. 2.18., for whoredome takes away their heartHos. 4.11.. If they reply that Dauid did commit adultery and yet did returne? I answere, it is true, of many thousand adulterers, one Dauid did returne, but why mayest thou not feare thou shouldest perish with the multitude, did not returne? besides when thou canst shew once Dauids exquisite sorrowes and teares, I will beleeue thy interest in the application of Dauids example.
Vncleanesse] By vncleanesse here I suppose is meant all externall pollutions or filthinesses, besides whoredome. As first with Diuels,Seuen kindes of vncleannesse, besides whoredome. and that either sleeping, by filthy dreams, or waking as is reported of some witches. Secondly, with beasts and this is buggery. Thirdly, with men, and that is Sodomitrie. Fourthly, with our owne kindred, and that is incest. Fiftly, with more wiues then one and that is Poligamie. Sixtly, with ones owne wife, by the intemperate or intempestiue vse of the marriage bed, as in the time of separation. Seuenthly, with a mans owne selfe, as was Onans sinne, or in like filthinesse, though not for the same end. These as the Gentiles walke in the vanitie of their minds, their cogitations are darkened, they are strangers from the life of God,Eph. 4.17. Rom. 1.24.26.27.29. etc. through their ignorance and hardnesse of heart, being for the most part, past feeling, and many of them deliuered vp to a reprobate sense, as a scourge of other sinnes and foule vices, which abound in them, these are the shame of our assemblies: and many times visited with secret and horrible Iudgements.
Inordinate affection] The originall word,(...). notes internall vncleanesse especially the burning and flaming of lust though it neuer come to action, or the daily passions of lust, which arise out of such a softnesse or effeminatenesse of mind, as is carried and fired with euery occasion, or temptation: this is the lust of concupiscence1 Thes. 4.5., and howsoeuer the world litle cares for this euill, yet let true Christians striue to keep their hearts pure and cleane from it, for they were as good haue a burning fire in them1 Cor. 7.9.. Secondly, those lusts fight against the soule1 Pet. 2.12., they wound and pierce the conscience. Thirdly, the Deuill beginnes the frame of his worke in these: hee desires no more liberty, then to be allowed to beget these lusts in the heart. He is not called the father of lustIoh. 8.44., for nothing: he can by these inordinate thoughts and affections, erect vnto himselfe such strong holds2 Cor. 10.5., as nothing but the mighty power of God, can cast downe. Fourthly, the Apostle saith, lust is foolish, and noysome, and drownes men in perditionTim. 6.9.. Fiftly, they hinder the efficacie of the word: thats the reason why diuers men and women, are euer learning and are neuer able to come to the knowledge of the truth: euen this, they are carried about with diuers lusts. Sixtly, they greatly purge vpon faith and hope: they hinder or weaken the trust on the grace of God brought vs by Iesus Christ: and therefore the Apostle Peter counsels Christians not to fashion themselues according to the lusts of their former ignorance1 Pet. 1.13.14.. Seuenthly those monstrous crimes, mentioned in the first to the Romanes, grow originally from these lustsRom. 1.24..
The vses of all these together, now follow. And first wee may hence see great cause of thankefulnesse,Vses. if the Lord haue deliuered vs and kept vs from these monstrous abhominations, and especially if the Lord haue made vs sincere to looke to and pray against, and in some happy measure to get victory ouer those base lusts of the heart and euill thoughts: if there were nothing else to breake the pride of our natures, this should, to consider seriously what
 monstrous diuelish filthinesse, Sathan hath wrought others to, and if God should leaue vs, might bring the best of vs to. But especially this should teach vs to vse all possible remedies against these or any of these vncleanesses.
Remedies against vncleanesse. The first sort of remedies.The remedies are of two sorts. First, for such as haue beene guilty of any of the f^rmer vncleanesses. Secondly, for such as would preserue themselues against them, that they might not be defiled with them. There are two principall remedies for the vncleane person. The first is marriage or the right vse of it, if it be in single persons, they must remember the Apostles words, It is better to marry thou to burne1 Cor. 7.9., and if they be married, they must know, that the loue of their Husbands or wiues, is the speciall helpe to driue away these impure pollutions: for such is the counsell of the holy Ghost in the fifth of the Prouerbes, to them that are infected with these vicious and predominant inclinationsPro. 5.15. and 21., and if they finde (as it is certaine euery vncleane person doth finde) want of loue to their owne husbands or wiues, then must they begge affection of God by daily and earnest praier. But in the second place vnclean persons must know that marriage alone will not serue turne, but they must adde repentance: for lamentable experience shewes, that marriage without repentance abates not the power of lust. And therefore such as would deliuer their soules from the vengeance to come due vnto them, for vncleannesse whether inward or outward, must seeke to God and with many prayers and teares begge pardon: they must be washed from filthinesse by the bloud of Christ, and the teares of true repentance. Neither let men deceiue themselues a little sorrow will not serue turne for these pollutions, and therefore the Apostle vseth the word washed1 Cor. 6.9.11., to note the repentance of the Corinthians from these and such like sinnes. Now there can be no washing without water, neither will a droppe or two serue turne.
The second sort of remedies.Secondly, that those that are not guilty may be preserued against vncleannesse, these things are of great vse and profit. First, the word of God and the sound knowledge of it, for saith the Lord in the second of Prouerbs: If thou wilt receiue my words, and hide my commandements within thee: if thou callest after knowledge, and criest for vnderstanding, if thou seekest her as siluer, and searchest for her as for treasures,Pro. 2.1.3.4.11.12.16.17. then shall counsell and vnderstanding preserue thee, and deliuer thee from the euill way and from the strange woman, which flattereth with her words, and forsaketh the guide of her youth, and forgetteth she couenant of her God. And hereunto agreeth Dauid: for propounding this question, by what meanes a young man might cleanse his heart, hee answereth, by taking heed to the wordPsal. 119.9.. So S. Iohn speaking to the young men, saith, the word of God abideth in you, and ye haue ouercome the wicked one1 Ioh. 2.14..
Secondly, meditation is another great preseruatiue: wouldst thou remoue wickednesse from thy flesh, euen all the vanities of youth? then thou must remember thy creator in the daies of thy youthEccl. 11. vlt. with 12.1.. Thou must much and often think of the Lord God that made thee, not that thou shouldest wallow in the mire of these swinish pollutions. Besides it is profitable to force thy heart to the often meditation of thine owne mortalitie: that the thoughts of thy death, may be a kinde of death to thy lusts: this the Apostle Peter implies, when he saith, as strangers and pilgrims abstaine from fleshly lusts: manifestly importing, that if we did seriously thinke that we are here but strangers and pilgrims, it would tame the violence of these hatefull lusts. Also we should much ponder vpon the examples of such as haue sinned, and the Lord hath fearfully visited them both for and in their sinne, for all those things came vnto them for ensamples and were written to admonish vs vpon whom the ends of the world are come1 Cor. 10.6.8.11..
The third preseruatiue, is daily, earnest and constant praier vnto God against them, And if wee feele the beginning to rise in vs, we should labour for speciall sorrowes, euen, with griefe of heart to racke and crucifie them. Lust
 will not vsually out of the soule if it get any footing, till it be fired out with confession and godly sorrow. And therefore the Apostle vseth the pl^^^^^ of crucifying the lusts of the fleshGal. 5.24.. And that praier is a remedie, the Apostles owne practise shewes, for when Satan buffeted him, he praied vnto God, and that thrice, that he might get the temptation to depart from him2 Cor. 12.9..
The fourth preseruatiue, is to walke in loue, I meane Christian loue to Gods children, and such a loue as hath both affection, and societie, and spirituall imployment in the furtherance of the Gospell. When the Apostle would charge the Ephesians to auoid fornication and all vncleannesse, hee doth first aduise them, and that seriously, to walke in loue,Eph. 5.2.3. as knowing that the exercise of true Christian loue breeds such contentment, and desire of holinesse, that it mightily fenceth the heart against all base lusts whatsoeuer. For they cannot stand together: and vsually such as are withdrawne by concupiscence, are likewise withdrawne from all profitable fellowship with Gods children.
The fift preseruatiue, is watchfulnesse, in the daily obseruing of the first motions of lust, and in carefulnesse in directing the heart into Gods presence, deuoting in our couenants and desires our thoughts and affections to God. Thus Salomon, when be would giue direction against the whorish woman, aduiseth, My sonne, giue mee thy heart, and let thine eyes delight in my wayesProu. 23.26.27. The causes and occasions of lust..
The last preseruatiue is to auoid the causes and occasions of lust and vncleannesse. The first is idlenesse. This was one of the causes of the detested vncleannesse of Sodome, as the Prophet Ezechiel shewesEzech. 46.49. And contrariwise diligence in our callings is a notable helpe to keepe out inordinate desires, and vaine thoughts, and commonly persons ouertaken with vncleannesse abound with idlenesse. The second is, fulnesse of bread, that is, by a synecdoche, excesse in meats and drinkes, either for the measure or daintinesse of them. And contrariwise, to beat downe our bodies1 Cor 9.27., either by abstinence, or sobrietie in the vse of the creatures, is a notable meanes to quench and abate those flames if they be risen, and to keepe them also from that speciall aptnesse to rise. The third is, the high estimation of earthly things, and the too great liking of them: for this loue secretly brings in lust. Thus the Apostle to Timothie saies, that the loue of mony and riches, breeds noisome lusts, which in short time drowne man in perdition1 Tim. 6.9.. The like may be said of the estimation and too much viewing of apparell, beautie, etc. The fourth is ignorance and hardnesse of heart: for thus it was in those the Apostle mentions in the fourth to the EphesiansEph. 4.17.18, that greedinesse to defile themselues with all sorts of vncleannesse arose and increased in them by reason of the insensiblenesse of the heart, and the blindnesse and emptinesse of their mindes. And on the other side, lust cannot get such a head, so long as any sound measure of knowledge is stirring in the minde, or tendernesse remaines in the heart; lust desires both a darke house and a darke minde. The fift is euill company: and therefore the holy Ghost giues this rule to those that would not bee ensnared with the strange woman, Walke thou in the way of good men, and keepe the way of the righteous.Prou. 1.20. The last is care for the flesh. It is the libertie men take not only to feed themselues in contemplatiue wickednes, but also to plod and cast about how to satisfie and fulfill their lusts, that doth so much confirme them in the custome of vncleannesse. And therefore the Apostles counsell is, take not care to fulfill the lusts of the flesh.Rom. 13.14.
Thus farre of the sinnes of the seuenth commandement. The sinne against the tenth commandement followes.
Euill concupiscence.] This vice containes all sorts of euill thoughts,Hovv euill co^cupiscence differs from inordinate affection. and inclinations, and desires, after any kinde of pleasure, profit, honour, but especially lustfull inclinations or thoughts. And it differs from inordinate affection, because inordinate affection hath in it principally the burning of lust and a kind of effeminatenesse, the soule being ouercome and inthralled with the power
 of lust. Now I thinke this concupiscence notes lust as it is in inclination or euill motion, before it come to that high degree of flaming, or consent: and it is well called euill concupiscence, for there is a good concupiscence, both naturall,There is a threefold good concupiscence. and ciuill, and spirituall. Naturall, after meat, sleepe, procreation, etc. Ciuill, which is an ordinate desire after lawfull profits and pleasures. Spirituall, and that is a lust for and after heauenly things. And so the spirit lusts against the flesh.
Now that wee may know the Apostle hath great reason to counsell men to to mortifie euill thoughts, though they neuer come to consent, these reasons may shew: First, concupiscence in the very inclination and first thoughts is a breeder, it is the mother of all sorts of wickednesse, if it be not betimes killed in the conception.Iam. 1.14.15. The Apostle Iames shewes, that concupiscence will bee quickly enticed, yea it will entice and draw away a man, though from without it be allured with no obiect. And when it hath drawne a man aside, it will conceiue, and breed with very contemplatiue pleasures, and when it hath conceiued, and lien in the wombe of the minde, and laine there nourished from time to time, vnlesse God shew the greater mercy, it will bring forth, bring forth I say a birth of some notable externall euill action, and when it hath gone so farre, like an impudent beldame, it will egge on still vnto the finishing of sinne, by custome in the practise, and so indeed (of it selfe) it will neuer leaue, till it hath brought forth (as a second birth) death, and that both spirituall and eternall death, and sometimes a temporall death too. Secondly, if these lusts goe no further then the inward man, yet sinne may raigne euen in these. There may be a world of wickednesse in a man, though he neuer speake filthy words, or commit filthy action. There is a conuersing with the very inward lusts of the fleshEph. 2.3., which may proue a man to be meerely carnall and without grace, as well as outward euill life. Thirdly, this secret concupiscence may be a notable hinderance to all holy duties.Rom. 7. This was that the Apostle so bitterly cries out against in the seuenth to the Romans: This was it that rebelled so against the law of his minde: and when hee would doe any good, it would be present to hinder it. This is it whereby the flesh makes warre and daily fights against the spiritGal. 5.17., tis the lust after other things, that enters into mans heart, and choakes the word, and makes it vnfruitfullMark. 4.19. Iam. 4.1.3.4.. What is the reason why many pray and speed not? Is it not by reason of their lusts that fight in their members? Qu. But is there any man that is wholly freed from these? Ans. There is not. Euery man hath in him diuers kindes of euill thoughts; but yet there is great difference: for then is a mans estate dangerous, when these lusts and euill thoughts are obeyedRom. 6.11., seruedTit. 3.3., fulfilledEph. 2.3., and cared forRom. 13.13.. For those are the tearmes by which the power of them in wicked men are exprest, but so they are not in a childe of God, that walkes before God in vprightnesse. The consideration of all this may breake the hearts of ciuill honest men: for hence they may see that God meanes to take account of their inward euill thoughts; and that if very concupiscence be not mortified, it may destroy their soules, though they be neuer so free from outward enormities of life.Rom. 7.7. Paul while he was carnall, was vnrebukeable for outward conuersation, but when the law shewed him his lusts and euill thoughts, he then saw all was in vaine.
And couetousnesse which is idolatry.] Now followeth the sinne against the first commandement: and it is described both in it selfe, and in relation to God. In it selfe it is couetousnesse; and in relation to God, it is idolatrie.
What couetousnesse is.Couetousnesse is a spirituall disease in the heart of man, flowing from nature corrupted, and insnared by Sathan and the world, inclining the soule to an immoderate and confident (yet vaine) care after earthly things, for our owne priuate good, to the singular detriment of the soule. Couetousnesse I call a disease: for it is such a priuation of good, as hath not only want of vertue and
 happinesse, but a position of euill in it, to be shunned more then any disease. For as the text saith, it is an euill sicknes. And this disease is spirituall; and therefore it is hard to be cured. No medicine can helpe it, but the bloud of Christ. It is not felt by the most, but hated only in the name of it. The subiect where this disease is, is the heart of man. For there is the seat or pallace of this vice. And therefore S. MarkeMark. 7.22. addes couetousnesse to those vices Saint Mathew had said did defile a man. The internall efficient mouing cause of this euill, is nature corrupted. Tis a sinne euery man had need to looke to: for mans nature is stirred with it. It is an vniuersall quaere, Who wil shew vs any good?Psal. 4.7. and yet I say corrupted nature, for nature of it selfe is content with a little: it is corruption that hath bread this disease. The externall efficient causes, are the diuell snaring, and the world tempting. The forme of this euill is, an inclination to the immoderate and confident care of earthly things. I say inclining the soule to take in the lowest degree of couetousnesse. For some haue their hearts exercised in it, and wholly taken vp with it: their eies and their hearts, and their tongues are full of it. Now others are only secretly drawne away with it, and daily infected with the inclinations to it. I adde, moderate and confident care, because honest labour or some desire after earthly things are not condemned. Only two things constitute this vice. First, want of moderation, either in the matter, when nothing will be enough to satisfie their hauing, or in the measure of the care, when it is a distracting, vexing continuall care, that engrosseth in a manner all the thoughts and desires of a man. Secondly, carnall confidence, when man placeth his felicity and chiefest stay and trust in the things he either possesseth or hopeth for. I adde, yet vaine, because let the couetous person, bestow neuer so much care, or attaine to neuer so much successe of his cares, yet as Salomon saith, He that loueth siluer, shall not be satisfied with siluer* and he that loueth riches, shall be without the fruit thereofEccles. 5.9.. And after all his trauell, his riches may perish whiles he lookes on, or if they were more sure to continue, yet he shall not continue with them himselfe. For as he came forth of his mothers belly, he shall returne naked, to goe as he came,14. and shall beare nothing away of his labour, which he hath caused to passe by his hand.15. In all points as he came, so shall he goe, and then what profit hath he that he hath trauelled for the wind? The obiect of this care and desire is earthly things: for if it were a couetousnesse or desire of the best things, or spirituall gifts, that were both commended and commanded1 Cor. 14.1.. These words, for his owne priuate good, note the end of the couetous mans care. For if all this care for earthly things were for Gods glory, or the good of the Church, it might be allowed. And I say for his good, because that he propounds to himselfe, though many times when hee hath gotten much together, the Lord will not let him haue the vse of it. Note the best thing in the description, is the effect of couetousnesse,The effects of couetousnesse and that is the singular detriment of the soule, which may appeare diuersly. For first couetousnesse doth infatuate and besot the minde of man, that it cannot vnderstand. The Prophet Esay saith of those dumbe and greedie dogs, that they could not vnderstand, and he giueth the reason: For (saith he) they all looke to their owne way, euery one for his aduantage and for his owne purpose and profitEsay 56.11.12.. And Salomon seems to say, that if couetousnesse be in the heart of a Prince, it will make him destitute of vnderstandingProu. 28.16.. And it is certaine (marke it) worldly minded persons are the most dull and incapable persons in spirituall things, almost of all other sorts of men. For though they would get a little vnderstanding while they are hearing, yet the cares of life presently choakes all. Secondly, couetousnesse pierceth the soule through with many a sorrow1 Tim. 6.10.. The couetous person is seldome or neuer free from one notable vexation or other. His heart is troubled, and he will trouble his house also: as Salomon saith, he that is greedie of gaine, troubleth his owne houseProu. 15.27.. All is continually in a tumult, of haste and hurrie, what with labour,
 and what with passion and contention, the couetous man and his household neuer liue at hearts ease and rest. Thirdly, couetousnesse and the desire to be rich, bring into the soule a wonderfull number of temptations and noisome lusts, enough to damne him, if he had no other sinnes1 Tim. 6.9.. Fourthly, it is here added, that couetousnesse is idolatrie: it makes a man an idolater. Mammon is the idoll, and the worldling is the Priest that sacrificeth to Mammon. Now the couetous man serues his mammon with a two-fold worship: for with inward worship, he loues, desires, delights in, and trusts in his wealth; and for his outward seruice, he spends all his time vpon his idoll, either in gathering, or keeping, or increasing, or honoring it. Lastly, what should I number particulars? Couetousnesse! why the Apostle saith, it is the root of all euils. For there is almost no kinde of sinne, but the sap of couetousnesse will nourish it. If the Lord had but the ripping vp of the heart and life of a couetous person, and would describe his vices before vs, oh what swarme of all sorts of euils could the Lord finde out? Well, let vs be assured of this generall, that howsoeuer couetous persons may colour matters, yet indeed they are wonderfull vicious persons. Neither are their sinnes the fewer or lesser, because they discerne them not: for the dust of earthly profits hath put out their eyes, they cannot see nor discerne, as was before shewed.
Q. But who is couetous? For all men while they crie out against the sinne, denie that they are couetous. Tis rare to finde any couetous person that will confesse that he is couetous. And therefore for answer hereunto, it will not be amisse out of the word of God to shew the signes of a couetous man.
The signes of a couetous man.The first signe of a couetous man, is the desire to haue the Sabboth ouer, that hee might be at his worldly affaires. A couetous man thinkes all the time set apart for Gods seruice exceeding tedious and long; and hee hath a great inward boiling of desire to haue such times and imployments past. The Sabboth is wonderfull burdensome to a worldly minde, especially if he be restrained from worldly imploiments. The Prophet Amos bringeth in the couetous men of his time, saying thus in the discontentment of their hearts, When will the new Moone be gone that wee may sell corne, and the Sabboth that wee may set forth wheat?
Prou 28.16. 1 Thess. 4.6.The second signe of couetousnesse, is oppression and fraud. When men to compasse gaine, care not how they vex and racke the poore, or such as liue vnder them; or in buying or selling (out of greedinesse of gaine) circumuent and pill, and defraud others, by customary lying, or false weights, measures, or ballances, or any other fraudulent course: this is an euill couetousnesse. Vsury also, that is, a desire to increase riches by interest, is a palpable signe of couetousnesse, especially in these times, when the sinne of vsury is so vniuersally condemned: for if men were not besotted with the loue of riches, they would not dare to liue in such a damned sinne. But I thinke all men easily know that Vsurers are couetous, and therefore I need not proue it.
The third signe of couetousnesse, is greedy and distracting care: I meane such a care as deuoures a mans thoughts, that euery day will keepe possession in a mans soule, and run in his minde continually, both sleeping and waking: plodding and carking cares. And this may be discerned by comparing these cares with our care for eternall things. When we haue more care for this world then for heauen, we need goe no further, but resolue vpon it, couetousnes hath deceiued vs. Neither doe I meane that they only are couetous, that immoderately disquiet themselues with continuall cares for getting of treasures and the superfluities of abundance: for it is sure that couetousnesse may bee in vs in a high degree, though our cares be but about things that are necessary, as about the things we must eat or put on: as the comparing of the 15. verse of Luk. 12. with v. 21.22.Luk. 12.15.21.22. will shew. Now the care for necessaries is not simply forbidden,
 because wee are bound to vse the meanes with diligence and carefulnesse: but the care that is a signe of couetousnesse may be discerned by the very tearmes the Euangelist S. Luke vseth to describe it by: for in the 22. verseV^rs. 22. our Sauiour saith, Take no thought for your life, etc. and by taking thought hee notes a perplexed inward sorrowfull and fearfull care about life and the things thereof. And vers. 26.Vers. 26. he saith, Why take ye thought for the raiment? As if hee would haue vs note that it is a propertie of couetous cares, to be deeply drowned in perplexitie, euen about trifles, and small matters: and surely wee may obserue worldly minded people, and one would wonder to see how they vex and disquiet themselues about euery meane occasion, especially if there bee the least colour of any profit or losse towards. Againe, our Sauiour vpbraideth those that are carried with those cares, that they haue but a little faith:Vers. 28. whereby he shewes that then our cares are faultie, and arise from the infection of couetousnesse, when they are raised by vnbeleefe and mistrustfulnesse of Gods prouidence or promise. Lastly, in the 29. verseVers. 29. our Sauiour saith thus: Therefore aske not what yee shall eat, or what yee shall drinke, neither stand in doubt,(...). or as you may see it rendred in the margent, neither make discourses in the aire: and by these last words he notes another propertie of a couetous person, and that is when he hath his head tossed with cares or feares, either about the compassing of his profits, or preuenting of losses, etc. he is so full of words and many questions, what he shall doe, and how he shall auoid such and such a losse, that he hath neuer done either moaning himselfe, or consulting to no purpose, in things that either cannot be done, or not otherwise, etc. Or it may note this endlesse framing of proiects for the compassing of his desires. Thus of the signes. Yet notwithstanding these signes, I must needs confesse that couetousnesse is not easily discerned, both because it is an inward distrust in the spirit of a man, and also because there comes to this vice vsually fained words2 Pet. 2.3., to hide it from the view of others, or subtile thoughts and euasions to blindfold the conscience within; and besides it is the nature of this sinne quickly to darken the discerning of the minde, and therefore I thinke couetousnesse in the most may be well called coloured couetousnesse1 Thess. 2.5., it is so on both sides masked.
The vse of all should be to teach vs, as the author to the Hebrewes saith, to haue our conuersation without couetousnesse, and to be content with the things wee haue, resting stedfastly vpon the promise of God, I will not faile thee nor forsake theeHeb. 13.5. (...) Not without money, but without the loue of it.. And to this end wee should pray as Dauid did, that God would incline our hearts to his testimonies, and not to couetousnessePsal. 119. Preseruatiues or remedies against couetousnesse..
Q. But what are the best remedies or preseruatiues against couetousnesse? Ans. There are these things among the rest that are of great vse to preserue vs from couetousnesse, or to weaken the power of it.
The first is that which I mentioned before, viz. praier to God daily that hee would incline our hearts to his testimonies, that so wee might haue our mindes drawne away from the cares of couetousnesse.
The second is meditation. And there are diuers things which being seriously thought of, may preuaile against the perplexed cares of couetousnesse.  As first example, and that either of godly men, and the holiest Worthies  of the Lord, that in all ages haue willingly confessed themselues to bee strangers and pilgrims, looking for a Citie in another Countrey, hauing a foundation whose builder and maker is GodHeb. 11.9.10; or else of wicked men: for it is so base a vice, that it should bee found in none but GentilesM^tth. 6., that know neither Gods promise nor prouidence: and sure it is found in none but vngodly men, that are strangers from the cou^nants of promise. Secondly, the nature of man: for consider,Terra a tere^^^. the soule of man is a celestiall thing and diuine, and hath nothing from the earth. And the body of man is erected, with a face towards heauen, and the whole earth is vnder mans feet, and hath its name from treading vpon it, to
 note that man should walke on it with his feet, not dote on it with his heart Thirdly, the nature of couetousnesse: it will neuer be satisfied, and how should it? For the desire of the couetous is not naturall, but against nature. Naturall desires are finite,Non plus satiabitur cor hominis auro quam corpus aura. but vnnaturall desires finde no end, and therefore cannot be filled with the finite things of the world. Besides, earthly things are vaine and empty. Now the vessell that is only full of winde is empty still for all that. So is the minde of the couetous. His heart will be no more filled or satisfied with gold then his body with winde. Hereupon it is that a couetous man is alwaies poore, and hath not what hee hath, but hath his wealth as the prisoner hath his fetters, viz. to inthrall him. Fourthly, the nature, promise, and prouidence of God. He is a heauenly fatherLuk. 12.30.. Is he a father? why then doe wee doubt of his willingnesse to helpe vs? And is he a heauenly father? why then doe wee question his all-sufficiencie to prouide what we need? Besides, hath he giuen vs life, and will he not giue vs food to preserue life? Doth hee daily prouide for thousand thousands of fowles, that are base creatures? and will he not prouide for man, whom he created after his owne image, and made him Lord of all creatures? Doth he cloath the grasse of the field, which is to day, and to morrow is cut downe? and will he not cloath man? Oh the weaknesse of our faith! Besides, is not the Lord engaged by promise, neuer to leaue vs nor forsake vs? Fiftly, the condition of the couetous: All his care cannot adde a cubit to his stature.Prou. 29.33. And besides, the poore and the vsurer meet together in many things. One God made them both, one Sunne lights them both, one heauen couers them both, and one graue of earth shall hold them both Sixtly, the gaine of godlinesse: it is better thrift to couet after godlinesse, for it hath the promises of this life and the life to come1 Tim. 6.8.. And who can count the gaine of godlinesse, seeing God is the godly mans portionPsal. 16., and his exceeding great rewardGen. 15.1..
The third preseruatiue is the daily practise of pietie. If we would seeke the kingdome of God first, both in the first part of our life, and in the first part of euery day of our life, as well in our houses as in Gods house, these religious duties constantly performed, would be a great and continuall helpe against worldly cares, they would cleanse our hearts of them, and daily prepare our hearts against them. But how can it be otherwise with a man then it is? They must needs liue and die the drudges of the world, seeing they haue no more care of holy duties at home or abroad: they liue like swine without all care of any thing but rooting in the earth.
The fourth preseruatiue is the due preparation for Christs second comming. For when our Sauiour Christ had dehorted men from the cares of this life, he adioynes this exhortation: Let your loines be girded about, and your lights burning, and ye your selues like vnto them that wait for their master, when he will returne from the wedding, that when he commeth and knocketh they may open vnto him immediately: blessed are those seruants whom the Lord when he commeth shall finde waking, etc. One great reason why couetous men doe so securely continue in the immoderate cares for this world, is because they doe so little thinke of death and iudgement. Whereas on the other side Christians doe with some ease withdraw their hearts from the world, when they haue inured themselues to die daily by the constant remembrance of their latter end, and by holding fast the euidence of faith and hope, waiting when Christ will call for them.
The fift preseruatiue is to shun the meanes and occasions of couetousnesse. And to this end it is good not to conuerse much with couetous persons, or to get our selues libertie to conceiue the hope of any long prosperitie and rest in the world: and generally we should labour to obserue our owne hearts and other mens liues, and what we finde to be a meanes to kindle or inflame couetous desires, that wee should auoid, and betimes set against it, or mortifie it.
 And thus farre of couetousnesse. And thus also of the catalogue of sinnes from which he doth disswade. The reasons follow.

VERS. 6. For the which things sake the wrath of God commeth on the children of disobedience.VERS. 7. Wherein ye also walked once when ye liued in them.THese words containe two reasons to enforce the exhortation in the former verse. The one is taken from the euill effects of the former sinnes, vers. 6. The other is taken from their owne experience, while they liued in the estate of corruption, vers. 7. In laying downe the reason from the effect, two things are to be noted. First, what sinne brings, viz. the wrath of God. Secondly, vpon whom, viz. vpon the children of disobedience.Before I come to intreat of the wrath of God apart, I consider of it as it stands in coherence with the former reason. For in these words we are assured that man liuing and continuing in filthines and couetousnes shall not escape Gods wrath: for they incurre both his hatred and his plagues, both which are signified by the word wrath.Gods wrath vpon vncleane persons. And if any aske what plagues filthy persons and couetous persons shall feele: I answer briefly and distinctly, that neither of them shall scape Gods wrath, as the Scriptures plentifully shew. The filthy person brings vpon himselfe Gods curse temporall, corporall, spirituall, and eternall: Temporall, for whoredome and any kinde of vncleannesse brings vpon men many temporall plagues in their estate, the fire of Gods iudgements consuming many times their whole increase, as hath beene shewed before. Corporall, for God many times meets with the sinnes of the body by iudgements vpon the body: so that many filthy persons after they haue consumed their flesh and their body by loathsome diseases which follow this sinne, in the end say with the foolish young man, Oh how haue I hated instruction, and despised correctionPro. 5.11.12? Now I am brought almost into all euill in the middest of the assembly. Spirituall, for vncleannesse breeds in many a reprobate senseRom. 1.24.29. etc., and finall impenitencie. Many also for their filthinesse are pursued with secret and fearfull terrors of conscience, and sometimes phrensie, and desperate perturbations. Eternall, for the adulterer destroyes his owne soule, and is shut out of the kingdome of heauen, as hath beene also before declared.Neither let the couetous person thinke hee shall speed any better: for God hates him wonderfully. And therefore the Prophet Ezechiel saith, that the Lord smites his fistsEzech. 22.13. at the couetous: which is a borrowed phrase, to expresse most bitter and sharpe threatnings. Now lest the people should obiect that those were but great words, the Lord would not doe so, they would deale well enough with the Lord, he preuenteth it, and saith, Can thy heart endure,Vers. 14. or can thine hands be strong in the dayes that I shall haue to doe with thee? I the Lord haue spoken it, and will doe it. Let couetous persons without further enquirie assure themselues that couetousnesse is a maine cause of all the euils are vpon them or theirs, and besides they may be assertained that all the seruice they doe to God is abhorred, and meere lost labour: It were to no purpose if they would bring him incense from Sheba, and sweet calamus from a farre countrey; their burnt offerings would not bee pleasant, nor their sacrifices sweet vnto himIer. 6.13.20.. Ob. But couetous persons are of most men so well furnished, that there is not that meanes to bring them to any great hurt. Sol. The Prophet shewes that God can lay a stumbling blocke before them, and father and sonne together may fall vpon it, and neighbour and friend may perish togetherIer. 6.21.. The Lord hath meanes enough when men little thinke of it, to bring downe rebellious sinners. Ob. But wee see couetous persons and wealthy worldlings scape the best and longest of many others. Sol. The Prophet Amos saith,Amos 8.5 6.7. the Lord hath sworne by the excellencie of
 Iacob, will neuer forget any of their workes. Though the Lord may deferre, yet certainly hee will neuer forget: and therefore they are not a iot the better for scaping so long. But howsoeuer they might escape outward iudgements, yet they may be infallibly sure they haue sinned against their owne soulesHab. 2.10., and that they shall know in the day of their death: their riches shall not then profit them, when the Lord taketh away their souleIob 27.8.: he that is a great oppressor shall not prolong his dayesPro. 18.16.; for he that getteth riches, and not by right, shall leaue them in the midst of his dayes, and at his end shall be a fooleIer. 17.11.. How horrible then shall that voice be, Thou foole this night shall thy soule be taken from theeLuk. 12.16.? And thus farre of these words as they concerne the coherence with the former words. Now I consider them as they are in themselues. And first of the wrath of God.Iustice in God considered foure vvayes.Wrath of God.] It is apparant that wrath in God belongs to his iustice. And iustice may be considered as it flowes from God foure wayes. First, as he is a free Lord of all: and so his decrees are iustRo. 9.13.14. Secondly, as he is God of all: and so the common workes of preseruing both good and bad, are iust1 Tim. 4.14 Matt. 5.45.. Thirdly, as a father in Christ: and so his excellencie, the God of beleeuers: and thus he is iust in performing his promises, and infusing his grace, and in bestowing the iustice of his sonne. Fourthly, as Iudge of the world, and so his iustice is not only distributiue, but correctiue. And vnto this iustice doth wrath belong.Anger is properly in God.Anger in man is a perturbation or passion in his heart: and therefore it hath troubled Diuines to conceiue how anger should be in the most pure, happie, and bountifull nature of God, and the rather seeing affections are not properly in God. Neither is their declaration full enough, that say it is giuen to God improperly and by anthropopathie: for I am of their opinion that thinke anger is properly in God. First, in such a manner as agrees to the nature of God that is in a manner to vs vnconceiuable. Secondly, in such a sense as is reuealed in Scripture.Wrath diuersly interpreted.The wrath of God in Scripture is taken sometimes for his iust decree and purpose to reuengeIoh. 3. vlt., sometimes for commination or threatning to punish. So some thinke it is to be taken in those words of the Prophet Hosea: I will not doe according to the fiercenesse of my wrathHos. 11.9., that is, according to my grieuous threatnings. Sometimes it is taken for the effects or punishments themselues, as in the Epistle to the Romans, Is God vnrighteous which bringeth wrathRom. 3.5.? it is well rendred, which punisheth.The wrath of God is distinguished by diuers degrees, and so hath diuers names: for there is wrath present, and wrath to come. Present wrath, is the anger of God in this present life,Ioh. 3. vlt. and is either impendent or powred out. Wrath impendent, is the anger of God hanging ouer mens heads, ready to be manifested in his iudgements: and so wrath hangs in the nature of God, and in the threatnings of his word, and in the possibilities of the creatures. Wrath powred out, is the iudgement of God fallen vpon men for their sinnes by which they prouoked God, and so there was great wrath vpon the peopleLuk 21.23. in the destruction of Ierusalem: and thus he reuealeth his wrath from heauen vpon the vnrighteousnesse of menRom. 1.17.. Wrath to comeMatt. 3.7. Rom. 2.5., is that fearfull miserie to be declared vpon the soule of the impenitent at his death, and vpon soule and body at the day of iudgement, in the euerlasting perdition of both.But that wee may be yet more profitably touched with the meditation of this point, I propound six things concerning Gods wrath further to be considered. First, the fearfulnesse of it. Secondly, what it is that workes or brings this wrath vpon vs. Thirdly, the signes to know Gods wrath. Fourthly, the meanes to pacifie it. Fiftly, the signes of wrath pacified. And lastly, the vses of all.The fearfull greatnesse of Gods vvrath shevved.For the first. The fearfulnesse and greatnesse of Gods wrath or anger for sinne may appeare three wayes. First, by Scripture. Secondly, by similitude.
 Thirdly, by example. That Gods anger for sinne is exceeding terrible and fearfull, I will shew by one place of Scripture onely,First by Scripture. Nahum 1.2.3.4.5.6. and that is the first of Nahum the Prophet: for he saith, God is iealous, and the Lord reuengeth, the Lord reuengeth: where the repetition shewes the certaintie of it, that God will be as sure to reuenge as euer the sinner was to sinne. But this is more confirmed, when he saith, he is the Lord of anger: as if he would import that his anger is his essence, as if he were all made of anger, and that he is the author of all the iust anger that is in the world. And if the drops of anger in great men haue such terror in it, what is the maine Ocean of anger which is in God himselfe? And to assure vs yet further of the terror of his wrath, he addeth, The Lord will take vengeance on his aduersaries; which signifieth that the Lord will account of impenitent sinners as a man accounts of his worst enemies, and therefore the Lord will shew his displeasure to the vttermost of their deserts and his iustice. And therefore if any doe obiect that they see it otherwise,Ob. Sol. for the plagues of wicked men are not so many nor so great as their sinnes, he answereth that, and saith that the Lord reserueth wrath for his enemies: hee hath not inflicted vpon them all they shall haue, there is the greatest part behinde, the full vials of his furie are not yet poured out. And if any should reply,Ob. Sol. that they haue obserued that wicked men haue prospered long, and scaped for a great while, without any punishments to speake of, the Prophet answereth that, and saith that the Lord is slow to anger, that is, hee is many times long before he manifests his great displeasure, but he is great in power, that is, hee is of singular fiercenesse and vnresistablenesse when he doth enter into iudgement, he will not faile, nor be hindered.Ob. Sol. And if any would hope that God would change his minde, that also is preuented, the Prophet auouching it confidently, that he will not surely cleere the wicked. And this is the more certaine, because of the dreadfull meanes that the Lord hath to declare his anger. His way is in the whirlewinde, and in the storme, and the clouds are the dust of his feet. The meaning is, that God hath wayes to execute his iudgement, wayes I say that are vnresistable (for who can stay a whirlewinde?) and terrible like the storme, plagues falling thicke and threefold, like the drops of the tempest, and in the meanes the Lord can runne like a Giant, running fiercely and raising the dust with his feet. And to this giue all the creatures witnesse. He rebuketh the sea, and it drieth. Bashan is wasted, and Carmell, and the floure of Lebanon is wasted. The mountaines tremble before him, and the hils melt, and the earth is burnt at his sight, yea the world and all that dwell therein. And therefore who can stand before his wrath? or who can abide the fiercenesse of his wrath? His wrath is poured out like fire, and the rockes are broken by him.The wrath of God (to shew the exquisite, and intolerable,Secondly, by similitude. and remedilesse paine that wicked men feele when they beare it) is compared to a consuming fire, and to note the infinitenesse of it, God himselfe is said to be a consuming fireHeb. 12.29. Deut. 4.24.. Moses also saith that the fire that is kindled in Gods wrath, shall burne to the bottome of hell, and it were able to consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire the foundation of the mountainesDeut. 32.22. Thirdly, by example..Thirdly, who can th nke the anger of God not to be infinitely terrible, that can but seriously consider these examples and presidents of it? First, Gods reprobating, or fore damning of millions of men. Secondly, the sinne of Adam, pursued with such vnconceiueable iudgements vpon him and his name. Thi^dly, the drowning of the old world, the burning of Sodome, the opening of the earth to swallow vp the rebellious, the sea swallowing vp Pharaoh and his ho^st. Fourthly, the forlorne estate of the Gentiles, not looked after for many hundred yeeres. Fiftly, the Iewes (sometimes the only people to whom the Lord drew neere) now made a curse, and astonishment, and a hissing throughout the earth. Sixtly, the torments which Christ himselfe endured,
 when he was but suretie for sinners. Seuenthly, what are warres, famines, pestilences, diseases, seditions, heresies, and the infinite molestations in the life of man, but so many euident proofes of wonderfull anger in God? Eightly, the testimonies of afflicted consciences be liuely in this point. When but a drop of anger lights vpon the soule of man in this world, how vnable is he to sustaine his spirit? what flouds of teares flow from his wounded heart? Lastly, the burning of the world and the flames of hell shall one day make full proofe of Gods anger. And thus of the first point.Hovv vvrath is brought vpon vs.For the second, wrath is wrought or brought vpon vs foure wayes. First, the Law workes wrath: for being transgressed, it breeds displeasure, pleads for iudgement, records sinne, and presents it in Gods sight. Secondly, Christ in the ministerie of the word applies wrath, or discouers Gods indignation: and so he is said to smite and slay the wickedReu. 19.15. Esay 11.3. (...), Rom. 13.4.. Thirdly, the Magistrate is a reuenger in executing Gods wrath c. Fourthly, wrath is brought vpon vs by Gods armie: the creatures are Gods warriours, they fight for the Lord against sinners, and are speedily and vnresistably armed when God is pleased to raise them.The signes of Gods anger.Thirdly, concerning the signes of Gods anger: wee must vnderstand that Gods eternall anger towards other men in particular cannot be knowne, nor his temporall anger by any ordinary way of certaintie, except it be extraordinarily by reuelation, as to the Prophets or Apostles. For by outward things we cannot know Gods loue or hatred to particular persons, onely Gods publike anger to publike states may be knowne, and so may his priuate anger to our selues in speciall.Signes of publike anger.There are three signes to know Gods publike anger. 1. The prediction of his Ministers: as extraordinarily the Prophets from vision or reuelation did foretell the iudgements to ensue. And ordinarily wrath may be knowne by the comminations of faithfull Preachers: for when vpon obseruation of threatnings in the Law made to such sinnes as then abound, they doe with one consent in many places with instance and confidence giue warning of plagues to ensue, it is time for the world to awaken: for the Lords secrets are with his seruants. And he will make good their righteous threatnings. Secondly, The signes in heauen, or earth, or sea: prodigious sights, or signes in the sunne, or moone, or commets, or strange births, or the extraordinary raging of the seas, and such like. Thirdly, publike plagues are both signes of wrath present, and withall they giue warning of greater wrath to come, if we doe not repent. Such are famine, warre, pestilence, and other raging diseases, the death of great Princes, and the sudden and common death of the best men, these all foretell euill to come. As wee may know fire, so may we know Gods anger. Wee know fire either by the report of men worthy to be credited, or by the smoake, or by the flame beginning to breake out: and so may discerne Gods wrath, either by the relation of his Ambassadors that are faithfull men, or by the smoake of prodigies or wonders in heauen and earth, or else by the flame of iudgements already begunne. And thus of the signes of Gods publike anger.Signes of priuate anger.The signes of Gods anger to a particular man are such as these: First, if a man haue not the markes of a childe of God vpon him: for whom God loues and is not angrie with, they are marked with peculiar graces as indelibly as they were marked in Ezechiel with the letter TauEzech. 9.. Secondly, if he finde himselfe directly vnder the threatnings of Gods word. Thirdly, it there bee no effectuall working of the spirit of grace in the vse of the meanes, it is a plaine signe of Gods anger, when a man heares the word powerfully preached, and reades, and prayes, without all affection or life, and is so constantly. For if the Lord were pleased, hee would shew himselfe in the vse of the meanes
 of communion with him. Fourthly, a man may gather something by his crosses: for if he finde a sting in them, that God fights against him in them, so as they pierce, and vex, and disquiet his soule with perplexitie, but especially if hee finde his heart also closed with hardnesse, so as hee doe not call when the Lord bindeth him, this is in all likelihood not onely a signe of wrath, but that the wrath increasethIob 36.13., this is the rod of indignation. Fiftly, if a man liue in some sinnes, they are manifest signes of wrath, as persecution1 Thess. 2.16, whoredomeProu. 22.14, hatred of the brethren1 Iohn., with-holding the truth in vnrighteousnesseRom. 1.18., couetousnesse and vncleannesseEph. 5.35., and generally all sinnes contained in any of the catalogues, against which the Lord denounceth his iudgements in seuerall Scriptures, Lastly, sometimes Gods anger is felt in the terrors and paine of the conscience, the Lord making some men to feele the edge of his axe, and fighting against them with his terrors. Now wheresoeuer these are felt by a soule that hath not beene truly humbled for sinne, they are assured pledges and beginnings of Gods wrath from heauen.Hitherto of the greatnesse, meanes, and signes of Gods anger.Hovv publike vvrath is pacified. Now of the way to pacifie Gods anger when it is perceiued. Gods publike anger is pacified and staied, first by the praiers and fastings of the righteous: and therefore it is the Prophet Ioels counsell, that if they would haue the Lord repent him of the euill, and returne and leaue a blessing behinde him, they must sanctifie a fast, and call a solemne assemblyIoel 2.13.14. etc.. Secondly, by the seuere execution of iustice by Magistrates vpon notorious offenders: and thus Phinehas staied the plagueNum. 25.1.. Thirdly, by the generall repentance of the people: and thus Gods anger towards Nineuie was pacifiedJonah. 3.. Fourthly and especially, by the intercession of Christ intreating for a Citie or Nation. So was Ierusalem deliuered out of captiuitie, as the Prophet Zacharie declares, Zach. 1.12.Zach. 1.12. How priuate wrath is pacified.Concerning the pacifying of Gods anger to particular persons, I will first consider what will not pacifie it, and then what will pacifie it. For the first, no multitude of gifts can deliuer theeIoh. 36.18., and the most mighty helpes cannot cause the Lord to with-draw his angerIob 36.18.: it will not auaile thee to come before the Lord with burnt offerings and with calues of a yeere old. The Lord will not be pleased with thousands of rammes, or with ten thousand riuers of oyle. Nor will the sonne of thy body make an attonement for the sinnes of thy souleMich. 6.6.7.. To crie Lord, Lord, at homeMatth. 7., or the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the LordIer. 7. abroad, will not a whit abate of his fierce anger: and as little will it auaile to build Churches, mend high wayes, erect Tombes for dead Prophets, or the like workes of labour or cost.Now for the affirmatiue, if we speake properly, nothing will quench Gods anger but the bloud of Christ: For hee is the propitiation for our sinneIoh. 2.1. R^m. 5.9.. Yet in some respects, and as meanes the Lord doth appoint vnto vs, that wee might be capable of reconciliation, these things are auailable: First, the duties of mortification, as confession of sinne, and iudging of our selues, and examining of our hearts and liues. If we acknowledge our sinnes, hee is faithfull and iust to forgiue vs our sinnes1 Ioh. 1.9., and if we iudge our selues, the Lord will giue ouer iudging vs1 Cor. 11.34.. If disobedient Israel will returne and know his iniquities, the Lord will not let his wrath fall vpon himJer. 3.12.13. Godly sorrow also is very auailable to quench wrath. If Ierusalem will wash her heart, she shall be sauedJer. 4.14.; the Lord will heare the voice of our weepingPs^l. 6.8.. Praier also is of great vse and force, for the Lord is a God that heareth praierPsal. 65.2.. And the Prophet Zephany sheweth, that if the people can learne a language once to call vpon the name of the LordZeph. 3 9. in the sinceritie of their hearts, hee will not poure vpon them that fierce wrath which shall certainly fall vpon all the families that call not vpon his name.Secondly, faith in the bloud of Christ procureth reconcillation and forgiuenesse of the sinnes that are past through the patience of GodRom. 3.25., especially the worke of
 faith, whereby a Christian perceiuing Gods anger, and encouraged with the support of Gods couenant and promise in Christ, doth in all tendernesse of heart importune Gods free mercy, and wrestle and striue with importunitie, casting himselfe vpon Christ for shelter, and seriously setting himselfe against euery iniquitie, euen because there is hope.Hovv vve may knovv that God is pacified.Finally, wee may discerne that God is pacified diuers wayes: First, by induction from the practise of the former rules; for if we doe what God requires, we may conclude and inferre, we shall receiue what God promiseth. Secondly, it may be perceiued by Gods presence in the meanes: if we finde our hearts vnloosed, and the passages of the meanes againe opened, that is a comfortable testimonie that the Lord is returned. Thirdly, it may bee perceiued by the witnesse of the spirit of adoption, speaking peacePsal. 85 8. to our consciences, and with vnutterable ioyes quieting and satisfying our hearts.Vses.The vse followeth. And first the doctrine of Gods wrath may greatly humble and astonish impenitent sinners. Is the anger of the Lord kindled against thee? how long then wilt thou be without innocencieHos. 8.5.? Be not a mocker, lest thy bonds increaseEsay 28.22.. Art thou an vncleane person, a railer, a drunkard, an vsurer, a swearer, a lier, a prophaner of Gods Sabboths, a voluptuous epicure, a carnall worldling, or the like? Be not deceiued, nor let any deceiue thee with vaine words, crying peace, peace, dawbing with vntempered morter; for assuredly the wrath of God for these things commeth vpon the children of disobedience: and who knowes the power of his wrathPsal. 90.11.? Secondly, seeing Gods wrath is so exceeding terrible and fierce, blessed are all they that are deliuered from it in Iesus Christ. We should be stirred vp to constant thankfulnesse, because the Lord hath forgiuen vs the punishment of our sinnes,1 Thess 5.8.9. Heb. 3.11.12. so as now there is no condemnation to vs being in Christ Iesus. Lastly, seeing the Lords anger is so dreadfull, wee should all learne to walke before him in all vprightnesse, and feare, and trembling, fencing our selues with the breast-plate of faith, and the helmet of hope, being in all things sober and watchfull, taking heed to our selues that wee be not hardened through the deceitfulnesse of sinne. And thus of the wrath of God.The children of disobedience.The second maine thing in this verse to be considered of, is the persons vpon whom it fals, viz. the children of disobedience. And by children of disobedience he meaneth generally wicked and vnregenerate men. Now wicked men are of two sorts. Some are cleerely out of the Church, and haue beene branded in seuerall ages with seuerall tearmes of distinction: as now the Infidels, and before, all the vncircumcised Gentiles. Before the floud they were called sonnes of men. Now others are in the Church, and are children of God, by creation, generall vocation, and externall profession: but indeed are wicked and prophane Esaus. The former sort were disobedient men:D sobedient men. and the latter are disobedient children.Disobedient children. And these disobedient children in the Church are of two sorts: for some will not be tied to liue in their fathers house, but that they may the more securely sinne, and wallow in all filthy abominations, they shunne Gods house for the most part, and liue without any conscionable subiection to any ministerie. Such was the prodigall sonne, and such are our common swearers, drunkards, and vncleane persons: nay they goe further, for they speake euill of their fathers house, and slander their owne mothers sons. Now the other sort liue in their fathers house, they come to heare, and receiue the Sacraments, they are there at bed and boord, but yet they will doe what they list.Filij insuasibilita^is. Filij incredulitatis. Filij inobedientiae. They will not be perswaded by the word, spirit, or seruants of God: and so they are children of vnperswadablenesse: They will not beleeue their fathers threatnings or promises; and so they are children of incredulitie: They will not conforme themselues to their fathers will; and so are called children of disobedience.
(...)

Now the estate of both these sorts of disobedient children is, that the fearefull wrath of God is vpon them: no father can so plague and cast off a wicked sonne, as they are sure to be plagued and cast off of God. As they are children of disobedience by their owne stubbornnesse, so are they children of wrath by Gods iustice: and if they continue thus, they may proue children of perdition.
Q.Quest. But how may the children of disobedience be knowne? Ans.Answ. We may gather signes either from the consideration of these words, or from other Scriptures. From these words two wayes: first, he is a childe of disobedience,The marks of a childe of disobedience. that is led and ruled, and hath all his thoughts and affections, and his actions as it were framed and begotten, and nursed vp by the corruption of his nature arising from the disobedience of the first man, or by the temptations of Sathan the Prince of all darknesse and disobedience. It is one thing to sinne by infirmitie, to fall by occasion into a sinne, and another thing to be led and ruled, and to frame ones life and imployment after the rules and proiects that are hatched by the flesh or Sathan. To be a childe to sinne, that is to be ruled and mastered and led by it, to be as it were at the command of lust and corruption, that is not in a childe of God standing in vprightnesse. Secondly,(...). the word here rendred disobedience, imports vnteachablenesse, such a disobedience as is wilfull, when a man sinnes, and will sinne, and will not be perswaded either by Gods word, or Gods spirit, or Gods people, that would aduise or admonish him. To be of an incurable or inteachable disposition, is a ranke signe of a childe of disobedience.
Further, if wee marke the coherence, in the second chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians, vers. 2. compared with the first, wee may easily discerne that a childe of disobedience is dead in trespasses and sinnes. His soule can lie at rest, though he be guiltie of neuer so many sinnes. Cast a mountaine on a dead man, and hee will not complaine or aile any thing. And sure it is a notable signe of a childe of disobedience, to be guiltie of a multitude of sinnes, and yet to be senselesse vnder them: to be able to goe from day to day, and weeke to weeke, and moneth to moneth, and neuer to aile any thing, for any sound remorse he findes for his sinne. Especially when men are at that passe that the Prophet Ieremy complained of, that though God strike them, yet they are not grieued; yea though the Lord consume them, they refuse to receiue correction, and make their faces harder then a rocke, refusing to returneIer. 5.3..
Q. But may not the wrath of God come vpon his owne children?Whether vvrath may not come vpon Gods children as vvell as the children of disobedience. Is God neuer angry with his owne seruants? Ans. God may be angry with his owne people: for when the Prophet Dauid saith, his anger endureth but a momentPsal. 30.5., hee implies then that God will be angry. And in the 89. Psalme, though the Lord saith hee will not take away his goodnesse and his mercy, yet if they keepe not his law, he saith expresly, he will visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquitie with stripesPs. 89.32.33.. And thus he is angry with them sometimes for their couetousnesseEsay 55.17., sometimes for their carelesse worshipEsay 64.5.7., sometimes for vnworthy receiuing1 Cor. 11., sometimes for their losse of their first loueReu. 2., but generally euery grosse sinne angers God, by whomsoeuer it be committed. But yet there is great difference betweene Gods anger towards his owne children, and that wrath that commeth vpon the children of disobedience, and that principally in three things. First, wrath comming vpon the faithfull is not eternall, but temporary and in this life only: for they are deliuered from the wrath to come1 The. 1. vlt., for there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Iesus, they are already past from death to life. But so are not wicked men. For God is so angry with them in this life, that his anger may continue for euer, and not be extinguished in their very death. And not only so, but Gods anger with his own children euen in this life is not for all their daies, but only a very short time of their life. For as Dauid saith, his anger endureth but a moment: weeping may endure
 for a night, but ioy commeth in the morningPsal. 30.5.. And in another place he saith he will not alwayes chide, neither will he keepe his anger for euerPsal. 103.9.. And the Lord witnesseth by the Prophet Esay, that he forsaketh but for a small moment, he hideth his face in a little wrath, but he hath mercy with euerlasting kindnesEsay 54.7.8.. When a child of God falleth, he is sure he shall riseMich. 7.8.: but it is not so with the vngodly. Secondly, as Gods wrath differs in the continuance, so it differs in the measure: it is milder towards his children then it is towards the children of disobedience. Which appeares to be so two wayes: For first Gods anger as it is manifested in outward iudgements vpon his owne people, is euer proportioned to their strength: he doth not consider what their sinne deserues, but what their spirits are able to sustaine. He will not suffer them to be tempted aboue that which they are able, but will giue issue with the temptation, that they may bee able to beare it1 Cor. 10.13. And the Prophet Esay sheweth that the Lord hath great care lest by contending ouer-long with his people, the spirit should faile, and the soule which he hath madeEsay 57.16.. And the Prophet Dauid shewes, that God deales not with his people after their sins, nor rewards them after their iniquities: but as a father pittieth his children, so the Lord pittieth them that feare himPsal. 103.10 14.. But now with the wicked it is much otherwise: for the Lord neuer asks what strength they haue to beare it, or how they will take it, but what sinne they haue committed, and how they haue deserued it. Besides, the affections of Gods children are sweetned with many mercies: for though the Lord be angry for their sinne, yet if they will seeke God, and worke righteousnesse, they may hold out to beare the crosse, for the Lord will meet them in the vse of the meanes,Esay 64.5. to the great ease and ioy of their hearts. Excellently speaketh the Prophet Dauid vnto the Lord, acknowledging this point, when he said, Thou answerest them O Lord our God, thou wast a God that forgauest them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inuentionsPsal. 99.8.. And the Prophet Micah seemeth to say, that while Gods people sit in darknesse, yet the Lord can be a light vnto themMich. 7.7.8., for their God will heare them. And herein also the Lord reserueth his mercies from the wicked, so as when they fall they haue no assurance of rising, nor is the Lord carefull to lighten their darknesse: I meane they haue no promise for it. For if the Lord shew them fauour, if they repent not, it will make them more vnexcusable, and their iudgement the heauier. Thirdly, it differs in the end: for the end of Gods wrath on his owne seruants is their good and saluation. They are iudged, that they might not perish with the world1 Cor 11.32.. And they are whipped by the Father of spirits, that they may bring forth the quiet fruit of righteousnesseHeb. 12.11.. In a word, Gods iudgements are as medicines to heale them. But on the other side, wicked men are vessels of wrath, and all tends to the fitting of them to destruction. The Lord comes not to them to trie, but to consume; not to better them, but for their vvilfull impenitencie to declare his iustice vpon them. All these their differences are notably exprest by the Prophet Esay in his 27. and 28. chapter: for hee sheweth that the Lord is a carefull and wise husbandman; and the husbandman in nature hath this discretion, that he should not plow all day to sowEsay 21.24.: so is it with the Lord, he doth not continue still plowing with long furrowes vpon the backes of the righteous. When he hath plowed vp the fallow ground of their hearts, he will not still goe ouer them, to breake the clods that remaine: but hauing once made himselfe a furrow, he will sow and not plow. And for the second, the Prophet seriously expostulateth with such as should any way incline to thinke that the wicked and the godly were smitten alike. Hath he smitten him (saith the Prophet) as he smote those that smote himEsay 27.7.? As if he should aske, hath the Lord plagued Israel as he plagued those that were enemies vnto Israel? And then he shewes this difference, that when the Lord came to visit Israel, hee contended with him in measure, and smote him in his bunches: whereas when God smites at a wicked man,Vers. 8. he smites at the root, and after many blowes he will continually
 haue him downe. And for the least difference, the Prophet shewes further, that by this shall the iniquitie of Iacob be purged, and this is all fruit, to take away his sinnevers. 9.: As if he would plainely affirme, that God meant so to cast Israel into the furnace, as nothing should be left but the drosse, his purpose was therefore to afflict him that he might medicine him against his sinne. And thus of the sixt verse.



VERS. 7. In which yee also walked sometime when yee liued in them.

THese words containe the second reason to inforce the mortification of vice, and it is taken from their owne experience: as if he would say, yee haue liued a long time in these corruptions and sins, and therefore it is sufficient that you haue spent the time past in these lusts of the Gentiles, it is high time now to abandon them: besides you should remember the misery you liued in by reason of sinne, and from thence learne to confirme your selues in a constant course of resisting and striuing against the occasions and beginnings of those sinnes.
From the coherence and the generall consideration of the whole verse diuers things may be briefly noted. First,Obseruations from the coherence. that the knowledge and meditation of a mans misery by nature is a good medicine to kill lust and couetousnesse: The Apostle like a wise Physitian, vseth here the counsell hereunto as a principall part of his direction. For in that he puts them in minde of it, it shewes that they should minde it by themselues much more. For not only it will shew that these sinnes did then abound, but the very thought of such a wofull estate will beat downe and kill by degrees the vitious inclinations of nature vnto such sinnes. Secondly, in that the Colossians can beare it to be told of their sinnes past, it giues vs occasion to take notice of this for a truth: that where a man hath soundly repented of any sin, he can easily beare it, to be touched with the remembrance of it, and with lowlinesse doth endure the needfull discourse concerning it. It is a notable testimonie that a man hath not truely repented of sinne, when he is so impatient and vnquiet in the mention or remembrance of sinne. If a man haue a wounded arme, while it is vncured,Simile. the least touch of it makes a man start and cry out: but when it is whole, you may gripe it hard and yet he aileth nothing at all. So it is with our consciences in matters of sinne: They are but in a miserable case that rage, and fret, and reuile when the sinnes they haue liued in are by publike doctrine disgraced, or threatned. But may some one say,The profit of remembring our misery by nature. to what end doth the Apostle so often put them in minde of their sinfulnesse and misery past? I answer, he doth it for great reasons. For the more men thinke of their misery by nature, the more it quickneth to a sense and admiration of Gods mercy that hath drawne them out of such a wretched estate. Besides it is a notable meanes to keepe a Christian humble, and to make him watchfull ouer a nature that by lamentable experience hath been so prone to sinne: and it serues to stir vp Christians to a more eager desire and diligence in vsing the meanes to aduantage them in knowledge and grace. Tis now time, to redeeme the time, that hath been so long lost. And it will make a childe of God industrious in Gods worke, seeing he hath spent so much time in the seruice of the deuill, the world, and the flesh. And further it helps a man to some measure of patience and meeknesse and compassion, in dealing with the sinnes of other men, considering that he himselfe hath been vnwise, disobedient, seruing the lusts and diuers pleasures, etc. And lastly,Hovv farre priuate men may meddle vvith the former sins of others. (as was before noted) it serues to kill the daily lusts that may bud and sprout out after calling.
Now concerning the remembring of the sinnes of others, we must know the Apostle had a warrant by his calling and commission to rehearse the sins
 of others. For Gods ministers are enioyned to shew Gods people their sinnes: But a like liberty is not lawfull to euery priuate man. Priuate men may remembers others of their estate past, if it may stirre them vp to thankfulnesse, or if it may further them in humiliation for new offences, or they may exhort one another, lest any be deceiued by sinne, and so for preuention of corruptions vnto which they are by nature prone: or in some speciall cases to cleare Gods iustice against hard-hearted sinners, otherwise it is a vile and sinfull course to be raking into the liues of others: but especially to be grating vpon the faults past of penitent sinners. Where God hath pardoned, what hath man to doe to impute? And thus of the coherence and generall consideration of the words.
This verse containes two specialties of their miserie by nature. First, their continuance in sinne, in that he saith, yee walked. Secondly, their delight in sinne, in that he saith, yee liued in them, that is, it was the life of your life.
(...).In which] That is, in which sinnes: and so it teacheth vs, that we should be more troubled for sinne then for crosses. For he doth not say, in which miseries or iudgements, but in which sinnes and corruptions. As any are more spirituall, sin is their greatest sorrow: and as any are more carnall they are more troubled with crosses.
Yee] A man can neuer be soundly and profitably humbled, till he minde his owne sinnes. The knowledge of sin that is transient is dangerous, as we may see in the Pharisie. The more he knowes by the Publican, the prouder he is in himselfe, but the knowledge that is reflexed is profitable. And therefore the Publican that troubled himselfe about his owne sinne, went home more iustified than the other. And therefore the Apostle here tels not of the misery of other men, but expresly guides them to the consideration of their owne misery. This should teach vs without shifting or delay to search and try our owne waies, and to grow skilfull in recounting the euils of our owne liues. The true knowledge of our selues, is a great step in a holy life. Tis that the most of vs neuer attaine to. And yet it is of singular vse; it would make vs humble in our selues, compassionate towards others, easie to be admonished, tender-hearted in Gods worship, more apt to godly sorrow, and of great ripenesse and dexteritie of knowledge in cases of conscience.
Also] Sinne is a poyson that ouerflowes all sorts of men. This also takes in rich men, and great men, and lea^ned men, and old men, and the ciuiller sort of men. There is no estate, calling or condition of men, nor sex, or nation, but they haue been infected with this plague. It hath runne ouer the whole earth. And therefore it should humble rich men, and learned men, and all sorts of men. Looke not at thy wealth, or thy wit, or thy learning, or thy nobilitie, or thy same amongst men, looke at thy filthy nature: thou hast now, or thou hast had the plague vpon thy soule: and as wise, and learned, and rich, and ciuill, and noble, as thou haue died of this sicknes, and are in hell.
Walked] This word notes not onely inclination to sinne, but action: not only words, but practise; and in practise, not onely a falling by infirmitie, but continuance and progresse in sinne. To walke in sinne, is to proceede in sinne from one kind to another, and from one sinne to another, and to lie and dwell in sinne. And this is the wretched condition and thraldome of euery one by nature, thus hard is it to giue ouer sinne, and were it not for the great mercy of God, thus would all men continue.
Why men liue so long in sin.Qu. But what should be the reason that men continue so long in sinne, and are so loth to get out of this miserable path? Ans. The soule by nature is dead in sinneEph. 1.2.: And all flesh is couered with a vaile of blindnesEsay 25.8.: And Sathan the prince of darknes, workes effectually in the children of disobedience: besides the course and custome of the world, that lies in wickednes1 Ioh. 5.18. Ephes. 2.2., much hardens
 and confirmes the sinner, and the minde and will of the flesh is stubborne. And withall euery wicked man is a great student: He deuiseth and imagineth, and forecasteth how to finde out waies, to set himselfe in a way that is not good. And many times God in his fearefull iudgement, deliuers many a man vp to a spirituall lethargie and slumber, and reprobate minde, that hearing he may heare, and not vnderstand, and seeing he may see and not perceiue, hauing his heart false, and his eares dull, and his eyes closed vp, lest he should be conuerted and humbledAct. 28.27..
The vse may be to teach vs to inlarge our hearts in the sense of Gods goodnesse that hath deliuered vs from an estate that was in it selfe so fearefull. Especially it may comfort vs against our infirmities: that howsoeuer we faile by occasion, yet by Gods mercy we doe not walke in sinne. We proceede not from degree to degree, and from sinne to sin: it is a happy time with a Christian, when he getteth victory ouer his sinnes, so as at least by degrees he gets downe the power of them. And on the other side, they are in a wofull estate that haue their corruptions growing vpon them both for power and number, and continuance. O woe will be vnto them when the master shall come and finde them so doing. And thus of the first specialty.
The second is, Ye liued in them] That is,The wickedest men many times most liuely. yee set the delight of your hearts vpon them. Sinne was the life of your liues. None many times more liuely and in greater iollity, then such as are in greatest danger of Gods wrath: and so cursedly vile is mans euill disposition, that as many men are the more sinfull they are the more secure, and full of carnall liuelinesse. Who more frollicke, then our drunkards, swaggerers, swearers, abominable filthy persons? Yea, they carry themselues, as if they had found out a life of excellency and contentment aboue all other men: and yet are buried in the ditches of monstrous wickednes, and are descending swiftly to their owne place, hasting to the vengeance to come. Many times the holiest men are most pensiue, and the vilest men, most liuely.
Liued] There is a fourefold life of men.A fourefold life. The life of nature, the life of corruption, the life of grace, and the life of glory. The first life Adam liued before his fall. The last, the blessed liue in heauen. The third, the godly liue after their conuersion on earth: and the second, is the life of all the vnregenerate. Sin is aliue: It hath a liuing being in the vnconuerted sinner: It is a monster ingendred in the heart of man, by coniunction with Sathan, seating his seuerall limbs in the seuerall faculties of the soule. Now it will not be amisse to consider how we may know when this monster is aliue, and when he is dead. Sinne may be knowne to be aliue,How we may know when sinne is aliue, first by the flaming desires of the heart and thoughts of the minde, inordinately bent vpon things forbidden. Secondly, by the command and authoritie it holds ouer all the faculties and powers of the soule, and bodie, vsing them as seruants and executioners of the lusts of the flesh. Thirdly, by the contentment men place in knowne euils. Fourthly, by customarie practise. And lastly, if this monster by the deceitfull working of Sathan should liue still for a time, (as many times it doth euen in the worst men) yet there is a way to try whether it be a-liue or no. For bring it to the law, and it will presently reuiue. If it be pricked and pierced with the terrors and reproofes of a sound application, it will shew it selfe, by vnquietnesse, and vnruly distempers. And on the other side, it is certaine sinne is dead,and when it is dead. if thy flaming desires to euill be quenched. Secondly, if the command ouer the facultie of the soule be ceased. Thirdly, if a man seeke and place his chiefe contentment in spirituall things. Fourthly, if the customarie practise of euill be broken off and dissolued: and lastly, if the heart will abide the searching and sound application of the law.
In them] So wretchedly is the vnregenerate heart of man composed, that he
 doth not only liue and sinne, but he liues in sinne, and with sinne, and by sinne too. He liues in sinne, because he is drowned vnder the power and guilt of sinne. He liues with sinne, because he is not a guest onely, but a soiourner also with his sinne. Sinne keeps the house, and the sinne is at bed and boord there. And he liues by sinne too, for most sinners cannot contriue how to liue without them. The letcher cannot liue without his mistris, and the vsurer cannot liue without his gaine, and so of the rest. All these are woefull circumstances of euill, and doe marueilously decipher out a soule that feeles not the life of Iesus Christ in him, and they impart also a further misery. It is easie to commit sinne, but it is not easie to be rid of sinne; a man may also quickly forget his sinne, but he shall not so quickly forgoe his sinne; for howsoeuer by Gods singular patience, he liues, for all his sinne, yet by the singular wretchednesse of his condition, all his sinnes will liue with him, they are not transient, but so long as he liues, his sinne will liue with him; yea it will goe with him too when he dies, if it be not preuented with speedy repentance.
The vse also of all this may be to teach conuerted Christians, that are deliuered from this wofull misery, to walke as children of the light: hauing their fruit in all goodnesse and righteousnesse and truth: hauing no further fellowship with the vnfruitfull workes of darknes, seeing all is now made manifest by the lightEphes. 5.8, 9.11.13.: yea they should striue to expresse as much life of contentment in the works of new life and light, as before they euer felt in the paths of sinne and darknesse; and if wicked men walke on with such vnwearied resolutions and endeuours in such a dangerous estate, how should Christians be stir'd to all possible constancy in well-doing, seeing they are sure that all that walke vprightly walke safely? Thus of the seuenth verse.



VERS. 8. But now put yee away euen all these things, anger, wrath, malice, cursed speaking, filthy speaking out of your mouth.

HItherto of the mortification of vices especially against a mans selfe. Now followes the mortification of iniuries. And therein I consider, first the exhortation it selfe in the eight verse and a part of the ninth. Secondly, the reasons vers. 9.10, 11. In the exhortation I consider, first the charge, put away euen all these things: secondly, the catalogue of iniuries to be put away and mortified, anger, wrath, malice, etc.
From the coherence, in that the Apostle fastens this branch of the exhortation vpon the remembrance of their misery in the former verse, it shewes, that the meditation of our misery, is as good to kill or beat downe the power of rage and strong passions and distempers, as it hath beene shewed to be good to kill lust and couetousnes. When you see men or women of heady passions and violent affections, fall into affliction of conscience, then imagine they will hurle off their natures, and grow more calme and meeke, but till then seldome doe any mend, or not for any long time.
Now] That is in the time of grace: and so it giues vs occasion to consider that grace yeelds no liberty to sinne. Now that thou hast receiued the true grace of God, there is no time left for passion, fretting, cursed speaking, or filthy speaking, or lying, or any such iniurious euils. Grace inioynes vs to take leaue of our old affections, and our owne peruerse courses. Many such things as before thy conuersion might in some respects beene more borne withall, must now be left: for the conuerted Christian must liue circumspectly, and precisely, watching in all things, and walking wisely both at home and abroad, he must part with his old humors and peruerse qualities, and therefore their condemnation sleepeth not,Iud. 4. that turne the grace of God into wantonnesse.
Put away] Sinne is not truely repented of till it be put away. Now sinne is
 put away two waies. First, by iustification, and so God puts away our sinnes:How sinne is put away. for when God pardoneth iniquity, hee casteth it away and neuer sees it or remembers it moreMic. 7.18, 19.. Secondly, by sanctification, and so we must put away our sinnes. We must put away or pull downe sinne as the rebell puts downe his weapons, when he seekes the seruice of his Prince, or we must deale with our sinnes as God deales with the mighty, that is we must put them downe from their seates: if we cannot destroy them from liuing, yet we may disturbe them sitting, or raigning, or resting in vs, or we must put them away as the wronged husband doth his filthy wife. We must diuorce our sinnnes that by couenant they should neuer be ours more. We will neuer loue them, and let them sleep in our bosome, and dwell with vs, and be familiar with our natures, as they haue beene. Now we put away sinne three waies; First by confessing them to God. Secondly, by godly sorrow, washing the stain and filth of them from off our hearts. Thirdly, by renouncing and forsaking the practise of them, all are here intended, but the last principally, and this we must know will not be done with ease, if it be truely and soundly done. The Prophet Micah meanes something, when he saith of the Lord, he will subdue our iniquities, and then after saith, he will cast them away into the depths of the seaMic. 7.19.. Must God subdue if he cast away: then man must be sure of it, that he must labour seriously the subduing of his sinne before he can haue any comfort or successe in putting them away. Sinnes are like an armie of rebels, that will not be vanquished without some adoe.
All these things] In the originall it may be read, all things:(...). it is true that God many times puts his seruants to it, euen to denie and put away all things, they must denie themseluesLuk. 9.24., and their credits, yea and their liues tooMat. 10.39., if neede be; they must denie the world, and their profits and pleasures1 Ioh. 2.16, 17 A man neuer truly repents, till he endeuour to be rid of all sinne.. Yea they must denie and forsake, and (which is more) rather then leaue Christ and the sinceritie of the Gospell, they must hate father and mother, wife and children, and brethren and sisters, or else they cannot be Christs disciples. But I restraine the sense as it is here vnto sins onely. And so it notes that euery man that will truely repent, must resolue to part with all sins aswell as one: he must desire and indeuour to hate and put away euery sinne, aswell the sinnes haue beene named, as the sinnes are to be named. As we would haue God to receiue vs graciously, and take away all iniquitieHos. 14.3. aswell as one, so we must resolue sincerely to put away euery sinne aswell as one. If the Lord should leaue one sin vnforgiuen, it might be enough to condemne vs, and so if we leaue but one sinne, that we haue no desire nor will to repent of, that one sin would plead against vs, that we had not truely repented of the rest. If we marke the true catalogue of sinnes, which here followeth, it shewes that we must forsake all sorts of sinnes aswell as one: For we must forsake and put away inward sinnes aswell as outward, for he saith, put away anger and wrath: we must put away lesser sinnes aswell as greater, for he saith, put away filthy speaking, aswell as before he had said, mortifie fornication and vncleannesse. Now that we may be incouraged to this sinceritie in forsaking all sinne aswell as one,Motiues. we may consider diuers motiues. First, Christ suffered for all sinnes aswell as one: and therefore we should arme our selues with the same minde, in suffering in our flesh to cease from sin u indefinitely, that is from all sin. Secondly,1 Pet. 4.1. we would haue God grant all our requests and not leaue one out. Nay we haue a promise that we shall obtaine whatsoeuer we aske in Christs nameMar. 11.24., and therefore it is reason, when God cals for the repentance of all our sinnes, we should doe it, and not leaue one out. Thirdly, Christ is all in all things, and filleth all in all thingsColos. 3.11. Ephes. 1.23., and therefore it is as easie for thee if thy heart be right to receiue and procure from Christ, vertue and strength against euery sinne as well as against any sinne. 4. This is all fruitEsay 27.11., euen the taking away of euery sinne, what pleasure or profit
 soeuer they might bring to vs. When God lookes for signes and markes of truth and vprightnes, this fruit of true desire to repent, is all fruit: it is wonderfully liked of God, and if he may finde this heart and desire in vs, he accounts it in steede of all other things. 5. Christians are made partakers of euery heauenly gift, euen euery spirituall blessing in heauenly things1 Cor. 1.7. Ephes. 1.3.. Men as they would put on euery grace, so they must put off euery sin. Lastly, God will shew vs all his goodExod. 33.19. and 34.6, 7., he will with-hold from vs nothing that may be good for vsPsal. 84 11., euen till he giue vs proofe of his glory in euery diuine attribute. And why then should not we by serious and sound confession striue euen to shew him all our euill, that we might obtaine pardon for them and strength against them? But if none of these reasons may perswade with vs to be vpright and sincere, then let vs know, that though we fauour and hide and extenuate our sinnes, yet the time will come when all shall be naked and manifest before God, euen all the sinnes that are found vpon vs. And therefore it were better to confesse them now, that God might not charge them vpon vs then, and to forsake them now, that being washed from them by repentance, and iustified from them by the spirit of the Lord Iesus, we may then be accepted as if wee had neuer committed them.Quest. Q. But can a Christian put away all his sinnes in this life? Answ.Answ. He may, and I will shew you how by a distribution. 1. Vnwilling defects, as belonging to originall sinnes are pardoned the first moment of conuersion. 2. Sinnes of ignorance are remoued by generall repentance, and by the daily sacrifice. 3. Sinnes not loued, nor rooted are done away, by an absolute forsaking of them. He that will continue any longer in sinnes that bring him no profit nor pleasure, and such euils as he hath power to leaue if he will, if these be not giuen absolutely ouer, it is to no purpose for a man to talke of repentance. 4. Particular sinnes that a man hath greatly loued, they are put away by serious and distinct labour in praier, and sensible sorrow and griefe of heart for them: For lesse then this will not suffice for particular beloued sinnes. Now lastly, there will remaine certaine remnants of some sins, that haue rootes in our corrupted dispositions, euen after the first repentance. Now these are said in Gods acceptation to be put away, when a man prayes against them, and mournes ouer them, and daily iudgeth himselfe for them: and so they may be in his nature, and yet be truly, though not perfitly put away. And thus of the generall charge. The catalogue followes. And the sinnes are either sinnes of the heart, or sinnes of the tongue. The sinnes of the heart are anger, wrath, malice. The sinnes of the tongue are, blaspheming or cursed speaking, filthy speaking, and lying. First of the sinnes of the heart.
Anger, wrath,] I suppose these words expresse one and the same sinne: it may be the two words import two degrees of anger. For there is inward fretting, without words or signe: and there is open anger, a signified passion, that discouers it selfe by outward shewes: both are iustly condemned.
Anger may be considered, 1. as indifferent. 2. as laudable. 3. as a vice. Anger is a naturall passion,Anger indifferent. and so in it selfe neither good nor euill, as it is a sense with dislike of iniurie: So Adam might haue conceiued anger against the serpent. The reason of the Stoicks, that condemne anger as a naturall passion, for euill, because it is a perturbation, is without reason. For all perturbation is not euill, but vniust perturbation onely: for Christ was angry and vexed, and grieuously troubled, as at the death of Lazarus; and yet he was without sinne.
Laudable anger. Ira per zelum. Ira per vicium.Now for the second, anger may be considered as laudable and good: for that there is such an anger, I will not stand vpon the distinction of the schoolemen, that there is anger of zeale, and anger of vice: the Scripture manifestly shewes there may be good anger. The Apostle saith, Be angry and sinne notEphes. 4.26.. And Salomon saith, Anger is better then laughterEccles. 7.3., and the Euangelist saith,
 our Sauiour looked about vpon them angerlyMark. 3.5., and Saint Matthew saith, he that is angry with his brother without a cause(...), Mat. 5.22. What good anger is., as if he would acknowledge a iust anger, when there was a iust cause of anger. Now this good anger, is a godly passion of iust zeale, of iustice, conceiued against sinne in our selues or others, that desireth iust reuenge, to the sauing of the person, appeasing of Gods anger, or the promoting of the kingdome of Christ. I say, it is a godly passion. For there are two sorts of naturall passions: Some are so euill, they can neuer be good, as enuie. Some are so naturall, as they may be either good or euill as they agree or disagree with the law of God, and such is anger. I say iust zeale, for I know that euery zeale hath not alwaies either good cause or good effect. I adde against sinne, because it must not be our indignation at the person. And we may be angry and vexed at our owne sinnes, as Paul wasRom. 7., aswell as at the sinnes of others. And reuenge also is the end of anger: for so may a Christian be reuenged on himselfe as a fruit of godly sorrow2 Cor. 7.10.; as also he may desire the iust reuenge of the Magistrate vpon others, the end must be to saue the person, not to expresse our spleenes, and to appease Gods wrath, as Phineas did, and others of Gods seruants: And lastly, to promote Christs kingdome, by sauing a soule from sinneJam. 5. vlt.. But it is vicious anger is here meant.
Vicious angerVicious anger (...). hath her degrees. For there is 1. the offence, a griefe of the heart, it may be this is that the Apostle hath Ephes. 4.31. and is translated, bitternesse. 2. Inflamed anger, or the inward working of this bitternesse, or vexation, or offence, or griefe. 3. Outward rage, neither are all men of one fit in their anger. For some are quickly angry, and quickly appeased: some are slow to anger, and slow from anger: some are quickly inflamed, but slowly pacified. The best is, slowly to kindle and quickly to be satisfied, but all are naught.
Now concerning vicious anger, I propound two things principally to be considered. 1. Reasons. 2. Remedies against it. Now for the first, There are diuers things might perswade a Christian to make conscience of the mortification of anger and frowardnesse. 1. The commandement of God, which is expresse, Be not hastie in thy spirit to be angry, as Salomon recordeth it in the 7th of EcclesiastesEccl. 7.11.. 2. The praises the Lord giues to men that can bridle their anger, and the disgraces the Holy Ghost casts vpon impatient persons, as Prouerb. 14.29. He that is slow to wrath is of great vnderstanding: but he that is hastie of spirit exalteth folly. And againe, Prouerb. 19.11. It is the discretion of a man to deferre his anger, it is his glory to passe ouer a transgression. And againe, Prou. 12.8. A man shall be commended according to his wisdome, but he that is of a peruerse heart shall be despised. And in the place of Ecclesiastes before alleaged, he saith, Anger resteth in the bosome of fooles. 3. The nature of euill anger. What is anger, but the furie of the vncleane spirit, the madnesse of the soule, the vnrest of all faculties, a very beast within the heart of man? 4. The effects of anger: Which may be considered, either more generally, or more particularly. And the particular euill effects are either internall, or externall. The internall effects are such as these: 1. It blindes the minde, the iust anger troubles the minde, but vniust anger blindes it. 2. It looseth the bowels of pitty and mercy, especially from the persons. A man hath no affections neither for duties of piety, nor of mercy. 3. It grieues the spirit of GodEph. 4.30, 31.. 4. It lets in the Diuell into a mans heartEphes. 4.17.. The externall effects are these: 1. It will interrupt prayer, as the Apostle Peter intimates, if there be frowardnesse through indiscretion or contempt in the familie, that will interrupt prayer, and worke a negligence in Gods worship1 Pet. 3.7.. And therefore it is one thing the Apostle Paul expressely requires wee should looke to concerning praier, namely, That men pray as without doubting, so without wrath1 Tim. 2.8.. 2. It is a
 great hinderance to the profit of hearing, and therefore it is one of the Apostle Iames his rules, that if we would profit by the word, we should be slow to wrathIam. 1.19, 20.. 3. It doth notably shame a man, and discouer and blaze abroad his folly, for as Salomon obserueth, he that is of a hastie minde exalteth follyPro. 14.29.: and in the 12. chapter and 16 verse, he saith, a foole in a day may be knowne by his anger. 4. Anger disables a man for society: for it is Gods commandment, or aduise, that we should make no friendship with an angry man, nor goe with a furious man: and as for other reasons, lest we learne his wayes, and receiue destruction to our owne soulesPro. 22.24, 25.. And in generall, anger is the doore or gate of vice, and therefore Dauid in the 37 Psalme, saith, Cease from anger, leaue off wrath, fret not thy selfe also to doe euillPsal. 37.8., as if he would imply, that to abound in anger, is to abound in sin: and it cannot be, but a man must be guilty of much sinne, that liues in fretting and passion, and inward vnrest; and Salomon saith plainely, that a furious man aboundeth in transgressionsPro. 29.22.: besides anger brings Gods curse vpon a man, as it is in Iob, anger slayeth the foolishIob 5.2., it bringeth many times great and sudden iudgments, and as Salomon obserues, a man of great wrath shall suffer punishment, and if thou deliuer him, yet thou must doe it againePro. 19.19.. Hence it is, that our Sauiour Christ, denounceth iudgment both temporall and eternall against vnaduised anger in the fifth of MatthewMatth. 5.22.. And thus of the reasons.
The remedies against anger are of two sorts. 1. there are remedies for anger in our selues. 2. there are remedies for anger in others.
There are diuers things are good to represse and subdue and mortifie anger in our selues. 1. From the coherence of these words with the former verse, it appeares, that the serious and frequent meditation of our misery, is a good meanes to cut downe the power and vnrulinesse of our passions. 2. Sauing knowledge will make a man peaceable, gentle, easie to be intreatedJam. 3.17.; and the true reason why there is so much passion many times in the heart, is, because there is so litle knowledge in the head: for passion and folly are twins. Thirdly, to preuent anger, or to restraine it, it is good to take heede of medling with the strife that belongs not to vs, but carefully to minde and meddle with our owne businesseProu. 26.7., especially we should take heede of medling with foolish and indiscreet persons, for he that contendeth with the foolish, whether he rage or laugh there is no restProu. 29.9.. Fourthly, we must not giue place to wrath c, nor let it haue a vent by sudden, and vnaduised words, or by suffering our affections to increase in swelling and desire of reuenge: we should silence our passions, and resolue to suspect and restraine our words. Anger smothered will languish, but let out will flame vnto further mischiefe. Fifthly, we should diuert the course of our anger, and spend the heat of our affections vpon our owne sinnes, and it were good to get into our heads a catalogue of some of our chiefest corruptions, that if we be suddenly tempted to anger, we might presently thinke of those sinnes, and spend our zeale vpon them. Sixtly, we should consider him that prouokes vs to anger; that he is the instrument of God to try our patience: and that if he doe it wilfully it is a brand of his folly. Lastly, the meditation of the passion of Christ is an excellent remedy to kill anger and to crucifie it. And thus of anger in our selues.
Now the remedies for anger in others are such as these. First, silence. Vnto many natures, to answer againe is to put fewell to the fire: For anger is fire, and words are fuell. Secondly, if thy silence wil be interpreted to be sullennesse, or contempt (for some thinke they are despised, if they be not answered) then the next remedy is a soft answerProu. 15.1.. And thirdly, it seemes that a gift in secret, is good to pacifie anger: for so Salomon thinks, Pro. 21.14. But fourthly, if this will not serue, then it is good to giue place to itRom. 12.19., I meane to goe away from the angry person, till his anger be ouer. But especially take heed that thou prouoke not anger, for the forcing of wrath bringeth out strife, as the churning of
 milke bringeth forth butter, and the wringing of the nose bringeth forth bloudProu. 30.33..
The vse of all this may be to humble euery one of vs. We may lay our hands vpon onr mouths, and repent of our foolishnes in our passionsProu. 30.32.. And we should for hereafter be carefull, in all companies, but especially in our families to auoide the customarie sinnes of passion. Peeuishnesse and this daily fretting and chafing, is a cause of much sinne and disorder, and a notable let of piety: and an extreame affliction to others that are troubled with it: It is better dwell in the corner of a house top, then with a brawling woman in a wide houseProu. 21.6.. For a continuall dropping in a rainy day, and a contentious woman are a-likePro. 27.15.. Thus of anger and wrath: Malice followeth.
Malice] The word (...) is diuersly taken. Sometimes for euill of punishment, or griefe for crossesMatth. 6.34.. Sometimes for wickednes in generall, or the euill habit opposed to vertueAct. 8.22.. Sometimes for malice or hatred: and so it is taken Rom. 1.29. 1 Cor. 5.8. and so it is to be taken here. And this malice is nothing else, but anger inveterate.
Malice hath diuers degrees. For it begins in the base estimation and loathing of the heartLeuit. 19.17.: and then it proceeds to a desire, that plods and waites for euery opportunitie of reuenge: and so it is grudge. Afterwards it becomes open, and shewes it selfe, by inflation, which is, when a man goes so as he thinkes his neighbour not worthy to be looked vpon. Secondly, by strife and contention, suits and brawles. Thirdly, by bitternesse and gall, in censuring and iudging. And lastly, by wilfulnesse, and a resolution not to be intreated.
Againe, Malice is varied by the persons in whom it is. There is publike malice and priuate malice: publike malice is in publike estates, and is shewed by factions and diuisions. Priuate malice is varied by the obiects, for there is a malice in wicked men against Gods seruants: Thus they haue hated them that rebuke in the gateAmos 5.10.: Thus all the members of Christ are hated of the world1 Ioh. 3.15.: and this hatred of goodnesse is exceeding ill interpreted of the Lord, he accounts it as manslaughter1 Ioh. 3.11., and will accordingly iudge itPsal. 129.5, 6, 7..
There is also domesticall malice between husband and wife, brethren and sisters, seruants and masters, etc. This domesticall grudge or malice is exceeding hatefull to God, and hurtfull to the familie: besides, it is desperate, for a brother offended is harder to winne then a strong castlePro. 18.19.: and the Lord hates all that haue any hand in it; for he that soweth discord among brethrenPro. 6.19., is one of the six things the Lord hates.
There is also malice abroad, betweene man and man in controuersing: and that kinde of malice is principally here mentioned. Now this kinde of malice is not alwaies open and professed; for he that hateth, as the Wiseman saith, many times dissembleth with his lips, and layeth vp deceit within him: there may be seauen abomin^^ions in his heart, though he speake fairePro. 26.24, 25.. And in another place, he saith, hatred may be hidden with lying lipsProu. 10.18.: but of what kinde soeuer it be, it is exceeding naught, and to be auoided. Now concerning this sinne, I further propound two things: 1. reasons. 2. remedies against it, and then I will touch some vse of all.
And the first reason may be taken from the vile nature of it. It is a vice so transcendent, that it passeth other vices; it hath been vsually said, that to be angry is humane, but to perseuere in anger (which is this malice) is deuilish: and therefore it is reckoned in the first to the Romanes, amongst the monstrous sinnes, which the monstrous Gentiles fell into: besides, to hate and be hatefull, is a dangerous signe of vnregeneracieTit. 3.3., euen that a man was neuer truly conuerted, for he that saith he is in the light and hateth his brother, is in darknesse euen till now1 Joh. 2 9.. Thirdly, it is worthy to be repented of and carefully shunned, euen for the ill effects of it, for it is like leauen1 Cor. 5.8., it will sowre and spoyle whatsoeuer
 praise-worthy qualities were in a man before: and it is a great let both to the word and prayer; and thence it is that the Apostle Peter exhorts, that if wee would grow by the word in affection and practise, we must then lay aside all malice and enuy1 Pet. 2.1, 2.: and the Apostle Iames shewes in his 4th chapterIam. 4.1, 2, 3., that many desire, and aske and haue not, and he implies that (among other things) their warring, and fighting, and iangling contentions were the cause of it. But our Sauiour Christ is expresly plaine, that if mens stomacks be so big, they will not forgiue, the Lord will not forgiue them, though they be neuer so importunateMatth. 6.14.: and besides, men that in their passionate grudges, are so hasty to strife, are many times brought to those straits in the end, that they know not what to doe, when they are put to shame by their aduersariesProu. 25.8.. Further, Salomon obserues, that men that thinke to hide their grudge and hatred, haue their wickednesse, many times, shewed before the whole congregationPro. 26.26.: and they that dig pits in their spight for others, by the iust prouidence fall into the same themseluesPro. 26.27.. Few malitious persons prosper; he that by his malice is caried into contention, knowes not what he doth, for he is as he that letteth out the waterPro. 17.14.: a whole floud of mischiefe may breake in vpon him, that he dreames not of, for he that hateth his brother, as Saint Iohn saith, walketh in darknesse, and knowes not whether he goeth, for the darknesse of malice hath blinded his eyes1 Ioh. 2.11.. Finally, let such as will not be reconciled, nor agree with the aduersarie quickly, feare that prison, that is threatned by our Sauiour, euen the prison of hell, into the which, if they be cast, they shall not come out till they haue paid the vttermost farthingMatth. 5.. And on the other side, it is a singular praise to be ready and forward to be reconciled, and lay aside malice and discord, and a crowne of reward shall be giuen to such,@ as seeke peace and agreement: yea a double crowne, one, because he will be reconciled, and another, because he seekes it, and asketh peace first.
The remedies against malice in our selues.The remedies against malice follow: and they are of two sorts. For malice is to be medicined in our owne hearts, or auoided; or it is to be compounded, or preuented in others. Now to take order that malice might not infect vs, these rules are to be obserued. First, we must take heede of the causes of malice, and they are either within vs or without vs; within vs there is pridePro. 13.10., and impatience, and enuy, and in some nature a very lust to contend, a kinde of petulancie, and a very spirit of contradiction; now vnlesse we keepe out or subdue these, it cannot be, but grudge and malicious discords will transport vs. Againe, without vs, there is the tale-bearer and scorner, and the froward person, and the busie-body, called the man of imaginations, all these must be shunned, and auoided, if we would liue without malice or contention: for where no wood is, there the fire goeth out, and so where there is no tale-bearer strife ceasethProu. 26.20.. And the like may be said of contentious and froward persons, for as coles are to burning coles, so is a contentious man to kindle strifeProu. 26.21.. If a man fi^^e himselfe apt to grudge or strife, it is his best way, to keep out of the way of froward persons, that may soone fire him. The like counsell must be giuen concerning the scorner; for, saith the Wiseman, cast out the scorner and contention shall goe outPro. 22.10.: and it is sure, that he that would not be infected with hatred, his best way will be to hate the busie-body. Now if this direction will not serue the turne, then in the second place, thou must mortifie thy rising malice, and confesse it with griefe vnto God, till by prayer thou get some victory ouer it. Thirdly, much malice and grudge would be auoided, if we did but obserue that counsell, Leuit. 19.17. namely, that when we did conceiue dislike of any thing in our brother, for which we did feare we should hate him, we should go to him, and reproue him, rebuking him plainely for his sinne: many times a seasonable reproofe drawes out the poyson of beginning grudge and malice. Fourthly, it is good to meditate vpon the passion of Christ, and of his readinesse to forgiue
 euen vpon the crosse great wrongs, and worser enemies: we should lay a necessitie vpon our selues, to be aduised before we would admit contention, or the resolution to contend, for as Salomon saith, by pride commeth contention, but with the well-aduised is wisdomePro. 13.10., euen this wisdome to forbeare contention. Finally, in the fourth to the Ephesians, the Apostle before he saith, Let all bitternesse, and wrath, and malice, etc. be put away, had said in the verse before, grieue not the holy spirit of God, whereby yee are sealed to the day of redemptionEph. 4.30, 31.: as if he would import, that a man might be induced to put away malice, and the rest of the vices there named, with great ease and readinesse, if he would obey the motions of the spirit, and busie himselfe seriously about the assurance of his full and finall redemption, daily thinking of the time when hee shall be rid of all wants, and sinnes, and wrongs too: if we could oftner thinke of Gods iudgements, and the great day of reuenge and recompence, it would cause vs to haue lesse stomach to be our owne iudges and reuengers. And if the spirit of God might rule vs, our flesh would haue litle heart to busie it selfe about the works of malice.
Now for malice in others,Remedie for malice in others. it must be considered either as it is to be compounded, or as it is to be auoided; and for the compounding of it, obserue these rules. First, if thou wilt not doe good for euill, (which yet is requiredPro. 25.21.) yet be sure, thou render non euill for euillRom. 12.17.. Secondly, if thy brother haue ought against thee, so as thou be priuy to thy selfe that thou hast done him any wrong, or giuen him any cause so to conceiue, then goe thou and seeke reconciliation, tender it and aske it of him. Thirdly, if the contention be yet secret, follow Salomons counsell, say nothing of it to others, but debate thy cause with thy neighbour himselfe, and discouer not thy secret to anotherProu. 25.4.: peace might soone be made with many men, if the discord were not made so publike. Now for auoiding of contention and malitious discords, there are diuers rules of great vse. I. Meddle not with the strife that belongs not to theePro. 26.17.. II. Contend not with fooles: thou shalt neuer haue done if thou meddle with foolish persons, for whether they rage or laugh, there is no restPro. 29.9.. III. Let nothing be done through vaine-gloryPhil. 2.3.. IV. Speake euill of no manTit. 3.2.. V. Be courteous and tender-heartedEph. 4.31, 32. VI. Wrong no man, but follow that which is good both amongst your selues and towards all menThess. 5.11.. Lastly, pray for a couering loue, for hatred stirreth vp strife, but loue couereth all sinnePro. 10.12..
The vse of all this, may be both for reproofe and for instruction. For reproofe of many men, that are fearefully sowred with this leauen, they doe not onely let the Sunne goe downe vpon their wrath, but they let the Sunne goe his whole course, and can finde no time from the one end of the yeere vnto the other, to compound and lay aside their discords. Nay so hath malice seated it selfe in some dogged and spightfull natures, that it seemeth to proclaime, it will neuer loose possession, till the deuill the father of malice hath full possession both of soule and body. But let euery godly minde be perswaded to auoide this monstrous sinne, yea let vs striue to auoide the very beginning of it, or if nature haue such corruption, that for the present we cannot get our hearts rid of all secret poyson of dislike, let vs be sure we be but children in malitiousnesse: it is a monstrous wickednesse to haue a head that is exercised to strife, and a heart that hath a kinde of sinfull dexteritie, in framing and plodding for malitious courses. And thus much of malice.
Cursed speaking] The word in the originall, is (...), blasphemie. Now blasphemie or cursed speaking, it is a sinne either against piety, or against righteousnesse. As it is against piety, it is blasphemie to reproch, or reason against the person or nature of God: or against the prouidence and works of God: or against the worship of God and the meanes thereof; and so it is cursed speaking and a kinde of blasphemie to repine at Gods works1 Cor. 10.10.: to reproch Gods
 sabbothsLament. 1., or messengers1 Cor. 16.16., or his word. Also there is a cursed speaking which is against righteousnesse in the second table: and thus it is cursed speaking, When subiects curse the KingEccl. 10. vlt.: When Masters threaten their seruantsEphes. 6.9.: When Parents prouoke their childrenEphes. 6.4.: When Husbands are bitter to their WiuesColos. 3.19.: When wiues brawle and chide with their HusbandsPro. 25.24.: When great men lord it ouer the pooreProu. 13.8., and the like. Cursed speaking is either before the face, and so it is strife of words; or behinde the backe, and so it is backbiting or whispering2 Cor. 12.20.. It is cursed speaking, to mocke and scorne; it is cursed speaking, to iudge and censure; it is cursed speaking, to slander and disgrace; it is cursed speaking, to be euer complaining in all places. Finally, it is cursed speaking when men speake euill of any man, and there is a speciall kinde of it in speaking euill of godly men, and this properly is blasphemie in the second table, for the Lord for the honor he beares to his people, is pleased to afford the name of blasphemie to their reproches, as importing, that he takes it as if he were reproched himselfe.
We should all of vs take heede of cursed speaking of what kinde soeuer; for it ariseth of ill causes, as enuie or malice; and it hath effects, for it is certaine thou werest as good pierce others with a sword, as smite them with thy tongue. And therefore a bitter and cursed tongue is often compared in the scripture, to the stinge of adders, and to a sword, yea a sharpe sword, to a razor, and to arrowes, and the like, besides the hurt it doth to thy selfe: for if thou bite and deuoure, take heede thou be not deuouredGal. 5.15.. And it is iust with God thou shouldest be iudged and censured, that accustomes thy selfe to iudge and censureMatth. 7.1.. And though thou speake euill neuer so secretly, yet God doth many times wonderfully discouer the shame of it before others; and if man would not iudge thee for thy euill tongue, yet it is certaine God willJam. 5.9.. And it is many times seene that men and women of distempered and spightfull tongues are made a very abhomination amongst menProu. 24., so as all men are weary of them, and shun them. Lastly, scornefull and cursed speaking proues a notable hinderance to the successe of the word1 Pet. 2.1, 2., and that these kinde of people might obserue, when they come to heare they receiue not a blessing, and why? but because blessing is so farre from their lips, as they loued cursing so it commeth to them.
The vse of all may be to exhort vs to put away far from vs a froward mouth and peruerse lipsProu. 4.24., and that nothing be done through strife, but rather that all things be done without murmuring or reasonings, or brawlings, or reuilings. And herein such as feare God, should striue to giue good example, seeing they are as lights in the middest of crooked and peruerse people. Q.Quest. But what are the remedies of cursed speaking? Answ.Answ. If we haue sinned through bitternesse,Remedies. we should obserue two rules; 1. Let thy owne words grieue theePsal. 56.5., that is, labour by prayer and godly sorrow to beate downe the power of they peruersnesse, without defending, excusing or extenuating of thy frowardnesse. 2. Keepe thy heart with all diligenceProu. 23.24.: Looke to the first risings of thy passions. For bitternesse is first in the heart before it can come into the tongue. Now for preuenting of euill speaking in others, the only rule is to giue them no occasion, either by words or iniurious and wicked life. Ob.Obiect. But they will raile and reuile without a cause. Answ.Answ. Then obserue these rules: 1. Betake thy selfe to prayer, so did DauidPsal. 104.2, 3, 4.. 2. It is good oft-times to be as deafe man that heareth notPsal. 38.13, 14. 3. Be sure thou be carefull thou wrong not the names of others, else though thou be innocent in the things imputed, yet thou art iustly scourged with the like euillMatth. 17.1.. 4. The constantest and surest medicine for railing, is a holy continuance in godly conuersation: for though for the present it seeme not to profit the railer, yet in time to come it mayPhil. 2.15.. I adde also Salomons rule, namely, with an angry countenance to driue away a backbiting
 tongue. For that is many times the bellowes to kindle the fire of bitternesse and fierce speaking.
Filthy speaking] This is an other of the wretched vices of the tongue,Reasons against filthy speaking. to be with all care and conscience auoided by a Christian. And therefore the Apostle in the fifth to the Ephesians also, aswell as here puts it into the Catalogue of euils he would most seriously disswade them from: and out of that Chapter, we may gather diuers reasons against it. 1. Wee are deare vnto God and therefore should follow him as deare children. Now of all things we neuer saw any colour of this in God. Angrie speaking indeede is sometimes for our capacity giuen to God: but neuer filthy speaking, or any the least glimspe of it. 2. Our loue should bee as Christs was. Now his was to profit not to infect, and it was pleasing to God, not hated, as this filth of wordes must needes be. 3. It is a shame, and vncomlinesse, and dishonour to a Christian. 4. If any would obiect it is but a small matter, the Apostle would soone answer, men ought not to be deceiued with vaine words for it is sure that because of this and such like things commeth the wrath of God vpon the children of disobedience. 5. This is a froth of filthinesse that should onely be found in vnregenerate men that lie in darknesse, and it is a worke of darkenesse, to speake filthily aswell as to doe filthily. 6. If we be children of the light we should shew it by our fearefulnesse to speake or doe any thing that were vnpleasing to God. And we should shew it by reproouing such filthinesse in others: for such filth if it be not reproued is not regarded, but a Christian reproofe will make manifest in some measure that it is not good nor agreeing to truth and righteousnes, and goodnes. 7. Men are in some degree of a Lethargie that vse this sin. 8. A Christian ought to walk exactly, strictly, precisely or circumspectly, it is no more then he is bound to do, to make conscience of the least filthy word aswell as of filthy actions, and therein to take notice of Gods will. And thus of the second vice of the tongue.



VERS. 9. Lie not one to another, seeing that yee haue put off the old man with his workes.

LIe not one to another] This is the last vice in the Catalogue, lying is giuen oftentimes to the dumbe creatures: and so Images lie, and teach lies, and so the wonders of Antichrist are lying wonders2 Thes. 2.11.. But it is most vsually and properly ascribed to man; and so he lies either in nature, or in worke, or in word. In nature, and so the Prophet Dauid saith men of high degree are a liePsal. 62.9.. In worke, and so men lie either through hypocrisie, or deceit. Hypocrisie is lying, whether it be in worship to GodEsay 59.13., or carriage towards menReuel. 2.9.. Deceit is lying, and therefore the bread of deceit is called bread of lying, Prouerb. 20.17. But most properly a lie is in word, and so there is a lie in doctrine when men teach falshood, or apply truths to wrong persons or for wrong ends. The Deuill is a lying spirit in the mouth of many Teachers. Men lie also in false witnesse bearing, so doe they in slaundering and flattering. But most strictly, lying is in the report of things vntrue in conuersing with men whether at home or abroad.
There are many reasons why a Christian should take heede of lying.Reasons against lying. First if we consider the cause of lying it is the Deuill, hee is the father of liesIoh. 8.44.. Secondly if we consider the nature of a lye, it is most shamefull and hatefull: and therefore the lyar denies his lie, because he is ashamed to be taken with it.
And our Swaggerers hold the lie so disgracefull that they will reuenge it many times with bloud* Riches cannot adde so much grace to a man as lying wil bring him disgrace, and therefore Salomon saith: A poore man walking in his integrity, is better then a rich man which is a lyar f. And the Lord vseth to recken
 lying with the most monstrous sinnes, to make vs the more to hate it: as wee may see in the Catalogues of the Reuelation, and in other places of Scripture. Thirdly,Reu. 21.8.22.15. on the contrarie to speake the truth is to shew righteousnessePro. 12.17.. A mouth without guile is a marke of Gods redeemedReuel. 14.5., and the remnant of Israell, as ingenerall they will doe no iniquitie, so in speciall they will not speake lyesZeph. 13.3.. Fourthly, in the Epistle to the Ephesians the Apostle reasons thus, Put away lying; speake euery man truth to his neighbour for we are members one of an otherEph. 4.25.. It were most vnnaturall for the head to lie to the hand, or one member to be false to another: so vnnaturall is it for Christians to lie one to an other. For they are (or professe to be) members one of an other. Fiftly, if wee consider the effects or consequents of lying, for it makes vs abhominable to God, as they that doe truely are Gods delight, so lying lippes are abhomination to the LordPro. 12.22., and a lyars tongue is one of the 7. abhominable things which Salomon reckoneth vpPro. 6.17.. The law also is giuen to lyars among the rest, as the Apostle to Timothie affirmes1 Tim. 1.10.. It is one of the sinnes that brings vpon a mans soule and body, the forfeiture of the law. If lying bee not restrained in time thou maist get such a habit of lying that thou canst hardly tell any thing but thou wilt mixe some falshood with it, and that will both increase thy sinne and the guilt of it. Besides thou wilt loose thy credit, so that thou wilt hardly be beleeued if thou speake the truth. Sixtly, know that God will enter into iudgement with all lyarsHosea 4.2., sometimes by ordinarie iudgements, sometimes by extraordinarie, as he did with Ananiah and SaphirahAct. 5.. Now the holy Ghost saith: he that speaketh lies shall not escapePro. 19.5., but God will destroy them that speake leasingsPsal. 5.6., or if wee could escape in this world, yet the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone is prepared for them that speake or loue lies.Reuel. 22.15
Vse.The Vse may be for reproofe and humiliation to such as finde themselues ouertaken with this sinne, especially if it raigne in them, but more especially they are in a cursed condition that seeke liesPsal. 4.4., and teach their tongues to lieIer. 9.5., neither let men please themselues that they can doe it couertly. For liars are for the most part easily found out, there is amongst the rest 3. signes of a lyar and in one of the three he vsually discouers himselfe.Three signes of a lyar. 1. To vary incontinentlyPro. 12.19.. 2. To hearken to a false tonguePro. 17.4.. 3. To loue liesReuel. 22.15.. But let euery one that feareth God obey this counsell of the Apostle, to put lying in the Catalogue of sinnes he would daily watch against. And because by nature wee are all prone vnto this sinne, we should remember it euen in our praiers to God, that he would remoue farre from vs vanitie and liesPro. 3.8.. Before I passe from this vice, there are certaine questionsQuest. to be answered,Answ. as first whether all lying be sinne or no. That this may be vnderstood men vse to diuide lies into three sorts. There is an officious, and a pernicious, and a iesting lye. All men condemne the pernicious lie, many excuse the lie in iest, and some commend the officious lie, but the truth is, all are naught. And therefore the Apostle saith, lie not at all, for he speaketh indefinitely. But it will be obiected that the midwiues and Rahab and Micholl did lie, but it must be answered, that their zeale and piety was to be praised,Obiect. but the meanes they vsed was not to be imitated. If any obiect that the Patriarches vsed lying, they must know that diuers speeches of theirs, which to some seeme to bee lyes, indeed were not. For Sarah was Abrahams sister, and Iacob was Isaacks first borne by diuine dispensation and prophetically, and so Pauls speech about the high Priest may be excused, when he saith he knew not that he was the high Priest. For from the death of Christ the right of the Priesthood ceased. If it bee further obiectedObiect. that of two euils the lesse is to be chosen. I answere,Answ. that, that rule is to be vnderstood of euils of inconuenience, not of euils of sinne. Now that it may further appeare that it is not lawfull to lie, no though it were to saue others from great danger. These reasons may be weighed. First we may not do euill that good may
 come of itRom. 3.. 2. Peter was rebuked for dissembling, though it were, as hee conceiued, to a good end, euen to auoide offence and scandallGal. 2.. 3. Nay it is not lawfull to him, though it were to defend Gods cause, or to preuent his dishonour: therefore Iob saith earnestly and in great heate, will yee speake wickedly for God, and talke deceitfully for him, will yee accept his personIob 13.7.8.9. etc. 4. If wee might lye to saue others out of danger, then wee might lye to saue our selues also: for we are not more bound to care for the safety of others, then our owne: but wee may not lye to saue our selues, for then Peter had not sinned by denying his Master, keeping his faith and his heart, seeing it was to saue his owne life. Lastly, wee might as well commit fornication with the Moabites to draw them to our religion, or steale from rich men to giue to the poore, as to lye to profit.
Quest.Quest. But is it not lawfull to suppresse the truth sometimes?
Answ.Answ. Truth is either religious or politicall. For religious truth, being asked of our faith, we are ingenuously to professe it. Now politicall truth is to be considered, either as it is required in iudgment, or as it is to be vsed in cases out of iudgement. As for the truth before a iudge, it may not bee concealed, when thou art called to answer the truth; but in priuate conuersing, wee are not alwaies bound to reueale all the truth: for the precept, Speake euery man the truthEph. 4.15., is an affirmatiue precept, and so doth not binde alwaies, and at all times, and in all places. Besides charitie bindes vs to conceale and couer many infirmities, and a wise man keeps in some part till afterwards; and besides it is apparant, men are not bound to discouer their secret sinnes to all men. Samuel also is taught to conceale a part of the truth, when he went to annoint Dauid. And thus of the catalogue of iniuries.
Seeing you haue put off the old man with his workes.] In these words with the verses that follow to the 12th is contained three reasons to inforce the mortification of iniuries.

I. They are the workes of the old man:vers: 10. and they haue by profession put off the old man, and so they should doe his workes.
II. They are now in the state of grace, they are new men, and therefore haue new manners: they are by the meanes renued in knowledge,vers: 11. and therefore ought to grow in practise, euen in the mortification of what remaines of corruption, they are renued after the Image of Christ, and Christs image is the patterne of all holinesse, and they must therefore leaue those sinnes, because how like soeuer they bee to the humors and dispositions of the most men, yet they are not found in the Image of Christ.
III. God is vnpartially righteous and iust: if men minde not mortification, he cares not for them, though they were Iewes, circumcised, freemen. And contrariwise, if they doe conscionably striue after the holinesse of Christ, and the mortification of sinnes, hee will accept them, though they were Graecians, Scythians, bond, etc.

In these words is heedfully to be noted, the matter to be auoided: both the old man and his workes. 2. The maner imploied in the metaphor (put off) with the time, haue, and the persons, yee.
The old man is by some taken to be their old condition of life in the time of Idolatrie; by others, to be their custome and habit in sinne:vvhat the old man signifieth but it is generally by the most taken to be the corruption of nature, and inborne prauitie, that vicious humor and ill disposition that naturally is in euery one of vs, it is the image of the first Adam in our hearts.
This corruption is here said to be, the man:Why corruption is called the man. because it is seated in euery part of man, and because it rules and frames a man, and because it liues in man, so as sinne only seemes to be aliue and the man dead, and because God will take
 notice of nothing in the sinner, but his sinne.
And vvhy it is called the old man.2. The old man partly in respect of the first Adam, whose sinne is ours by propagation, and who is called old, to distinguish him from the second Adam1 Cor: 15.4.5: and partly in respect of our state of corruption, which in the renued estate we change so, that our condition after calling is said to be new, and our disposition before calling said to be old. This corruption may be said to be old also by the effects, for in godly men it waxeth old and withereth more and more daily by the power of Christ in them: and in wicked men, it spends the strength, and vigor, and power of the faculties of the soule, and makes him more and more withered and deformed in Gods sight, and withall it hastens old age, and death vpon their bodies. Also in some men, sinne may be said to be old in respect of continuance, this is most fearefull; age in any corruption is a most grieuous circumstance of aggrauation; it is best not to sinne at all, and the next, to get quickly out of it.
What are the works of the old man.Thus of his nature: now of his workes. The workes of the old man are in generall, workes of darknesse, of iniquitie, of the flesh, vaine, vnfruitfull, corrupt, abhominable, deceiuable, shamefull, and tend to death. And now particularly, if we would know what he doth, and how he is imployed, wee must vnderstand, that he giues lawes to the members against the law of God and the minde; that hee frames obiections and lets against all holy duties; that he striues to bring the soule into bondage and captiuitie vnder imperious lusts; that he inflames the desires of the heart against the spirit: that he infects our vaine generation, and workes both sinne and wrath for our posteritie; but more especially, his workes are either inward or outward: inwardly he works Atheisme, impatience, contempt, carnall confidence, hypocrisie: he forges and frames continually, and multiplies euill thoughts: he workes lusts of all sorts, he workes anger, rage, malice, griefe, euill suspitions, and the like. Outwardly, he workes all sorts of disorders, impieties, vnrighteousnesse, and intemperance. A catalogue of his outward workes are set downe, in the Epistle to the GalathiansGal. 5.22.23.. He is here in the coherence, described to be couetous, filthy, wrathfull, cursed, and lying: and all these are well called his workes, because he rests not in euill dispositions, but will burst out into action: besides, it is his trade to sin, and they are well called his workes, because they are properly a mans own, for till a man repent he hath nothing his owne but his sin, and it is to be obserued that his works indefinitely must be put away: as if the holy Ghost would imply, that all his workes were nought: for his best workes are infected with the viciousnes of his person, or else they are not warranted in the word, or they are not finished, or the end was not good, or the manner not good, or they were wrought too late, or being out of Christ, they were not presented by Christ vnto God, in whom onely they can be accepted.
Thus of the matter to be reformed, the manner followes. Put off] The faithfull are said to put off the old man six waies. 1. In signification, or sacramentally, and so in baptisme. 2. In profession, or outward acknowledgment: and so we professe to leaue off the practise of sinne. 3. By iustification. and so the guilt of sinne is put off. 4. By relation, and so in our head Christ Iesus he is euery way already perfectly put off. 5. By Hope, and so we beleeue he shall be wholy remooued at the last day. 6. By Sanctification, and so he is put off but in part, and inchoatiuely: the last way is here principally meant.
Now in respect of Sanctification, the old man and his works are put away, first, in the word, for so Christians are said to be cleane by the wordJoh. 15.3.. And to be sanctified by the wordIoh. 17.17.. The word, first, begins the worke of reformation, it informes, renues, chaseth away the affections and lusts of sinne, etc. And then secondly, the Christian at home puts him away by confession, and godly sorrow, and the diuorce of daily practise of reformation. This is in effect
 that which is signified in the other metaphor, of crucifying the old manRom. 6.6.: for to crucifie him, is to lift him vp on the crosse of Christ, and to naile him with the application of Gods threatnings, which causeth the paines of godly sorrow.
Haue] Q. Can men put off the old man in this life. Answ. They may by inchoation not perfectly. Q. But when may wee haue the comfort of it, that the old man is put off and crucified in vs. Ans. When he is so subdued that he raignes not, for (to take the benefit of the word, crucified) to crucifie is not absolutely and outright to kill: and therefore it is said in the Creede, Christ was dead, after he had said, he was crucified, to note a further degree. Now then, (as I conceiue of it) sinne is crucified, when we make our natures smart for it, so repenting of our sinne, as we allow no sinne: for to crucifie a man, is to leaue no member free: prouided that we be sure, that the old man be so pierced, that he will die of it, though he be not presently dead.
Yee] The persons are indefinitely set down, to note that it is a duty required of all sorts of men, to put off the old man, and this worke it is required of great men, of learned men, of wise men, of young men, in a word, of all men without exception. The vses follow.Vse.
And first we may here informe our selues concerning the necessitie of mortification, there is in vs such corruption of nature, and such works of corruption, as if they be not mortified, they will certainely mortifie vs. Secondly, here may be collected, matter of confutation, and that of Popish antiquity: for euery man carries that about with him, that may prooue that a thing may be ancient and yet vile. Thirdly, how can the most of vs escape, but the reproofes of God must needs fall vpon vs, for euery man looks to the mending of his house, and his lands, and his apparell, etc. but who lookes to the mending of his nature? euery man hath courage to put away an euill seruant, and an adulterous wife, but where are the people that will resolutely set vpon the diuorce of sinne? men may be deceiued, but the truth of God will remaine vnchangeable, if we haue not put off the old man with his deceiueable affections and workes, we haue not after all this hearing learned Christ as the truth is in himEph. 4.22.23: but when I speake of putting of, I meane not that sinne should be put off, as men put off their garments, with a purpose to put them on againe, after a certaine time.



VERS. 10. And haue put on the new man, which is renued in knowledge after the Image of him that created him.

IN this verse is contained the second reason to inforce mortification, taken from their new estate in grace. The reason in it selfe intreats of the new birth, and describes it by shewing what it is, 1. In generall, it is the putting on of the new man. 2. In particular, it is the renuing of the minde with knowledge, and of the whole man, after the Image of God and Christ.
The maine generall doctrine of the verse is, that all that are accepted of God in Iesus Christ, haue put on the new man, or are made new creatures. And for the further opening of this great point, I consider three things. First, the necessitie of the new birth. 2. What it hath in it. 3. The maner by which it is effected: and then I come to the vse.
For the first,The necessitie of the new birth. those places of Scripture most euidently proue it is of absolute necessitie. The Apostle to the Galathians saith, neither circumcision nor vncircumcision auaileth any thing, but a new creatureGal. 6.15.: and to the EphesiansEph. 4.21.24 he sheweth, that if we be taught as the truth is in Christ Iesus, then to put off the old man, and to put on the new, are as the maine principles of all sauing doctrine. And to the Corinthians he saith, If any man be in Christ Iesus, let him be a new creature2 Cor. 5.17.. And our Sauiour Christ in the third of Iohn is peremptory, except a man be borne againe, he can neuer enter into the kingdome of heauenIoh. 3.5..

His nature is new, in foure things.Now for the second. Whosoeuer is a new creature, or hath put on the new man, it is certaine he is new. 1. In his nature. 2. In his obedience. Hee is new in his nature, and that will appeare after sound tryall in foure things. For, first, he hath new gifts, as the gifts of knowledgeMat. 13.11. or discerning, the gift of prayer, or as the Prophet cals it, of supplicationsZach. 12.12., the gift of vprightnes, or a spirit without guilePsal. 32.2., yea the Apostle saith, they were not destitute of any heauenly gift1 Cor. 1.6.. 2. Hee hath new delights, for hee feeles the ioyes of the holy GhostRom. 14.17, and that in new things, in which hee was neuer wont to delight before, as in the Law of GodPsal. 1.12., in prayer, in the Sacraments, etc. And also in new persons, for now all his delight is in the excellent onesPsal. 16.3., that truly feare God, and no more in carnall persons: yea and in new times too, for hee was neuer wont to reioyce in the time of affliction, but now he findes maruellous ioy euen in tribulationRom. 5.3.4.. 3. He hath new sorrowes: also they are not now so much for losses, shame, sicknesse, or the like, as for sinne, or Gods spirituall iudgments, or the afflictions of Gods childten. 4. He hath new desires also, as after puritie of naturePsal. 51.2., pardon of sinneMath. 5.6., softnesse of heartEsay 63.17., the presence of GodPsal. 42., successe of the meanes, audience in prayer, and the comming of Christ1 Tim. 4.8., and the saluation of IsraelRom 9. The triall of his obedience in 3. things., and the like.
And as he is new in his nature, so is hee new in his obedience also, and that if we respect either manner, or the matter, or the end: if we respect the manner, or the matter, or the end; if we respect the manner of his doing Gods worke, it is first with consecration of his soule and body to Gods seruiceRom. 12.1.. 2. It is with delight, hee loues to be Gods seruantEsay 5.6.. 3. It is in Christian simplicitie, and harmlesnesse, and godly purenesse, and strictnesse2 Cor. 1.12. and 11.3. Eph. 5.15.. Now secondly, if wee respect the matter of his obedience, he is exceedingly changed and renued; for now he hath respect not to one or two commandements, but to all Gods commandementsPsal. 119., he would be sanctified throughout1 Thes. 5.23., he labours for inward holinesse aswell as outward2 Cor. 7.1. Psal. 24.4.5., and as he is altered in his seruice of God, so is he in his calling too: for he walkes more conscionably towards all men, and hath learned to practise his generall calling in his particular. And thirdly, for the ends of his obedience, his praise is not now of men but of GodRom. 2.16., his desire is to approue himselfe to God, without respect of the world, how men will take it, and he will constantly professe and practise, though it be against his ease, credit, pleasure, or profit.
The third thing propounded, was the meanes of the new birth: and howsoeuer the most men stand affected, yet the truth of God is certaine and vnchangeable, the ordinarie outward means to conuert a soule to God, or make vs new creatures, is the word preached, we are borne againe by this immortall seede of the word, as the Apostle1 Pet. 1.23. Peter saith: and the Apostle Paul is peremptorie in the Epistle to the Romanes, how can a man beleeue except it be by hearing of the word preachedRom. 10.14.17.: the inward meanes is the spirit of Christ: which in respect of his working herein is called the spirit of reuelationEph. 1.18., of glory1 Pet. 4.14., of loue, of power, and of a sound minde2 Tim. 1.7..
The vses follow. And first all Gods seruants that haue felt the power of the word renuing them, may greatly reioyce in the mercies of God to them, and the rather if they further consider the priuiledge of their new estate; for art thou a new creature, then thou hast the benefit of a new couenantIer. 31.33., thou hast a new name vpon theeEsay 62.2. Reu. 3.5., and a new spirit within theeEzek. 36.27., to comfort theeIoh. 14., to direct thee, to confirme thee, and to make intercession for thee: thou hast new aliance, a new Father, euen God the Father: and new kindred with all the Saints both Iewes and GentilesEph. 2.14.: a new Prince and MinisterEsay 55.6., euen Iesus Christ: new attendants, the very Angels of GodHeb. 1.14.: new wages and new workeEsay 62.11.: a new commandement, the rigor and curse of the Law being taken away: new food euen Manna from heauen, the word of life: new signes and helpes, to guide thee
 in the wayIer. 31.21.. And when thou shalt die a new death, (not die as other men) and a new graue or tombe wherein no carnall man lay, thy graue being perfumed by the body of Christ: a new way to heauenHeb. 10., and a new Mansion in heauen2 Cor. 5.8., what shall I say, but conclude with the Apostle, if thou be a new creature thou shalt haue all things new2 Cor. 5.17.. And therefore let all the holy seede, the blessed of the Lord sing new songes of praise to God.
Secondly the consideration of the doctrine of the new birth, may serue greatly for reproofe of the fearefull securitie of multitudes of people, that are sunke so deepe in rebellion that they cannot consider nor seriouslie minde their owne conuersion. They looke not vpwards to behold the angry countenance of God, nor to the times past to consider the millions of men that haue perished for want of the new birth, nor within them, to see the Image of God defaced, and the Deuill intrenched in strong holds (for tentations) and the conscience: either awake, and then the fire of hell is within them, or a sleep, and then they are in danger euery moment when it will awake: nor doe they consider the time to come, or thinke of those last things, death, iudgement, and hell. Oh: the spirit of fornication that doth inchaunt men that they cannot so much as minde to returne. Now if any prophane spirit should aske mee, where are any such men as I haue before described to bee new creatures? I would answere him they are not to be found in Tauernes, Ale-houses, Play-houses, cock-pits, beare-baits or such like, but blessed be God there is a remnant, a tenth, one of a City, and two of a Tribe, that are such as the Lord doth describe and will be accepted of in Iesus Christ.
Renued in knowledge] Knowledge is a chiefe part of the new grace of a Christian, without it the minde cannot be goodPro. 19.2., it is a singular gift of God, to the elect, to reueale vnto them the mysteries of the KingdomeMat. 13.11., it is the beginning of eternall life on earthIoh. 17.3., but wee must vnderstand that this knowledge here meant, is neither naturall, nor sensuall, nor ciuill, nor morall, nor historicall, nor a generall Theologicall knowledge,What true knowledge is. but a religious sauing knowledge, it is a knowledge by which a Christian sees in a mirrour, hee stands and wonders: it is a knowledge that will transforme a man2 Cor. 3.18., it is the experimentall knowledge of the vertue of Christs death and resurrectionPhil. 3.10., it is a knowledge will keepe a man from the euill wayProuerb. 2., it is a knowledge will encounter euery thought and affectionEs. 11.8.10. that exalts it selfe against the obedience of Christ, it is a knowledge that is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easie to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruites, without iudging and without hypocrisieIam. 3.17. Rules for attaining of true knovvledge..
The vse is, to teach vs, that as we would be assured we are new creatures, so we should labour to be possessed of sound knowledge, and to this end, 1. We must stand vp from the dead, and with-draw from wicked society, else Christ will neuer giue vs lightEphes. 5.14.. 2. Wee must consecrate our selues to holy life and seeke the feare of God, for that is the beginning of this wisedomeRom, 12.1. Prou. 1.. 3. Wee must denie our carnall wisedome and become fooles that we may be wise2 Cor. 3.18.. 4. Wee must walke with the wiseProu. 13.20.. 5. We must begge of God a lowly and a humble heart, for with the lowly is knowledgeProu. 11.3.. Lastly, wee must studie the Scripture, and attend vpon daily hearing and reading, for they are the onely fountaines of true knowledge and wisedome2 Tim. 3.16..
Renued] The knowledge of the faithfull in this life, euen after calling needes to be daily renued. For sinne makes a breach both in the heart and minde. And Sathan plants daily temptations and obiects against the doctrin of God, against which the minde needes new store of prouision, out of the word, for defence. And our affections are wonderfull apt to lose sence and feeling, and then there is no other way to recouer sence but by renuing contemplation. And besides in asmuch as faith and repentance must be daily renued, therefore also must examination of life, and meditation of Gods promise
 and grace, be renued also. Finally we know but in part and successiuely, and therefore ought continually to be growing and adding to the measure of the knowledge receiued.
Vse.This may serue, 1. for information. For here we may know the necessity of daily teaching, since we neede daily to be renued in knowledge. 2. For great reproofe of that negligence is euery where to be found, in omission of hearing or reading the Scripture, or vsing of other priuate helpes for knowledge. 3. For instruction, for it should teach vs to be constant in the vse of all the helpes God hath commanded or afforded vs. And wee should beare infirmities in others, since our owne knowledge is vnperfit. And wee should learne to be wise to sobriety, and not thinke our selues able to iudge of euery doctrine or worke of God. The Lord hath laide a restraint vpon vs, and in this life we cannot attaine a full knowledge, and therefore we should represse the itching curiositie of our natures, thirsting after forbidden knowledge. Lastly, we should resolue of the neede we haue to be admonished, instructed, directed, or rebuked, and therefore reioyce in it, if any will shew vs that mercie to smite vs with rebukes, or guide vs in the way.

After the Image of him that created him.

How Christ is the Image of God.Gods Image is in Christ, in the Angels, and in man, Christ is the Image of God in two respects, because he is the eternall sonne, begotten of his substance: and therefore called the character of his person or substanceHeb. 1.3, The Image of the inuisible GodCol. 1.16., and so he hath most perfitly the nature of the father in him. 2. Because he was manifested in the flesh, for in Christ, made visible by the flesh, the perfection and as it were the face of the Father is now seene. And therefore our Sauiour saith, he that seeth mee hath seene the FatherIoh. 14.9., for the fulnesse of the godhead which was in the sonne being vnited and as it were imprinted on the flesh bodilyCol. 2.9., he did resemble and as it were expresse his owne and his fathers nature after diuers manners, and by diuers workes, or actions.
How the Angels are Gods Image.The Angels are Gods Image, and therefore called the sonnes of God, because they resemble him, as they are spirituall, and incorporeall, and immortall substances. And secondly as they are created holy, iust, and full of all wisedome and diuine perfections in their kinde.
How man is Gods Image.Amongst the visible creatures man onely beares the Image of God. And so he doth, 1. By creationGen. 1.26.. 2. By regenerationEphes. 4.24.. He was created in it. And then falling from God by sinne, hee recouers the renuing of the Image of God, by grace and effectuall calling in Iesus Christ, that this may bee more fully vnderstood, we must know that man is the Image of God, either considered more strictly as a superiour, or more generally as man. As a Superiour man is said to be Gods Image in Scripture two waies chiefly, 1. As a husband and so in the familie the Apostle calls him, the Image and glory of God1 Cor. 11.7.. 2. As a Magistrate, and so Princes and Rulers are called godsPsal. 82. on earth, but neither of these are meant here. For this Image of God here mentioned, is that likenesse of God, which by the spirit of grace is wrought in euery one of the faithfull after their calling.
Howsoeuer the perfit vnderstanding of Gods Image, belongs to God himselfe and to the vision of heauen, yet in some measure we may conceiue of it, as it is reuealed in the word, and imprinted in the nature and obedience of man. Two things I principally propound to he here considered more distinctly, 1. Wherein man is the Image of God. 2. The differences of the Image of God in man, either from that which is in Christ, and the Angels, or as it is to be considered in the seuerall estates of man, and then I come to the vse of all.
For the first, man is said to beare the similitude of God, or to haue in or
 vpon him the Image of God in 5. respects. First, in that in conceiuing of God man begets a kind of Image in his minde. For whatsoeuer we thinke of, there ariseth in the minde some likenesse of it, now if wee conceiue of God amisse, then we commit horrible Idolatrie, and whatsoeuer seruice is done to the likenesse we so conceiue off is done to an Idoll. But now when Christians taught out of the word, conceiue of God according to the descriptions of the word, that is not after the likenesse of any creature, but in a way of apprehending of God in the humane nature of Christ, or otherwise according to his nature or properties, in some true measure, this Idaea or forme of God, as I may so call it, in the minde of the faithfull is a kinde of the Image of God. For to conceiue a likenesse of God is not vnlawfull, but to conceiue him to bee like any creature in heauen and earth that is prohibited and vnlawfull. Secondly Man is after the Image of God in his substance, and therefore we are well enough said to be Gods ofspringAct. 17.28.. Now man is Gods Image both in his soule and in his body. The soule is the Image of God, as it is spirituall and simple, and as it is inuisible, and as it is immortal, and as it is an vnderstanding essence hauing power to know all sort of things, and to will freely. And some thinke it is Gods Image as there is in it a purtraiture as it were of the Trinity, for as there is in God distinct persons and yet euery person hath the whole essence, so there is in the soule distinct faculties, and yet euery facultie hath in it the whole soule, yea is the whole soule. Now that the body also is Gods Image these reasons may proue. 1. Man is said to be made after Gods Image in the first creation. Man I say, not the soule of Man onely. 2. Gods Image was in Christs body: for he saith, hee that seeth me seeth the Father. He saith not hee that seeth my soule, nor indeed could the soule be seene. 3. When the Lord prohibiteth the shedding of mans bloud, he yeeldeth this reason, for in the Image of God made he man, now it is manifest the soule cannot be killed, therefore mans body is after Gods Image. Now that God hath any body, but in three respects. 1. As mans body is a little world, and so the example of the world which was in God from all eternity, is as it were briefly and summarily exprest by God in mans body. 2. There is none of our members almost but they are attributed to God in Scripture, and so there is a double vse of our members, the one that they might serue the offices of the soule, and the other that they might be as it were certaine types or resemblances of some of the perfections of God. 3. Because the gifts of the minde do cause the body to shine as the candle doth the horne in the lanthorne.
Thirdly, man is after Gods Image in the qualities of the soule: such as are wisedome, loue, zeale, patience, meeknesse, and the rest: for in these he resembleth in some manner those glorious and blessed attributes of God. 4. Man is after Gods Image, in respect of sanctity of actions, in that hee is holy as he is holy, and in that he resembleth God in his workes, as in louing and hating where God loues and hates, and in knowing and approuing of things as God approues or knowes of them, it is plaine man resembles God in louing and shewing kindnesse to his enemiesMat. 5. but generally by holinesse of cariage man doth resemble God, I meane in the creation did so, and by grace the faithfull beginne to do so. Lastly man beares the Image of God in his soueraignty of dominion, and that both ouer himselfe and as he is Gods vicegerent ouer the liuing creatures and the earth, and thus of the first point.
Now for the differences of Gods Image, first that Image of God in man and the Image of God in Christ differs in two things. 1. Christ was the substantiall Image of the father, as he was God, and we are his image but by similitude. 2. Christ as man by reason of the personall vnion is filled with almost infinite perfections aboue measure which are in no man else besides.
Againe it differs from the Image of God in Angels in three respects. 1. Because
 they excell in nature, for they are wholy spirituall, and in action, they performe Gods will with greater glory and power. 2. They are free from all humane necessities euer since their creation. 3. They enioy the vision of glory in the presence of glory in heauen, in a manner peculiar to their place and natures.
Now for the differences of the image of God in man according to the different estates of man, we must know the image of God according to the threefold estate of man, is likewise threefold. 1. There is the image of nature, which Adam had. 2. The Image of grace, which the Saints now haue. And thirdly, the Image of glory, which the blessed haue in heauen.
The Image of God in Adam had distinct specialties, Adam was a perfect Diuine, and a perfect Philosopher, euen in an instant, he knew the nature of all things in the instant of his creation, which now is attained vnto with extreame labour, and singular weaknesse. 2. He had an immortall nature, free from infirmities, diseases, death. 3. Hee should haue propagated an immortall seed, after the image of God, whereas now grace will not be propagated. 4. His obedience was charged with the obseruation of the tree of life and of good and euill.
Vses.The image of grace hath these specialties; 1. Faith. 2. Godly sorrow. 3. The cohabitation of the flesh. 4. A feeblenesse and defect in the measure of grace. 5. A peculiar kinde of inhabitation of the spirit of Christ.
Lastly, the image of glory hath these differences; a freedome like the Angels from all terrene necessities. 2. An vtter abolishing of the sinfull flesh, and of the very naturall disposition to die. 3. A full perfection of all graces. 4. A losse of faith and sorrow, and all the works of repentance. 5. A speciall vnutterable communion with God and good Angels in glory.
The consideration of this doctrine of Gods image, should serue, to teach vs to loue and admire all that feare God, since the Lord hath graced them with this honour to be like God: it is a greater fauour, then if they had resembled the noblest Princes that euer were on earth, no all the carnall men on earth in all their glory, cannot reach to that absolutenesse of excellencie, that is in one of the poorest of Gods seruants. 2. Since the seat of this glorious resemblance of God is in the heart, it should teach vs especially to looke to our hearts, and keepe them with all diligencePro. 4., euen to be conscionably carefull to see to it, what thoughts and affections are lodged there: the deuill desires no more aduantage, then to haue libertie to erect in the heart houlds for euill thoughts and sensuall desires. 3. If it should be our glory to be fashioned after the image of God, then it condemnes the abhominable securitie of the most men, that are so mindlesse of the repaire of the losse of this diuine gift, and in steed thereof with so much care fashion themselues after this worldRom. 12.2., or after the lusts of their owne and old Ignorance1 Pet. 1.14., or after the wills and humors of men1 Pet. 4.2.. 3. How are we bound vnto God for this vnsearchable loue, that is pleased to restore vnto vs this diuine gift through the Gospell of Iesus Christ.
Thus in generall of Gods image.
But before I passe from these words, there is further to be considered, first, the forme of speech, in that he saith not, his Image, but after his Image. 2. The efficient cause, noted in those words, of him that created him. For the first, wee must vnderstand, that to say, man is the Image of God, and man is after the image of God,Imago ad Imaginem. is not all one; for man is said to be the Image of God, because hee is truely so: and hee is said to be after his Image, because he is not perfectly so; Christ onely resembles God in full perfection.
Now for the efficient cause of Gods Image, he is described heere by a Periphrasis, he that created him. Man was two waies created; first in respect of being, and so God created him. 2. In respect of new being, and so Christ created
 himEphes. 2.10. 1 Cor. 8.6.; neither of these senses can be well excluded. And if the words be vnderstood of the first creation, then these things may be obserued; that Adam was not to be considered as a singular man, but as he sustained the person of all mankinde, else how could we be said to bee created after Gods image; and as in him we receiued this image, so by him we lost it. 2. That the interest we haue now to creation, is not sufficient to saluation: and therefore they are grossely deceiued, that thinke God must needes saue them, because hee made them. 3. That the Lord would haue the doctrine of the worke of Creation to be remembred, and much thought vpon by conuerted Christians: and the rather because it serues for great vse in our regeneration. For it furthers both repentance and faith, and therefore in diuers places of Scripture, where the holy Ghost intreats of doctrine, of repentance, and faith, the word Create is metaphorically vsed, to assure vs that God will performe his promise, though it were as hard a worke as to create all things at first. Thus he hath promised to create a cleane heartPsalm. 51., and to create the fruite of the lips to be peaceEsay 57.19., and to create vpon euery place of Mount Sion, and vpon the assemblies thereof, a cloude and smoake by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night, that vpon all the glory may be a defenceEsay 4.5., and to create lightEsay 45.7., and deliuerance out of afflictions. Besides the doctrine of the creation, teacheth vs the feare of that dreadfull maiestie, that was able to worke so wonderfullyPsal. 33.7. and 8.9., and it inforceth humilitie, by shewing that we are made of the dust in respect of our bodies, and that our soules were giuen vs of God, with all the gifts we haue in our mindes: as also by giuing vs occasion to consider the image of God that we haue lost: and thus of creation as it is referred to God.
Secondly, it may be referred to Christ, and so be vnderstood of our regeneration, which is as it were a re-creation, or a new creation: and in this sense it shewes that we should conforme our selues to the likenesse of him that doth regenerate vs by his word and spirit. But may some one say, is there any difference betwixt the image of God in vs, and the image of Christ in vs? I answer, that to be fashioned after the image of Christ, hath two things in it more then is properly in conformitie to Gods image, for wee must be like him in sufferingsRom. 8.19.. And secondly, in the impressions of the vertue of his death and resurrectionRom. 6. Phil. 3.. And thus of the tenth Verse.



VERS. 11. Where is neither Graecian, nor Iew, circumcision nor vncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian; bond, free, but Christ is all in all things.

THis Verse may containe an other reason to perswade to mortification and holy life. And the reason may be taken from the great respect God hath of true grace in Christ, and the little loue or care he hath for any thing else, a Barbarian, a Scythian, a bond-man, if he haue grace shall be accepted: wheras a Graecian, a Iew, a free-man, without grace, is without respect with God, Christ is all. It may be the Apostle here meets with the false Apostles, that so much vrged the obseruation of Iewish rites, and stand so much vpon it to diuert the people from the sound care of reformation of life, by filling their heads with questions and vaine wrangling about the law, whereas the Apostle shewes men may be absolute and compleat in these outward obseruances, and yet their circumcision auailes them nothing before God. Here are then euidently two things in this verse: first, what it is God stands not vpon. 2. What it is, is all in all with him.
Where there is neither Graecian nor Iew, circumcision nor vncircumcision, Barbarian, nor Scythian, bond nor free. Out of these words these two things may be obserued.


Nothing will auaile without Christ.I. That nothing without Christ can make vs truly happy. The image of God, or felicitie of man, stands not in birth, freedome, naturall parts, or outward obseruances, for he is not a Iew that is one outwardly, nor is that liberty that is onely in the flesh, nor is that wisdome that is onely in learned men, such as were the Graecians. Diues was a rich man, Goliah was a strong man, Achitophell was a wise man, Absolon was a faire man, Esau was circumcised, and Cain was well borne, and yet all these are in hell.
II. That in Christ there is no difference, all is one, whether thou bee poore or rich, Iew or Gentile, bond or free, male or femaleGal. 3.28., with God there is no respect of persons. In the power of his ordinances (as by name) in the preaching of the Gospell, he extends his mercy both to Iewes and GentilesRom. 1.16.: so in the disposing of his gifts1 Cor. 12.13., hee bestowes knowledge and other graces, vpon people of all sorts, and for acceptation, whosoeuer feareth him and doth righteousnesse, he is accepted, of what nation or state soeuer hee beAct. 10.34., and all this will more fully appeare, when he shall iudge euery man without respect of persons, according to his workes, at the last dayRom. 1.10..

Vses.The consideration hereof may teach vs diuers things, 1. To feare God and forsake our sinnes, since hee is a God so terrible, that will not be swaied with outward respectsDeut. 10.16.17.. 2. Not to stand vpon outward birth or greatnesse in the world, nor to pride our selues in our wits, or rest our selues vpon our outward seruing of God:Act. 10.34. 1 Pet. 1.17. for the Lord accepts not the persons of Princes, nor regardeth the rich, more then the poore, or the learned more then the vnlearned, for they are all the worke of his handsIoh. 34.19.. 3. To be industrious in well doing, seeing he that doth good shall be accepted, whether he be bond or free, Graecian, Barbarian, one or otherRom. 2.8.9.10.: for the same God is Lord ouer all, and rich vnto all that call vpon himRom. 10 11., and endeauour by well doing, to approue themselues in his sight. 4. Not to despise poore Christians, seeing God accepts of them, and hath made them rich in faith, and heires of a kingdomeIam. 2.1.5.. 5. Not to giue titles to menIob. 32.21.22, and by seruile flatterie or feares, to bee so much taken vp, with their meere outward praises, or places. Lastly, Magistrates in the administration of Iustice, should resemble this absolutenesse of God, so as no respect of persons, poore or rich, friends or foes, strangers or home-borne should carry them besides the iust regard of the causeDeut. 1.17. 2 Chron. 29.6. How Christ is all in all..
But Christ is all in all.] And so he is, 1. In respect of the vnion of the mysticall body, as it is hee in whom euery one that is a new creature is considered to be and consist. Euery conuert, is created in Christ IesusEph. 2.10.. 2. In respect of sufficiencie, a man needs no more then Christ, hee onely may suffice, the whole compleatnesse of saluation is in Christ. 3. In respect of efficiencie: if wee looke vpon the benefits conferred vpon all Christians by Christ, he makes a amends for all wants, he is in steed of liberty to the seruant, and in steede of birth and honour to the Scithian and Barbarian, he is the substance of all shadowes, to the vncircumcised: what shall I say, he is righteousnesseDan. 9.29., and richesCol. 1.27., and wisedome1 Cor. 1.30., sanctification, and freedome2 Cor. 3.17., and a recompenceEsay 40.9. to Christians, yea in him all things are theirs1 Cor. 3.21., and as the pledge of all they haue receiued the spirit of the sonne into their heartsGal. 4 6. Vses..
The vse of all this may be diuers; 1. Vnto vs therefore there should bee one Lord, euen the Lord Iesus Christ1 Cor. 8.6. The Vses.. 2. All sorts of men should striue by all meanes to set out and shew Christ onely. Ministers should reach Christ only. Magistrates should chiefly intend the glory of Christ: nay all sorts of men should seeke Christ, in choosing callings, wiues, seruants, places of abode, etc. Christ should be all in all with vs, yea in those wee haue to deale withall, wee should beare with many wants and weaknesses, so they haue Christ, for that is
 all in all 3. We should learne to bee satisfied with Christ, though we want health, or liberty, or wealth, or worldly friends, or great wits, or strong memories, etc. Christ makes amends for all, he is enough: if the Lord haue giuen vs Christ, he hath done enough for vs, though it be sure that with him hee will giue vs all things also. 4. This may greatly reproue the wonderfull stupidity of men, that are so taken vp with admiration of these outward priuiledges, when as we see how all is vaine without Christ, what shall it profit a man if he had all honour and riches, and countenance of friends, and the pleasures of life, if when he came into Gods sight hee might haue no acceptance for his soule? If Christ bee all things, then without Christ, all things else are nothing,Excellent consolation in Christ. but especially this doctrine serues for singular comfort to Gods children in all their distresses, and that will better appeare if wee consider the particulars. For first, are they afflicted in conscience, vnder the sence of Gods anger, and their owne sinnes? Why, he is the propitiation for their sinnes,Rom. 3.25 hee is the end of the Law for them,Rom 10.4. yea all that the Law can require of them: hee will be their witnesse and their testimonyEsay 55.6. 1 Cor. 1.6.. Hee giues them promises and faith to beleeue themGal.. 3.22., and it is his bloud that perfectly cures and clenseth them from all their wounds and sinnes1 Ioh. 1.7.. Secondly, are they distressed vnder the power of Sathans temptations, or accusations: why, he sitteth at the right hand of God, to see that nothing be laid to their charge, he maketh intercession for them,Zac. 3.1.2.3. Rom. 8.33. and for the stings of this ould serpent, hee is a continuall brasen serpent,Joh. 3. they may but looke vpon him and be healed. Yea hee was tempted himselfe that hee might succour them that are tempted,Heb. 2.18. and his power dwelleth in them, to be manifested in their weakenesse,2 Cor. 12.9. and hee came into the world of purpose, to dissolue the worke of the Deuill.1 Ioh. 3.7. Thirdly, are they dismaide with the sense of their own weaknesses and ignorances? why, they haue such an high Priest as is touched with their infirmities,Heb. 4.15. and knowes how to haue compassion on the ignorant,Heb. 5.1. he will not breake the bruised reed, nor quench the smoaking flaxeEsay 42.2.3.. Fourthly, are they pressed with outward troubles? Why, Christ is the merit of their deliuerance from this present euill world,Gal. 1.4. hee is the sanctification of their crosses, so as all shall worke together for the best to them that loue GodRom. 8.28., yea hee will be their consolation, so that as their sufferings abounds, his comfort shall abound also,2 Cor. 1.5. or if he doe not deliuer, then hee makes a supply, by giuing them better things, out of the riches of his glory. He is a husband to the widow, and a father to the fatherlesse, and as the shadow of the rocke in a weary land,Esay 33.2. to them that are persecuted and driuen to and fro, by the hot rage of euill men. Lastly, are they in the feare, or in the danger of death? Why, Christ is all in all here also, for he hath ouercome death for them,Hos. 13.14. he hath opened the way to heauen,Heb. 10.19. he hath destroyed him that had power ouer death,Heb. 2.14 hee hath freed them from the wrath to come,1 Thes. 1. vlt. he hath begotten in them a liuely hope1 Pet. 1.3. of a happy issue from the passage of death, he is the first borne of the dead,Colos. 1.17. and hee will be the resurrection and the life vnto themIoh. 11.. What shall I say, but conclude with the Apostle, Christ is in life and death aduantagePhil. 1., onely that Christ may be all in all to vs, we must heare him, we must beleeue in him, wee must deny our selues, and take vp our crosse and follow him, and finally we must liue to him, and die in him.
And thus of this eleuenth verse, and so of the second part of the generall exhortation.





VER. 12.13. Therefore as the elect of God holy and beloued, put on bowels of mercy, kindnesse, humblenesse of minde, meeknesse, long-suffering.
Forbearing one another and forgiuing one another, if any haue a quarrell against another: euen as Christ forgaue you, so also doe you.


The diuision of this part of the text.THere are three things requisite to holy life. First, the meditation of heauenly things. Secondly, the mortification of vice. Thirdly, the exercise of holy graces and duties. Of the first the Apostle hath intreated from verse 1. to verse 5. Of the second from verse the 5. hitherto. Now in these words, and those that follow to the 18. verse hee intreats of the third, for he giues rules for the obedience of the new man, and those rules are more speciall, or more generall. The more speciall rules are from the 11. verse to the sixteenth. The more generall rules are in the 16. and 17. ver: the one concerning the means of holy life, v. 16. and the other concerning the end of holy life, v. 17.
The speciall rules giue in charge the exercise of nine graces, and in the setting downe of these rules I obserue. 1. The Motiues to perswade to the obseruation of them, and they are three; the one taken from their election, the other from their sanctification; the third from the loue of God to them. And these are briefly thrust together in a parenthesis in the beginning of the twelfth verse. 2. The manner how they be charged with these graces, and that is noted in the Metaphor put on. 3. The graces themselues, and they are in number nine. Some of them haue their greatest praise in prosperitie principally, as mercy kindnesse, meeknes, humblenesse of minde, some of them concerne the times of aduersitie principally, as long-suffering and clemencie in forbearing and forgiuing. Some indifferently belong to all times, as loue, peace, thankefulnesse, or amiablenesse, ver. 14.15.
Obseruation from coherence.Now from the coherence imported in the word (therefore) diuers things may be noted.
1. In that he prescribes the mortification of vices, before the exercise of graces, it shewes that till vice be mortified, grace will not grow nor prosper, the true reason why many men thriue no better in the gift of Gods spirit, is because they are so little and so sleightly in confessing and bewailing of their corruptions of heart and life.
2. In that he rests not in the reformation of vices, but prescribes also rules of new obedience, it shewes that it is not enough to leaue sinne, but wee must be exercised in doing good. It will not serue turne for the husbandman, that his fruit trees beare no euill fruit, but hee will cut them downe if they bring not forth good fruit, barrennesse is cause great enough of hewing downe.
3. Men that are truely renued after the Image of Christ are willing to bee appointed and prescribed, for the attaining and exercise of euery holy needfull grace and dutie, he that hath true experience of the beginning of any true grace, hath a true desire, and a willing endeauour, and a iust estimation of all grace. For as he that repents of one sinne loues no sin, so he that trauels in the birth of any grace desires all grace, so farre as in conscience he knowes them to be required of God, and in some degree, except it be in the time of violent temptations, or that the losse of the meanes occasion any deadnesse or faintnesse, in the desires of the heart, or that there be a relapse into some presumptuous sinne after calling.
4. If this (therefore) carry vs to the former verse, then we are informed, that our indeauour after mercy, meeknesse, patience, loue, peace or the rest, will neuer want acceptation with God. And withall wee may take comfort if we
 would seriously set about the practise of these, though wee found many lets, and doubts, and difficulties, yet Christ will be all in all to help vs, and giue good successe.
Thus of the coherence. The motiues follow, and first of Election.Of Election. Two kinds of Election.
Elect] Gods seruants are Gods elect, and that both in respect of election before time, and also in respect of election in time, for the Lord hath in his eternall counsell chose them in Christ, to the obtaining of saluation to the praise of his graceEph. 1.4.5. Rom. 8.19.. And besides at some time in their life, the Lord doth select, and separate them, from out of the world, and worldly courses, to the profession of sincerity, hauing sanctified them by the spirit.
The doctrine of Election hath both consolation and instruction in it,Vse. it is full of comfort, if we consider the priuiledges of Gods chosen, euen those great fauours he shewes them, when he beginnes once to discouer his euerlasting choise of them, the Lord doth euer after auouch them for his peculiar people, to make them high in praise and in honourDeut. 26.15 16.. The men of their strife shall surely perish and come to nothingEsa. 41.8.11 12.. The Lord will helpe them and comfort them in all strife, he will be a wall of fire round about them, and the glory in the middest of them, the Lord will owne them as his portion that hee hath taken to himselfe out of the whole earthZach. 1.5.12. He will vse them as his friends, hee will heare their praiers, and communicate his secrets vnto themIoh. 15.19.. But who can count their priuiledges, no tongue of men or Angels are able to doe it, which since it is so, we should take vnto vs continually the words of the Psalmist, and say euery one of vs, Remember me o Lord with the fauour of thy people, and visite mee with thy saluation, that I may see the felicitie of thy chosen, and reioyce in the ioy of thy people, and glory with thine inheritancePsa. 106.4.5. Especially wee should labour to make our calling and election sure2 Pet. 1.10., for then we shall be safe, in as much as thereby an entrance is ministred vnto vs, into the kingdome of Iesus Christ.
Now if any shall aske who they are that may be sure of their election?Who may be sure they are elect. I answere, First with the Apostle Paul, They that receiue the Gospell in power and much assurance, with ioy in the holy Ghost though it should bee with much affliction1 Thes. 5.6.. And with the Apostle Peter, such as to whom God hath giuen precious promises, and such as flie the corruptions of the world through lust, that ioyne vertue with their faith, and knowledge, and temperance, and patience, and godlinesse, and brotherly kindnesse and loue2 Pet. 1.4.5.6.7.10. Lastly if wee be comforted in our election, we should then labour to inflame our hearts out of the sense of this euerlasting goodnesse of God, euen to set vp the Lord, and to feare him and walke in his waies, and particularly by the Apostles direction to be very carefull of these holy graces that follow.
Thus of the first Motiue.
Holie] They are holy diuers waies; For they are holy, 1. in the head.Hovv many vvaies the elect are holy. 2. In their lawes. 3. In their Sacraments, in respect of which they are sacramentally holy. 4. By imputation. 5. By hopeGal. 5.6., of that consummate holinesse in heauen. 6. In their calling, so they are Saints by calling2 Cor. 1.1.. 7. As they are Temples of the holy Ghost. But the holinesse of sanctification is here meant, and so they are holy by inchoation.
Holinesse is essentiall to a childe of God, Gods elect are holy, this is euery where proued in ScriptureDeut. 7.6. Isa. 4.4., I will not stand vpon it, only for instruction, let vs from hence obserue. That if euer we would haue comfort of our election, we must labour to be holy, and that both in body and in spirit2 Cor. 7.1. Eph. 5.3. Quest., we see they are here ioyned and we must not separate them; But may some one say, seeing no man is without his thousands of sinnes, and infirmities, what must wee doe that we may haue comfort, that we are holy in Gods account,Answ. 4. Signes of a holy man. being so many waies faultie in our natures and actions? For answere hereunto, wee must know that there be foure things which if a man do attaine vnto, though
 he hath otherwise many infirmities, yet he is holy in Gods account, yea in the holinesse of sanctification. The first is this, if a man can so farre forth subdue his corruptions, that sinne raignes not in him; so long as it is in him but as a rebell, it doth not frustrate his comfort in his sanctification. 2. If a mans praiers, desires, and indeauors be to respect all Gods commandements as well as one; Iustice as well as Piety, holy times as well as holy things, inward obedience as well as outward, secret obedience as well as open, auoyding lesser sinnes as well as greater. 3. If a man be sincere in the vse of the meanes that make a man holy, preparing his heart to seeke God in them, esteeme them as his appointed food, mourning for want of successe desired, endeauouring to profit by euery ordinance of God, and that at all times as well as sometimes, at home as well as at Church. Lastly if a man can finde comfort in the pardon of his sinnes, he needs not doubt of his acceptation to be holy.
Fiue properties of Gods loue.Beloued] In this word is lodged the third Motiue, which is taken from Gods loue, as if the Apostle would affirme that if Christians did seriously consider what it is to be loued of God, they would finde full incouragement to all grace and dutie: now this may be better opened, if wee consider but the properties of Gods loue, wherein it wonderfully excels. As first, if God loue thee it is with a free loue,Hos. 14.5. he stands not vpon thy desert or worthinesse. Againe, he loues first, hee loues before he be loued, he loued vs when wee hated him, he chose vs when we did not chuse him. 3. Gods loue is wonderfull tender, which will appeare if wee consider that he is not onely gracious, but mercifull, slow to anger, of much kindnesse, and repenteth him of the euillIoel. 2.13.. 4. Gods loue is naturall, not forced, and therefore he is said to quiet himselfe in his loueZeph. 3.17., and himselfe loueth mercyMich. 7.18.. Lastly, his loue is an euerlasting loueIer. 31.3., where hee loueth, he loueth to the endIoh. 13.1. Vses.. And therefore we should labour to know the loue of God to our selues, euen to be particularly assured that we are Gods beloued or else this could not be a motiue to holinesse, as here it is. And besides the meditation of Gods loue to vs should incourage vs against all crosses, for God will giue his beloued restPsal. 127.2.. They shall be blessed, and it shall be well with them. They shall be deliuered, for he will helpe with his right handPsal. 60.5.. But especially it should hearten vs against the scornes of the world, and the hate of wicked men: if God loue vs, it mattereth not greatly who hate vs: And in speciall, the meditation of this loue of God should teach vs to tyre our selues with these worthy graces, as so many ornaments; for thus should the beloued of God be decked. And doth the Lord loue vs, and shall not we striue to shew our loue to him againe? Euen by louing his word, glory, children, presence and commandements. Lastly; we may here learne how to loue: for God loues, First those that are holy. Secondly, those whom he had chosen: so it should bee with vs; first we should chuse for holinesse, and then loue for our choice. This may teach the people how to loue their Magistrates and Ministers, and so wiues and seruants. And contrariwise.
Thus of the motiues, the manner followes.
Put on] viz. as men doe their garments, it is true that these graces for the worth of them are royall, and so must be put on as the King doth his crowne, or the Prince elected his robes, it is also true that for safety these graces are as armour to defend vs against the allurements of the world, or the reproches of euill men, and so may be put on as the souldier doth his armor. Besides these graces are required in vs as the ornaments of a renued estate, and so are to be put on as the new baptized was said to put on his new garments. But I thinke the metaphor is taken generally from the putting on of rayment.
Diuers things may be here noted. 1. It is apparant that these graces are not naturall, the shadowes and pictures of them may be in naturall men. And what wicked men can get is but by the restraining spirit, or by reason of naturall
 defect, or for ill ends. It is certaine a man may be said to be borne,Note. as well with clothes on his backe, as with grace in his heart.
2. How should the hearts of many smite them, to thinke of it, how they  neglect this clothing of their soules with graces: They euery day remember to put on apparell on their backes, but scarce any day thinke of putting on vertue for their hearts? Oh when thou seest thy naked body clothed, shouldst thou not remember that thy soule in it selfe more naked then thy body, had need of clothing also? Oh the iudgement that abides many a man and woman, how excessiuely carefull are they to trimme the body, and yet are excessiuely carelesse of trimming their soules, that haue so many gownes for their backes, that they haue neuer a grace for their hearts: yea the better sort may be humbled if they search their hearts seriously: for either they want diuers parcels of this holy raiment, or else they are not well fitted on them, they hang so loose many times, there is little comelinesse or warmth by their wearing of these graces. But let vs all be instructed to remember these graces, and by praier and practise to exercise our selues in them, and daily to be assaying how we can put them on, till by constant vse of all good meanes, we can grow spiritually skilfull in wearing of them, and expressing the power of them in conuersation, as plainely as we shew the garments on our backes, resoluing that these vertues will be our best ornaments, and that they are best clad that are clothed with these godly graces in their hearts.
Thus of the manner, the enumeration of the graces follow.
Bowels of mercy.] From the Coherence I note two things concerning mercy: First that it is not naturall, we are exhorted to put it on, naturally wee are hatefull and hate one anotherEsay 11.: which should teach vs to obserue and discerne the defects of our hearts herein,Iam. 3.17.19. and by praier to striue with God for the repaire of our natures, and in all wrongs from wicked men, to bee lesse mooued, as resoluing it is naturall with them.Tit. 3.3.
2. We may note here that mercy is as it were the doore of vertue. It stands here in the forefront, and leades in and out all the rest, it lets in humilitie, meeknesse, patience, etc.
Now in these words themselues I obserue 3. things.
1. That mercy is of more sorts then one, therefore he saith mercies,More sorts of mercy than one. Luk. 6. Math. 25. one mercy will not serue the turne, hee that hath true mercy hath many mercies, or waies to shew mercy: many miseries in mans life needes many sorts of mercy.
There is mercy corporall, and mercy spirituall, it is corporall mercy to lend, to giue, to visit, to cloath, to feed, to protect from violence:Corporal and Spirituall mercy. hospitality to strangers, and the buriall of the dead are also corporall mercies. Spirituall mercies are not all of a sort, for wee may shew mercy sometimes in things wherein no man can help, as by praying vnto God for helpe: now in things wherein man can helpe, the mercy to be shewed respects either the ignorance or other distresses of other men. The mercy to the ignorant is either instruction in the things they should know, or councell in the things they should do. Now his other distresses arise either from his actions, or from his passions: his actions are either against thee, and so thy mercy is to forgiue, or against others, and so thy mercy is to admonish or correct. Thy mercy towards him, in respect of his passions or sufferings, is either in words and so it is consolation, or in deeds, and so it is confirmation. What shall I say? there is the mercy of the Minister, and the mercy of the Magistrate, and also the mercy of the priuate man.
2. Mercies, notes that it is not enough to be mercifull once or seldome, but we must be much in the workes of mercy, seldome mercy will be no better accepted with God, then seldome praier, we are bound to watch to the opportunitie
 of mercy: and we shall reape not only according to the matter, but according to the measure of mercyHosea 10 12. What is bowels of mercy..
3. It is not enough to be mercifull, but we must put on the bowels of mercies, and this hath in it diuers things. For it imports:
1. That our mercies must be from the heart, not in hypocrisie or for a shew, it must be true and vnfained mercy.
2. That there should be in vs the affections of mercy, we should loue mercy, and shew it with all cheerefulnesse and zealeMich. 6.8. Rom. ^2.8. 2 Cor 9.7.15.^.8.3.4..
3. That there should be a Sympathie and fellow-feeling in the distresses of others. These bowels were in Christ, in Moses and Paul.
4. That our mercy should be extended to the highest degree wee can get our hearts to; That was imported by the phrase of pouring out our soules to the needyIsa. 58.10. Vse..
The vse of this doctrine of mercy may be first for instruction, to teach vs to make conscience of this holy grace, and to be sure we be alwaies clad with it according to the occasions and oportunities of mercy. And to this end we should labour to stirre vp our selues by the meditation of the motiues vnto mercy,Motiues to mercy. such as these. God hath commanded itZach. 7.6. Hosea 12.10.. They are our owne flesh, that need our mercyEsay 58.. Our heauenly Father is mercifull, yea his mercy is aboue all his workesLuk. 6.33. Psal. 86., yea hee is Father of all mercies2 Cor. 1.3., Mercy will proue that wee are righteousPsal. 37.21., and blessedMich. 5.7., and that the loue of God is in vs1 Ioh. 3.17., and that our profession of religion is sincereIam. 1.27., and that our knowledge is from aboueIam. 3.17., and that wee are true neighbours and the right Samaritans. God wonderfully accepts of mercie aboue many other thingsMich. 6 8. Hos. 6 5., and accounts what is that way done, to be done as it were to himselfePro. 14.31. and 19.17.. Besides, what is mercifully bestowed is safest kept, the surest chest to keepe our goods in, is the bosome of the poore, the house of the widdow, and the mouthes of the orphanes. What shall I say? mercy rewards our owne soulesPro. 11.17., assures vs of forgiuenesse of sinnesPro. 16.6., makes the heart cheerefull and stedfast1 Cor. 15.58., It shewes vs life, righteousnesse, and gloryPro. 21.21.; and we shall reape after the measure of mercies, both in this life, and at the last dayHos. 10.12. Rules in shewing mercy..
Onely in shewing mercy we must looke to diuers rules, it must bee holy mercy, not foolish pitty, as magistrates must not spare where God will punish, for this is euery where a monstrous wickednesse in carelesse magistrates, vnder the pretence of mercy they spare the punishment of drunkenesse, whoredome, but especially bloud, and the prophanation of the Sabbath. It is a wonder that many Magistrates should euer go to heauen, they are guiltie of so much bloud and wickednesse, by not executing the Iudgement of God, and the King, vpon such villanies. And it is not mercie vnder pretence of housekeeping to entertaine disordered persons, swaggerers, drunkards, swearers, gamesters, and the like, he that will shew mercy must haue a good eyePro. 22.9. to consider where, and to whom, and how he shewes mercy, the true mercifull man doth measure his affaires by iudgementPsal 112.5.. 2. Thy mercy must be speedy mercie, thou must not say go and come againe to morow, if thou canst doe it nowPro. 3.28.. 3. It must be of goods well gotten, God hates robbery for burnt offeringEsay 62.8.. 4. We must looke to our ends, for that mercy is lost that is shewed to win the praise of men, or for any other carnall respect.
2. The consideration of the doctrine of mercy may serue for the great reproofe of the want of mercy in men, and that monstrous vnmercifulnes that euery where abounds amongst men, we may complaine that mercifull men are perished, or if mercy get into the hearts of some it is like the morning dew, it is quickly dried vp. But the world is full of vsurie and crueltie, and oppression, the world hath almost as many wild beasts and monsters, as it hath Land-lords in diuers places. And shall nothing be said thinke we in the day of Christ to
 vnmercifull ministers, and Church Gouernors also. Oh the bloud-guiltines of many monsters rather then Ministers that feed not, or not with wholesome food, the soules of the people. And is there not tithing of Mint, and Cummin, and Annis, while the waightier things of the Law are let alone? It is no mercy to spare idle and scandalous and Idoll-shepheards. What should I speak of particulars? there is vnmercifulnesse euen in the lender, there is no borrowing vnlesse thou wilt be a seruant to him that lendethPro. 22.7.. Oh what summes of money are spent vpon haukes, houndes, cockes, beares, players, whores, (for I may well ioyne them together) gaming, drinking, apparell, feasting, etc. which should be profitably spent vpon the necessities of the poore. But let men repent of their vnmercifulnesse, for the curse of God is vpon themPro. 14.21 and 20.21., and the Lord takes the wrong as done vnto himselfePro. 14.31., their cry shall not bee heard,Pro. 21.13. nor their fasting nor sacrifice accepted,Esay 5.8. Hos. 6.5. and God will spoile their soules,Pro. 22.23. and iudgement mercilesse shall be to them that shew no mercyIam. 2.13..
Thirdly, this doctrine is exceeding comfortable too, for here is implied great comfort to all Gods children, for if God require such tender mercy in me, he will certainely shew mercy himselfe. And againe, poore men may be much incouraged to consider how carefull God is of them, and how much mercy he requires to be shewed them; yea it is a comfort to them if they bee godly poore, that there being so many kinds of mercy, they may shew mercy themselues, euen to their richest benefactors, by spirituall mercy. And this also must needes be comfortable to mercifull men, for as God requires mercy, so it is sure he will reward mercyPsal. 112.4 Esay 58.7. etc. (...). True Christian curtesie..
Thus of mercy.
Kindnesse] The word is curtesie or goodnes, comitas. It is sure the Lord requires this Christian curtesie, or goodnesse of disposition and carriage in euery conuertEph. 4.32. Gal. 5.22.; and kindnesse is one of the things wee should approoue our selues by.2 Cor. 6.6. Now Christian curtesie or goodnesse hath in it these things. 1. It salutes willingly1 Pet. 5.14. Ruth. 2.4. Iud. 6.12. Math. 11.14.. 2. It is faire and amiable in conuersing, not harsh, sullen, crabbed, intractable, clownish, desperate, scornefull, hard to please, churlish, or stately. 3. In matters of offence, it is easie to be intreated, kind to enemies, it qualifies the speeches of the angry with good interpretations, and sometimes it yeelds to their affections, it will sometimes part with right for peace sake, it will forgiueIam. 3.17. Luk. 6.35. Ephes. 4.32.. 4. In the praises or happinesse of others it is without enuy. 5. It is easie to liberalitie1 Pet. 2.5. Rom. 2.4. Vse. and preuents. 6. It loues brotherly fellowship.
The vse may be both to humble and to teach. Certainely the failings of the best of vs may much abase vs, and the knowledge of it that God requires it should teach vs to make conscience of it by praier and holy striuing with our natures to endeauour to expresse this fairenesse and kinde conuersing, since religion requires curtesie as well as piety, wee should labour to be vnrebukeable therein also, especially we should put on this vertue in vsing meanes to winne others to the truth.
Here also we may see the vanity of their aspersion that say religion will make men stoicall and vnciuill.
Yet least any should mistake,What curtesie hath not in it. we must know that curtesie hath not in it the honouring of euill men, or the reioycing at the euills of any man, or a promiscuous respect of all both good and bad alike, no nor of all good alike in the measure of manifestation, nor hath it an opennes in vnaduised communicating of secrets to all, nor a lightnesse of familiarity in contracting an inward friendship, without due respect of the disposition and conuersation of the parties.
Thus of kindnesse.Math. 11.29. Rom. 12.16. 1 Pet. 5.5.
Humblenesse of mind.] I shall not need to shew that humilitie, or this humblenesse of mind is required. For it is plaine in the text, but rather I would
 consider what it is,What humblenesse of mind is negatiuely and affirmatiuely. Esay 5.7.10. and then make vse of it. And first I consider of it negatiuely, by shewing what it is not. It is not sillinesse, arising out of the ignorance of a mans place or gifts, nor is it any carelesse disregard of a mans selfe, nor euery abasing of a mans selfe, for wicked men to compasse their ends can humble themselues to hell p. Nor is it a will-worship when a man by voluntary religion layeth hard things vpon his body; thus it was no humilitie, to forbeare toucing, tasting, handling, or vpon pretence of vnworthinesse to imploy the Kings sonne, to bring in mediation of Angels or Saints, as inferiours in the court18.23.. Nor is it complementall curtesie, for wee see that may be in greater exactnesse in men, and yet monstrous pride and malice belodged in mens hearts. Nor is it any counterfet submissiuenesse, as when some men scorne to refuse offices, and yet fret afterward when they go without them, or else refuse of purpose to be the more importuned. Nor is it humblenesse of mind to be (with fretting) complaining of our wants, out of emulation of others; nor is it onely to be humbled, for humiliation and humilitie differ.
Now that the nature of this grace may be found out, we must consider that vsually it is begotten in a man by the power of the word, and followes the breaking of the heart by mortification, and declares it selfe both inwardly and outwardly. Inwardly humblenesse of minde hath in it a sight and sense, and digested opinion of our owne great vnworthinesse, and is nor easily stirred to great thoughts with vaine applauses. It hath in it a tender sense of tentations, a hatred of hypocrisie, and a willingnesse to suffer afflictions, and a contentation in some measure, in what estate soeuer, it pleaseth God to bring a man to. Outwardly it expresseth it selfe both towards God and men; towards God it keepes a man lowly in the vse of the meanes, and hath a continued feare and awfull sense of Gods presenceMich. 6.8. and stands not at it to bee accounted vile for the seruice of God2 Sam. 6.22.. In carriage towards men, it is not affected in words or gestures, it is not censorious, nor arrogantPsal. 131.1.2.3., nor contentiousPhil. 2.3.. It desires not open and publike places: it is not swelled with praises, nor it affects not the vaine praises of it selfe: but contrariwise, it makes a man go before in giuing honour, and not to thinke much to equall himselfe with them of the lower sortRom. 12., reioycing in the loue of a poore Christian, as well as of a great man. It will make a man subiect to, and thankfull for admonitions, and willing to embrace the truth, though it be found in the possession of others. Finally, it is ioyfull vpon the doing of any good, and thankfull for lesser fauours.
Vse.The vse is as for humiliation vnder the sense of our wants in expressing the practise of this grace: so for instruction, to teach vs to labour after it, as a most praise-worthy vertue, we should seeke lowlinesse as the Prophet speakesZeph. 2.3. Motiues.. And to this ende wee should contemplate of the motiues hereunto. For humilitie is one of the graces we are especially charged to imitate in ChristMat. 11 29. It is a grace that God highly accounts of, he holds vs worthy of our vocation, if hee may see this in vsEph. 4.1.2., the Lord himselfe will in his speciall reuiuing presence dwell in the contrite, and humble souleIsa. 57.15. Psalm. 34.18.. He will not despise their prayersPsal. 102 7.. Wisdome is with the lowlyPro. 11.3.. The Lord will heale them, and create the fruit of the lippes to be peaceEsay 57.15.19.. Howsoeuer it may go with the humble otherwise, yet the Lord will be sure to giue grace to the humble1 Pet. 5.5.6.. Lastly humilitie goeth before honor* the Lord will exalt vs if we abase our selues, and we are most precious in his eies, when we are most vile in our owne eies. And contrariwise this may shew vs the hatefulnesse of pride, etc. the more the Lord stands vpon humblenes of minde, the more it imports he abhorres pride: And that the nature and praise of true humility may the better appeare, it will not be amisse to set out the sorts of Pride.
Generally, pride is expressed, either in things that concerne God, or in
 things that concerne man. In the things that concerne God:The sorts of pride. there is the pride of the Atheist, whereby he striues to remoue the sense of the being of God. And the pride of the Hereticke, when he assaults the attributes of God, or his persons. And the pride of the Papist, who will claime by his merits. And the pride of the Curious, who will search into things not reuealed. And the pride of the Persecutor who will pursue by slanders or violence, the power of Gods ordinances. And the pride of the Impenitent, that dare liue and die in his sinnes without care of Gods threatnings. And towards men pride is discouered diuers waies, as by oppugning the fame of the best men, by the singularitie of conceit of worth aboue others, either for place or gifts, by bragging and boasting by vaine ioyes, by new fanglenesse in apparell, by striuing for offices, and highest places, yea, there is a spirituall pride in euery grace and holinesse. Now contrarie hereunto is that humilitie God requires in this place.
And thus of humblenesse of minde.
Meekenesse] Christian meekenesse hath in it, as I conceiue, these things.What Christian meeknes hath in it. First, a quietnesse of heart in the freedome from passion, by which one is slow to anger, and not easily prouoked. Secondly, a teachablenesse and tractablenesse, or being easie to be perswadedEsay 11. Iam. 3.17.. Thirdly, a childelike confidence in Gods care and prouidence, becomming in that respect a as little childeMath. 18.. Fourthly, it is not swelled with prosperitie. Fiftly, it thinkes not much of the yoke of ChristMat. 11.30.. In what measure a man is truly meeke, in the same measure he accounts Gods seruice, a reasonable and easie seruice. Sixtly, in conuersing it hath two principall properties; the first is feare1 Pet. 3.2.3., as it is opposed vnto boldnesse, conceitednesse, roughheartednesse: the 2. is an Euangelicall harmelesnesse, or simplicity2 Cor. 11.3..
The consideration may much humble the best of vs, if wee consider how passion doth ouer-master vs, and how successe doth swell vs, and how stiffe our hearts are after an vnconceiuable manner against the power of the meanes, and how vnquiet weare for want of confidence in God. Oh where is this conuersation with feare to bee found? And for the simplicity that is in Christ Iesus, how is it mixed in some, and wanted in others, and lost in many, who are beguiled of the Serpent? Yet inasmuch as this grace is indispensibly required that it should be put on, let vs stirre vp our hearts as to seeke righteousnesse, so to seeke meeknesse with it. And to this end, wee should auoide what doth encounter it: As namely, wee should take heede of lust, and malice, and couetousnesse, and contention: For these things will wonderfully disturbe the heart, and fill it maruellously with perturbations; and also wee should meditate of the incouragements to this grace; For meekenesse would much auaile vs in the profit and power of the wordIam. 1.21.22 Jsay 29.19. Math. 11.29., and God hath promised to water this grace with secret ioyes, and easefull refreshings n. Besides God doth in speciall manner vndertake their protection as the places in the margent will shewPsal 76.1. to 9. and 147.5.6 and 149.4.. For meeknes in the hid man of the heart is a thing much set by1 Pet. 3.4., he will guide them in iudgement and teach them his wayPsal. 25.9. What long-suffering hath in it..
Long suffering] By Long-suffering is meant, as I take it, First, an vnwearied firmenesse of heart, holding out vnder all crosses, tentations, oppositions etc. The minde not being easily broken, put out, confounded, discouraged, distempered, or vnquieted with any kind of passion. And so indeede it is nothing else but the perseuerance of patience. Secondly, there is a long-suffering which is a spirituall perseuerance of hope, vnder the promise, with an expectation of the performance of itHeb. 6.12.15. There is a long-suffering in our carriage toward others, in regard of their reformation, and so we should suffer long in hope of the conuersion of the wicked2 Tim. 4.25.: and in expecting the reformation of infirmities in Gods children, whom wee loue and admonish1 Thes. 5.14.. And this is
 the praise of Christian loue, that it doth suffer long1 Cor. 13. Motiues..
The long-suffering is an excellent grace and a worthy ornament, meet to be put on, aswell as any of the rest, and would wonderfully grace the liues of Christians. And the rather should wee loue it, and long after it, because it is so eminent a praise in God himselfe,Rom. 9.22. Luk. 18.7. and in Christ1 King. 1.17.; yea as any haue excelled in the Church, so haue they beene approued in the triall of this grace, as were the Apostles. But it is enough to commend it, it is an excellent fruite of the sanctifying spiritGal. 5.22.. Onely we must know there is great difference between enduring long and long-suffering; for true Christian long-suffering is accompanied not onely with patience, but with diligence,Heb. 6.12. Col. 1.11. 1 Tim. 4.5. and ioyfulnesse, and watching in all things, but especially with the renuing of faith in Gods promise and prouidence.



VERS. 13. Forbearing one another, and forgiuing one another, if any man haue a quarrell to another, euen as Christ forgaue you, euen so doe yee.

THere are two vertues in conuersing that concerne aduersitie. 1. Long-suffering vnder crosses, and clemencie vnder iniuries.
Of Long-suffering before. 1. Of Clemencie in this verse, where two things may be noted: 1. the duty required: 2. the reason rendred for the vrging of the dutie. The duty is propounded in the two principall parts of it, viz. to forbeare, and to forgiue; and amplified by the supposition of a case, If any man haue a quarrell to another. The reason is from the example of Christ forgiuing vs.
Forbearing] The originall word is rendred sometimes to maintaine,Act. 18.14. sometimes to suffer, to endure1 Cor. 4.12. 2 Thes. 1.4. 2 Tim. 4.4. Heb. 13.22., sometimes not onely to endure, but forbeare also2 Cor. 11.1., sometimes to supportEphes. 4.1. What it is to forbeare.. In the two last senses it may be well taken here.
Now if wee would distinctly know what it is to forbeare one another, as it here imports a maine part of Christian clemencie; we must vnderstand, that it is not an omission of holy duties to others, nor a refusing to satisfie others in their griefes or offences, nor a shunning of their company, nor yet a swallowing downe of all sorts of iniuries, committed with an high hand, without acknowledgement or satisfaction. But out of clemencie to forbeare others, hath in it such things as these. 1. A freedome from the thirst of reuenge. 2. A bearing with the infirmities of others, which may be performed two waies; First, by couering them, and not blazing them abroad, if they be secret. And secondly, by silence, in not reprouing them when they faile meerely in frailty. Thirdly, it hath in it not onely a bearing with them, but a bearing of them,Gal. 6.2. and that I thinke may be two waies also. First, in not stirring or prouoking their infirmities. Secondly, by pleasing our neighbours humour in that which is good to edificationRom. 15.1.2.. Fourthly, there is a forbearance in matters of wrong to vs, and thus to forbeare, is not to prosecute euery wrong, either by answers or by suits. And this forbearance is to be practised, when we are able to reuenge, else it is no thankes to vs to forbeare, when we want either power or oportunitie to doe it. 2. Tis forbearance not to meete wrong with wrong.
Or thus, there is a threefold forbearance: First, in iudgement, when in doubtfull cases wee suspend our opinions or censures. Secondly, in words which consist either in not answering, or in giuing soft answers. Thirdly, in deedes when we render not euill for euill.
Againe, forbearance is varied from the consideration of time, for in some things we must forbeare euer, neuer taking notice of the infirmities or wrongs
 as in some weakenesse that are by meere ouersight, or ignorance, and in some things we must for beare for a time, that is, till there bee a fit opportunitie to admonish or correct, etc.
The consideration thereof serues greatly for the reproofe of that wretched distemper in many that professe the same faith and hope,Vses. prouoking one another, and consuming one another, and by frowardnesse, disquieting the rest and content of others. Is it not heere an expresse charge that wee should forbeare one another? Haue we not heere the example of Christ who did so,Motiues. who might haue had a thousand fold more iust reason to vpbraid, censure, or finde fault, then we haue, or can haue. Besides this distempered peeuishnes, and froward misconceiuing and censuring, it is bred of ill causes, for it comes either of malice or ignorance. Of malice, for loue couereth a multitude of sins, especially it suspendeth doubtfull actions. Of ignorance, for it is certaine a wise man will keepe in till afterwards, or hold it his glory to be able to passe by an offence. Further, this sinne may be aggrauated by the relations that are mutually betweene Christians. Are they not fellow-members, coheires, fellow-citizens, partakers of the same afflictions, are they not brethren, etc. Besides is not this also a constant iustice, that they that iudge, are iudged; they that censure, are censured; and doth not this enuying, and iangling, giue occasion of reioycing to aduersaries? Doth it not many times so transforme Christians, that it makes them very like wicked men, when they grow so distempered that they reuile their owne mothers sonnesPsal. 50.20. Gal. 5.9.10.11 12.13.15.? In the fifth to the Galathians the Apostle vrgeth this reproofe by diuers reasons, such as this. A little of the leauen of these distempers, will sowre the whole lumpe: and those courses tend not to any good, but to the disquieting of Gods people, and it is not a small matter to trouble and vexe them. Besides inasmuch as Christians haue trouble enough otherwaies, it doth not become their brethren to trouble them: and we should be so farre from troubling our brethren, as we should rather serue them by loue, and if men will needes bite one another, let them take heede lest they be deuoured one of another. Lastly, if men will not be warned, then let them know the Iudge standeth at the dooreIam. 5.9. Rules for the practise of forbearance.. Now that we may attaine this forbearing, euen to be rightly ordered towards the infirmities, or wrongs of others, we must labour to get more Christian loue of others; for that will endure all things, and beleeue all things, and makes vs able to beare, and it will driue out suspition, which like a wretched Beldame is the mother and nurse of all murmurings, and vaine iangling: and besides, wee must get a greater knowledge of our owne selues, and our owne ignorance and corruptions; for when we seeme to our selues, to be somthing deceiuing our selues, we are ready with intemperance, to apprehend supposed indignities when none are offeredGal. 6.1.2.3. Or if thou must needs speak, then speake the words of admonition, euen Gods words, if thou be sure they haue sinned, insteed of thine owne vaine, and passionate vpbraidings, or reproches, or censures.
One another] Obserue, that vsually where there is any contention or quarrell, both sides are guiltie, though one principally doe the wrong, yet few men are so temperate, but they doe wrong againe, either in words, or deedes, or affections: and therefore thou shouldest forbeare, seeing thou art priuie to thy selfe, that in this businesse, thou hast not beene such as thou shouldest bee.
Forgiuing] The word signifies sometimes to giue1 Cor. 2.12. Phil. 1.29., sometimes to giue freelyLuk. 7.21. Act. 27.24. Rom. 8.32. Gal. 3.8. Phil^m. 22., sometimes to remit freely the punishmentAct. 3.14., sometimes to deliuer vp for fauour, or to pleasure othersAct. 15.11.16., sometimes to forgiue and so here.
Quest. But can any man forgiue sinne to another?
Answ. Man may forgiue the trespasse, though not the sinne. 2. Man may forgiue the punishment that by man might be inflicted, so as not to require
 it. 3. Man may pray to God to forgiue it.
Ob.Obiect. But it is said, no man can forgiue sinne but God. Sol.Sol. True, no man can remit the eternall punishment, or the curse of the Law, or take away the guilt of sinne before God. But man may forgiue it as farre as concernes himselfe.
Now others may obiect contrariwise, that 2 Cor. 2.7. They are willed to forgiue,Ob. and yet the sinne of the incestuous person was not so much a trespasse that concerned them, as a sinne against God. Sol.Sol. This sin also was a trespasse against them. 1. As it was a scandall. 2. As it might cause them and their profession to be euill spoken of, for his sake: againe, to forgiue in that place, may be taken in a large sense, for to be reconciled to him.
Quest.Quest. Is reconciliation necessarily comprehended vnder forgiuenesse?
Answ.Answ. Wee are tied to seeke it, and desire it, and to vse all humble and iust, and discreet courses to attaine it. But if it will not be had we are discharged if we forgiue. Neither vnto obstinate offenders, that will not acknowledge their sinne, are we bound to remit the punishment, or sometimes to notifie the pardon of the fault.
If any man haue a quarrell to another] When he saith here (if any man) it imports, that such Christians might be, as there should be no iarres amongst them. Discords might wonderfully bee preuented if there were care and discretion in men.
The word rendred quarrell, signifies a complaint, certainely it is a great weakenesse, to be vpon euery occasion complaining of the wrongs are done vs, and making report of them to others. And it shewes too, that we should forbeare and forgiue euen in such things as these.
And where hee saith (any man) it shewes no men are exempted from the practise of clemencie: That it is here required of one is required of all, no greatnesse of gifts or place can priuiledge any.
As Christ forgaue you, so doe you] 1. Examples in all rules of practise moue much.
2. As heere the head of the Church is an example to all his members, so should those that are heads of the common-wealth, or familie, carry themselues so, as by their examples to direct aswell as by their precept, not onely shew what to do by commanding, but how to doe it also by example.
3. Especially, in forbearing and forgiuing, example in great persons doth wonderfully affect the common people; and therefore because there are so few on earth, here is one from heauen.
Quest.Quest. But why is there added reason to this vertue, and not so to each of the former?
Answ.Answ. Because the conscience is soone perswaded in the generall, that the rest are good, as humilitie, meeknesse, etc. But now wee are wonderfully hardly perswaded to forgiue. Secondly, the Lord may well adde reasons to perswade to forgiue, because of the speciall danger of not forgiuing; for if a man doe not forgiue, there is expresse threatnings that hee shall not bee forgiuenMath. 6 14. and ^8.25. How Christ is said to forgiue..
Quest. But how is Christ said to forgiue. Answ. Remission of sinnes is attributed to Christ. 1. As the meritorious cause of forgiuenesse. 2. Because he applies it. 3. Because the Christian in his name sues out the pardon of his sinnes, and by him procures forgiuenesse. Certainly it may bee a singular comfort to all distressed soules if they consider, that he that is their brother, head, Sauiour, euen he that shed his bloud for them, is he that disposeth of all pardons,What actions in Christ are imitable. and applies remission of sinnes; sure it is no hard matter to get a pardon from him, that is so ingaged in his loue to vs.
Here also we see that the action of Christ is the instruction of the Christian,
 Christ forgaue, so must he; wee must remember the distinctions of Christs actions, some were miraculous, as fasting 40 daies, raising the dead, etc; these are not to be imitated, because they cannot: some are peculiar actions belonging to his office, as to redeeme, or make intercession, etc. these also are proper to him onely: Now some are morall, these last are only imitable. Or thus, some actions of Christ he did as God, some as Mediator, some as man. The last onely binde vs to follow.
Againe, in that we are bound to forgiue, as he forgaue,To forgiue as Christ forgaue hath six things in it. it not onely teacheth, that we must doe it as well as he: but for the manner of it as he did. And how was that? First, Christ forgaue his inferiors. Secondly, Christ forgaue great faults aswell as lesse, yea all sorts of faults, yea though they were often fallen into. Thirdly, nothing was too deare to Christ to merit or confirme his forgiuenesse, therefore he shed his owne bloud, he stood not vpon his profit, or his ease. Fourthly, Christ vses all meanes to preuent offending. Fifthly, where Christ forgiues he forgets. Sixthly, Christ forgiues two waies. First, vpon the Crosse before men did repent. Secondly, by the Gospell, publishing his pardon vpon mans repentance, he did not carry them grudge till they repented: and all these wayes should we imitate Christ.
Lastly, obserue here the certainty of assurance: For if a man did not certainely, and infallibly know, that Christ did forgiue him, how could that be made a reason, if he did not know it to be.
And thus of clemencie, and so of the two first sorts of graces.



VERS. 14. And aboue all these put on loue, which is the bond of perfectnes.

THE vertues that ought to raigne at all times, are loue, peace, and thankfulnesse. Of loue in this verse, which the Apostle sets out as the most noble, ample, and profitable of all the vertues. Two things are here to be considered: First, the dignitie of loue, where he saith, Aboue all put on loue etc. Secondly, the vse of it, it is the bond of perfectnesse.
Aboue all these] Some read, with all these. Some read, for all these, meaning that all the former doe flow from this, and therefore we should get loue that we might be mercifull, humble, etc. And so it would import that we should get loue, that we might approue our selues, that these are not meere complements, or dissembled offices, or things taken vp for wrong ends.
But most properly and commonly it is read as here, Aboue all these.How loue is aboue all vertues. And so notes the dignitie of loue aboue all other vertues, for it is indeed more excellent, both in respect of causation, as they say in Schooles, because it begets the rest as the efficient cause, and for the preseruation of it other vertues are practised, or the finall cause of them: as also it is aboue the rest in acceptation, whether we respect God or men. And thirdly, it is aboue the rest in respect of continuance1 Cor. 13.8.. And this may serue to reproue our great neglect of so noble a grace: and it may teach vs in our prayers to remember to pray for this, and in our practise to prouoke vnto loueHeb. 10.24. Obiect..
A cauill of the Papists must be auoided here: For they absurdly reason thus: If loue be aboue all vertues, then it is loue that makes vs iust in Gods sight.
But for answer we may easily satisfie our selues with this, that before men,Sol. and in conuersing with men, loue is aboue all: But before God faith is aboue all; loue is aboue faith onely in some respects, as in continuance, but faith is aboue loue in iustification.
Put on] Loue is not naturall, tis a vertue that in the truth of it is wonderfull
 rare in the world, for man is vnto man naturally a wolfe, a fox, a beare, a tygre, a lion, yea a very deuill; and that is the reason why men are so constant in malice, it is naturall with them, and this is the reason why vnitie and louing concord is found in no calling amongst men.
Loue] Loue is of diuers kindes, there is naturall, ciuill, morall, and religious loue: It is naturall loue for a man to loue himselfe, his parents, kinred, etc. Tis ciuill loue that is framed in vs by the lawes of men, by authoritie from God, whereby we are brought not to violate the rules of iustice, or society: In morall loue, that loue of friends is of eminent respect; but it is religious or Christian loue is meant here.
Christian loue is caried both towards God and towards men, and both may be here meant: For the very loue of God may be required as needfull in our conuersing with men, because we can neuer loue men aright, till we first loue God; and besides we are bound in our cariage, to shew our loue to God, by zeale for his glory, and auoyding sinne in our callings, for the loue we beare to him.
Sure it is that the true loue of God is exceeding needfull to be put on, as a most royall robe; I say the true loue of God, and therefore I aduise all sorts of men as to labour for it, so to try themselues whether this loue of God be right in them; if we loue God, we receiue them that come in his nameIoh. 5.42., and the loue of the world doth not raigne in vs1 Ioh. 2.15.17, and we are much in thinking of God and godlinesse, for we often thinke of what we loue, and we loue the word of GodIoh. 14.27. Signes of the loue of God., and in aduersitie we runne first to God for help, denying our selues to bring glory to God, subiecting our wills to his will, glorying in the hope of his mercy; and it is certaine also if we loue God aright, we desire his presence, both of grace and glory. And this loue will compell vs to holinesse2 Cor. 5.14., causing vs to hate what he hates, and to obey his commandementsIoh. 14. What it is to loue our enemies., and besides kindnesses from God will wonderfully inflame vs and content vs.
The loue to men is loue of enemies, or brotherly loue of Gods children; Christians are bound to loue their very enemies, and this kind of loue must be put on as well as the other, onely let vs aduisedly consider what the loue of enemies hath in it. When God requires vs to loue our enemies, he doth not require vs to loue their vices, or to hold needlesse society with their persons, or to further them in such kindnesses as might make them more wicked, or to relinquish the defence of our iust cause; but to loue is not to returne euill for euill,Rom. 12. neither in words1 Pet. 3.8, 9 or deeds, and to pray for them,Matth. 5. and to supply their necessities as we haue occasion,Rom. 12.19. Exod. 23.4. 2 Chro. 28.8, 9, 13.15. 2 King. 6.22. Loue of brethren. ouercomming their euill with goodnesse, and in some cases to be extraordinarily humbled for themPsal. 38.13..
But I thinke the loue of brethren is principally here meant: this is a fire kindled by the sanctifying spirit of God2 Tim. 1.7., this was intended in our electionEphes. 1.14., this proues our faithGal. 5.6., this nourisheth the mysticall body of ChristEph. 4.17., this loue is without dissimulationRom 12.9. 2 Cor. 6.6., it is diligent and labouring loue1 Thess. 1.3 Heb. 6.10., it is harmeles and inoffensiueRom. 13.10., it woundeth not by suspitious prouocations or scandalsRom. 14.15., it is not mercenarie, for as God is not to be loued for reward, though he be not loued without reward: so we must loue men, not for their good turnes they do vs, but for the good graces God hath giuen them. And we should shew our loue in vsing our gifts for the best good of the bodyRom. 12.6, 7., and manifest our compassion and fellow-feeling by counsell and admonitions2 Cor. 2.4., and consolationsPhil. 1.7., and alwaies of edification1 Cor 8.1., and by workes of mercy2 Cor. 8.24., auoyding contentionPhil. 2.3., and couering the infirmities one of another1 Pet. 4.8. Loue is the bond of perfection three vvaies..
Thus of the dignitie and nature of loue: the vse of it followes, which is
The bond of perfection] Loue is said to be the bond of perfection three waies. 1. Because it is a most perfect bond, and so it is an Hebraisme; for all vertues are not as it were collected in loue, all other vertues will soone be vnloosed,
 vnlesse they be fastned in loue; neither doth it only tye vertues together, but it giues them their perfection, mouing them, and perfecting them, and making them accepted. And it is most perfect, because it is most principall among vertues, nothing is in this life well composed that is not directed hither.
But let none mistake, he doth not shew here how we be made perfect before God, but how we might conuerse perfectly amongst men. And so the summe of this sense is, that all should be well with vs, in liuing one with another, if loue flourish amongst vs, perfection consisteth in loue by way of bond.
Secondly, it is a bond of perfection, because it is the bond that ties together the Church, which is the beauty and perfection of the whole world.
Thirdly, it is a bond of perfection as it leads vs to God who is perfection it selfe; yea by loue God is ioyned to man, and dwels in him.
The vse of all is, seeing loue is of this nature, vse, dignitie, and perfection,Vse. therefore we should labour to be rooted in loue, euen euery way firmely setled in it. And to this end we should labour more to mortifie our owne selfe-loue, and the care for our owne ease, profit, credit, etc.
And this may wonderfully also shame vs for those defects are found in vs. It may greatly reproue in vs that coldnesse of affection that is euen in the better sort, and those frequent ianglings and discords, and that fearefull neglect of fellowship in the Gospell in many places, and all those euill fruits that arise from the want of the exercise of this grace, such as are suspitions, blinde censures, etc. And thus of loue.



VERS. 15. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also yee are called in one body: and be thankefull.

IN this Verse he exhorts vnto the two last vertues, Peace and Thankfulnes. In the exhortation to peace, there is the dutie and the reason. The dutie in these words, let the peace of God rule in your hearts, where I consider the nature of the vertue, peace: the author of it, God: the power of it, let it rule: the seat or subiect of it, in your hearts: the reason of it is double, first from their vocation, to the which yee are called: Secondly, from their mutuall relation, as members of one bodie.
Peace] Peace is threefold, internall, externall, and eternall.Threefold peace. Internall peace is the tranquilitie of the minde and conscience in God, satisfied in the sense of his goodnesseRom. 14.17.: Externall peace is the quiet and concord in our outward estate, and cariageEphes. 4.3.: Eternall is the blessed rest of the Saints in heauenEsay 57.2.; the last is not here meant.
Of God] Peace is said to be of God in diuers respects. 1. Because our peace should be such as may stand with the glory of God, so we should seeke the truth and peaceZach. 8. vlt.. 2. It may be said to be of God because he commandeth it1 Cor. 14.31.. 3. Because he giueth it, he is the author of it; hence peace is said to be a fruit of the spiritGal. 5.22.: and God is said to be the God of peace2 Cor. 13.11. 1 Thess. 5.23. Heb. 13.20. (...).. In this last sense I thinke it is meant here.
Let it rule] The originall word is a terme borrowed from running at race, and it imports; Let peace be the iudge, let it sit and ouer-see, and moderate all the affections of the heart, seeing we are in a continuall strife, whereas our affections would carry vs to contentions, discords, brawlings, grudges, and diuisions, etc. Let the victory be in the power of peace. Let peace giue the applause, and finally determine the matter.
Thus of the explication of the sense of the words.

Now all these words may be first vnderstood of internall peace with God, and then God may be said to be the author of it in diues respects.
Hovv peace is of God.1. It may be said to be of God, because he sent his Sonne to merit it. Hence Christ is said to be our peaceEph. 2.14.17., Prince of peaceEsay 9.6., Lord of peace2 Thes. 3.16.. Secondly, because he sends his messengers to proclaime it, and invite men to itEsay 52.7.. Thirdly, because he sends his spirit to worke itGal. 5.22. Hovv it rules..
Now this peace of God is said to rule,
First, when it ouerswayes doubts and tentations, establishing the heart in the confidence of the assurance of Gods loue in Christ, which is when a man can say as the Apostle did, I am perswaded neither principalities nor powers, neither heights nor depths, things present nor things to come, shall euer be able to separate vs from the loue of God which is in Christ Iesus. Catharinus a very Papist could gather certainty out of this place.
Secondly, when in our cariage we continually feare to offend God, or doe any thing that might disturbe the peace of our consciences.
Thirdly, when in aduersitie we can denie our selues, and rather chuse to suffer affliction then forgoe the peace of Christ in our heartsIoh. 16.33..
Now when the Holy Ghost adds in your hearts, it implies that true peace with God will encounter both presumption, and hypocrisie, and diffidence: Presumption, for it will rule in our hearts, it will not abide hardnes of heart, and the spirituall slumber: It will not rest till there be affections of godlinesse, as well as common profession of it. Hypocrisie, for it notes that it will not rule onely by keeping iustice in a mans life, but it will rule within a mans thoughts and affections.Ioh. 14.17. Diffidence, and so these words excellently encounter a feare in weake Christians. Oh I shall loose my peace, and that rest I haue: now this is answered here, thy peace is in thine heart, and therefore who can take it from thee? It is not like thy money and credit etc, for these may be taken away: But peace can no man, nor Deuill take away without thine owne consent; it is in a chest where no hands can come but Gods and thine owne.
Vses.The vse of this may serue for reproofe of that lamentable securitie, that is in most men about their inward peace with God, not onely that most men wretchedly procrastinate through the hardnesse of their hearts, refuse peace in the season when God offers peace, and beseecheth them to be reconciled, but also for that the most men confirme themselues in this presumption, that they are in Gods fauor, when indeed they are not. It was the fault of some ProphetsIer. 23.17, 18, and is too common a fault of many Ministers, to cry peace, peace, when there is no peace, by reason of the sinnes men liue in without repentance. The Holy Ghost in many places complaines that such is the state of the most men, that they haue not knowne the waies of peacePsal. 14. Rom 3.17.. And the day of iudgment shall finde many that cry peace and safetie, while they are ready suddenly to perish1 Thess. 5.3.: Iehu could say, what peace so long as the whoredomes and witchcrafts of their mother Iesabel remaine? So may not we say, what peace can there be vnto men, (though the world struggle and gainesay) so long as lip-seruice, swearing, prophanation of the Sabboth,What vve must do to get peace. bloud, drunkennesse, whoredome, contempt of the word etc, doe so much abound without amendment?
Secondly, hence we may learne by all meanes to seeke the peace of God into our heart. And to this end we must be Gods peoplePsal. 85.8., and get an humble and contrite heatIsa. 57.15.19 Psal. 37.11., and soundly labour our iustification by faithRom 5.1., we must be good and true in our heartsPsal. 125. vlt., and worke righteousnesEsay 32.17. Rom 2.10. G^l. 6.16., and studie the Scriptures, waiting vpon the word preachedEsay 57.19. Luk 10.6..
Thirdly, it may serue for comfort to all Gods seruants that seeke true peace, the Lord would haue them to haue peace, and to haue plenty of it that it may rule in them. Ob. Oh but I haue many and great afflictions in the world. Sol. What though, in Christ thou maist haue peaceIoh. 16.33.. Oh but I cannot see which
 way I should haue any peace. Sol. He will create peaceEsa. 57.19.. Oh but the Deuill is very violent in tempting. Sol. The God of peace will tread the Deuill downe shortlyRom. 16.20.. Oh but the peace we haue, neither is, nor here will be perfect. Sol. Peace shall comeEsay 57.2.. Oh, but I am afraid lest my peace with God breake, and so hold not. Sol. The mountaines may fall, but Gods couenant of peace shall not fallEsay 54.10..
Thus of internall peace, externall peace followes: And it is either domesticall, or ecclesiasticall, or politicall. Peace should rule our houses, and shew it selfe by freedome from bitternesse, and chiding, and brawling, and absurd peeuish passions.
And for Church peace (to write a word or two of that) it is not onely a rest from persecution, but also from discords within, this is a marueilous blessing. This peace hath not in it a confusion of all sorts of men, ioyned together in one vniuersall amitie, though they be neuer so wicked: For Christ came not to send such peace, and the word is a fanne that will make a diuision. The world will hate, and darknes will not mix with light, the children of the Prophets will be as signes and wonders euen in Israel. But this peace is a holy amitie and heauenly concord, in the true members of the mysticall bodie, both in consent and doctrine. This peace in the Church is of singular worth, and occasions vnspeakeable ioy and growth in the Church: this is to be sought and prayed for of euery Christian, but especially it should be the care of Church-gouernors. And certainely there would be more peace if they would more and more loue goodnes, and honour good men, and more carefully preuent and seuerely purge out the leauen of corrupt doctrine, and wicked life, and so tithe minte and cummin, as not to neglect the weightier things of the law, especially if they would more disgrace flatterers and slanderers, that imploy their whole might to make the breach worse.
Politicall peace is either priuate, and so it is a rest from suites and quarrels: Or publike, and so it is a rest from warres, and rebellions, and tumults.
But I thinke by externall peace here is meant in generall, concord, and a quiet, harmelesse, peaceable course of conuersing with men in all our cariage. Now God is said to be the author of it, in that it is his gift, and speciall prouidence to worke it amongst men; and it is said to rule when we can preferre publike peace before our priuate respects; and when we can seeke it, and not stay till it be sought of vs; and when we can forbeare and forgiue, notwithstanding any inequalitie. Now this peace may be said to rule in the heart, though it be externall, because if corrupt passions be killed in thee, (as enuie, rage, malice, desire of reuenge, etc.) men would easily agree in life; binde the heart to the good abearing, and the hands will binde themselues.
The vse may be both for reproofe of the peruerse dispositions of the most men that will not liue in peace, but with all falshood and sinne, nourish debate and vaine contentions: as also it may informe and inflame men to desire peace, to seeke it, yea to follow after itPs. 34.13, 14 Rom. 14.18. Heb. 12.14.. But that men might attaine peace, they must haue salt in themseluesMark 9.50., that is, by mortification season, tame, and purge their owne hearts; yea they must vse the salt of discretion, and to that end pray God to make them wise in their conuersation; yet men must euer remember so to seeke peace as to retaine truth too,Zach. 8.19. Heb. 12.14. Jam. 3.18. peace without holinesse is but prophane rest.
Thus of the dutie: the reasons follow.
To the which yee are called] We are called to peace not onely by men, who by their lawes require peace, but chiefly by God, and that two wayes. First, in the generall precepts of the words which are set downe in diuers places. Secondly, in speciall manner, in the word of reconciliation, that word that conuerts vs and reconciles vs, doth at the very first shew vs the very necessitie and
 worth of peace; as the sense of our neede of Gods mercy, makes vs mercifull to men; so the sense of our neede of peace with God, makes vs peaceable with men.
This confutes their folly, that say forwardnesse in religion makes men turbulent; most wretchedly do prophane men sinne against Gods people in that aspersion: for they are called to peace, and are the most peaceable people in the world. But let all that feare God, euen shew the fruit of their holy calling, by approuing themselues to be louers of peace.
In one bodie] The second reason is taken from their mutuall relation amongst themselues, they are members of one body, and as it is vnnaturall and vnseemely to see a man teare his owne flesh, so it is most vnnaturall and vnseemely for Christians to bite and deuoure one another, by iarring, and complayning, and wrangling one with another: and we should hence learne to speake all one thing, and haue all one faith, and one heart, and so liue in peace that the God of loue and peace may be with vs. But of this mysticall vnion in the former Chapter.
Thus of Peace. Thankfulnesse followes.
And be yee thankefull] Thankfulnesse is either to God or men. Tis the latter here is meant: Thankfulnesse to men must be considered in it selfe, and in the amiable performance of it, for the word is by some rendred amiable. And it may be it notes but the right manner of affecting in giuing or receiuing thankes.
This thankfulnes hath in it principally gratitude, that is, thanks in words, yet it may containe also gratuities, that is, tokens of good will, whereby we indeuour indeed to recompence good for good.
Thankfulnes is sometimes in desire, sometimes indeede; it is true thankfulnesse vnfainedly to desire opportunitie to shew it.
Thankfulnes may be due, not onely to godly men, but also to wicked men; yea such as turne to be our enemies, we should watch to the opportunities of doing them good, though they be euill.
Now the Amiablenesse required, is either in him that must performe thankfulnes, or in him that must receiue it.
What is required in performing thankfulnes.In performing thankfulnesse we must obserue these rules. First, it must be wholly. 2. It must be in all places. 3. It must be without flattery, or insinuation to begge new fauours. 4. It must be without the fauouring of the vices of others.
What is required in receiuing thanks.In receiuing thanks there are these three rules.
1. That he intend not to bring into bondage by shewing of kindnesse, for so to receiue kindnesse were to lose a mans liberty.
2. That out of pride he wax not conceited by complaining of vnthankfulnesse, for the meere want of manner or measure he expects, where he might see it comes not of ingratitude, or a will not to giue thanks, but meerely out of naturall defect, or want of skill, or will to complement it.
3. That he water what he hath sowed, that is, labour to keepe kindnesse a foot by nourishing it, at fit occasions and opportunities of doing good.



VERS. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdome, teaching and admonishing one another, in Psalmes, and Hymnes, and spirituall songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.

HItherto of the speciall rules of holy conuersing with men: The generall rules follow, vers. 16.17. and they concerne,
1. The meanes of holy life, vers. 16. viz. the word.2. The end of holy life, vers. 17. viz. the glory of Christ.
The sixteenth verse conteines an exhortation to the carefull, and plentifull, and frequent vse of the word.
Doctrine from Coherence.
The word is the principall meanes,The vvord makes men not onely more religious, but also more iust. not onely to make vs religious and holy in our behauiour towards God, but also to make vs righteous, iust, and amiable in our cariage towards men. It is the word that makes vs, 1. New creatures1 Pet. 1.23. Jam. 1.18.. 2. HumbleEsay 66.2.. 3. Meeke, Psal. 45.4. where it is called, the word of meeknesse, not because it requires it, and containeth discourse of the praises of it, but by effect, because it makes men so. 4. Patient and long-suffering, Reuel. 3.10. The word of my patience. It begets patience, yea, such patience as Christ will owne, yea such as by influence comes from Christ, by meanes of the word. 5. Clement, able to forbeare, and forgiueJam. 3.17.. 6. Louing, able to expresse in cariage the affections and duties of louePhil. 1.9. and 2.14.16.. 7. Peaceable, Esay 2.2.4. The word shall iudge all strife, so as men shall not only lay aside the effects and meanes of contention and hostilitie, but become by the power of the word, willing to serue one another in loue, yea to abide the labour of loue, noted by mattockes and sithes. No worke so base, or laborious, but godly men perswaded by the word, will vndertake them for the good and peace of the Church, and their brethren. I might instance in the rest of the vertues, but these shall suffice.
This should informe vs concerning the causes of the viciousnesse of the liues of the most: it is because they so stubbornly rebel against the word;Vse. either refusing to heare it, or hardning their heart against the working of it. And secondly, if we finde our corruptions in our selues to get head, and make vs not onely a burthen to our selues, but an offence to our brethren, we should come to the word, and to Christs ministers, for there we may finde helpe if we will be aduised: and if our seruant and children in their cariage be disordered, we should bring them to Gods house, that there they may be framed to a greater care of their behauiour in our house.
Thus of the Coherence.
This verse in it selfe containes an exhortation concerning the word of God: and thus he exhorts to the right vse, First, of the word in generall. Secondly, of one part of the word, which is the Psalmes. Concerning the word in generall, here is to be considered: First, the author of it, word of Christ. Secondly, the manner of entertainment of the word, let it dwell in you plenteously in all wisdome. Thirdly, the end or vse it should be put to: First, to teach in what we know not. Secondly, to admonish in what we doe not.
Word of Christ] (...), the word is taken sometimes for Christ himselfe, Iohn 1.1. And so it is true that we should labour that the word Christ should dwell in vs. Sometimes for preaching, Act. 20.7. and so it is true that wee should grow so carefull and skilfull in remembring the Sermons we heare, that our hearts should be stored with riches of that kinde. Sometimes for memorable sayings, Act. 2.22. and 20.35. 1 Tim. 4.9. 2 Tim. 2.11. Tit. 1.3.6. Heb. 7.28. Rom. 13.9. And so it is true that a Christian should be so familiarly acquainted with Scriptures, that all the memorable sayings in them should be ready in their memories.
But to come neerer, by the word of Christ, some vnderstand the counsel^ and exhortations of Christ, concerning the contemning of the world, to the intent to deuote our selues to the contemplation of heauenly things. Some vnderstand the promises in Scripture concerning Christ, or to be had in him Some vnderstand that part of the Scripture, which Christ by his owne mouth vttered. It is true, that in euery of these a Christian should be exceeding rich.

But I take it, that all these senses are too strait and narrow for this place. By the word of Christ therefore I vnderstand, the whole word of God contained in both the old and new Testament. And this is said to be the word of Christ foure waies.
The Scripture is the vvord of Christ in foure respects.First, as Christ is the subiect of it, the summe of the word is Christ. Secondly, as it is the proper inheritance and riches of the bodie of Christ, the dowrie he hath bestowed vpon his Church. Thirdly, as he is the conseruing cause of it. Fourthly, as he is the author of it: and so I take it here principally to be meant.
Christ is the author of the word: First, in respect of inspiration2 Pet. 1. vlt.. Secondly, in respect of commission to his AmbassadorsTit. 1.3., he doth not onely indite the Ambassage, but giues commission to the Ambassadors. Thirdly, in respect of confirmationMar. 16. vlt. externally, by the signes that follow it; and internally, by the seale of the spiritEphes. 1.13.. Fourthly, in respect of personall promulgation of it in that, in the old Testament in humane shape he appeared to declare it to Adam, Abraham, Iacob, and the Patriarkes, and also by visions to the Prophets, and in the new Testament by incarnation, taking truely our nature, did by liuely voice in his owne person preach the Gospell to men. Fifthly, in respect of energie, or the power and efficacie of the word, which wholly depends vpon Christ, and is shewed by the growing of the word notwithstanding all oppositions, and that it cannot be bound, though the Ministers of it suffer2 Tim. 2.9., and in the difference of power betweene Christs ministers and hirelings: yea, hence it is so liuely and mighty in operation, that it discernes and discouers the very secrets of men, and tells tales of the hearersHeb. 4.12, 13. Vse..
The vse is either more generall, or more speciall: more generall, either for information to satisfie vs concerning the hard sayings in Scripture, and the experience of the truth of that, Ioh. 8.43. viz. that wicked men cannot heare the words of Christ. It comes from the soueraigne maiestie, and secret excellencie of the word, and the spirituall nature of it (as the word of Christ) remoued from the sense of the carnall reason and fleshly affections of vnregenerate men. And also this serues for instruction, and that either negatiuely, or affirmatiuely.
Men sinne against the vvord six vvayes.Negatiuely, the vse is, therefore take heede of sinning against the word of Christ: and as men sinne against the word many wayes, so principally six wayes.
First, by contemning of itJoh. 12.48. Heb 2.2.. Secondly, by betraying it to Satan, letting him steale it out of our heartsMat. 13.20.. Thirdly, by choaking it with cares and lustsMat. 13.21.. Fourthly, by making it of none effect(...). by traditions. Fifthly, by a proud challenging of the knowledge of it to our selues1 Cor. 14.36.. Sixtly, by being ashamed of our obedience or profession of the words of Christ, when we are amongst sinfull and wicked menMar. 8.38..
Affirmatiuely, it may teach vs foure things.

1. To receiue the word of God with all humilitie and meeknesseJam. 1.21..
2. To receiue it with faithHeb. 4.2..
3. To glorifie the word of GodAct. 13.48.: which we doe, First, when we ascribe the praise not to men, but to Christ. Secondly, when we esteeme it more then the words of the greatest men.
4. To be carefull of our cariage and practise, that so the word of Christ which we professe, be not euill spoken ofTit. 2.5., for the blame of our euill life will be laid vpon the word; they will say, this is their gadding to Sermons.

In speciall, seeing the word is the word of Christ, it should teach,
First Ministers foure things.

1. To teach it with boldnesse(...). Act. 5.31., not fearing the face of any man.

2. To attend vpon the word onely, and not meddle with ciuill businesses: is it meete to leaue the word of Christ to serue tablesAct. 6.2.?
3. To humble themselues to walke with God in so good a function. Who is sufficient for these things? We speake not our owne words, or the words of men, for then wit, reading, learning, and direction might perfect vs, but we speake the words of Christ, and therefore our fitnes and sufficiency to speake to mens consciences, comes of the immediate blessing and assistance of Christ.
4. To deliuer the word with all faithfulnesse, studying to approue themselues as the workemen of God, (seeing they deliuer the word of God) diuiding the word aright2 Tim. 2.15., holding fast the faithfull word of doctrineTit. 1.9.: not making merchandise of the word, but as of sinceritie, and as of God, in the sight of God, speaking in Christ2 Cor. 2. vlt.. Casting from them the cloake of shame, not walking in craftinesse, nor handling the word deceitfully, but in declaring the truth, approuing themselues to euery mans conscienc^ in the sight of God2 Cor. 4.2..

Secondly, the people, to imbrace the word, presse to it, neuer be ashamed of it, nor giue it ouer, but receiue it constantly with ioy, though it cost them much paines, and many crosses and disgraces2 Thess. 1.5.. For this constant receiuing of, and cleauing to the word, makes them exceeding deare to Christ, as deare as his mother, and his brethren: This is the chusing of the best partLuk. 10.42., this is a signe that they are the Disciples of ChristJoh. 8.31., that they loue Christ, indeedIoh. 14.23, 24, that they be in Christ1 Joh. 2.5.: Shee said well, that said of Christ, Blessed was the wombe that bare thee, and the breasts that gaue thee sucke: but Christ addes, that they are more blessed that heare the word of Christ and keepe itLuk. 11.28.. The blessed Virgin was more happy in that shee conceiued Christ in her heart, then that she bare him in her wombe.
Thus of the author of the word.
The entertainment of the word followes: and here the Apostle designes, First, the subiect, persons, You. Secondly, the measure, Dwell plenteously. Thirdly, the manner, in all wisdome.
First, I consider of the expositions of all the words, which are very full of senses, and then make vse of all together.
In you] These words note vnto vs two things: First, the persons who must entertaine. Secondly, the place where, in you, that is, in your hearts.
First, for the persons: The Apostle would haue vs know, that not onely Cleargy men (Epaphras and Archippus) but lay-men of all sorts are tyed to the studie of Scriptures.
I distribute the sorts:
First, yong men as well as the gray haires,1 Ioh. 2.12. for the word helps them to ouercome the Deuill, euen all tentations to lust, and vngodlinesse whatsoeuer; yea by the blessing of God many times it makes them wiser then the ancientPs. 119.100..
Secondly, distressed men, as well as such as liue at ease, and prosperitie, and abound in leisure: I say, such as haue many cares and troubles, distressed, either by crossesPsal. 119.92., or by persecutionsPsal. 119.87., or by contemptPs. 119.141..
Thirdly, ignorant men, as well as learned men, such as are simple in respect of naturall parts, or vntaught in respect of education, are tyed aswell as others; they may not say, they were not brought vp to learning, for many times simple and vnlearned people in the very entrance into the wordPsal. 119.129.130., when they bring good and holy desires with them, get more light of the wonders of Gods law in few weeks, then many great learned men doe in all their daies, for sound sauing knowledge.
Fourthly, Women aswell as men are bound hereunto, Prou. 31.26. and 1.8.
 Yea,Women must seeke knovvledge as vvell as men. such women as are full of businesse and cares, not good women or wiues, but good huswiues also are tied, yea not onely to learne the word, but to teach it as the places shew.
Thus of the persons.
Secondly, in you, notes the place that the word must be entertained in: In you, that is, in your mindes, for contemplation; in your hearts for holy desires, and affections; in your consciences to guide them to a holy manner of giuing sentence, etc. This is that which is promised to all the faithfull in the couenant of grace, Ierem. 31.33. and noted as the signe of the righteous, Psal. 37.21.
Dwell] A metaphor borrowed from houshold entertainment, and notes three things vnto vs.
1. That the word should be familiar to vs, and knowne of vs readily, and we so acquainted with it, as with our brethren, or sisters: Say vnto wisdome, thou art my sister, etc. Pro 7.4: To note, that as in nature he is accounted a singular idiot that knowes not his owne brothers or sisters; So in religion, in Gods account it is extreame simplicitie, and blindnesse, not to be familiarly acquainted with the grounds of behauiour and comfort, as they are contained in the word.
The Scriptures in our houses.2. That it should be domesticall, we must get it into our houses, aswell as our Churches, and that three waies: First, when we come home from God, house we should keepe the word taught a foote by repetitions of it, and by talking of it vpon all occasions, that the life of doctrine be not lost. Secondly, there is required a familiar teaching, and plaine and familiar instructing of seruants, distilling of the principles, and profitable precepts of the law as they are able. God gaue his testimonies to Israel, not that the Clergy men should haue them in the Temple and Synagogue, but that Parents should haue them in their seuerall dwellings, to instruct their children, and their childrens childrenPsal. 78.5, 6 Deut. 6.. Thirdly, the admonitions, rebukes, counsels, and incouragements vsed in the familie should be grounded on the word: for conscience onely is the fountaine of all right subiection, and obedience: the bonds of nature (because he came out of thy loines) or the bonds of policie (because he is thy hired seruant) are too weake to inforce (of themselues) a constant, and cheerefull, and iust subiection. The true reason why men speed so ill in their seruants and children is because they nurture them with their owne words, but distill not into their consciences the words of Christ.
The vse of Scripture in our houses.Quest. But to what end should there neede all this adoe about the Scriptures in our houses, what good comes of it?
Answ. If it be not intimated sufficiently before: yet plainely vnderstand, that the word is to be exercised in our houses; First, as a refuge against afflict^on and domesticall crosses, both to direct and comfort vs, Psalm. 119.143.147.165. Secondly, as a meanes of instruction to our ignorant children and seruants. Thirdly, as a meanes of the sanctification of the creatures, and our callings, 1 Tim. 4.4. Lastly, seeing Satan will tempt vs, and our natures will be vicious, not onely in Gods house, but in our owne houses, we haue reason to carry the medicine to the sore, and to bring the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, home with vs, and draw it there, seeing the Deuill will cast his fiery darts there. He that is in danger of a subtle and furious enemie, alwaies must looke vnto two things: First, that he hath on all his armour: Secondly, that he be ready at all times, in all places, when his aduersarie will encounter with him. A malicious and skilfull aduersarie desires but to finde his enemie vnarmed in one part of his bodie, or in one place: so is it with vs, for because men haue no sword of the Spirit at home, therefore it comes to passe that men that haue good affections in Gods house haue base and vile affections
 in their owne houses. Thirdly, it notes that the word must be constantly entertained and exercised in our houses: for they are not said to dwell with men, that lodge there onely for a night, or a day or two;Ps. 119.112. so the sudden and passionate vse of the word now and then will not serue it.
Plenteously] The originall word notes two things. 1. The measure,(...). and so it is well rendred, plenteously. 2. The worth of the knowledge of the word, and so it is by some rendred, richly. In the first sense it teacheth vs that wee should labour by all meanes to abound in the knowledge and vse of the word. It should be, not in a scant and sparing measure, or in some parts of it, but we should grow from measure to measure, and from knowledge to knowledge. In the second sense it teacheth vs, that the knowledge of the word is the Christians riches, so he saith, 1 Cor. 1.5. rich in all speech and knowledge. Christians should account their vtterance in holy and profitable speeches, and conferences, and the inward notions of sauing knowledge, as their best wealth, so as they should neuer thinke themselues poore so long as they may haue plenty of knowledge in the vse of the meanes. Thus Dauid reckons of his wealth. Gods statutes more deere to him then thousands of gold and siluerPs. 119.32., and that knowledge he can get from the word out of Gods treasury, maugre the malice and power of the Deuill or euill men, he accounts more worth then rich spoilesPs. 119.162., this may appeare in the contrary in the case of the LaodiceansReu. 3.18, 19..
In all wisdome] Wisdome is sometimes taken for vertue, as folly is for sin; but here I take it for knowledge, and that not as the gaining of heauenly wisdome is the end of the entertainment of the word, but as it notes the manner how we should entertaine the word.Of the vvise vse and entertainment of the vvord. This wise manner of entertaining the word, I consider both negatiuely and affirmatiuely: Negatiuely to handle the word wisely is not to handle or vse it, First, coldly, fruitlesly, or vnaptly: Secondly, peruersly, in wresting the word to ill ends, to nourish curiositie, ambition, or sin. Thirdly, carnally as the Capernaites, that know no flesh of Christ, but the flesh of his body, nor any eating but carnall. Fourthly, not indiscreetly when we come abroad into company, we should so professe and vse the word, as that we dishonour it not by indiscretion, by not heeding places, times, occasions, etc.
Affirmatiuely to vse the word wisely, is in the generall, especially to teach our selues. And to this end: First, to vnderstand it. Secondly, to seeke profitable things, not curious and pleasing things only. Thirdly, so to try all things, as to keepe that which is good. Good I say particularly and for our owne vse; there be some things in hearing, reading, etc. that doe exceedingly, not only affect vs, but are in speciall manner fitting vs: now it is a speciall wisdome to keepe these things whatsoeuer else we lose. Fourthly, to wait vpon all the opportunities of getting profit by the word, to know our seasonsIerem. 8.7.. Fifthly, in cariage abroad, not to be so indiscreetly open in the discouerie of our mindes, and knowledge, and opinions, as to be catched by the fraud of any, and to this end, not to trust all that faine themselues to be iust menLuk. 20.20..
In all wisdome] All for measure, all for diuersitie of the things knowne, all for sinceritie of the obseruation of the rules of wisdome, in the manner of entertaining the word, all wisdome, that is, all necessarie to saluation.
Thus of the explication.
The vses follow, and those are either generall from all the words,The vses generall and speciall. or speciall from each of them. The generall vses are for reproofe, information, instruction, or consolation.
1. For reproofe, if it must be thus of all entertained, how great a sinne is it to neglect or contemne the word, and in as much as this is a great and common sinne, it is required, and requited by God with foure singular curses. The first iudgment vpon the contemners of the word is, that all the comforts
 of the word,Foure iudgements vpon contemners of the vvord. Esay 29.11. are vnto them as a sealed booke: so as that word which is to the faithfull a well-head of all true and sound ioy, vnto them is of no taste nor power; they can finde some sauour in any profits and sports, etc. but none in the word. The second iudgement is, that when they doe for fashion, or for feare, and other ill ends come to heare the preaching of the word, they are many times slaine by the word of Gods mouth, and the Prophets euen mow downe scores, hundreds, and thousands of them, so as they are pierced and galled, smitten and buffeted with the terrors of the word, (which is only open to rebuke them) and they see that threatning many times comprehends vnder it multitudes of men.
Ob.Obiect. But this comes onely of the seueritie of the teachers, that set themselues to preach damnation, and to vtter terrible things.
Sol.Ans. This was the obiection in the Prophet Micha his time, and vttered by such as bare the name of Iacob, to whom all the promises did belong, and they were answered by the Prophet, that for resoluing of their doubt, they should aske two questions of their owne consciences. The first was, whether they thought their workes were like the workes of Iacob, and the rest of the ancient Saints, to whom such comforts did belong; or whether such vile prophanenesse and wickednes were found in Iacob, as was apparantly found in them. The second question was, whether they did not see that the words of God were alwaies good to such as walke vprightly. In all which he shewes that it is not the vncharitable seueritie of Gods seruants,Mich. 2.7. (for the doctrine is good to good men) but the vile prophanenes and contempt of the word in the people that made them lyable to such terrors in the word.
The third iudgement is, that all ciuill praises in men that contemne the wisdome of God in the word, are singularly vile in Gods sight, Ier. 8.8.9. and he instructeth in wisdome.
Psal. 119.155.Lastly, saluation is farre from the wicked, because they seeke not Gods statutes, the euidence of the hope of a better life is remoued from them, so as speaking from their owne sense, they auouch it that no man can be sure of eternall life to himselfe: and if in the generall, the prophane neglect of the word be thus sought out and iudged of God; then surely those persons must needs be in great danger, that neuer opened their dores to the word, neuer taught their children and seruants, scarse euer had a Bible in their houses: but especially such as shun the word, as a true rocke of offence. Yea many of Gods children may be iustly rebuked in this, that they are so far from shewing that the word hath dwelt plenteously in them, that whereas for time and the plenty and power of the meanes,Heb. 5.13.12. they might haue beene teachers, they haue need againe to be taught the very principles. And they shew it in that they are so inexpert and vnskilfull in the word of righteousnes.
The second generall vse is for information. See the admirable largenesse of the word and the perfectnes aboue all other things vnder the sunne, it is good for worship in the temple,Psal. 119.96. it is good for our affaires in the family, it is of vse in prosperity and in aduersity, it fits for the profit of all sorts of men, at all times, and in all places, and so doth nothing else in the world.
The third generall vse is for instruction. The meditation of the intertainement of the word in all these words required, should teach vs to open our Churches, open our houses, yea our hearts and all for the word. And to this end to consecrate our selues to the studie of the word in all the meanes both publike and priuate.
Ob.Obiect. But if I should, it will be in vaine I haue such an ill memory, etc.
Sol. Psal. 119.160.Ans. The beginning of the word is truth, and men should finde by experience the contrary to their feares, if they in sinceritie sought vnto God in the word; and as for ill memory, we must know, that a good memorie is the gift of God,
 as well as a good heart, and no man hath it naturally, wicked men may haue large memories, but not sanctified to containe holy things: and therefore if men would seeke to God in vprightnesse of desire: whatsoeuer they lost, yet the iudgement or answer of God in the word preached, or by reading or conference, (which resolueth their doubts, pointeth at the meanes to redresse their corruptions, etc.) should not be wholly forgotten. The iudgements of his righteousnesse indure for euer, that part of knowledge that particularly answers their desires, or the experience of their want in themselues, this shall be deeply imprinted in them by God, so as the vertue thereof shall neuer be lost. To conclude seeing the holy Ghost requires all carefull intertainement of the word, we should do that vnto it that we would do for the entertaining of some great man into our houses. 1. make cleane the roome of our hearts: purge out hypocrisie, malice, etc. 2. When the word is come in molest it not, take heed of strange affections, passions and lusts. 3. Receiue it with ioy and expresse all the signes of ioy.
The last generall vse is for consolation vnto all such as loue the word. They should encourage themselues and say with Dauid, thy statutes shall be my song, so long as I continue in the house of my Pilgrimage. Ob.Ob. Sol. Esay 51.7. But our inward desires and delights in the word are mixed withoutward disgraces and scornes of men: we are reproched, slandered, rebuked, etc. Ans. Hearken vnto me ye that know righteousnesse (not ye that talke of it, or heare them that teach it, but yee that know indeed what sinceritie meanes) and ye of the people in whose hearts are my lawes: as if God would wish them to looke vp and see the great reward of their well doing. Ob.Ob. Sol. Ob. Sol. But they might say we are tanted and threatned, and disgraced. Ans. Feare not the reproach of men, nor be afraid of their rebukes. Ob. But we see that wicked scorners scape vnpunished, and are in better credit doing ill, then we doing well. Ans. Though God doe not by sudden iudgements destroy them all at once, yet hee promiseth that his curse shall secretly and insensibly eat them as the moth. God doth daily iudge them, though we see it not; and for the faithfull,Esay 51.7.8. their righteousnesse shall neuer be taken away by the reproaches of men, but it will endure for euer, etc.
Thus of the vses in generall.
From the particular consideration of each of the words, diuers speciall vses may be made.
Dwell.] First, if the word must dwell with vs, it should teach vs to practise what we are here exhorted, get the word into our houses, let it so dwell with vs, that nothing sound more in a Christian house then the word: that is to liue comfortably. This is to liue in the shadow of the AlmightiePsal. 91.1., in the very light of Gods countenancePsal. 140.. A house without the word is a very dungeon of darknesse. To exercise our selues in the law, it will giue our hearts rest in the daies of euill. The fathers commandement and the mothers instruction would leade our children and seruants when they walke,Psal. 94.12. it would watch for them when they sleepe, and when they wake it would talke with them, it would be a lanterne, and the very way of life to them. It would keepe them from the strange womanProu. 9.20. to 25., there would not be such filthines in many houses as now commonly appeares to be. What can better preserue Iacob from confusion, or his face from being pale, then if he might see his children the worke of Gods hand, framed and fitted by the word in regeneration, and the duties of new obedience? This would make religious parents to sanctifie Gods name, euen to sanctifie the holy one, and with singular encouragement from the God of Israel, Isa. 29.22.23.
In you.] Secondly, in that the people are made the subiect persons to bee exhorted hereunto, it plainly confutes the opinion and practise of the Papists, that either hide the word in a strange tongue, or prohibit priuate men from the domesticall and daily vse of it. But the Apostle doth not enuie it in
 the Lords people, that the word should dwell plenteously in them as well as in Clergie men.
Plenteously.] 3. In that he requires the word should not only dwell with vs, but for measure be plenteously there, it should teach vs in practise to endeuour it: but for explication of this vse, I consider of two questions to answer them.
Quest.Quest. 1. What must we doe that the word might be in vs plenteously, and the knowledge of it abound?
Ans.Answ. Six things are to be practised. 1. Wee must walke at libertie, freeing our heads from worldly cares, lusts, and delightsPsal. 119.45. 2. Wee must auoid euill company, and say with Dauid, Away from mee all yee wicked, for I seeke Gods statutesPs. 119.115.. 3. We must striue to take away the lets of the practise of what we doe know: this Dauid cals the lifting vp of his hands to Gods LawPs. 119.48.. 4. We must exercise our selues in the word day and night, in reading, hearing, meditating, conference, propounding of doubts, and comparing of places, and all times, by all wayes, turning our selues into all formes to gaine knowledge. 5. We should by praier beseech God to doe two things for vs: first, to giue vs the spirit of reuelationEphes. 1.18., secondly, to giue vs larger heartsPsal. 119.32.. 6. We must be thankfull for what knowledge we doe get by the meanesPs. 119.171.
Quest.Quest. 2. But how may we know whether the word doe dwell plenteously in vs?
Answ.Answ. It may be tried and discouered seuen wayes. 1. By our growth in true humilitie and meeknesse.Psal. 15.9. 2. By the confirmation of the testimonie of Iesus in our hearts1 Cor. 1.5.4.. 3. By the measure of our growth in the loue of God and his people; yea and thus we may trie our declining in the vigor of knowledge, (for knowledge had in abundance, may be blasted, and grow singularly dull and feeble) for as our affections to the meanes, and to Gods children is, so is the vigor of our knowledge: hee must not say he knowes God, that hates his brother: yea and so will it serue for triall to euery one in the degrees of ascending or declination euen in Gods children. 4. By the desires and secret muses of our hearts, for then we grow in knowledge, and haue store of it, when we can say as Dauid doth, I haue remembred thy namePs. 119.35. O Lord in the night: and as the Church saith, The desires of our soules is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee, and our spirits within vs seeke after theeEsay 26.9.. 5. By our confidence in it: a man that hath gotten a great deale of wealth, money or lands, enlargeth his heart to a great confidence in it. So a Christian hath gotten a great deale of sauing knowledge, when he is able to make it his portion in all estates whatsoeuer befals himPs. 119.57.: it shewes men haue but a little of the word in them, when euery crosse can dissolue their rest and confidence. 6. By our measure of libertie from the power and bondage of speciall corruptionsIoh. 8.31.32.. 7. By our abilitie in admonishing; they are full of goodnesse and knowledge, that are able to admonishRom. 15.14..
Richly.] 4. In that the word must dwell in vs richly, it may serue 1. for reproofe, and that two wayes: First of mens worldlinesse, that thinke any other riches would serue the turne, but to be rich in God they neuer desire it, but all in vaine as the Parable shewes, Luk. 12. Secondly, of mens hypocrisie, they say they are rich when they are not, Reu. 3.18. Secondly for instruction, therefore let heauen suffer violence, a Christian should be no more a weary of his paines in seeking this riches of the word, then carnall men are of their worldly profits, yea we should pray God so to quicken vs, that wee may keepe his testimonies as wee would keepe treasurePsal. 119 11.88.72..
Lastly, in that he addes, in all wisdome, it should teach vs first to pray to God with Dauid, that he would teach vs good iudgement and knowledgePsal. 119.66., and secondly to make conscience, as to get vnderstanding of the word, so to vse wisdome and discretion, both in the bettering of our knowledge, and in practise the
 same Scripture that bindes vs to a plentifull vse of the word, bindes vnto a wise vse of it.
Thus of the second thing, viz. the entertainment we must giue to the word. The end or vse the word should be put to followes.
Teaching and admonishing your selues, or one another: viz. your fellow members and partakers with you of the same promises and hope.
These words may be referred either to the generall exhortation before, or to the particular charge concerning Psalmes or Hymnes afterwards. I principally consider them as referred to the generall exhortation before, and so I note, that though there be many good effects of the word, or many vses it should be put to, yet teaching (about things not knowne) and admonishing (about things knowne, and not practised) are chiefe.
Ob.Ob. It seemes this place fauours the opinion of such as hold that Christian neighbours met together vpon the Lords day, or at other times, when there is no publike exercise, may labour to edifie themselues by instructing one another out of the word priuately.
Ans. It is not vnlawfull so to doe, and this place doth approue of it:Sol. so as they keepe themselues within their bounds, viz. that the matter taught be not against pietie the true peace of Sion, and that the manner be plaine and familiar, as familie instruction should be, by keeping a foot publike doctrine, by conference, propounding of doubts, or instructing of the ignorant out of such places as they doe vndoubtedly vnderstand.
Concerning teaching, we must know that God doth teach by his spiritNeh 9.20., by his rodEsay 26.9., and by his word, so here: but that which wee are here to note is, that the word is to be vsed by euery Christian, euen for instruction, this is the end why the Law was giuenExod. 24.12., a wise man hauing gotten knowledge into his head, must by his lips spreade it abroadProu. 15.7.. Qu. But whom must wee teach? Ans. Principally our selues, so as wee consider our owne wayes to turne our feet into Gods testimoniesPsa. 119.59; yet also wee are to teach one another, when we spie our brethren to be ignorant: so should not only Ministers doe, but masters of families, and euery Christian in conuersing with others.
Admonishing.] Man is admonished, 1. By the rebukes of the LawIam 2.9.. 2. By the example of Scripture1 Cor. 10.11. 3. By the spirit of GodEsay 30.21.. 4. By the conscience, in wicked men many times. 5. Men are rebuked by their owne wordsIob 15.6.. 6. By the words of other men especially, as admonition is grounded on the words of God. So here.
Concerning admonition I propound foure things. 1. Who may admonish.Who may admonish. 2. Who are to be admonished. 3. How. 4. The vses.
Quest. 1. Who may admonish? Ans. Ministers may2 Tim. 4 12., parents mayEphes. 6.4., yea men ought not to reiect the admonitions of their wiuesGen. 21.12. nay which is more, they may not despise the iudgement of their seruantsIob 31.13.. Quest. 2. Who are to be admonished? Ans. I consider it, 1. Negatiuely. Not
1. They that sinne against the holy Ghost.Who are to admonish.2. Hereticall men, after once or twice warning, Tit. 3.10.3. Not stubborne, wilfull, scornfull, prophane persons. Not dogges and swine, Matth. 7. Not the scorner, Prou. 9 8.4. If it be about wrongs and abuses offered to vs, either by hypocriticall friends, or open enemies: it is a godly mans part, at some times and in some places, to be deafe and dumbe* as if they vnderstood not, or as men in whose mouthes are no reproofe, Psal. 38.14.
2. Affirmatiuely, in generall euery man, Act. 20.31. In particular, I instance onely in some sorts of men; we must admonish vnruly professors1 Thess. 5.14.: besides, ordinary wicked men that appeare not to be scorners, not onely may, but ought to be admonished, that the light may manifest their workesEph. 5.11., that
 they may become sounder in the faithTit. 1.13.; and though this be not amongst men for the time any whit pleasing, yet the blessing of goodnesse shall come vpon them, whilest they that flatter men in their sinnes, and say to the wicked, thou art righteous, shall be cursed and hated of the multitudePro. 24.24.. Yea none are so wise and godly, but they may bee admonishedPro. 9.9., such as are full of goodnesse and knowledge, able to admonish othersRom. 15.14., but it should be our most vsuall and principall labour to admonish our owne soules, and reproue our wayes in Gods sightIob 23.15., for it is a speciall way by which a wise man may be profitable to himselfeIob 22.2..
Quest. 3. What rules are to be obserued in admonition?
What rules are to be obserued in admonition.Ans. In admonition wee must consider, first, how to performe it: secondly, how to receiue it. In performing admonition, wee must especially looke to two things: First, that the ground of admonition be out of the word of God, being the words of Christ, not our owne words. To this end wee should store our selues, and hold fast the faithfull word according to doctrine: First, wee should be constantly stored with grounds out of the word, both for matters of opinion, and against the corruptions of mans life, and for performance of holy duties, that as we haue occasion wee may rebuke, etc.Tit. 1.9. Secondly, wee must see that the manner of admonition bee right. Admonition is to be performed: First, with Innocencie; wee must not be faultie our selues, or if wee haue beene, we must plainly acknowledge it before we admonish. Secondly, with discretion, which must be shewed in three things: First, that wee be sure that they haue offended, not led to it by suspicion of our owne hearts, or by heare-say, or by outward appearance, not iudge by the hearing of our eares, and sight of our eyesEsa. 11.3.. Secondly, that if we know it to be an offence, wee must consider whether it be not of the number of those offences a wise man must hold his glory to passe byPro. 25.11.. Thirdly, that it be done seasonably, with loue, admonishing as a brother2 Thess. 3.15. Fourthly, with meeknesseGal. 6.1.. Fiftly, with secrecieMatt. 18.15. Prou 25.9.. Sixtly, with plainenesse, spare no words to satisfie themLeu. 19.17.. Seuenthly, with compassion and tendernesse2 Cor. 2.4.. Eighthly, with perseueranceProu. 13.19., wee must not bee weary and discouraged, but accomplish it. Ninthly, with all authoritieTit. 2. vlt., that neither our selues nor Gods ordinances be despised.
In receiuing admonition we must looke to foure things. We must receiue admonition: First, with loue and holy estimation1 Thess. 5.12. Psal. 141.7.. Secondly, with all humilitie, readily inclined to suspect our selues, knowing that we haue cause to say and thinke of our selues as that worthy man did, I am more foolish then any man and haue not the vnderstanding of a man in me, etc.Prou. 30.2.3 Thirdly, with subiection and direct acknowledgement, giuing glory to God. Fourthly, with reformation, else all is in vaine.
The vses are, first, to teach vs therefore to stirre vp our selues to performe this mercy in admonishing: for a wise man, euen Salomons wise man, that is, a religious wise man may learne wisdome by itProu. 9.9.. Yea it is as a golden earing to the wise and obedient eareProu. 25.12.. And he that rebuketh, shall finde more fauour at the length then he that flattereth with his tongueProu. 18.23.. Men are said to be pulled out of the fire by admonitionIud. 22.23.. Secondly, we must take heed of sinning against admonition. Now men sinne against admonition three wayes. First, in not performing it: this hath very ill effects, such as these; not admonishing breedes dwelling suspitions, suspitions breed a very habit of misinterpretation, misinterpretation begets a lothnesse to come vnto the light to shew the reasons of dislike, this lothnesse begets a very separation in heart, separation begets a decay of loue to the meanes, decay of respect to the meanes begets a decay of zeale and gifts, and from hence there is a high way to internall or externall apostacie, or some great iudgements of God.
Secondly, in not performing it aright, as when men make their wrath to
 fall vpon the fatherlesse, or digge pits for their friendsIob 6.27., or when men respect Gods personIob 13.8 9., and make the pretence of Gods cause, glory, name, etc. to be the colour for the venting of their owne particular enuy and dislike; or when men neuer haue done, but grow impudent, and reproach men ten times, and are not ashamedJob 19.3.. To conclude, when men faile in the manner before described, want innocencie, discretion, meekenesse, loue, etc.
Thirdly, in not receiuing admonition: and thus men faile diuersly, when men shift, excuse, denie, extenuate, etc. and yet in heart be conuinced, or when men fall into passion, or grudging, or traducing afterwards; or when men would faine make the admonisher to sinne in the word, and lay snares for him that rebukesEsa. 29.21.. But there are some are worse then any of these, for they are such as none dares declare their way vnto their face: Men dare not, they are so passionate and haughtie, but God will lay them in the slimy valley where are Many already like them, and innumerable more shall come after themIob 21.31.32. Many are the ill effects of resisting admonition: It is a signe of a scornerProu. 13.1. and 15.12., and that men are out of the wayProu. 15.10., it brings temporall iudgements and shame vpon themProu. 13.18. Hos. 4.4.5., men may also come to that horrible condition by resisting admonition, that they beeing peruerted shall goe about damned of their owne soulesTit. 3.10.11..
Thus of the generall exhortation.
The speciall exhortation concernes one part of the word, and that is the Psalmes. Which are heere to be considered.

1 In respect of matter, Psalmes, Hymnes, and Spirituall songs.
2 In respect of the manner, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord.

The matter is heere three waies to be considered: First, in the ground,What meant by Psalmes, Hymnes, and spirituall Songs. foundation, or authoritie of the Psalmes we vse, viz. they must be the word of Christ, that is contained in the Scriptures. Secondly in the kindes of Psalmes, there are many sort of Psalmes in Scripture. The Psalmes of Moses, Dauid, Salomon, and other Prophets: but all are heere referred to three heads; they are either Psalmes, specially so called, or Hymnes, or Songs, great adoe there is among Interpreters, to find a difference in these; some would haue Psalmes to be the songs of men, and Hymnes of Angels: some thinke they differ especially, in the manner of Musicke. Some are sung by voice, some plaid vpon instruments; but the plausiblest opinion is not to distinguish them, by the persons that vse them, or by the kinde of musicke, but by the matter, and so they say Psalmes containe exhortation to maners or holy life. Hymnes containe praises to God in the commemoration of his benefits. Songs containe doctrine of the cheefe good, or mans eternall felicitie. But I thinke there needs not any curious distinction: it may suffice vs that there is varietie of Psalmes in Scripture and God allowes vs the vse of euery kinde. Thirdly, the propertie of the Psalmes, they are Spirituall, both because they are indited by the spirit, and because they make vs more spirituall in the due vse of them.
From hence then we may learne these things.

1 That singing of Psalmes is Gods ordinance, binding all sorts of men: Ephes. 6.19. Iam. 5.13. Psalm. 66.1.2. and 92.1. and 135.3. a part of our goodnesse, and a most comely thing.
2 That a Christian should cheefely recreate himselfe in singing of Psalmes, Iam. 5.13. God doth not allow vs other recreations to shoulder out this, as the most doe.
3 That we should sing Psalmes in our houses aswel as our Churches both for daily exercise, Psalm. 101.1.2. and when Christians meet together: 1. Cor. 14.26. Ephes. 5.19.

The manner followes;Rules in singing of Psalmes there are foure things required of vs in singing of Psalmes: First, we should teach and admonish in the vse of them, and that either
 our selues, by considering the matter, or others, as the Ministers in appointing of Psalmes for the congregation, or the Master of the familie, or when Christians meet, there should be choice of such Psalmes as may instruct or comfort, or rebuke, according to the occasion: there is edifying euen in appointing of Psalmes, 1 Cor. 14.26. Secondly, we must sing with grace: this is diuersly interpreted; some vnderstand it of the dexteritie that should be vsed in singing, to affect our selues or others: some take it to be that inward comelinesse, right order, reuerence, or delight of the heart in singing: some would haue it signifie thanksgiuing. But I thinke, to sing with grace, is to exercise the graces of the heart in singing: we must sing with holy ioyPsal. 9.2., with trust in Gods merciesPsal. 13 5., with a holy commemoration of Gods benefitsPsal. 47.6., yea with the praier and desires of our hearts, that our words in singing may be acceptablePsalm. 104.33.34.. Thirdly, wee must sing with our hearts, not with our tongues only outwardly for ostentation: to sing with our hearts is to sing with vnderstandingPsal. 47.7. 1 Cor. 14.14., with sense and feeling. Hence wee are said to prepare our hearts before we singPsal. 57.7.: and it is to be obserued that Dauid bids his tongue awakePsal. 57.8., noting that hee obserued in men a lethargie, not a hoarsnesse of voice, but a slumber in heart when they vsed the voice. Fourthly, we must sing to the LordEphes. 5.19., that is, both to Gods glory, and in sense of Gods presence, and vpon a holy remembrance of Gods blessings. This is to sing to his name.
The vse is first for instruction, when we are merry to sing PsalmesIam. 5.13., yea to account this as heauenly melodie,Ephes. 5.19., a precious perfume for our chambers, a holy homage to God, the calues of our lips, yea wee should resolue against all the prophane contempt of the world, to praise God thus while we liuePsal. 156.2. and 104.33., and to this end wee should striue against the obiections and backwardnesse of our owne natures: for the flesh will obiect against singing of Psalmes, as well as against praying, reading, etc. Secondly, for reproofe of such as set their delight in fleshly lusts and sports, in dancing, gaming, etc. in singing of carols, ballads, filthy rimes, etc. all which delights are so farre from being spirituall, that they make our hearts farre more fleshly and carnall; yea it reproues the best of vs, for want of the right manner in the vse of singing, in all the foure things before, which wee should bee humbled for, as for any other our sinnes.
Thus of the 16. Verse.



VERS. 17. And whatsoeuer ye shall doe in word or deed, doe all in the name of the Lord Iesus: giuing thankes to God euen the Father by him.

THis verse containes the second generall rule to be obserued in our conuersation, and it is an exhortation to the minding of the right end in all our actions. In the former verse hee tooke order for the meanes of holy life; here he takes order for the end of it.
Doct. In generall, vnto the goodnesse of the action a good end is essentially required;Vnto goodnesse of the action, the goodnesse of the end is required. for though a good intention make not the action good, yet without a good intention the action cannot bee accepted as good in Gods sight. It is a good thing to heare and follow Christ, but not good in the Capernaits, that follow for the loaues; or in the Pharisies, that heare to carpe, or carrie tales, and informe against him. It is a good action to vse our knowledge, but ceaseth to be good in vs, when it puffeth vp, and is done for vaine ostentation. It is good to receiue the Sacraments; but yet Circumcision was not good, either as the sonnes of Iacob required it, nor as the King and his sonnes receiued it. Workes of holy and religious seruices are good
 but when men come to Church on the Sabboths, to make amends for their sinnes on the weeke dayes, it ceaseth to be good to them. It is good to honour Gods Ministers; but where men honour them either to keepe their owne credit with the people, as Saul honoured Samuel, or that they may excuse them, as in the ParableLuk. 14.19., such honour is not good. Workes of mercy are good; but being done for praise of men, or to merit by them, they come vnder a negatiue precept, Giue not your almes. It is good to forbeare one another, but not good in such men as forbeare onely for want of power or opportunitie to reuenge: and therefore we should informe our selues better,Matt. 6. and as wee would haue God to accept or blesse vs, to get good ends to our actions.
Thus of the generall.
In this verse the end of well-doing is two wayes considered: First, as it is the end of intention, that is, that wee should propound and aime at, as the motiue and marke of our endeuours, and that is ordered and required in these words, Whatsoeuer yee doe in word or deed, doe all in the name of the Lord Iesus. Secondly, as it is the end of consummation, ^. that by which wee finish our workes, and that is required in these words, giuing thankes to God, euen the Father by him. In short, the end of intention is the glory of God in Christ, the end of consummation is the giuing of thankes when wee haue done our endeuours.
In the first part I consider:
1 What should bee the maine end of our actions: Doe all in the name of Christ.2 How we are tied to it: First, for persons, Yee. Secondly, for kinds of imploiment, in word and deed. Thirdly, for extent, whatsoeuer yee doe, doe all.
Doe all in the name of the Lord Iesus.] Here foure things are required of vs.Things are done in the name of Christ foure vvayes. Ephes. 6.
First, that all be done in the assurance of the loue of Christ, that we be sure that we know Christ, as we know a man by his name; that when wee goe to doe Gods worke, we be first sure of Christs reward: this is to be shod with the preparation of the Gospell of peace.
Secondly, that all be done in the name, that is, by the authoritie of Christ, and his warrant in his word: not in the name of Moses for ceremonie, or in the name of Angels, or Saints, for intercession, nay in all wee doe, our conscience should be tied onely properly by the command of Christ, not because such great men would haue it so, or I did it to please my parents or kindred, etc. for then thou doest it in the name of men, and not of Christ.
Thirdly, that all be done with inuocation or calling vpon God in the name of Christ, all should be consecrate and begun with praier.
Fourthly and principally, that all be done to the glory of God in Christ, this should be the scope of all our actions1 Cor. 10.31., all should breathe and sauour of Christ.
In word.] D. God requires to be glorified by the very words of Christians, and contrariwise holds himselfe many times dishonoured by their words: he that keepeth his tongue keepeth his lifePro. 13.3.. The honour and dishonour of the tongue is largely explicated, Iam. 3. But the vse is for instruction, to teach vs 1. to take heed of dishonouring Christ by our words, but in speciall we should take heed of words of disgrace and slander to the members of Christ, of vaine wordsEphes. 5.6., that boulster men vp in presumption against repentance and faith in Christ, of passionate and bitter wordsIob 6.3., of words of deceitPsal. 36.3., of the words that come from, or tend to the strange woman, filthy wordsCol. 3.8., yea take heed of high words, for high talke or the lips of excellencie becomes not a fooleProu. 17.7., for euill words greatly prouoke God, and call for stripes, bring many a crosse vpon a man, and are snares to mens soulesPro. 18.6.7.. Secondly, it should teach
 vs to endeuour to bring glory to God by our words: to this end we should for matter learne to speake the words of clemencie2 Chr. 10.17., words of wisdomeProu., words of sobrietie and truthActs 26., words of righteousnesseIob 6.25., wholesome words2 Tim. 1.13., words of eternall lifeIohn 6.; and to this end we should obserued diuers rules.

1. That our words be not many, for in a multitude of words cannot but be sinne, we are not able to weld aright many words.
2. That wee know and not forget Gods ten words: the ignorance of Gods ten lawes, causeth that men know not how they offend in their tongues: but in the ten words of God is an absolute patterne of all vprightnesse, both of heart, speech and life.
3. That we be much and often in taking vnto vs the words of confession and praierHos. 14.3. Zeph. 3.9.: our speech is purified, and God much glorified by often confession and praier; this is to speake a pure language.
4. Our eare must seeke learningProu. 18.11.; we must be swift to heare and slow to speakeIam. 1., and be contented to be taught as well how to speake as how to liue.
Lastly, we must tame our tongues, make conscience of mortification for our sinnes in word, as well as for euill deed; set a watch before the doore of our lips, and pray God to open them.

Or deedes] D. God will haue deedes as well as words, our hands must be bound to good behauiour,Mal. 7.21. 1 Joh. 3.18. Prou. 14.23. and that our labours and workes may be done to Gods glory they must be done. 1. with prayer, Psalm. 9. last. 2. with warrant from the word. 3. with faith in Gods promise for the successe: For whatsoeuer is not of Faith is sinne. 4. With perseuerance, they are not good workes, till they be finished and accomplished.
Whatsoeuer] this worde is a note either of vniuersalitie or perfection. Of perfection I say in this sence. Whatsoeuer ye doe or settle about, doe it all, that is, let it be compleat and perfectly done, but I take it heere as a note of vniuersalitie.
D. We are bound to glorifie God not only in word and deed, but in al our words, and all our deeds; wee are tied to euery good worke, to respect all Gods commandements, wee are bound to glorifie God not onely in actions of worship,2 Tim. 3.3. vlt. Psalm. 119. but of righteousnesse too. Not onely in religious businesses, but in ciuill offices, not onely in our generall calling, but in our particular. Not onely abroad, but at home: making conscience not onely of filthie deedes, but of filthy speaking, not onely of great and crying sinnes, but of lesser sins: not onely of our open deeds, but of our carriage in secret. Vse is for reproofe, men discouer their vnsoundnesse of heart in this respect exceedingly: many will not forsweare that will sweare at euery word, at least by lesse oathes, as by the masse, faith, troth, truth, etc. many shop-keepers will not beare false witnesse in a Court, that will lye daily in selling their wares. Many will looke to their carriage abroad, that care not how to order themselues at home. Many will not doe their owne worke by keeping shop, or trauelling on the Sabbath, that neuer stick at it to speake their owne words on the Sabbath: but if the case of such like men as these be to be suspected, how fearefully bad is their case that are so farre from making conscience of euery word and deede, as they are to euery good worke reprobate?Six reasons vvhy Gods children should bee more carefull of their vvords and deeds then others. that are neither good at home, nor abroad, neither in worship nor life, neither to others nor to themselues. Tit. 1. vlt.
Yee] D. They that haue comfort in their election, and Gods loue, they that haue begun to make Conscience of their waies, and to loue the word, they that make a profession of the name of Christ aboue all others are exactly to looke to themselues, to euery word, and euery deede. 1. Because they
 are neerer the courts of the great King, they liue alwaies in the presence chamber. 2. Because God hath bestowed vpon them more blessings, and therefore as he giues more wages, requires more worke. 3. Because they are more obserued then any other. A loose word is more noted in them then execrable blasphemy in others, they are more talked of for seeing a vaine sight then others for haunting of leud playes. 4. Because their hearts are made pure by the bloud of Christ: and fine white linnen is sooner and deeper stained then course ragges. 5. They are trusted with more glorious riches. A little sinne in them much grieues Gods spirit, whereas a great sinne troubles not a wicked man that hath no spirit of God in him. 6. They are sure to haue a recompence of reward for euery good worde and worke, and therefore to further their owne reckoning and glorie, should bee aboundant in the worke of the Lord.
Vse therefore to quicken vs, to a desire to walke precisely, circumspectly, exactly, Ephes. 5.15. striuing to redeeme the time that hath been lost in the seruice of sinne and the world.

Giuing thankes to God euen the Father by him:]

These words are diuersly considered.
Some thinke the former words are an explication of these, as if he should say be carefull in all things to glorifie God, for this is right thanking of God; when men do not only praise God in words but in obedience.
Some thinke in these words is lodged a reason of the former, as if he should say, glorfie God in all your actions, and seeke to God by praier in the name of Christ, and ye shall bee sure of singular blessings and grace and comforts from God: and in the assurance thereof, when ye prouide to pray or practise, prouide thankes ready also, for God will not faile in the successe.
Some thinke these words to be an inlarging of the former rule by wishing them, whatsoeuer fals out to be thankefull, so as neither prosperitie puffe them vp, nor aduersitie deiect them, but I take it to be a distinct rule from the former, and so heere is to be noted.

1. The dutie required, viz. Giue thankes.
2. The explication of it.
1. By the obiect, to God euen the Father.2. By the efficient cause, by him.

Giuing thankes.] Concerning our thankfulnesse to God, I consider,Why. 1. the necessitie o^ it, God will not dispense with it: therefore in Ephes. 5.20. the former rule being omitted, this is specially vrged; and 1 Thess. 5.18. this is charged vpon vs, as the will of God in Christ Iesus. Secondly,For vvhat. for what wee must giue thankes, viz. for Christ as the fountaine of all fauour,Eucharist. hence the Sacrament ordained to that end, for all the comforts of Gods election and loue, for all graces and meanes of grace. coher. for our libertie in Christ, euen vnto outward things1 Cor. 10.30., for any successe or victorie ouer our corruptions of natureRom. 7 25., in short, for all things whatsoeuer2 Cor. 4.15. 1 Thess 5.18. Hovv. 1 Cor. 14.16..
3. How? viz not like the Pharisie, with pride of heart and selfe-liking, with opinion of merit, or with ostentation, but with obseruation of 4. rules. 1. If we blesse, we must blesse in the spirit, i. with vnderstanding and feeling in our hearts. 2. When we giue thankes, we should doe it with such tendernesse, that our praises should awake the graces of Gods spirit to make them get life and grow. Our praises should stirre vp faith in Gods promise, loue to Gods glory, feare of Gods presence, hatred of our sinnes, ioy in the holy Ghost2 Cor. 4.15.. 3. With a deepe sense of our owne vnworthinesse, and thus the 24 Elders are said to cast downe their crownes and fall on their face when they praised God, Reu. 4.9 10. and 7.12. Luk. 17.4. By all meanes. We must praise God by Psalmes, praier, celebration of the Sacrament, workes of mercy and obedience.
Hovv long.4. How long? That is answered, Eph. 5.20. Reuel. 7.12. Alwayes. If wee must pray alwayes, then wee must praise alwayes: wee may no more neglect thanksgiuing then praier. Nay when praier shall cease, because all mortall infirmities and wants shall cease, yet thanksgiuing must goe with vs within the vaile, and liue with vs for euer in heauen.
Vse 1. To inflame vs to the holy practise of thankfulnesse daily, and alwayes watching hereunto, preseruing sense, not forgetting Gods mercies, euen making it our daily sacrifice. 2. To humble vs vnder our vnthankfulnesse for grace, knowledge, the word, fellowship in the Gospell, and all kindes of blessings; yea wee sinne greatly in not giuing thankes for our successe in our callings, yea many are not yet instructed to giue thankes for their food. Let those remember that men are said then to eat to God, when they giue thanks, Rom. 14.6. To whom then doe they eat that giue not thankes? Certainly not to the Lord. Finally, if the poore Gentiles were so punished for vnthankfulnesse, Rom. 1.21. that had but the glimmering light of nature to guide them, and read their lessons only in the booke of Gods workes, what shall become of vs in the day of the Lord, that haue the light of Scripture, of the Gospell, of the Spirit, of the Sacraments, and so many incomparable fauours bestowed vpon vs? Vnlesse wee repent of our vnthankfulnesse, wee shall perish with a worse destruction then Tirus and Sidon, or Sodome and Gomorrah.
To God euen the Father.] These words are to be vnderstood* not diuidendly, but conioynedly, and so declare who is our God, euen he that hath proued himselfe a Father in Christ, louing vs in him, and accepting of vs, and heaping many blessings vpon vs, two sweet words. He is a God, there is his maiestie: he is a Father, there is his loue, and therefore great incouragement to go to him with all suits and praises. With all suits, he is God, and therefore able to help; and Father, and therefore willing to help. With all praises, hee is God, and therefore meet to be worshipped, he is a Father, and therefore will accept the calues of our lips, nor according to what we bring, but according to what we desire to bring, and all this should make vs both to hate it, to praise men or Angels, or sacrifice to our nets, and also to honour him with the affection of children, and with the feare of creatures.
By him:] these words may be referred.
1. To singing of Psalmes in the former verse, and so they note that all ioy is vaine without Christ, yea these spirituall and better sorts of delight are vaine vnlesse Christ be ours. How miserable art thou when thy tongue sings Psalms and Christ dwels not in thine heart? many men sing the word of Christ that haue no part in the word Christ.
2. To the word Father next before, to note that God hath shewed himselfe a Father in bestowing many mercies vpon vs by Christ, and so the consideration of Gods mercies by Christ, should breed thankefulnesse.
3. To the word thanksgiuing, and so they note the efficient helping cause, and teach vs, that as Christ brings downe Gods graces and blessings to vs, so he carrieth vp our praises to God, and as we must pray in his name, so our praises will not be accepted vnlesse they be made in his name, and presented in his intercession.
Thus of the generall rule.
Hitherto also of the first maine part of the information of holy life, viz. the information of our life in generall. Hitherto the Apostle hath taught vs what to do in our generall calling as Christians: now from ver. 18. to v. 2. of the next Chapter, he shewes vs what we must be in our particular standings, or thus: hitherto he hath giuen morall precepts, now he giues oiconomicall: or rather thus. Hitherto he hath set downe the duties belonging to all Christians, now he informeth vs in the duties speciall, as they are wiues, husbands, parents, etc.





VERS. 18. Wiues submit your selues to your Husbands as it is comely, in the Lord.
VERS. 19. Husbands loue your Wiues, and be not bitter vnto them.


BEfore I come to the particular consideration of these words, I must obserue something from the coherence and generall consideration of all the verses together.
Doct. It is plaine that men are to be taught how to gouerne themselues in their houses, as well as in the duties of their generall calling: this is meet to be noted, because some mens either ignorance, or wilfulnesse and prophanenesse is such, that they thinke Ministers should not meddle to tell them how to liue at home, or how to carry themselues in their shops.
Doct. 2. From coherence, that we may liue comfortably, and blessedly in our families and particular callings, wee must labour in the daily and constant vse of the meanes to be sincere in the generall. The studie of the word to frame men, to be good men and women in Gods sight, would make men good husbands, seruants, children, wiues, etc. First, get to be a good man, and then thou wilt the easier proue a good husband, etc.
Vse. First, for reproofe of such as cannot abide to see their children, or seruants to heare Sermons, studie the Scriptures, labour for grace, etc. whereas nothing would more fit them to all pleasing in their carriage at home. Secondly, for triall; if religion and the profession of it, make thee not a better wife, husband, or seruant, suspect thy selfe that all is not right, but that thou art an hypocrite, repent and amend. Thirdly, for instruction: if men finde such stubbornnesse in their wiues, or children, or seruants, the best way is to giue them more libertie to the meanes, and to driue them into Gods house to heare the word, to call vpon them to reade the Scriptures, and to vse such like holy exercises; for if this will not mend them, nothing in the world will. 3. Before I consider of the particular members of a familie,Of the gouernment of a familie. I must intreat generally of the whole: and concerning the gouernment of a familie by the rules of Gods word, I consider 4. things.
1. The authoritie of it:1. The authoritie of it. there is a way how to walke in vprightnesse, euen in our houses, so as God will come to vs, if our families be rightly orderedPsal. 101.2.. There is a wisdome or sauing knowledge how to erect and found a holy familie, and how to order and establish itProu. 24.3.: there are many administrations, as the administration of a Church, of a Citie, or Common-wealth, so likewise the administration of a familie, yet but one Lord, 1 Cor. 12. Yea, the gouerning of a house honestly, or in holy comelinesse, is manifestly expressed, 1 Tim. 3.5.
2. The antiquitie of it:2. The antiquitie of it. it is the most ancienst of all gouernments, yea out of which all the rest sprang: the Church was bred and cherished by this gouernment in families for many hundreds of yeeres in the beginning of the world, euen till the people came out of Aegypt.
3. The vtilitie of it:3. The vtilitie of it. it is called a perfect wayPsal. 101.2., and that in three respects: First, as opposed to hypocrisie; it shewes a mans way is not hypocriticall, when a man will not onely looke to his feet when he goes into Gods house, but is carefull how to walke vprightly in his owne house. Secondly, as it is the ground and field of practise; knowledge is neuer perfect till it bee practised, and the most ordinary way of practise is at home. Thirdly, as it perfects vs in blessednesse, in that it brings Gods promise into execution: besides, the familie is the Seminarie both of Church and Common-wealth,Gen. 18.19. for it brings forth, and brings vp a seed, it preserues the Common-wealth, and
 as it frames by education a holy seed, it preserues the charge.
4. What is necessary to the vvell-being of it.4. What things are necessary and requisite vnto the blessed being of a familie?
Answ. For the erecting and establishing of a blessed familie, three things are principally necessary. First, a holy comming together. Secondly, a holy liuing together. Thirdly, a speciall fitnesse in the head of the familie. For the first, it is greatly materiall to the perpetuall well being of a familie, that all heedfulnesse be obserued in the first erecting of it: for as many order the matter, they so prouoke God by the first entring vpon the familie, that the familie trauels euer after vnder the burden of Gods anger, or great inconuenience, and cannot prosper: and thus men fault,
Foule faults in the first erecting of families.Either by ventring without a calling, or meanes to liue, or by ouer-leaping Gods ordinance of contract, or by ventring vpon mariage with persons that haue foule diseases, as the leprosie, French pox, etc. but especially when
First, more wiues then one are brought in. Secondly, there is not sufficient distance in bloud, but the mariage is incestuous. Thirdly, another mans wife is brought in, either the betrothed wife, or the vniustly diuorced wife of another man. Fourthly, there is not consent of parties, but the mariage is forced. Fiftly, there is not consent of parents. Sixtly, an infamous or scandalous person is chosen to be a yoake-fellow. Seuenthly, there is not equalitie, either for religion (but a beleeuer is matched with an vnbeleeuer) or age, or estate, or disposition.
And a like dangerous disorder there is in taking into the familie of disordered seruants, such as are swearers, filthy and scandalous persons, against which sinnes there lie knowne threatnings of God: and so with their sinnes they bring in Gods curse.
4. Things in a holy liuing together in a familie.The second thing that makes a familie blessed, is a holy liuing together, and there are foure things that are requisite especially to the good estate of the house. First, the constant practise of pietie and priuate worship. Secondly, the right order of imploiment in the mutuall labours of the familie. Thirdly, houshold discipline or reformation. Fourthly, hospitalitie, or a right respect of strangers.6. Things in houshold pietie. For the first, the pietie that is to be practised stands of 6. parts: First, praier and thanksgiuing to God. Men must pray euery where1 Tim. 2.8., our meats and callings must be sanctified by the word, and by praier1 Tim. 4 4.: thus Dauid praied morning, and euening, and at noonePsal. 55.18., so Daniel: yea it is a brand of prophane and abhominable persons, they call not vpon GodPsal. 14.4.. Yea those families are in great danger of his wrath, that call not vpon his nameIerem. 20.. Secondly, holy conference betwixt the members of the familie, as betweene husband and wife1 Pet. 3.7., and betweene father and childrenDeu. 6.21.22. Thirdly, singing of PsalmesColoss. 3.16. Ephes. 5 20.. Fourthly, repetition of doctrine publikely taught, examining it by the Scriptures alleadged, as did the BereansAct. 17.. Fiftly, fasting vpon extraordinary occasions, is very plaine, Zach. 12.16. Lastly, the parents instruction, Psal. 78.2.3.4. Deut. 6.6.
Quest. But what things may be taught in the familie?
What things may be taught in the familie.Answ. First, the common grounds of Gods seruice and worship, this is to teach them to feare God. Secondly, the meaning of the SacramentsExod. 12.25.26. and 13.14.. Thirdly, the LawDeut. 6.6., that is, the common grounds of honestie, and vice, teaching to loue such and such vertues, and hate such and such vices. Fourthly, the vse and consideration of Gods great iudgements: therefore God will tell Abraham of the destruction of Sodome, because he will make vse of it in his familie. Fiftly, the report of Gods great workes of oldPsal. 78.2.3.. Sixtly, to hope in God, acquainting them with their naturall miseries, and training them vp, by warning them to take heed of the common presumptions of the wicked, and by distilling into them the grounds of practise and promise, concerning Gods
 mercy to their soules and their last saluation. Seuenthly, we should acquaint our housholds with the generall course of the Scriptures: thus Timothie knew the Scriptures of a childe2 Tim. 3.15.: for an exact knowledge of all Scriptures was impossible for a child to attaine. Lastly, the things receiued by publike doctrine should be inforced and kept a foot in the familie, if any passe these bonds they intrude vpon the Ministers office, and ought to feare Vzzahs curse, and therefore as men should instruct, and so auoide the common prophanenesse of the world in neglecting Gods ordinance, so they should be wise to sobriety, and keepe themselues in all feare and humilitie within their owne line and measure.
Thus of Piety.
The second thing required is, a holy order of imployment in all the members of the familie, in their mutuall labours for the good of the outward estate of itGen. 3.19. 1 Cor. 7.20. Fiue things required in the labours of a familie.: vnto the orderly performance of the labours of a familie, fiue things are required.
First, diligence. Secondly, peace, else all sacrifice is in vaine, Prou. 17 1. Thirdly, prouidence, it is not the hand of the diligent, but his thoughts that bring abundance: care is required, not the care for successe, (for that is condemned Matth. 6.) but the care for the dutie, Prou. 21.5. Fourthly, retyrednesse: they must keepe at home. Seruants must not be stealing out of the familie without leaue: nor Masters leaue their standings. Keepe thy foot from thy neighbours house, Prou. 25.17. If a man cannot be found in the place of his labour, he is like a bird that wandreth from his nest, Prou. 27.19. Fifthly, frugalitie, in liuing within their compasse, and not spending aboue their meanes, they must make their lambes serue for cloathing, and the goates for rent or hire of the field, and the milke of the goates must be sufficient for them, and their families, and for the sustenance of the maides, Prou. 27. vlt. It is not a good rule to make reason iudge of their needes, or to propound vnto themselues, I will spend no more but what I neede, but they must looke to their meanes to spend according to that: for ordinarily there is not so litle comming in, but God can make it suffice, or will himselfe send them supply.
The third thing required is, domesticall discipline: Thus Iacob searcheth his house, purgeth it of all idols, and superstitious monuments, admonisheth his people of the feare of God, Gen. 35.2, 3. Thus Iob sacrificeth for his children, Iob 1.5. Thus Dauid will ridde his house of slanderers, lyars, apostates, etc. And so should we see to the reformation of abuses, by admonition, rebukes, correction, or complaints to the Magistrate, or Elders of the Church; the Father in his house is the keeper of both Tables.
The fourth thing is, the right order of hospitalitie, and respect of strangers, and it stands in two things: First, in seeking by all meanes to bring Gods ministers or seruants into our houseHeb. 13.2. 1 Pet. 1.8., that they might helpe vs, and as it were, blesse and perfume our houses, by their praiers, counsell, comforts, admonitions, etc. Rom. 1.11. Secondly, in prouiding that no strangers be admitted, or permitted that will hinder Gods worship, or any way the good of the familie; they must not be within our gates, that will not ioyne with vs to sanctifie the Sabboth in our dwellings, Exod. 20. Yea, if they be disordered persons, wee should vse them as the false Prophet; that they may say, thus was I wounded in the house of my friend, Zach. 13.
The Vse is: First, against the Papists, and that principally two waies: First, in that they forbid mariage, and so hinder the erecting of families to God. Secondly, in that they forbid knowledge to Lay-people, and so hinder the good gouernment of the Familie.
Secondly, against great abuses euen amongst vs. There is that open prophanenesse in the most houses, that if they searched with lights, there would
 no prayer, reading of scripture, holy conference, singing of Psalmes, or instruction be found there, but without light men may finde their houses full of swearing, deceit, lying, false measures, and weights, and all kinde of filthines, to the singular detriment of the familie: for hence it is that many families, doe in vaine rise earely, and goe to bed late, and eat the bread of painfulnesse and sorrow, for God for these sinnes will not build the house. Sometimes this is plagued by open iudgements, sometimes Gods curse secretly like a moath ears downe the prosperitie of the house. But alwaies all such families are very hatefull to God, euen like the dens or cages of wilde beasts. Secondly, it may humble the best of vs, if we search into our neglects, ignorances, and omissions of the many duties we should performe in our houses.
Thirdly, for instruction to teach vs by prayer to seeke a way of God for vs, and our houses, and to beseech God to build vs an house, 2 Sam. 2.7.11.25.27.29. and by all meanes to labour to liue godly at home in the practise of piety, this is to bring saluation to our houses. Thus our families would become as litle Churches, Rom. 16. 1 Cor. 16. Yea; wonderfull hath beene the successe of this holy order in some families. Thus the house of Dauid hath become as the house of God, Zach. 12.8. Yea, if we were thus carefull, God would hedge vs and our families round about, and all that we haue, that Satan could not touch vs, hee cannot breake Gods fence without Gods leaue, Iob 1.10. Our tabernacles would then flourish and stand long, Prou. 12.7. and 14.11.
Thus in generall of houshold gouernment, or the order generally belongging to the good estate of all the members.
Now I come to consider each member in the familie, and the Apostle diuides them into three couples: The wife and the husband, the childe and parents, the seruant and master.
Doctr: There are two reasons why the husbands and wiues are charged in the first place, viz. First, because that in this order they were thus instituted of God, he first made man and wife, and in the order of nature these first found the familie, and so the Apostle keeps the order of nature, and the first institution. Secondly, because the good behauiour of the inferiours in the families, lieth much in the good example of the husband and wife: if they be filthy, wastefull, or blasphemers, vsually their children and seruants are so; and many times it holds in the contrary, for their good example, either makes the familie in imitation grow like them, or at least it restraines much euill.
Qu. But why is the wife first appointed to her dutie, before the husband?
Answ. Because in the order of the familie she must first mend before the husband (howsoeuer before Gods iudgement seat they shall be tried equally) in domesticall behauiour, if shee would haue her husband reformed of wickednesse, or ill dealing, she must first mend her selfe.
Thus of the generall consideration.

Wiues be subiect to your husbands as is comely in the Lord.]

In these words, the Wiues dutie is first laid downe, Wiues submit to your husbands. Secondly, it is inlarged or confirmed: 1. by a reason, it is comely. 2. by a limitation, in the Lord.
In laying downe the dutie I consider: First, who are charged, Wiues. Secondly, with what, be subiect. Thirdly, to whom, to your Husbands.
Wiues] Doctrine. All wiues generally and indefinitely are tyed to a holy order of subiection to their husbands without distinction of yeares, the elder women and the yonger, Tit. 2.8. and without distinction of estate, poore mens wiues must be subiect aswell as Citizens wiues, or Gentiles, a great fault in the baser sort: Their houses in respect of rudenesse, are as void of righteousnesse
 as they are of riches. Great mens wiues also must be subiect, Pharaohs daughter, and Vashti the Empresse; yea though there be inequalitie of meanes, as if the wife were a Lady, and the Husband but a meaner man, yet shee must be subiect, and he not waite vpon her.
Vse. 1. For comfort of wiues, nothing is required of one, but what is required of all. 2. Of Husbands, in respect no meanes of estate, or alteration in their condition can loose them their honour in the subiection of their wiues. And thirdly, euery woman should learne to doe her dutie, seeing all are bound to it.
Be subiect] Here I consider: 1. What is required, viz: be subiect. 2. In what manner it is required, that is, in the indefinite propounding of it without exception of time or place, etc.
In the first I consider: first, that it is: secondly, I answer a question: thirdly, what it is.
1. That subiection in women is required without dispensation, by God, as as his ordinance is plaine by these Scriptures, Genes. 3.19. Ephes. 5.24. Tit. 2.5. 1 Pet. 3.1.
2. The Question is why the Apostle onely propounds here the wiues subiection, without mentioning any other dutie?Why subiection is onely named in the vviues dutie.
Ans. I might say it is the wisdome of God to scatter directions and comforts, that we may not finde them all in one place, to stirre vs vp to the more diligence in studie of the Scriptures, and with great good successe many times; for while they are seeking to learne to be good wiues, they meete also with those directions that make them good women too. God many times when we seek one blessing causeth vs to finde many.
2. I may say that it is the wisdome of God to epitomize and draw things into a short summe, that we may be more familiarly acquainted with his will: Thus when he would propound his eternall rules of all righteousnesse in the Law, he chuseth to giue them in ten words, that men might grow to be as familiarly acquainted with them, as with any ordinarie matter, that they might alwaies haue them before their eyes, and binde them to the fringe of their garments: so God giues women their duties in one word, that it might be ingrauen in their hearts, and sewed downe before their eyes in capitall letters vpon their cushions; be subiect should neuer be out of their mindes.
3. Because of the necessitie of it, if God may not haue this dutie, he will not accept of the rest; though they be faire, rich, wise, prouident, diligent, etc. yet if they be not subiect, they are not regarded of God.
4. Because women most faile in this, the speciall dutie of the husband is loue, and of the wife subiection, the man most failes in loue, and the woman in subiection.
Thirdly, I consider what this subiection is: and here, first, what it is: secondly, what it is not: thirdly, the meanes that women are to vse that they may be subiect.
For the first, in the right discharge of their subiection,Fiue things in the vviues subiection. wiues are tied to fiue things: first, honour: secondly, faithfulnes: thirdly, feare: fourthly, labour: fifthly, submission.
To be subiect, is first to honour them; to be faithfull, to feare them, to be diligent in labour for them and the familie, and to submit to them.
1. They must honour their husbands as their superiour, and heads,Wiues must honour their Husbands six vvaies. 1 Cor. 11.3. and this they must doe, first, by giuing reuerent titles to them, 1 Pet. 3.6. secondly, by striuing to resemble the very properties and praise-worthy qualities of the husband, she should be his image, or his glory. And thus also in his absence shee should resemble his authoritie ouer the familie: women should chuse such husbands, as they would not onely liue with and loue, but such as
 they would liue by, euen such as they would set before them as patternes of their natures and liues.
3. By liuing without suspition, making the best interpretation of their doubtfull actions. Michol is made a president of contempt and suspition, when shee so sinfully taunts and misinterprets Dauids dancing before the Arke, in presence of the maides of Israel.
4. By leauing to him the secrets of his publike imployment, and keeping her to her owne measure in caring for domesticall matters, she may not be of an inquisitiue humor, to lay a necessitie vpon the husband to reueale to her all occurrents, especially when the Husband is either Magistrate or Minister.
5. By yeelding him due beneuolence, 1 Cor. 7.3. shee may not without calling or consent, refuse her husbands bed.
6. By striuing to aduance her husbands credit, she must not shame her husband,Wiues shame their husba^ds foure vvaies. Pro. 12.4. Wiues shame their husbands, 1. When their feete will not keepe in their owne house, Prou. 7.11. 2. When they blaze abroad his infirmities. 3. When they neglect the care of his children, either for manners, apparell, or imployment, Tit. 3.5. 4. By liuing in any scandalous sinne, as when they be false accusers, giuen to much wine, intemperate, etc. Tit. 2.3. or busie-bodies, 1 Tim. 5.13, 14.
Wiues must shevv faithfulnesse in fiue things.The second part of subiection is faithfulnes: They must shew all faithfulnesse, 1. In respect of the mariage-bed, Prou. 2.17. 2. In respect of expence, shee must not be wastefull, for this is to pull downe the house with her owne hands, and euer the more secretly, the more sinfully, Prou. 14.1. shee should saue and not spend without consent. 3. In respect of the businesse of the family, shee should be such as her husbands heart may trust in her: it is a great sinne in wiues when they must be told, not onely what to doe, but when they are charged with the care of such and such things, they must neede to be continually told, and yet be carelesse still. 4. In the secrets of the familie, not disclosing them to strangers, but so taking notice of them, as not to discouer them without the consent of the husband, as the faults of Sion must not bee told at Gath. 5. In entertainment, that none be admitted that are suspected or disliked by the husband.
Wiues should shevv their feare six vvaies.The third thing is feare, Eph. 5.33. 1 Pet. 3.1, 2. They should shew the feare of their Husbands, 1. By reuerent behauiour to him, not rude audacious bold. 2. By striuing to be inoffensiue, auoiding or preuenting what might stirre him to anger, or dislike or griefe. 3. By giuing soft answers when hee is angry, Prou. 15. 4. By forbearing passion, or frowardnesse, euen with others in his sight. 5. Making him her couering when they are abroad, but many women are so intemperate and wilfull, that a man might as soone hide the winde with his fist, or oyle in his hand, as couer the infirmities of his wife, Prou. 27.15, 16. 6. By liuing quietly without contention, shee must not disquiet him.
Fourthly, her labour: her labour is of two sorts. First, to appoint vnto the familie, and ouersee their waies, Prou. 31.27. Secondly, shee must labour with her owne hands, Prou. 13.27.19. and this labour of her hands is prescribed with six rules.
Six rules for vviues vvorke.1. She must not spend moneths or yeares in staying for some imployment she could like to make a calling, but shee must presently seeke by all meanes to finde out labour, shee seeketh wooll and flax.
2. Shee must not stand vpon finer workes, as scorning baser imployment, but be content to set her hands to any labour that is meete, thus shee spinneth and seeketh wooll and flax. Pro. 31.13.19.
3. She must not spend her time in working of toyes or curious things, good for nothing but to shew skill and weare out time, but about profitable things
 for the familie, as carpets, vers. 22. sheets, vers. 24. the clothing of her familie, her husband, and her children, vers. 21.23.
4. Shee must not lye a bed till nine or ten a clocke, but she must rise while it is yet night, vers. 15. and her candle is not to be put out by night, vers. 18.
5. Shee must not be fickle and vnconstant, to change from worke to worke, to no profit, beginning many things, and finishing litle or nothing, but against all wearinesse or other impediments, shee must girde her loynes with strength, and strengthen her armes.
6. Lastly, all must be done cheerefully, not grudgingly, vers. 13.
The fifth thing is, submission, Eph. 5.22. and shee must submit her selfe,
1. To her husbands directions, and liue by the lawes prescribed her by her husband, Eph. 5.23. as the Church doth teach and liue by the word of Christ, else no true Church. Thus the woman asketh leaue to goe to the Prophet, 2. King. 4.22. And the wife is charged not to fast without consent, 1 Cor. 7.4. And thus also shee must receiue directions for the affaires of the familie.
2. To his restraints, so as she be contented to be restrained of her ease, will, desires, delights, etc. Thy desires shall be subiect to thy husband, Gen. 3.19. Thus the Church must denie her owne reason, profit, pleasure, etc. and submit herselfe to Christ, Ephes. 5.23. Thus must the wife cast about how to please her husband, 1 Cor. 7.34.
Thus of what it is.
Secondly, I consider what it is not, or what the wife is not bound to,What vviues are not bound to. though shee must be subiect. In generall, their subiection doth not lead them into bondage, and make them slaues and vassals to them, they remaine still their companions and yoke-fellowes.
In particular there are some things spirituall, some things domesticall, some things in her ciuill cariage, from which shee is not restrained by her subiection.
In matters of religion shee cannot be forced to neglect the meanes to saue her soule, the vnbeleeuing husband cannot compell the wife to forsake her faith and religion, and the meanes thereof, to please him. Againe, though her sex barre her from instruction in the Church, and her husbands authoritie barre her from sole instruction in the familie, yet notwithstanding vnder her husband shee may instruct her children, Pro. 6.20. and familie, Pro. 31.26. Besides, though her husband were neuer so great, wise, lordly, etc. yet she may admonish him, and he ought to be crossed of his owne course and will by her, as Abraham by Sarah, at Gods appointment, who charged him to heare her in what shee said, to doe it, Gen. 21.12.
In domesticall matters, sheels not subiected to his tyrannie and blowes, nor is she bound to beare with or consent to, or conceale his whoredomes, shee is not bound to imitate his example, or obey his will, to doe that that is ill. And lastly her subiection doth not binde her to deliuer her body when she is apart for her disease, Leuit. 18.19. Ezech. 8.6.
In ciuill matters I instance in one: She is not vtterly barred out from works of mercy, for though she may not take of his substance to spend it, no not in workes of piety and mercy, yet of her owne labours she may take to giue to the poore, or for pious vses, Pro. 31.20.
Thus of what not.
Thirdly, that women may performe this subiection; 1. They must keepe home. 2. They must seeke this abilitie of God, for he giues the graces of the wife: Nature makes her a woman, election a wife, but to be prudent and subiect is of the Lord, Pro. 19.14. and there shee must seeke it of God. 3. They must preserue and keepe warme in their hearts the loue of their husbands, for all disobedience ariseth of want of loue. Lastly, they must consider the reasons
 and incouragements to subiection.
First, he is thy head and therefore be subiect, 1 Cor, 11.3. Secondly, if the shame of men will not moue thee to be subiect, yet haue power on thine head, because of the Angels, 1 Corinth. 11.10. but especially consider the incouragements.
It should weigh much with them that God hath imposed such a free and ingenuous subiection. It is not boundlesse, when they may be still companions. 2. That God that requires them to be subiect, chargeth husbands to vse them well, and kindly to accept their obedience. 3. God hath valued the price of a good wife, and set the rate to be aboue pearles, Pro. 31.10. Finally, their labour in the Lord shall not be lost, for they are much set by of God, 1 Pet. 3.4. he will blesse them with the fruit of their wombe, Psal. 113.9. and 127.3. yea the saluation of their soules may be furthered by the right performance of familie duties.
Thus of the things required, viz: be subiect.
The manner how it is required followes: Be subiect indefinitely, and so sheweth that they must be subiect: 1. Not outwardly, but in spirit, Mal. 2.15. 2. Not abroad onely, but at home. 3. Not sometimes, but constantly alwaies. 4. Not in some things, but in euery thing, Ephes. 5.24. 5. Not for feare or shame, but for conscience sake, and voluntarily. Here I may take in the distinction: subiection is twofold: 1. By Gods institution, and so wiues are subiect, in that they are commanded to be so, and God hath taken preheminence from them. 2. By will, or the conscience cheerefully yeelding obedience to Gods will, and thus onely good wiues are subiect.
Thus of the dutie charged vpon them.
3. The persons to whom it is due followes.
To your husbands:] These words may be considered exclusiuely and inclusiuely, they exclude all others, shee is not to be subiect to her seruants or children, or the strange woman brought in by the husband; and so also they include all husbands, they must be subiect to their husbands, not the wise only but the foolish, not the courteous onely, but the froward, not the rich onely, but the poore also.
Thus of the laying downe of the dutie.
It is amplified, first by a reason, it is comely: secondly, by a limitation, in the Lord.
As is comely] (...). The originall word is rendred three waies.
1. As yee ought, vt oportet, and so it is a reason from Gods institution, yee must doe it, God indispensably requires it.
2. As is meete, vt convenit; it is meet especially two waies. 1. God hath giuen power ouer all in the family but one, and therefore great reason and equitie ye be appointed subiect vnto him, and it is not meet yee should rule so many if you will not obey one. Againe, yee are professors, and haue giuen your names to Christ, and therefore it is meet that you especially striue to be good wiues, and better then any others, lest the word be euill spoken of.
3. As is comely, vt decet: so it is here translated.
The vviues comelinesse in three things.The wiues comelinesse is not in beauty, Prou. 11.22. and 31.30. nor in the gorgeousnesse of apparell, 1 Pet. 3.3. but a wiues comelinesse is especially,
1. In her wisdome, Pro. 14.1. and that to be shewed in two things: first, in her skill to please her husband, neither offending him with chiding words, nor sullennesse, puling or crying, which is found to vex some men more then words. Secondly, in her skill to manage the businesses of the house, both seasonably, discreetly, and with prouidence.
2. In her meeknesse it is exceeding comely, where the hid man of the heart is incorrupt with a meeke and quiet spirit, this is better then all apparell, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4.

Thirdly, here it is in her subiection; for as it is an vncomely thing to see the body aboue the head, so it is to see a wife that will rule and not be subiect to her husband.
And if the wife labour to adorne her selfe thus, shee shall appeare comely to God, 1 Pet. 3.4. to men in the gate, Prou. 31.23.31. to her husband and children, Prou. 31.28. yea, shee is an ornament to sinceritie and holinesse it selfe, Tit. 2.3.
In the Lord] 1. These words are expounded diuersly.
First, in the Lord, that is, in the feare of God, as vnto the Lord in obedience to his ordinance, for Gods sake, because God requires this at your hands.
In this sense it may serue for two vses: First, for terror to wicked wiues, they must answer it before God, he will auenge their not subiecting of themselues, he will certainly account with them, if they be whorish, contentious, idle, carelesse, or wastefull, etc.
2. It is a great comfort vnto a godly woman, her subiection is in the Lord, it is in Gods account, euen as a sacrifice to him, he takes it as done to himselfe, God honours her obedience in the familie, as if it were piety in the Temple: and this may the more support them, if their husbands be vnkinde.
Secondly, in the Lord, that is, so farre as they command in the Lord; they must so loue their husbands, as they cease not to loue God; and so be subiect to them, as they leaue not their subiection to God. Their couenant with their husband no way inferres the breach of this couenant with God, and thus it is principally here meant.
Thus of the Wiues dutie.
The Husbands dutie followes in the 19 verse.

Husbands loue your Wiues, and be not bitter vnto them.]

Doctr: In generall; Husbands must be told their duties aswell as Wiues, as they would haue them mend, so they must mend themselues; and as they would haue comfort by liuing with them, so they must make conscience to practise their dutie to them: it is not the hauing of wiues or husbands, that breeds contentment, but the holy performance of duties mutually.
The dutie of the Husband is propounded here: First, by exhortation, Husbands loue your Wiues. Secondly, by dehortation, Be not bitter vnto them.
In the exhortation, there is the persons exhorted (Husbands), the dutie (loue), the persons to whom they owe it (your Wiues).
Husbands] This indefinite propounding of it shewes, that all sorts of Husbands are bound to shew this dutie, poore and rich, learned and vnlearned, yong and old.
Loue] Concerning the Husbands dutie as it is here expressed, I consider six things. First, that it is indispensably required, Secondly, why this dutie onely is named. Thirdly, how he must shew his loue. Fourthly, Reasons why. Fifthly, I answer certaine obiections. Sixthly, the lets of performance of loue.
First, it is required, Gen. 2.24. Ephes. 5.25. Tit. 2.2.
Secondly, the Apostle names this dutie in this one word, either because the Lord of purpose, would haue them studie the whole scriptures, that while they seeke for directions to make them good Husbands, they may finde also counsell to make them good men.
Or else in this word is comprehended their dutie, that so this being their word, they might write it in their hearts, and haue it euer in their eyes to doe it; or else it is because this is most necessarie, and as women faile in subiection, so doe men in loue.

For the third, viz. how he must shew his loue, we must vnderstand, that the husband owes the wife, First, naturall or ciuill loue, as a maried man. Secondly, spirituall loue, as a Christian maried man.
For the first: the loue of the husband is to be shewed foure waies.
Husbands shevv their loue 4 vvaies.1. By cohabitation, 1 Pet. 3.7. He must dwell with her, not wander from his wife, nor depart without calling and consent, nor dwell with drunkards, whores, or gamesters; dwell, I say, in his owne house, not in the ale-house, etc.
2. By chastitie: and that, first, by auoyding vnfaithfulnesse to her bed, not follow the strange woman. This sinne of whoredome, it consumes mens strength, wastes mens substance, compasseth men with all euill, in the middest of the congregation, is worse then theft, exceeding hatefull in Gods sight, and disgracefull amongst men, destroies the soule both by making men without vnderstanding, and sending them to hell, Prou. 5.19. and 6.25. and 9.17. Iob 31.7, 8. etc.
Secondly, by yeelding her due beneuolence, not departing from her bed without consent.
3. By honouring her, 1 Pet. 3.7. The Husband must shew that hee honoureth her:
Husbands honour their vviues six vvaies.First, by suffering himselfe to be admonished by her, Gen. 21.12.
Secondly, by vsing her as his companion, not lording ouer her as his slaue.
Thirdly, by trusting her with disposing of such things in the familie as shee is fit for and faithfull in, by giuing her imployment according to her gifts.
Fourthly, by not disgracing her before others, but chusing a fit time in secret to finde fault with her.
Fifthly, by not speaking when shee is in passion, but forcing both her and himselfe in all matters of difference to speake when they are both out of passion.
Sixthly, by yeelding a free and iust testimonie of her praises, Pro. 31.28.
4. By cherishing her, Eph. 5.28. And this he performes,
First, by prouiding her maintenance according to his abilitie, and that in labouring so in his calling, as he may prouide for her while he liues, and leaue her some meanes when he dies.
And for manner, doing it cheerefully, not stay till it be wrung from him, as from churlish Nabal. Thus doe not they that spend at alehouse, vpon whores, or sports, Beare-baites, plaies, gaming, or apparell, that should serue for maintenance of wiues and children at home.
Secondly, by protecting and rescuing her from wrongs and dangers, 1 Sam. 30.5.
Thirdly, by delighting in her loue; yea, not erring or wandring in his loue continually, Prou. 5.19.
Secondly, he owes her spirituall loue aswell as naturall, so Christ loued his Church, not onely to inrich it but to sanctifie it, Ephes. 5.25, 26. They must dwell with them as men of knowledge to helpe them, not onely by labour, but by knowledge also, 1 Pet. 3.7. This religious loue he must shew,
1. By forgiuing her offences vpon her repentance, this is one way wherby Christ makes his Church holy.2. By edifying her by counsell, exhortation, admonition, consolation, etc. 4. The reasons why he must loue her,Seuen reasons vvhy men must loue their vviues. are
1. Because God requires it.2. God so requires it, as a man must leaue his father and mother to cleaue vnto his wife, Gen. 2.24.3. The example of Christ should inforce it, Eph. 5.25.4. She is his owne flesh, and no man euer hated his owne flesh, Eph. 5.29.
(...)

5. Lest prayer be interrupted, 1 Pet. 3.17.
6. Thus he shall shew himselfe a member of Christ, and to be like his head, Ephes. 1.30.
7. It will preserue a man from the temptations, and inticements of the strange woman, Prou. 5.19, 20. Yea, and from all euill company and vnthriftinesse.

Fifthly, the Obiections follow.
Obiect: 1. Shee was of meane birth, condition, or portion,Mens obiections ansvvered. when I married her.
Ans. So, and much worse was the Church before Christ maried her, and yet Christ loues her.
Obiect. 2. But since mariage, shee is idle, froward, wastefull, etc.
Answ. This is a reason to moue thee to pray for her, and to watch ouer her waies to admonish and instruct her, but this is no reason to moue thee not to loue her: For the Church sinneth after calling, and yet Christ loues her, and shewes it by his intercession for her in heauen, and by labouring to clense her by his spirit and word in earth.
Obiect. 3. But shee is a carnall and vnregenerate woman, a meere wicked woman, that neither doth, nor will feare God, and Christ doth not loue heretikes or hypocrites, or prophane persons, and pagans.
Answ. Though this reason from Christs example doth not hold, yet the reason from Gods institution bindes thee; thou must loue her, not because shee deserues it, but because God requires it.
Quest. Is a man bound to esteeme his wife aboue all women?
Answ. In respect of the affection and practise of the things essentially necessarie to coniugall duties, he is, but not in opinion of his praises, for that is the commendation of the good wife, not of euery wife, Prou. 31.30.
Thus of the Obiections.
Sixthly, the lets follow:The causes vvhy men loue not their vviues. How comes it to passe that men do not performe this dutie? Answ. It is in some by reason of their sinfull comming together, as in sudden mariages, when they are done before there be a calling or affection in the he^rt: So when men haue ill ends, as those men that marry their wiues not for grace or fauour, but for wealth, when they are possessed of both, they will loue their wealth, and hate their wiues.
2. Corruption of nature is the cause of want of loue, they are wicked men, therefore wicked husbands.
3. It comes to passe, because men doe not by praier seeke loue of God, neglect of praier and mortification is the cause.
4. Men loue the strange woman, and therefore loue not their wiues, or they loue other mens wiues.
5. It comes to passe by the vntowardnesse of the wife, for though that bee no iust reason to the husband (because he should loue her, because God commands him) yet it is a iust iudgement of God vpon her.
Thus of what is required.
Loue] viz: indefinitely: First, in heart as well as in word, Mal. 2.15. Secondly, not before others onely, but priuately. Thirdly, not sometimes, or the first weeke, moneth, or yeare, but for euer constantly. Fourthly, for conscience sake, and not for shame or respect of her friends, or while her meanes doe last.
Your Wiues] This is added; First, to exclude all others, all others I say, not from Christian loue in the generall, but from coniugall loue. Secondly, to include all wiues, though poore, lesse wise, or frugall, froward, etc.
Thus of the exhortation.
The d^hortation followes, Be not bitter vnto them] In these words the
 Apostle doth mollifie the authoritie of the husband, and prouides that it passe not into tyrannie. Here I consider foure things. First, what it hath not in it. Secondly, how men shew themselues bitter to their wiues. Thirdly, the meanes to cure this bitternesse. Fourthly, the reasons to moue thereunto.
 For the first, this exhortation to loue, and dehortation from bitternes doth not binde them,
1. To loue their vices: they may know them to be the weaker vessell, yea take notice of the weaknesse of the vessell.
2. To lose his owne authoritie by lightnesse and vaine behauiour.
3. To omit the performance of holy duties to please her humour.
4. To giue her a licence to doe what shee list, and liue how shee will.
5. From finding fault and reprouing, so as they vse not their owne words, but Gods.
Lastly, distinguish their natures, wiues of soft and gentle natures must be vsed with all gentlenesse, but that lets not but that wilfull and stubborne wiues may be held downe to a meet subiection.
 Men shew their bitternesse: First, by words, and that diuersly, when they reproch them for their infirmites,Of bitter husbands. or deformities; or when they grow quarrellous, finding fault with euery thing, or grow into passion vpon euery occasion. Secondly, in deeds, by vsing them discourteously, or by vniust restraint. Or lastly, by blowes. Many men haue litle growing in their furrowes but wormwood, they haue a true gall of bitternes in them, they may be compared to the starre in the Reuelations, 8.11. for as that made the third part of the waters bitter, so are more then three parts of the words of many husbands bitter words; yea as if their naturall frowardnes were not enough, some men will sharpen and whet their tongues to sound out cursed words like swords or arrowes; yea some are so vnappeasable, their anger is like the fooles wrath, Prou. 27.3. these are a brood of Caldeans, a bitter, a furious nation.
For the cure of this bitternesse, foure rules are to be obserued:
 1. Men must pray God to cast something into their fountaine to sweeten it.
Foure rules for curing of this bitternes in men.2. They must turne the course of this humor, and spend it vpon their sins, in the practise of the duties of mortification.
3. Eat Gods booke, for that will inable men to godly sorrow, (by being bitter in their bellies) and will sweeten their mouthes.
4. Looke to the rootes of bitternes, stay the spring of it in the beginning, take heede of a custome in frowardnesse, for then onely custome in the vse of the meanes will cure thee; againe it will cost them daily sorrowes, before they can get their natures throughly healed.
 Lastly, the reasons follow why they must mortifie bitternesse.
Reasons against bitternesse.1. It is a wise mans glory and discretion to passe by infirmities, Prou. 19.10.
2. Shee is not his footestoole but his helper.
3. Seeing we are heires of blessing, let vs blesse and not curse, if God hath sweetned our hearts with grace, let not our fountaines send forth bitter waters and sweet.
4. The Apostle requires that all bitternesse be put away, all for degrees, (it is not inough we are not so bad as some be) and in all persons.
5. Lastly, it is a part of our good workes, and holy conuersation to mortifie bitternesse, and enuie, and strife, hereby we must shew that we haue the wisdome that is from aboue: for if our knowledge be right, it will make vs peaceable, gentle, and easie to be intreated. On the other side, if men sharpen their tongues to cursed and bitter speaking, they may not boast of their knowledge. For such wisdome is carnall, sensuall, and diuelish, and they are liars against the word, Iam. 3.13.17.

Vse is for instruction to all husbands that feare God, to approue themselues vnto God, in their sincere and louing behauiour towards their wiues, especially they should take notice of this vice of bitternesse, or if they haue failed this way, they should recouer themselues, repent and amend, and not be like those wretched persons that draw iniquitie with cords of vanitie, and call bitter sweet; it is ill to fault this way, but worse to excuse, defend, or denie it.
Thus of the husbands dutie.
The next couple in the familie, is parents and children.
The duties of children is set downe first, because the inferiors are charged first, and chiefly to mend and performe their duties.



VERS. 20. Children obey your Parents in all things, for this is well-pleasing to the Lord.

THe exhortation hath in it two things. First, their dutie. Secondly, the reasons of it. Their dutie hath in it foure things. First, who are charged (Children). Secondly, what is charged vpon them, (obey). Thirdly, to whom they owe it (your Parents). Fourthly, the extent how far forth (in all things). The reason is, because though it were not gratefull and pleasing to the Parents by reason of their waywardnesse, yet it is well-pleasing to God.
Children] viz: All children, without difference of sex, both sonnes and daughters; or of age, not onely infants, but children growne and of riper and full yeares of condition; the children both of poore and rich.
Obey] The obedience of Children must be considered:
More specially at sometimes, and so they must obey,The obedience of children considered of, more especially, or more generally.
1. In the choice of their callings.
2. In the election and disposing of their mariages, it must be with consent of Parents. Thus did Isaac, Gen. 24. Thus euen Ismael, Gen. 21.21. Thus Iaakob, Gen. 27.46. and 28.9. Thus Sampson, Iudg. 14.2. And this power hath euery Father ouer his Virgin, 1 Cor. 7.36, 37.
More generally here I consider. First, that they must obey not in some things, at some times, but alwaies throughout the course of our liues, this is plaine here, and likewise charged, Ephes. 6.2.
Secondly, how they must obey: Children must performe obedience,
1. With reuerence internall, and externall; internally they must conceiue a holy estimation, and tendernesse of respect, and honour and obseruance of their Parents. And externally they must shew it by all reuerent behauiour, as by rising vp before them, by giuing them the honour to speake first.2. With readinesse to receiue and heare instruction, Prou. 1.8.
Thirdly, with endeuour to fulfill their desires, by their labors or otherwise.
Fourthly, with submission, first to their rebukes, Pro. 13.1. secondly, to their restraints in diet, apparell, recreations, etc. thirdly, to their corrections.
Fifthly, with piety, praying for them; for if they must doe it for all men, much more for them; and if for all in authoritie then for Parents, 1 Tim. 2.1.
Sixtly, with all meeknesse of loue, shewed three waies:
1. By obeying, without inquiring, discoursing, murmuring, or contending.2. By bearing their infirmities, either of bodie, age or minde, obey though aged, diseased, crabbed, etc.3. Obeying without respect of profit; some children are obsequiou^, so long as any thing is to be had from their parents, but when they haue all they must haue, then their forwardnesse to please is neglected: this is a base and mercenarie obedience.

Seuenthly, with all thankfulnes and gratitude, a great part of which is to recompence their Parents kindnes, by releeuing their wants, if they fall into wants, 1 Tim. 5.4.
Your Parents] Viz: Both your Parents, not your Father onely, but your Mother also, Leuit. 19.3. Prou. 15.20.
In all things] Quest. But must they be obeyed in sinne?
Answ. No, you must so obey your earthly Father, as you disobey not your heauenly Father, therefore (in the Lord) is added, Eph. 6.1. But else we must obey in all things, that are not apparant to be sinfull, though against our ease, profit, credit, etc.
Or more plainely thus: All things are of three sorts: First, some things are simply good, this must be done though the Parents forbid, because God commands. Secondly, some things are simply euill, these things must not bee done, though Parents command, because God forbids. Thirdly, some things are indifferent, in these children must obey, though their Parents require things neuer so vnmeete, for things may be vnmeete that are not vnlawfull.
Thus of the doctrine of their obedience.
Against this doctrine children obiect many things.
Childrens obiections ansvvered.Obiect: I am now in better estate, in higher place, of better gifts, or such like, then my Parents.
Answ: This is no reason to withhold obedience and reuerence, for Ioseph was a Prince in Aegypt, and Iacob in great want: Salomon sits in his throne of Maiestie, and yet when his Mother comes to him, he yeelded all reuerence, the throne did not make her cease to be a Mother: yea, our Sauiour Christ infinitely excelled his Parents, and yet he was subiect vnto them, Luk. 1.51.
Obiect: But our Sauiour saith, call not men father on earth. Mat. 23.9.
Answ: The words are not to be vnderstood simply, but comparatiuely, and that, either to God, or to the Pharisies: call no man Father as thou callest God Father; but so giue titles to men, as all honour and sacred estimation of Gods fatherly care be preserued: and call no man Father, as the Pharisies ambitiously desire to be called; giue not trust and child-like honour to men of what profession soeuer, that you should onely trust in them, and by performing honour, or obedience, or recompence to them, grow carelesse of the duties you owe to your owne parents, as the Pharisies taught, Mat. 15.5.
Obiect: But my Parents require base things, and such as cast a kinde of discredit vpon me in the world.
Answ: Consider not the things required, but Gods ordination; besides God the Father required of Christ to beare the Crosse, spitting in the face, etc. yet he willingly obeyed.
Obiect: But my Parents are disordered persons, and foolish, etc.
Answ: Pray for them, but despise them not; besides God knowes what is good for thee, and therefore hath caused thee to come out of the loines of such Parents, and required subiection of thee.
Obiect: They are not my naturall Parents, but my step-father or step-mother.
Answ. Yet they must be obeyed, so Ruth obeyed Naomi, and Moses, Iethro: Exod. 18.19.
Obiect: They are not Parents at all, but my kindred onely, as my Vncle, Aunt, etc. with whom I am left in trust.
Answ. Thou must be ruled by them, so was Hester by Mordecai.
Vse. This condemnes the doctrine and practise of Papists, that defend the vowes of solitarie and single life of children without consent of Parents: and it meets with the doctrine of the Pharisies, that would dispense with childrens
 releeuing of their parents, so they would bestow it vpon them, Mat. 15.
2. This may serue for reproofe of stubborne and vngracious children that forsake their Parents instruction, Prou. 1.8. but especially such monsters as despise their Parents when they are old, or mocke them, or curse them, or chase them, or robbe them, etc. the cursed estate of such children is set downe in these Scriptures: Prou. 15.20. and 19.26. and 23.22. and 20.20. and 28.24. and 30.11.17.
Thus of the duty, the reason followes.
There are many reasons why they should obey:Reasons vvhy children should obey their parents.
1. Children haue their substance from them, euen their life and their education, their Parents then tooke care of them when they had no ragge to couer their nakednesse, nor morsell to put into their mouthes, and what can children render equiualent hereunto?2. Christ himselfe was obedient to his Parents, Luk. 2.51.3. This is the puritie and vprightnesse of children, and hereby they must be tried, and tried whether their worke be pure, Pro. 20.11.4. The consideration of Gods iudgements vpon wicked children should much moue, such as were Cham, Esau, Absolon, Abimelech, etc.5. If thou obey not thy Parents, thou maist liue to bee required by thy children.6. In the sixth of Ephes. 1.2.3.4. There are many reasons why children should obey.
First, it is the Lord, that is, their obedience is both commanded by God, and it is for God, and besides it is no further vrged then as may stand with faith and piety to the Lord.
Secondly, this is right, it is childrens iustice.
Thirdly, this commandement that requires this, is the first commandement with promise, for this had a promise in the very first promulgation of it in the Tables, written by the finger of God, whereas all the rest had their promises annexed afterwards by the ministrie of Moses.
Obiect. But the second Commandement had promise in the first promulgation of the Law.
Answ. Some answer the words of the second Commandement are a proposition, not a promise, but this answer satisfieth not. Some say the promises mentioned in that commandement, belong to the whole Law, and not to that Commandement alone; but I thinke the plainest answere is: the fift Commandement is the first Commandement with promise, viz. in the second Table. A fourth reason is, children must obey, for so it shall go well with them; they shall get good and contentment, and Gods grace and blessing by so doing. Fifthly, they shall liue long on earth to enioy the blessing of God.
Obiect. Wicked children liue long.
Answ. Their life is a death, and it is not well with them. Esay 65.20.
Obiect. Gods children doe not liue long.
Answ. For the most part they doe. 2. I say, if God performe not this promise absolutely in the letter, yet he performes this blessing by commutation into a better, as when he giues them eternall life for long life.
But the reason why children should obey is here mentioned in the Text.
It is well pleasing to the Lord:] Some leaue out (to the Lord) and so the argument is more generall, for obedience is exceeding pleasing to their Parents, Prou. 10.1. and 15.20. and 19.13. and 13.16. and besides it is pleasing to God, but I see no reason to leaue out the words.
Some render ((...)) in the Lord, and so here is; First, a limitation, they must obey, but in the Lord. Secondly, they must obey, not because nature
 and ciuilitie requires it, but for conscience sake, as Gods institution.
But I take it as it is here rendred, to the Lord.
Well-pleasing to the Lord] From the consideration of these words, I obserue foure things.
First, that it is not enough to serue God, but wee must so serue as we please him, Heb. 12.28.
Secondly that there is a way how to please God euen in Family duties, and these externall and ordinarie things at home, and this serues; First, to shew Gods great loue to man, in that he frames himselfe to mens condition, and likes what may like them, will be pleased himselfe with what pleaseth them: obedience and seruice to men he accounts a seruice to himselfe. Secondly, it is a great incouragement to diligence, and conscience in these Family duties, in as much as they will not only please man, but God. Thirdly, it reproues hypocrites, that care to be good no where but in Gods house, but God will haue obedience and not sacrifice, yea, here he will be serued with obedience to men.
Thirdly, that euen children are bound to make conscience of their waies, and to learne to please God in their youth. First, God requires it, Eccles. 12.^. Psal. 148.12. There is Scripture for babes and young men as well as old men. Secondly, there are worthy examples to excite them recorded in Scripture, as the examples of Ioseph, Samuel, Dauid, Iosiah, Ieremie, Daniel, and Timothie, yea, this was a great praise in Ieroboams young and dying sonne, 1 King. 14.3. Thirdly, a conscionable care in children to please God is much praised in Scripture, they are blessed that beare the yoke in their youth, and the workemanship of grace and obedience in the hearts and liues of children, is like the grauing of a Kings Pallace, Psal. 144.12. A happy thing when the young men see visions, as well as old men dreame dreames, Ioel. 2. Then doth the Church flourish when the Sonne marrieth the mother, Is. 62.5.
Vse 1. This should teach parents to beginne betimes to teach their children the trade of their way, Prou. 22.6. and to bring them vp in the instruction and admonition of the Lord, Ephes. 6.4.
2. Parents should learne also to be content that their children serue and please God as well as them; some Parents are so bad that they neither will instruct their children themselues, nor abide it, that they should heare sermons, read the Scriptures, seeke the companie of such as feare God, or sanctifie Gods Sabbaoths.
4. This should teach all to repent euen for the sinnes of their youth, Psa. 25. For they were then tied to please God aswell as afterwards.
4. That God will be pleased and will accept the indeauours and conscionable cares and obedience, euen of children, this is a comfort to children that though they cannot please wayward parents, yet they shall please God; and againe, it reproues froward parents; Is God pleased and art thou displeased? Doth God loue and like the desires and endeauours of his childe and dost thou dislike?
Thus of childrens duty, the Parents duty followes.

Fathers prouoke not your children to anger, least they be discouraged.]

Doctrine. From the coherence; Parents must performe their duty to their children, it is not an easie thing to be a Father and mother in performance of fatherly and motherly duties.
Prouoke not] D. Men are in general here to learne, that it is not enough to abstaine from sin, but they must abstaine from all prouocations to sin; It is not enough to abstaine from whoredome, but men must abstaine from wanton attire, from suspected places, from filthy speeches, from cha^bering and wantones, not enough to abstaine from murther, but men must abstaine from bitter and
 prouoking words. It is not enough to absteine from Idolatry, but men must abstaine from all the monuments and occasions of Idolatry and therefore men must abstaine from all marriage with Papists, and from making of images of the trinity, etc. If men would auoide periury, they must take heed of common swearing. So Ministers must not only call for peace and vnitie, but they must take heed of prouocations to discords, when all is at peace.
Thus of the generall.
The words of this verse are a dehortation, and therein is: First, the duty of parents: Secondly, the reason of it.
Parents] All Parents are tied to performe their duties to their children,By Fathers he meanes both Parents. none are too good to doe it. Vse for reproofe of such women as thinke themselues too good to nurse their owne children, and of such Fathers as turne the Care of their children wholly to others.
Prouoke to wrath] Here I note the manner of setting downe their duty and the matter.
The dutie of parents is negatiuely set downe, to teach that parents must not thinke onely of their sinnes against God and abroad to others; but they may be guiltie of much sinne in trespassing against their owne children, if parents were otherwise neuer so honest or religious, yet the carelesse discharge of their duty to their children may much prouoke God, and will certainely be found on their score if they repent not.
Quest. But why is the dutie of parents in this place so sparingly set downe but in one branch of it and that negatiuely?
Answ. It is not to allow Parents to be lesse carefull, but it may be the Apostle spares them heere, because in respect of other relations they are charged before and after as husbands and masters. Againe, it may bee the Apostle would haue children to know they haue not that liberty to inquire into their parents faults, or to reckon it as a part of their skill to finde them out: parents shall account to God but not to their children. Thus of the manner of setting their duty downe, the matter followes.
Prouoke not] Parents fault two waies, either by too much seuerity, or by too much indulgence, the former is here restrained. Againe, the prouocation is two-fold, either to sinne or to passion, it is a most cursed thing for parents to prouoke their children to sinne by counselling them to euill waies, or incouraging them to lewd courses. This the Apostle holds too horrible vile, for any professing religion, or the feare of God, and therefore mentions prouocation to anger.
Concerning this prouocation to anger I consider three things. First, how parents prouoke their children. Secondly, what they must doe that they bee not prouoked. Thirdly, what is not forbidden in these words.
Parents prouoke their children; first, by word; secondly, by deed.
1. By word three waies. First,How parents prouoke their children both by vvords and deeds. by burthening them with vniust and vnmeet precepts. Secondly, by pursuing them with contumelious words, especially when they be alwaies chiding and rating of them. Thirdly, by disgracing of them to others before their face, or behinde their backes.
2. By deedes fiue waies.
First, by carelesse education, for though children find not fault with this at first, yet when they come to be of yeeres, and finde their owne vnfitnesse for calling or society, etc. then they fret against their parents neglect.
Secondly, by discourtesies and vnkind vsage of them when they be grown to be of yeeres.
Thirdly, by vniust dealing about their marriages, when either they restraine them of marriage, when they haue a calling to it, and a liking of meete person, and thus they prouoke them to incontinency, or when they compell
 them to marry when they haue no calling nor liking, and thus they prouoke them to discontent.
Fourthly, by indiscreet and immoderate passion and seuerity in correcting them.
Fifthly, by vniust restraints either of present necessaries of food and raiment, Math. 7.9.10. 1 Tim. 5.8. Prou. 13.22. or in not saying vp for them, 1 Cor. 12.14.
Secondly, that parents may not prouoke their children. 1. They must begin betimes to teach them their duties, for ignorance is waiward. 2. they must sow the seedes of piety and godlinesse in their hearts, as they draw out reason by degrees, so there is a conscience euen in children as well as reason if it were informed, and conscience would make them not onely religious to God, but dutifull to parents. 3. They must not giue their children too much libertie at the first, for if they doe, then will iust restraint afterwards be prouocation. 4. They must pray for them to God, many pray for children, and so for their being, that afterwards neuer pray to God to guide their hearts, and so for their well being. 5. They must in generall striue to teach or guide them by incouragements and allurements, correction is not as diet, but as Phisicke, and thus recreation is not to be denied them, Zach. 8.5.6. If nothing else will restraine passion in children, they must impose silence vpon them, he that imposeth silence on a foole mittigateth anger, Prou. v. 26.
3. This dehortation hindreth not but that parents may:
1. Rebuke their Children.2. Correct them. Prou. 13.24. and 22.15.17. and 29.15.17. and 23.13. and 25.14. and 19.18.19.
Thus of the dutie.
Children] viz. All children, sonnes and daughters in law as well as naturall children; and these are prouoked.
1. By groundlesse iealousies and suspitions testified by secret listning, questioning and enquiring enuiously after euery thing they do or say.
2. By suffering seruants to vexe or molest them.
3. By euill reports of them.
4. By giuing euill counsell, or reporting of faults to the Sonne against his wife, or to the daughter against her husband to make debate is ill in any but much worse in parents.
This of the parties to whom they owe this dutie.
Lest they be discouraged] the reason followes.
There are many reasons why parents should be carefull by all meanes to keepe anger out of their Children.7. Reasons to preuent anger in children. 1. Wise men and godly men can scarce gouerne this affection without sinning, Psalm. 4. much lesse children. 2. Anger is a great prouoker of Gods anger, it breedes a guiltinesse of Gods anger, Math. 6.3. It lets in the Deuills, Eph. 4.26. and vsually Sathan in the times of these passions, sowes the most hellish seeds and stirs most impious thoughts in them. 4. It may bring them into great mischiefe in time, Prouerb. 28.18. 5. It is a great let to sound instruction and knowledge, Eccles. 7.11. Prouerbs 14.29. 6. The angry person is vsually suspitious, and so vnfit for society with men. Prou. 1.22.24. yea it is a great hinderance both to the profit of the word. Iam. 1.21. and the power and successe of praier. 1 Tim. 2.8. 7. Some times this rage in young persons is not to bee cooled but with bloud as in Caine.
But to omit the reasons, here parents must not prouoke their children lest they be discouraged.
Concerning discouragement in generall, we must know that it is a great sin to discourage others, and a great hurt to be discouraged, the people must not
 discourage their Teachers, Heb. 13.17. those that are in authoritie must not discourage such as are faithfull and desirous to approue their feare of God, and to discharge their duties. Gouernours in the familie must not discourage seruants or children in their good beginnings and desires after good things.1 Thes. 5.14. Againe this is a Christian mercy and compassion, to comfort and incourage the feeble, and lastly Gods fainting children should be admonished to be of good comfort, and to strengthen their weary knees, 2 Cor. 13.11. Esay 36.3.4.
Concerning the discouragement of children, Christian parents should be carefull: for they may be discouraged.
1. From the seruice of God when they shall see carnall men vse their children better then they that make such a profession of piety.
2. From the capacitie and desire after the vndertaking of the knowledge or exercise of great things, discouragement breakes their spirits, and makes them pusillanimous.
3. From the hope to please and so from the confidence of the parents loue, and then at length from the very meanes of pleasing either by honour or obedience. This of the duty of parents and children.
The third couple in the familie are seruants and masters.
The duty of seruants is set downe verse, 22.23.24.25.



VER. 22. Seruants be obedient to them that are your Masters according to the flesh in all things.

IN all the words that concerne the dutie of Seruants I obserue:
1. An exhortation, vers. 22.23.2. Reasons, vers. 24.25.
The exhortation is two waies to be considered: first as it is breifly set down, here is first the parties exhorted (Seruants): Secondly, the duty wherewith they are charged (be obedient): thirdly, the persons to whom, to your masters.
2. Secondly, as it is explicated in the explication, I consider,
1. The prouisoes about their obedience.2. The forme or manner how they must obey.
The prouisoes are either for limitation to curbe Masters, they are to obey according to the flesh, the soules and consciences are not in bondage to men, or for extent to seruants, they must obey in all things.
The manner how they must obey is set downe,
1. Negatiuely, not with eye seruice: 2. Not as men pleasers.
2. Affirmatiuely, with singlenesse of hart: 2. with feare of God: 3. heartily as to the Lord. The reasons are, 1. from hope of reward and wages from God, v. 24. 2. From the certain vengeance of God vpon them that do wrong, v. 25.
This is the order of the words.
From the generall consideration of all the words I obserue 5. things.
1. That seruants are to be instructed out of the word;5. Things generally obserued. which reprooues Masters that restraine seruants from hearing the word in Gods house, and open not the booke of God to them in their owne houses.
2. A question may here be mooued, why should the duety of seruants be thus largely in so many words set downe?
Answ. 1. Because vsually men shew lesse compassion to seruants: therfore God takes the more care of them, many men will haue some care of their children, to see them taught in some manner, but their seruants they wholly neglect. Therefore God who is a Father to seruants as well as children, prouides large instruction and comforts for seruants, if they will come to his booke to be taught.
2. The carefull Apostle saw that in the first conuersion of men from Gentilisme to Christianitie, there was greatest danger of disorder and scandall in seruants,
 partly out of wearinesse of their bondage and seruile condition, partly because men would lesse spare to tell of their faults, therefore the Apostle as most fearefull of them spends many words in the teaching and incouraging of them.
3. We may note here the candor of the Apostle, he doth freely deliuer his mind in the behalfe of seruants with a full vent of words, with great care without holding backe any thing that belongs vnto them. He was not of the mind of most Preachers now adaies, that hold the discourse of family duties, especially of seruants, too base a subiect for their wits and learning to be imploied in, neither was the Apostle of the humour of Lawyers, that seldome speake much but for great men, or when they may haue great gifts, the Apostle speaks as much for a seruant that could do nothing for him as for the Masters.
4. In laying downe his speech to seruants, he both teacheth and comforteth them, but for order he first teacheth them, and as any is more ignorant, this course is more needfull to be held, the common people should be in this manner dealt withall, they must first be rebuked, conuinced, exhorted, taught and then meet comforts to be applied; and not before.
Lastly, the scope and drift of the Apostle in all these words is to keepe Seruants in order, and that first to hold seruants in obedience, that none vnder colour of liberty in Christ should breake vp their subiection to their Masters. He was no Anabaptist. Secondly, to meet with the faultie obedience of such seruants as were resolued to stay in seruice. Hee meeteth here with fiue faults in seruants.

Fiue faults in Seruants.1. The first fault in Seruants is halfe seruice, or to obey in what they list, this he correcteth, when he saith (in all things)
2. The second fault is eye-seruice.
3. The third fault is prophanesse, most seruants neuer respect piety and Gods feare, but onely to please their Masters, this hee meeteth with when he saith, not as men pleasers, but fearing God.
4. The fourth fault is hypocriticall seruice, this he meeteth when he addeth in singlenesse of heart.
5. The fifth fault is basenesse of minde and discouragement, this he would preuent in the two last verses.

Thus of the generall.
Seruants] The Seruants in the Apostles time were for the most part bondslaues, bought and sold as beasts, and their Masters were Infidels and cruell to them; and yet many of these Seruants were conuerted to the faith of Christ. Where we may learne, that mens slaues may be Gods seruants, hee hath his elect among these; the deare children of God in this world may bee abased to most vile misery, and a most seruile condition.
The Vses are: First, to shew that felicitie is not in outward things, for Gods seruants that had attained the chiefe good, yet were in most base condition, in respect of the things of this life.
Secondly, to teach vs patience in lesser crosses, whatsoeuer thou art, yet thou art not a bondslaue, therefore bee patient; such as haue beene deare in Gods sight haue beene worse vsed then thou art.
Thirdly, to teach vs compassion to the baser sort of men, for Gods elect may be among these.
Lastly, this is a great comfort to the abiect.
But howsoeuer bought seruants were most vsuall in the Apostles time, yet hired seruants were vsed then too, and are here meant, aswell as the other, yea, all seruants though they were nobles seruing in Princes Courts, are tied to the duties generally here required.
And as any seruants haue more knowledge and doe professe sinceritie in
 religion, they are the more tied to bee carefull seruants to men, they should not onely be better men and women, but better seruants also.
Thus of the parties exhorted.
Be obedient] Here I consider 2. things.
1. That they must obey, they must approue themselues to their Masters not by wearing their cloth, or cognisance, or by words and complements, but by painefull and carefull obedience.
2. How they must obey, and that may be opened thus.
First, with reuerence, with all honour, 1 Tim. 6.1. both internall,4. Things in the manner of seruants obedience. with high account and estimation of their Masters, and externall, with reuerent words and behauiour.
Secondly, with all feare, 1 Pet. 2.18. Ephes. 6.5. and this they should shew, first, by auoiding what might offend. Secondly, by not answering againe. Thirdly, by a holy endeauour to please them. Tit. 2.9.
Thirdly, with subiection, to rebukes, 1 Pet. 2.11. 2. to correction, 1 Pet. 19.20. 3. to their restraints: first, in respect of diet, they must not be their owne caruers. Secondly, in respect of place, they must keepe the bounds of the Familie, and not at their pleasure be gadding out either by night or day vpon any pretence without leaue. Thirdly, in respect of companie, they must bring none into the Family, that are lewd persons, or of what sort soeuer against the liking of the Master, nor may they keepe company abroad to the iust offence of their Masters. Fourthly, in respect of apparell, though they haue neuer so good meanes, yet they must bee attired as becommeth Seruants.
And this subiection also they should shew in a ready acknowledgement of their fault when they vnderstand it. It is a great fault in Seruants that though they vnderstand, yet they will not answere. First acknowledge and giue glory to God, and submit themselues to their masters, Pro. 29.19.
4. Withall good faithfulnesse, Tit. 2.10. this faithfulnesse is required:
1. In respect of the goods of the family, and thus they must shew their faithfulnesse in not daring to purloyne the least penny from their Masters: no pickers, Tit. 2.10. 2. It is not enough that they are true, but they must bee thriftily carefull to see that nothing be spoiled or lost, or miscarry any way by their default and negligence, this was the great testimonie of Iacobs faithfulnesse, Gen. 31.36.
2. In respect of secrets, they must keepe the secrets of the Master, and of the family, yea and of the trade and calling to.
3. In respect of the businesse of the family, and here their faithfulnesse standeth in two things.
1. In diligence of labour, hee is not a faithfull seruant that eats the bread of Idlenesse, as many seruing-men do, that can tell of no calling but attendance.
2. In trustinesse, and in this seruants must be faithfull two waies: first in their care to see their Masters directions executed in the familie, as if they had beene present: secondly, in their speedy dispatch of busines abroad, a sloathfull messenger is an exceeding prouocation to them that send him, and it is a wretched fault in seruants, when they are sent forth of the familie about businesse they cannot find the way in againe in any due time.
Thus of the dutie to which they are exhorted.
To them that are your Masters] They must be subiect and obedient to all Masters, indefinitely without difference of Sexe (and so to the wife or widdow, 1 Tim. 5.14. Pro. 31.) or of condition they must bee obedient to the poorest as well as the rich.
Thus of the laying downe of the exhortation. The explication followes, and first of the prouisoes. According to the flesh.]

These words may be referred to Masters, and then the sense is this, that seruants must be obedient euen to such Masters as are fleshly, and carnall men, they must obey though their Masters be Ethnikes or prophane persons; it is a great praise for a seruant to men, to bee Gods seruant also, but it is a greater praise to be a religious seruant of an irreligious Master, to feare God in a prophane house.
2. To seruants, and so they are a limitation, they are subiect onely in respect of their flesh and bodies, and so here is two things to be obserued.
The one exprest: the bodies of seruants are in the power, and at the disposing of the Masters, and therefore seruants must learne to subiect their flesh to their Masters, both commands, restraints, and corrections.
The other implied: the soules of seruants are not in the power and at the disposing of Masters, their spirits are free, nor Master nor King can command the conscience.
Vse is, first, for reproofe of such seruants as giue more to their Masters then is due, thou oughtest to be of the same calling, trade, labour, etc. that thy master is of, but thou art not bound to be of the same religion, or humour with thy Master. It is a great fault not to giue the body to thy Master, but a great fault also, to giue both body and soule to bee at his disposing, both are extreames.
Secondly, should seruants feare their Masters because they haue power ouer the flesh? how much more should we feare God, that hath power to destroy both soule and flesh in hell, Math. 10.
Thirdly, this may be a great comfort to a seruant, thy soule is as free as the soule of him that sits on a throne, thy seruice in the flesh derogates nothing from the libertie of Christ in thy heart. Thy best part is free.
In all things] Seruants must obey in all things, euen in things that bee against their credit, profit, liking, ease, etc. There is a great sturdinesse in many seruants, either they will not doe somethings required, or not at the time when they are bidden, or not in the manner, but as they list, these courses are vile, and here condemned.
Ob.Obiect. But vnlawfull and vnmeet things are required.
Sol.I answer, that in cases of this nature, three rules are to be obserued by inferiours.
First, If the matter required be only inexpedient, and vnmeet, thou must obey: neither doth this rule let, but that seruants or inferiours may vse all humble and lawfull meanes to preuent vnmeet things.
Secondly, thou must be sure it be sinne that thou refusest, thou must not disobey vpon conceit, or coniecture, nor vpon thine owne humour and opinion, but it must appeare by the word of God to bee a sinne, or else thy coniectures are no ground of disobedience, if thou must needs doubt on both sides it is better doubt and obey, then doubt and disobey.
Thirdly, when it is apparant to be impious and sinnefull that is required, yet thou must looke to the manner of disobedience, thou must yeelde thy selfe to obey by suffering; yea, it is a wretched fault in seruants or inferiours, that are vrged to vnlawfull things, to refuse with sturdie, and insolent, and prouoking words, or behauiour, God frees thee from disobedience in act, but he frees thee not from reuerence, and from an holy estimation and humble demeanour.
The vse is for great reproofe of seruants, both indiscretion and stubbernes, and withall it chargeth masters; they must not require their seruants to lie and sweare in their shops onely to please and profit them, nor may they make their seruants breake Gods Sabbaths to satisfie their wils.
Obiect. But are they not required to obey in all things.

Answ. They are, but before he saith, according to the flesh, in labour not in sinne, and after he saith, they must so please men as they feare God too.
Thus of the prouisoes.
The forme of their obedience is set downe: First, negatiuely, not with eye-seruice] not as men pleasers.] Secondly, affirmatiuely. 1. With singlenesse of heart. 2. Fearing God. 3. Heartily.
Eye-seruice.] Some take it thus, not with outward seruice,(...). not onely doe the Labour of the body, but bring the care, prouidence, affection of the heart: or thus, be obedient to your Masters, and let not your eye bee onely vpon your Masters, but vpon God the great Master of all Masters and men. But I thinke the proper meaning of the word is, not with eye-seruice, that is, not onely in the presence of your Masters, not onely when their eye is vpon them: so that he meets with the wretched faultinesse of such seruants as when their Masters backes are turned, neglect their labour, fall to loitering, or get them out of the doores, or which is worse, fall to wantonnesse, drunkenesse, filching, smiting of their fellowes, and quarrelling, these seruants shall haue their portion at the day of Christ: Math. 14.48. and if eye-seruice be concondemned, what shal become of such seruants as are not good, no not so long as their Masters are by them?
Not as men pleasers] Obiect.(...). Is it a fault for seruants to please their Masters?
Answ. No, it is not, for they are commaunded to please in all things: Tit. 2.9. But two things are here condemned. First, so to please men, as neuer to care for pleasing God; so to attend a corporall seruice as not to care for the sauing health of their soules, this is prophannesse. Secondly, such seruants are here taxed, as seeke by all meanes to please their masters, but not to profit them, such are they that are flattering soothing persons, that serue their Masters onely with faire words, but else are emptie persons; such (or rather worse) are they that apply themselues to their Masters humors, to feed them with tales, or praising their ill courses and counsels, or executing their sinfull mindes: these seruants are many times the firebrands of contention, alienate parents from their children, friend from friend, and keepe malice on perpetuall foote: these are here rebuked. But let vs consider further, is this such a fault in poore seruants (that can pretend many things) to be men-pleasers, how foule a vice is it in freemen that are in no wants or restraint, how hurtfull is it to be a man-pleaser in the Courts of Princes, and in the houses of Nobles? how detested a vice is it in such as are Magistrates and publike states? And is it nought in the Court and Countrey, certainely it is much more vile in the Pulpit, and in Churchmen, and euen the greater they are, the worse and more abominable is their soothing and daubing.
Thus of the negatiue.
In the affirmatiue are three things, and the first is singlenesse of heart.
In singlenesse of heart.] Concerning singlenesse of heart, I consider it two waies.

1. In the generall, as it is in Gods seruants.
2. In speciall, as it is in mens seruants.

Singlenesse or sinceritie of heart as it is in Gods seruants, I consider of in two things.

1. In the nature of it.
2. In the signes of it.

Singlenesse of heart may be discerned by the contrarie to which it is opposed.
1. As it is opposed to hypocrisie, a sincere hearted man is no hypocrite, and shewes it three waies.

Hovv to knovv singlenesse of heart by 6. things to vvhich it is opposed.First, hee had rather be good then seeme so, as in case of almes, Rom. 12.8. compared with Math. 6.2. so in the practise of piety, he had rather haue grace and sound knowledge then an emptie shew of it.
Secondly, he will serue God at all times as well as at one time: it is a note of an hypocrite that he will not pray at all times, hee will serue God when he is sicke, but not when he is well, Iob. 27.7.8.9. So it is vile hypocrisie to come to Church in Lent to heare Sermons, but neuer come there, or but seldome all the yeere after.
Thirdly, he minds inward secret domesticall holinesse and piety, as well as outward open and Church holinesse, hee is an hypocrite that kneeles downe when he comes into the Church and neuer praieth in his family at home. It is vile hypocrisie and palpable, in such men as haue knees of praier when they first come vp into the pulpit, and no words of praier when they are risen vp to speake for or to Gods people.
2. As it is opposed to fleshly wisedome, 1 Cor. 1.12. There is a threefold wisedome of the flesh that batters and keepes out singlenesse and sinceritie of heart.
1. The first is a reaching after priuate ends in publike imployments, as preaching for gaine, 2 Cor. 2.17.
2. The second is a cunningnesse in committing or hiding sinne. It is sincerity to be wise to doe good, and simple concerning euill to be a bungler in acting it, and to haue nothing to say in defence of it when it is done, Rom. 16.19.
3. The third is fraud, shifting, subtiltie, and guilefull and deceitfull dealing in mens course for the things of this life. Thus Esau is a wild and cunning man, able by reason of his craft and subtiltie to liue in a wildernes, but Iaakob is a plaine man, a single hearted man, he can make no shift to helpe himselfe in earthly things by fraud or craft, but is open and plaine in all his dealings for the world; but a man of great reach for matters of his soule. This is a patterne of true singlenes, simplicitie, and sinceritie. 3. As it is opposed to a double heart, opposed I say to a heart and a heart, and a double hart is either a wauering heart, or a diuided heart: men haue a double heart that wauer and are tossed with vncertainties, such as are now for God and godlinesse, and shortly after for sinne and the flesh; now are resolued to leaue such a fault, as perswaded it is a fault, and by and by they will to it againe, as perswaded it is not a fault: here is no singlenesse of heart. And thus the heart is double in respect of times, it is double also, as diuided in respect of obiects, I instance in two things: first in matter of worship, the people that came to inhabite Samaria had a diuided heart, for they feared the God of the Countrey, because of the Lions and they feared the gods of the nations also, 2 King. 17.33. Such are they that feare Gods threatnings in his word, and feare the signes of heauen too. Secondly, our Sauiour instances in matters of the world. The minde which is the eie of the soule cannot be said to be single, when it is distracted, men cannot serue God and Mammon, Math. 6.21.22.23.24.
4. As it is opposed to spirituall pride, a single heart is an humble heart as Iob sheweth, Iob. 9.15.16. and sheweth it selfe in two things: First, that if God send crosses, it will not answer or iustifie it selfe, but make supplication, and so acknowledge Gods loue, as withall it will confesse that God doth iudge them for their corruptions. Secondly, if the sincere hearted man pray to God and the Lord be pleased to answer him by vnutterable feelings, euen by the witnesse of the spirit of adoption, yet hee will be so farre from spirituall pride and conceitednesse, that fearing before Gods mercies, he will be as if he beleeued not that God had heard his voice.
5. As opposed to perturbation and disquietnes of the heart, arising either
 from the cloudinesse and muddinesse of the Iudgement, not able to discerne things that differ,(...). Phil. 1.10. or from the vnrest of the conscience shewed by hourely or frequent checkings, 2 Cor. 1.12. or from the infidelity or grudging or distrustfulnesse of the heart, Act. 2.46.
6. As opposed to offensiuenesse, and so the single harted man is neither offensiue by wrongs, nor by scandals; in respect of wrongs he is innocent as the doue: he is no horned beast to pelt and gore others,(...). Math. 10.16. and in respect of scandals, hee is desirous to liue without blame, from those that are without, or griefe to the faithfull, Phil. 2.15. and 1.10.
Out of this may be gathered,12. Signes of a single hearted man. the signes or properties of a single or sincere hearted man. 1. He had rather be good then seeme to be so. 2. He striues to be good in secret at home, in heart as well as openly and abroad. 3. He serues not God by flashes or fits, but is constant, and will pray and serue God at all times. 4. He is a plaine man without fraud and guile in matters of the world, he loues plainnesse and open dealing, yet he is not simple, for in matters of his soule he is of great reach, and forecast, and discretion, etc. 5. He is a bungler in sinne, he knowes not the methode of Sathan. 6. Hee dotes not vpon the world, he can vse it as though he vsed it not, hee is not tossed with distracting cares. 7. He cannot abide mixtures in the worship of his God, he is neither Idolatrous, nor superstitious, nor humerous. 8. Good successe in grace and innocency, makes him more humble and fit to grieue for sinne, and feele the waight of it, he struggles as much against spirituall pride as against other sins. 9. He doth not allow himselfe to murmure nor repine, either through infidelity at God, or through grudging enuy at men, or distresse himselfe with vaine feare about how he shall doe hereafter. 10. He is harmelesse, desirous so to liue as he may wrong none in worldly matters, nor offend any in matters of religion. 11. He makes conscience of lesser sinnes as well as greater, this is his godly purenesse. 12. He is blest of God after some progresse in piety with two singular fauours: First he discerneth things that differ: Secondly, he hath the power, quietnesse and ioy of a good conscience.
Here also may be gathered negatiue signes, they are not single hearted; First, that are hypocrites taken vp about the gilding of the outside: Secondly, that will serue God but at some times. 3. That are skilfull in sinne, to commend it, or impudent to defend, deny or extenuate it. Fourthly, that are of a guilefull and fradulent disposition. Fifthly, that are eaten vp with worldly cares. Sixthly, that are scandalous, yea some of Gods children may hang downe their heads vnder the feare that their hearts are not so single as were meete by reason of their spirituall pride, the raging muddinesse of iudgement and the vnrest of the heart and conscience.
Thus of singlenesse of heart in Gods seruants.
Mens seruants shall approue themselues to be single hearted.8. Signes of a single hearted seruant.
1. If they can honour and obey poore Masters as well as rich.
2. If they can be carefull to serue, and profit with all heedfulnesse, and loue froward Masters as well as the courteous.
3. If they can obey for conscience of Gods command, though they haue no hope of reward from men, or conceit, nor feare of shame or punishment.
4. If they be as good within as without, serue with pure intention.
5. If they will bee diligent in the Masters absence, aswell as in his presence.
6. If they will be true in the least penny, not touch their Masters goods to purloine it, though they might secretly helpe themselues.
7. If they will labour when they might be at rest.
8. If they will restore what they haue ill gotten, or if they be not able will humble themselues by acknowledgement though none were able to accuse them.

Vse is for incouragement to all seruants and Iourney-men to get and expresse this vprightnesse and singlenesse of heart, for better is the poore that walketh in his singlenesse of heart, then he that abuseth his lips and is a foole Prou. 19.1. Yea, we should all take heed that Satan beguile vs not from the simplicitie that is in Christ Iesus.
Thus of singlenesse of heart.
Fearing God] The second thing required in the manner of their obedience in the feare of God.
Of the feare of God in seruants.The feare of God in a Seruant must haue foure things in it.
First, a not guiltinesse of the common vices of seruants, as swearing, whooring, stealing, gaming, etc.
Secondly, they must feare Gods presence, euen doe their businesse faithfully, not because the eye of their Master, but of God is vpon them, this is one part of their feare of God.
Thirdly, they must pray daily to God for their Masters, and the family, and for good successe vpon their owne labours, this prooued that Abrahams seruant feared God, Gen. 24.
Fourthly, they must be religious in the generall duties of piety to God, as well as in the particular duties of seruice to their Masters, they must so serue men as they feare God also.
Vses. First for Seruants, and then for Masters. Seruants must learne to doe all their labour fearing God, euen that God, 1. That set them in that calling. 2. Whose eies alwaies behold how they discharge their duty in their calling, and in as much as the feare of God is made the ground here of other duties, they should learne to be the better seruants to men because they feare God. Masters also must learne, first, what seruants to chuse, not such onely as will doe their worke, but such as feare God also, and if they haue failed in that, they should labour now to beget and nurse the feare of God in the seruants they haue, for Gods feare would make their seruants more dutifull to them, besides the reason why their seruants fall to whoring, stealing, vnthriftinesse, etc. is because the feare of God is not in them.
What masters must doe to get the feare of God into their seruants.Quest. But what should Masters do that their seruants might feare God?
Answ. Foure things: First, they should pray and read the Scriptures in their houses, and Chatechise their seruants. Secondly, they should bring them to the publike preaching of the word. Thirdly, they should giue them good example themselues. Fourthly, they should restraine them from prophane company, and incourage them, and allow them liberty at conuenient times to conuerse with such as feare God. Thus of the feare of God.



VER. 23. And whatsoeuer ye doe, doe it heartily, as to the Lord, and not vnto men.

THe third thing required in their obedience is that they doe it heartily, in this Verse is the manner of the dutie, and the inducement thereunto.
Heartily] Ex animo. The obedience of Seruants should be a hearty obedience, the Apostle will not haue only feare of God, but loue of the Master; their obedience must beginne at heart, not at hand or foot, if the heart be not with their obedience, the Master may haue their labour (and that he hath of the Oxe) but such seruants lose their labour.
Quest. What is it to obey Ex animo?
Answ. It is to obey voluntarily, and out of a heart and affection rightly ordered, but especially it is to obey out of a iudgement well informed.
8. Obiections of Seruants ansvvered.The vse is therefore to vrge them to doe it; and here I would consider of the obiections of Seruants, why they cannot obey Ex animo.
Obiect. 1. Bondage is against nature.

Sol. It is against nature as it was before the fall, but not as it is now since the fall.
Ob. 2. But Christ hath made vs free.
Sol. Free in soule in this life, not in body till your bodies be dissolued, or till death.
Ob. 3. But my Master is froward.
Sol. Yet thou must be subiect, 1 Pet. 2.18.
Ob. 4. But he doth not only giue ill words, but blowes.
Sol. Perhaps it is needfull, for a seruant will not be corrected by words, Prou. 29.19.
Ob. 5. But he correcteth me vniustly.
Sol. First, who shall iudge this? shall seruants themselues? Secondly, it is acceptable if for well doing and for conscience thou endure to be buffeted, etc. 1 Pet. 2.19.20.
Ob. 6. But my Master is not only a froward man, but a wicked man, and an enemie of Christ.
Sol. Yet thou must honour and obey him willingly, 1 Tim. 6.1.2.
Ob. 7. But I am an hired seruant, not a bought seruant.
Sol. Indeed Masters haue not that power ouer them they haue ouer bondslaues; but yet all seruants are here bound to obey heartily.
Ob. 8. But vnmeet things are required.
Sol. Discerne things that differ, but yet obey in all things. All thi^ reproues grudging, and slow and stubborne seruants.
Whatsoeuer yee doe.] Not only faire, easie, cleanly, and best sort of workes are to be done willingly, but all, or any kinde of labour whatsoeuer, though neuer so base or vile.
As to the Lord, and not to men.] Doct. Seruants in obeying their Masters, serue the Lord.
The vse is, both for instruction of seruants, and for comfort: For instruction, they must serue their Masters as they would serue the Lord, with all faithfulnesse, diligence, willingnesse, prouidence, conscience, etc.
For comfort and encouragement also is this doctrine, and that three wayes.
First, here is a limitation, they must doe no seruice to men that is against the Lord.
Secondly, art thou a seruant? care not for it, thou art Christs freeman.
Thirdly, let not the basenesse of thy worke discourage thee, for in seruing thy master thou seruest God as well as if thou wert preaching, or praying, etc. When the Apostle saith, not vnto men, wee must vnderstand, not principally or only. Thus of the exhortations. The reasons follow.



VERS. 24. Knowing that of the Lord yee shall receiue the reward of the inheritance: for yee serue the Lord Christ.

IN this verse seruants are perswaded to obedience, by a reason taken from the retribution or reward of their seruice; and the matter of the verse is comprehended in this Syllogisme. What faithfull men soeuer serue Christ, and doe their dutie to him faithfully and cheerefully, shall receiue of Christ the reward of inheritance: But you Christian seruants, when you performe your obsequious obedience to your Masters, serue the Lord Christ: Ergo, you shall haue the reward of the inheritance.
Knowing.] Doct. Seruants may and ought to know, and be assured of their owne saluation.
Vse is for confutation of Papists, and vnsound men, that denie certaintie of saluation* for if seruants that haue not the greatest wits or knowledge, that are imploied about small businesses, that haue not so much libertie, nor
 learning as other men, etc. yet may be assured not by coniecture, or hope, but by certaine knowledge, by most vndoubted faith: then what colour of reason can there be, why other Christians, the Lords people, should be denied this knowledge? and therefore in the second place it should teach vs to make our calling and election sure.
Reward.] Doct. The workes euen of seruants shall be rewarded.
Vse is for the comfort of seruants, and for reproofe of the vnbeleefe that is many times in Gods children, doubting of Gods acceptation of their praier and holy endeuours. Shall the base and secular workes of mens seruants bee rewarded, and the great workes of pietie in Gods seruice not be regarded?
Of the Lord.] God will be pay-master vnto seruants, and in that they are turned ouer to God for paiment, it implies that the most masters are carelesse and vnmercifull; and this they are not only in with-holding conuenient food and raiment, but in sending their seruants after long time of wearie labour out of their families emptie, and without meanes to liue in the world.

Reward of inheritance.]

Two things are here affirmed of heauen: First, it is a reward, and so free.
Secondly, it is an inheritance, and so sure.
There are foure vses may be made of this Doctrine. 1. Wee should much loue, esteeme, and desire heauen, it is the reward of God. Princes giue great gifts, but Gods least gift must needs be glorious. 2. Wee should learne to be liberall as God is liberall, giue freely, giue largely. 3. Here is a plaine confutation of the merit of heauen, for heauen is an inheritance; now the sonne doth not inherit the fathers lands, hee hath not his lands in measure according to his deserts, for most an end the land is purchased before the sonne be borne; much lesse can we merit heauen, and the rather because we cannot alleadge so much as this, we came out of the loynes of the father, seeing we are children but by adoption.
For yee serue the Lord Christ.] Doct. Christ is the chiefe Lord, and therefore masters should be well aduised how they vse their seruants, for they are Christs seruants; and seruants should be carefull how they obey their masters, for they must account to this Steward.
Thus of the first maine reason.



VERS. 25. But he that doth wrong, shall receiue for the wrong that he hath done: and there is no respect of persons.

SOme take this twentie fiue verse to be a conclusion of the whole Doctrine before concerning Familie-duties, as if hee would signifie, that he would not haue this doctrine of houshold gouernment more contemned then the doctrine of piety or righteousnesse; for whatsoeuer wife, husband, childe, father, or seruant, shall doe wrong in the neglect or breach of these commandements, for the familie shall bee sure to receiue for the wrong hee doth, at Gods hand, without respect of persons.
Some vnderstand the verse as a threatning to seruants, if they doe any way wrong their masters.
But the commonnest interpretation is meetest, viz. to vnderstand it as a reason taken from the certaine vengeance of God against all masters that wrong their seruants, and so is the second maine reason to vrge their obedience.
In the verse I likewise obserue 7. Doctrines.
1. Masters must account to God for all the wrong they doe to their seruants in word or deed.
2. All Masters shall be punished of God that doe wrong, if they repent
 not, though they were otherwise neuer so great, yea though they were neuer so good or righteous men; for if good men wrong their seruants, God will requite it, and chasten them for that as well as for other sinnes.
3. The soueraigntie of disposing an exact, full, and finall vengeance, belongs to God only, men administer only a part or drop of it.
4. God will rise vp in the defence of the poorest and meanest Christians to right their wrongs.
5. Seruants may not right their owne wrongs, and returne words for words, or blowes for blowes, but commit that to God.
6. Seruants must bee subiect not onely to the curteous and iust, but to the froward and iniurious masters.
Lastly, God is no respecter of persons, or faces, hee cares no more for the master then for the man, all are one in Christ Iesus, there is neither bond nor free, Iew nor Grecian, rich nor poore, but Christ is all in all things, as is before declared, Verse 11.
Thus of the duties of Seruants.

Thus also of the Doctrine of the third CHAPTER.




THE LOGICALL ANALYSIS OF the fourth Chapter.
THE first verse of this Chapter  belongs vnto the speciall rules of the former Chapter, and contains the dutie of masters, and the reason of it. Their dutie in these words, Ye masters doe that which is iust and equall to your seruants. The reason in these words, knowing that yee also haue a master in heauen.
In the second verse, and so to the end of the chapter, is contained the conclusion of the whole Epistle.
This conclusion containes 1. matter of exhortation to v. 7. 2. matter of salutation, from v. 7. to the end.
The exhortation may be 3. wayes considered: first, as it concernes praier, v. 2, 3, 4. secondly, as it concernes wise conuersation, v. 5. thirdly, as it concernes godly communication, v. 6.
Concerning praier, two things are to be obserued:  1 the manner, 2 the matter: In the manner 3 things are required: 1 Perseuerance, 2 Watchfulnesse, 3 Thankfulnesse, v. 2.
In the matter consider, 1 the persons for whom,  Praying also for vs: 2 the things for which, that God may open, etc. These things are 1 briefly laid downe, that God would open to vs a dore of vtterance: or 2 more fully explicated, 1 By the subiect, to speake the mysterie of
 Christ. 2. By a reason, For which I am in bands. 3. By the end, That I may vtter it as becommeth mee to speake, verse 3.4.
Wisdome of conuersation is propounded with limitation to the respect of some person, viz. them that  are without, verse 6.
In that part that concernes gracious communication there are two things. 1. The precept, Let your speech etc. 2. The end of the precept, that ye may know how etc. In the precept note first the properties of speech: 1. gracious, 2. powdred with salt: secondly, the continuance, viz. alwayes.
Thus of the exhortation. The salutation followes, from v. 7. to the end: where obserue, 1. a narration as an entrance. 2. The salutations themselues.
 The narration is in verse 7.8.9. and it concernes first Tichicus, v. 7.8. and Onesimus, v. 9.
Concerning Tichicus there are two things: First his praises, with relation to all Christians, a beloued brother, or to Christ, a faithfull minister, or to Paul, a fellow-seruant. Secondly, the end of his mission, which is threefold: First, to declare Pauls estate: Secondly, to know their estate: Thirdly, to comfort their hearts.
 Concerning Onesimus, there is likewise, first, his praises, in relation to all, so he is a brother, faithfull, beloued: relation to them, he is one of them: Secondly, the end of his mission, is to make knowne, etc. v. 9.
 The salutions follow, and they are first signified; secondly, required: the signified salutations are from verse 10. to 15. the other from verse 15. to the end.
The salutations signified are from six men, three of them Iewes, viz. Aristarchus, Marcus, and Iesus, v, 10.11. and three Gentiles, Epaphras, Lucas, Demas, v. 12.13.14.
 The Iewes are described, first by their names: secondly, by their country, they were of the circumcision: thirdly, by their praises, and so for what they were to the whole Church, labourers, fellow-workers to the kingdome of God, or to Paul, and so they were to his consolation, v. 11.

The salutations of the Gentiles follow, whereof the  first is of Epaphras, who is described, first, by his office, a seruant of Christ; secondly, by his relation to them, hee is one of you; thirdly, by his loue to them, shewed by his striuing in praier for them; fourthly, by his zeale not onely for them, but the neighbour Churches, vers. 13.
Thus of the salutations signified. The salutations  required follow; and those are either particular, verse 15, 16, 17. or generall, verse 18.
The particular salutations concerne either the Laodiceans,  verse 15, 16. or the Colossian Preacher, who is not only saluted, but exhorted, verse 17.
The generall salutation hath in it first a signe: The  salutation by the hand of me PAVL. Secondly, a request, remember my bands. Thirdly, a loue, Grace be with you, Amen, verse 18.

THE METAPHRASE vpon the fourth Chapter.VERSE 1. YE masters do that vvhich is iust and equall vnto your seruants, knovving that ye haue also a Master in heauen.MAsters also must doe that which is iust vnto their seruants, both for their soules, and for their bodies also, in diet, wages, or correction: and that which is equall both while they stay with them, in allowance of recreation, and respect of their weaknesse and sicknesse, and when they goe from them, not to let them goe away emptie: knowing that they themselues are seruants vnto GOD who is in heauen, and will call them to accounts.Vers. 2. Continue in praier, and vvatch in the same vvith thanksgiuing.To conclude, I returne againe to all sorts of Christians, and exhort them to three things principally: the first is about praier, the second is about their carriage, the third about their speeches. For their praiers there are three things exceeding necessary: perseuerance, and Christian watchfulnesse, and thankesgiuing for the graces and blessings they doe receiue.Vers. 3. Praying also for vs, that God may open vnto vs the doore of vtterance, to speake the mysterie of Christ: vvherefore I am also in bonds.Vers 4. That I may vtter it as it becommeth me to speake.Remembring vs also in their praiers, that GOD would open vnto vs a doore of vtterance with libertie, courage, power and good successe to breake open the mysterie of the Gospell of CHRIST, for which I am now in prison.That I may so speake of those dreadfull secrets, that I no way derogate from the maiestie of them, or that trust that is committed to me, or expected from me. Thus of what I would specially commend to you about praier.Now for your carriage;Verse 5. Walke vvisely tovvards them that are vvithout, and redeeme the time. I would haue you especially looke to your selues in respect of your behauiour before or amongst the wicked, who are not of GODS familie, and strangers from the life of GOD: it were an admirable thing to carry your selues in a wise and discreet manner towards them. Hence and by all other wayes shewing your sel^^ to be skilfull Marchants in redeeming the time which hath beene lost.Vers. 6. Let your speech bee gracious alvvaies, and poudred vvith salt, that yee may knovv hovv to ansvver euery man.Vers. 7. All my state shall Tichicus declare vnto you, vvho is a beloued brother, and faithfull Minister and fellovv seruant in the Lord.Vers. 8. Whom I haue sent vnto you for the same purpose, that hee might knovv your estate, and comfort your hearts.Vers. 9. With Onesimus a faithfull and beloued brother, vvho is one of you, they shall make knovvne vnto you all things vvhich are done here.Ver. 10. Aristarchus my prison-fellovv saluteth you, and Marcus, Barnabas sisters sonne, touching vvhom yee receiued co^mandements. If he come vnto you, receiue him.Vers. 11. And Iesus vvhich is called Justus, vvhich are of the circumcision. These onely are my vvorke-fellovves vnto the kingdome of God, vvhich haue beene vnto my consolation.V^rs. 12. Ep^phras the seruant of Christ, vvhich is one of you, s^luteth you, and alvvayes striueth for you in prayers, that yee may stand (...) and full in all the vvill of God.And for your communication, let it be of good and holy things, not offensiue, or slanderous, or filthy; and powdred with the salt of discretion and mortification; and thus let it be alwaies and in all companies, that yee may speake fitly vnto euery man, and to his place and the occasion.I haue sent ouer Tychicus to declare vnto you my whole estate, who is both a godly man well respected, and a painfull Minister, that ioynes with vs in GODS workes.And withall I send him to know how you doe, and to comfort you by all meanes with heartie consolations.And with him I haue sent Onesimus, who is now a godly man, truly sincere and well respected, euen he that was borne or brought vp amongst you. These two will relate all things to you.I haue also diuers commendations to deliuer to you, some from some Iewes, others from Gentiles. Of the first sort are Aristarchus, and Marcus, and Iesus. Aristarchus is my prison-fellow. Marcus is Barnabas sisters sonne, and it is hee concerning whom heretofore you receiued some aduertisements not to admit him, but now if he come vnto you, receiue him.Iesus by his good carriage hath gotten himselfe the surname of Iust. These three are Iewes, and indeed the only men that constantly hold out to helpe forward the kingdome of GOD: they are men in whom I am much comforted.Those of the Gentiles that desire to be remembred to you, are Epaphras, Luke, and Demas. Epaphras is a worthy seruant of CHRIST, and the dearer ought he to be to you, because he is one of you: he striueth mightily for you in all sorts of praiers, being importunate with God, that you might hold out without declining, and be more and more compleat and full in the knowledge and practise of the whole will of GOD.Vers. 13. For I beare him record, that hee hath a great zeale for you, and them that are in Laodicea, and them in Hierapolis.Vers. 14. Luke the beloued Physician and Demas greet you.Vers. 15. Salute the brethren which are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the Church which is in his house.Vers. 16. And vvhen this Epistle is read amongst you, cause it to be read also in the Church of the Laodiceans, and that you likevvise reade the Epistle from Laodicea.Vers. 17. And I say to Archippus, take heed to the ministerie vvhich thou hast receiued in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.Vers. 18. The salutation by the hand of mee Paul, remember my bonds, grace bee vvith you. Amen.For I bare him witnesse, that he is inflamed with great affection both for you, and them of Laodicea and Hierapolis.Luke also a Physitian both godly and greatly respected, saluteth you, and Demas.I pray you also to remember my salutations to the brethren of Laodicea; especially to Nymphas and that religious familie, who for their pietie and good order, are as it were a little Church.And when this Epistle hath beene publikely read of you, send it to the Church of Laodicea to be read there also, together with that letter which was sent to me from Laodicea.Commend me also to Archippus your Preacher, and charge him to take heed he do not his worke by halues, but as he hath receiued his commission from the LORD, so let him fulfill it, both by constancie, and painfulnesse, and powerfulnesse of preaching. I ioyne also my owne salutation, which is written with mine owne hand, and not by my Scribe. I pray forget me not in this restraint. The grace of GOD as the only faire portion, be now and alwayes with you. And my confident hope is, so it will.
(...)



CERTAINE OF THE choisest and chiefest points handled in the fourth CHAPTER.

HOw Masters doe that which is iust. fol. 157
Masters doe vnequally fiue wayes. fol. 158
Of continuance in praier, and of such as fall away from the affections and practise of praier, with the inconueniences of it. fol. 159
Obiections about praier answered. fol. 160
Of watching in praier. fol. 160
The doore of vtterance hath fiue things in it. fol. 162
Fiue things stop the mouthes of Gods Ministers. fol. 163
Christ is a mysterie to six sorts of men. fol. 163
Christ a mysterie fiue wayes. fol. 164
The Gospell hidden fiue wayes. fol. 164
How Ministers must preach. 165. How the people must heare. fol. 165
What it is to walke wisely. fol. 166
He walkes surely that obserues fiue rules. fol. 166
Who are without. fol. 167
The rules of answering in respect of wicked men. fol. 167
Six things obserued concerning redeeming the time. fol. 168
Foure considerations of the opportunitie of time. fol. 168
What time is lost: and how time may be bought againe: and how time must bee vsed when it is bought. fol. 169
Motiues to redeeme time. fol. 170
Obseruations concerning gracious speech. fol. 171
The reasons why some men cannot leaue their euill words. fol. 172
What they should doe to get victorie. fol. 172
Perseuerance in good words as well as good workes. fol. 173
Six things concerning answering vnbeleeuers. fol. 173
Seuen things required in answering well. fol. 173
Foure things concerning answering beleeuers. fol. 173
Six rules about receiuing one another. fol. 178
Whether the name of Iesus may be giuen to any man. fol. 179
Eight things to winne the reputation of iust men. fol. 179
What hearers are like to fall away. fol. 180
At threefold kingdome of God. fol. 180
The priuiledges of the kingdome of grace. fol. 181
Six signes to know the subiects of Christs kingdome. fol. 181
How men may get into the kingdome of God. fol. 182
Why many hearers haue no more comfort in hearing. fol. 183
Who are Christs seruants. fol. 184

The force of praier. 185. Sorts of praier. fol. 185
What striuing in praier imports. fol. 186
Eight things wee must fight against in praier. fol. 186
Rules for praier. fol. 187
The miserie of such as fall away. fol. 188
The causes of falling away. fol. 188
How many wayes Christians may be said to be perfect. fol. 189
What wee must doe to be perfect. fol. 189
The arraignment of the ciuill honest man. fol. 190. 191. 192
Twelue sorts of wrong zeale. fol. 194
Six things in true zeale. fol. 194
Foure sorts of men reproued about physicke. fol. 195
Three rules for our practise concerning such as we suspect in profession. fol. 196
A religious familie is a little Church. fol. 197
Foure orders in the familie. fol. 197
Of reading the Scriptures. fol. 198
The profit of reading Scripture, and the causes why many profit not. fol. 198
Painfull Preachers many times grow idle. fol. 199
How many wayes men remember the bonds of others. fol. 202
Of the authoritie of the Postscript. fol. 202




CHAPTER IIII.




VERSE I.

Ye masters doe that which is iust and equall vnto your seruants, knowing that yee haue also a master in heauen.


THis verse belongs vnto the doctrine of houshold gouernment, and containes, 1. the dutie of masters, 2. the reason, knowing, etc.
In the dutie, 1. the parties charged, (ye masters) 2. the dutie required, (doe that which is iust and equall) 3. the persons to whom it is to be performed, (vnto your seruants.)
Masters. All masters are charged, without difference, yea the wife as well as the husband by a Synecdoche, the greatest as well as the meanest, and the poorest must deale iustly as well as they that haue more meanes, etc.

Doe that which is iust and equall.

Doctrine from the coherence: That God that promiseth eternall things, will prouide temporall things also. In the former chapter God promised the reward of inheritance for seruants: here he takes order for their well being in the world, charging masters to see that they be vsed iustly and equally.
Iust.] Masters must doe iustly, and shew it, 1. generally,Hovv masters do that vvhich is iust. by not requiring vniust things of them, and by chusing such seruants as are iust into the familiePsal. 101.6., lest by bringing in lewd seruants the rest be infected. For if it be a great iniustice to bring in an infectious seruant that hath the plague vpon his body, and to appoint him to worke among the rest of his seruants that are free from the disease, then it is much more vniust to bring in lewd seruants, that haue the plague sore of sinne running vpon them: for the presence, and counsell, and example of lewd sinners, is of more power to infect a sound soule, than is a plaguie man to poison the sound body of others. 2. More particularly, masters must doe that which is iust, 1. to the soules, 2. to the bodies of their seruants. They must deale iustly with their soules, by helping them to grace if it be possible, but at least by bringing them to the publike meanes of grace, and by priuate training of them vp in Gods feare, by praier and instruction. The iustice they owe vnto their body may be referred vnto three heads: for either it concernes their maintenance, and so they must giue them their portion ofPro. 31.15. food conuenient for them; or it concernes their wages, and so they must giue the wages proportionable to their worke, and that in due time, and without defrauding them of any part of it; or it concernes their punishment, and so the iustice of the master must be shewed, both in this, that hee will punish
 their open disorders, as also that he will doe it with instruction, moderation, and to profit them and the whole familie.
Masters doe vnequally 7. vvayes.Equall.] Masters must not onely deale iustly, but they must deale equally with their seruants. And masters deale vnequally many wayes.
1. When they require inconuenient things: for though the seruant must obey, yet the master sinnes in requiring vnequall things.
2. When they impose more worke then they haue strength to doe.
3. When they turne them away when they are sicke: for it is equall that as thou hast had their labour when they were well, so thou shouldest keepe them when they are sicke.
4. When they restraine them of libertie for their soules. If thou haue the worke of their bodies, it is equall that thou take care for their soules: and if they serue thee six dayes, it is very equall thou shouldest proclaime libertie to them to doe Gods worke on the Sabboth day.
5. When they restraine and with-hold their meat and wages.
6. When they send them out of their seruice empty, after many yeeres bondage, and not prouide that they may haue some meanes to liue afterwards.
To conclude, it is not equall for the master to heare euery word that men say of his seruantsEccles. 7.23., nor is it meet they should bring vp their seruants delicatelyProu. 27.23., nor yet that they should leaue their callings and the whole care of their businesse to their seruants, but they ought diligently to know the state of the heards themseluesProu. 27.23..
Thus of the duty. The reason followes.

Knowing that yee haue also a master in heauen.

Here are foure Doctrines to be obserued.
1. That there is no master, but he is a seruant; and therefore as hee would require his worke to be done by his seruant, so hee should be carefull himselfe to doe Gods worke, to whom he is a seruant.
2. That Gods maiestie and mans authoritie may well stand together: Christ and Caesar can well agree: Mans gouernment in a familie, and Gods gouernment in the world, are not opposite one to the other.
3. Ignorance of God, and the accounts must be made to God, is the cause of that securitie, insolencie, and crueltie that is in men.
4. That it is ill to vse seruants ill, it will be required if they be wronged.
Thus of the reason.



VERS. 2. Continue in praier, and watch in the same with thankesgiuing.

IN this verse, with those that follow to the end of the chapter, is contained the conclusion of the whole Epistle.
This conclusion containes matter of exhortation, to verse 7. and matter of salutation, verse 7. to the end.
The exhortation may be three wayes considered.

1. As it concernes praier, vers. 2.3.4.
2. As it concernes wise conuersation, vers. 5.
3. And as it concernes godly communication, vers. 6.

Concerning praier, two things are to be obserued.

1. How we must pray, or the manner.
2. For what, or the matter.

In the manner three things are required: 1. perseuerance, 2. watchfulnesse, 3. thankefulnesse, vers. 2.
In the matter is further added, 1. the persons for whom, praying also for vs: 2. the things for which, that God may open, etc. vers. 3.4.

Continue in praier.] The doctrines implied in these words are foure.Of continuance in praier.
1. That our mortall condition is a condition of singular vanitie, in that the best of Gods seruants are euer wanting something.
2. That long praier of it selfe is not blame-worthy. Christ continued all night in praier.
3. That praier is of perpetuall vse in the life of a Christian.
4. That to pray by fits is not Gods ordinance, neither that he requires, nor that he will accept.
The doctrine exprest in these words is threefold.
1. That we must hold out and pray still,(...). and neuer giue ouer praier till we giue vp our soules into Gods hands.
2. That wee must pray vpon all occasions, for health, wealth, successe in our callings, preseruation of our estates, the blessing of God vpon the word, Sacraments, reading, etc. for pardon of sinne, saluation of our soules, euer stretching out our desires to all the opportunities and callings to praier.
3. Wee must be instant in praier, set all aside for praier, wait vpon it, for so the word is rendred, to wait, Act. 10.7.
Vse. Is first for reproofe of such wretched men as pray not at all,Of such as fall avvay from the affection and practise of praier. Iob 21.14. Secondly, for reproofe of such as make apostacie from the affections and practise of praier: and this is a fault in carnall men that fall from temporary faith, or in Gods children, that by the deceitfulnesse of sinne and Sathan, giue ouer their affections and carefull diligence in praier. For the first sort, wee must know, that when such men lose their ioy and delight in the word, they lose also their care in praier: but they must know they doe it not without singular danger; for now that hearing and praier are laid aside, seuen deuils worse than that one cast out by acknowledgement, may enter in: yea that they may fall from these affections into a reprobate sense; yea, which is worst, they are in danger of the sinne against the holy Ghost, and the more if they grow to hate praier and despight Gods grace in his children: and therfore they should be aduised with all speed to repent with sound sorrow, and beseech God to forgiue them, if it be possible, the thoughts of their hearts. And as for such of Gods children as are decaied and fallen away from the power and practise of praier, they should be wakened and remember themselues, both by considering the hurt they bring vpon themselues, and the remedies for their recouerie. The hurts befallen them by this apostacie are such as these. 1.The hurts that follovv the apostacie from the povver and practise of praier. The losse of the comforts of the sweet presence of God. 2. They put on a kinde of image of the old Adam againe, they looke as if they were no better than carnall people, they returne in many things to the filthinesse they had forsaken, they forme themselues to the courses of carnall wisdome, and too much like the world and the sinfull profits and pleasures of it. 3. Faith and loue are more and more enfeebled, lesse sense of Gods presence, and lesse loue to Gods children. 4. They bring vpon themselues a tedious dislike of the meanes of saluation, besides the danger of many temporall iudgements.
For remedie of this great inconuenience, they must doe three things.
1. They must purge by godly sorrow and fasting. 2. They must labour to reduce themselues vnto an holy order of liuing, both by a daily course of examination by the Law, and also by the consecration of themselues to the constant and orderly practise of all Christian duties. 3. They must by daily importunitie beseech God to giue them againe the words and affections of praier: and all this they should doe the more speedily, because if by long dwelling in apostacie they prouoke God, though by repentance they recouer themselues againe, yet the ioyes of Gods spirit, or the great measure of them, may be lost, so as they ^hall neuer recouer the ioy of their saluation all their dayes.
Obiections about praier ansvvered.3. This doctrine may serue for encouragement to many of Gods poore seruants, against all the doubts and feares of their owne hearts; these neede only better information, for their discouragements arise from mistakings, as may appeare by their obiections.
Ob. I haue much hardnesse of heart before I goe to praier.
Sol. 1. So had Dauid in the entrance into many of his Psalmes, yet hee recouereth and exulteth exceedingly before the end.
2. Hardnesse of heart that is felt and mourned for, is no hindrance to the successe of praier.
3. Therefore thou hast more need to pray, for praier is as a fire that melts the leaden hearts of men.
Ob. I want words when I come to pray.
Sol. 1. Goe to Christ, and beseech him to teach thee to pray, and pray God to giue thee words, that hath commanded thee to take vnto thee wordsLuk. 11. Hos. 14.3..
2. Be more in the examination of thy heart and life by the Law.
3. The Spirit helpes our infirmities, when (for words) wee know not how to pray as we oughtRom. 8.26..
4. The foundation of God remaineth sure, and is sealed; if thou but name the name of the Lord2 Tim. 2.20. (...). with vprightnesse, desiring and resoluing to depart from iniquitie, he may haue an infallible seale of saluation, that but nameth the name of God in praier, as the word is in the originall.
Ob. But I doubt of audience.
Sol. 1. Consider Gods nature, commandement, promise; his nature, he is a God that heareth praiersPsal. 95.2.; his commandement, for hee as peremptorily giues his commandements to pray, as he doth any of the tenne Commandements, and therefore will certainly accept of what he so earnestly commands; his promises also are to bee collected and considered as they lie scattered in seuerall Scriptures: He will be neere vnto all that call vpon him in truth. And his eares are open to the praiers of the righteous, etc. Only be thou carefull that thou lie not in any presumptuous sinne, and that thou turne not away thine eare from hearing the Law, and that thou allow not thine owne heart in wrath or doubting, for these and such like are great lets of audience.
Ob. I haue praied long and often, and yet I am not heard.
Sol. 1. God sometimes doth of purpose deferre to grant, that so he might compell them to continue to pray.
2. Consider the things thou praiest for, whether they be such things as God will euer grant: for if we aske amisse, or onely for fleshly things, or to spend vpon our lusts, God will neuer heareIam. 4.1.2.3..
3. God heares diuers wayes, for sometimes he granteth not what is asked, but giueth what is answerable to it or better, so he heard Christ, Heb. 5.7.
Thus of continuance in praier.

Watching in the same.

Of vvatching in praier.Doct. Watching is needfull vnto praierMatth. 26. Luk. 21.36. 1 Pet. 4.8.. For explication whereof we must know that watching is taken 2. wayes, either literally or metaphorically; literally, and so is either a iudgement or a dutie: watching as a iudgement, is when God brings vpon wicked men the terrors of the night, or for chastisement of his seruants, holds their eyes waking. As a dutie, watching is a voluntary restraining of our eyes from sleepe, and spending of the whole or part of the night in holy imployments. Thus the Church kept the night of the Passeouer holy, Exod. 12.42. Thus Christ watched, Matth. 14.23.25. Thus Paul, 2 Cor. 11.23. Thus Dauid, Psal. 139.18. And this watching vsed by Gods children was either ordinary, or extraordinary: Ordinary watching is nothing but a sober vse of sleepe, in which we ought to be moderate as well as in eating and drinking. Extraordinarily Gods children haue beene vsed to
 watch either vpon occasion of great iudgementsLam. 2.19. Isay 26.9. Psal. 102.7. Mark. 14.38., or for preparation to some great businesse. Thus Christ would spend whole nights in praier; thus hee watched before his passion. Or when they haue lost the benefit of Christs presence, Cant. 3.1, and all this they haue done with great successe, for their reines haue taught them in the nightPsal. 16.7., and their soules haue beene full as with marrowPsal. 63.5.6.. But wee may iustly complaine, and take vp the words in Iob 35.10. But none saith, where is God that made mee, euen the God that giueth songs in the night?
But it is spirituall watchfulnesse that is here specially required, and it is nothing else but a Christian heedfulnesse, obseruation, and consideration, both for preuention of euill, and embracing of the meanes, wayes and opportunities of good. And thus we must watch, first our owne hearts, to spie out where any spot of spirituall leprosie in thoughts or affections breakes out, to heale it in time. Secondly, the practises of Sathan, that wee be not insnared with his spirituall baits and methods. Thirdly, the wayes of God: if any mercy appeare, or fountaine of grace open, to snatch vp our incense, and runne presently to Gods Altar, and offer with our sacrifice the calues of our lips; or if any threatning arrest vs, or iudgement befall vs, to make our peace speedily, and flie from the anger to come. Fourthly, the comming of Christ either by death or iudgement, specially wee should watch vpon whom the ends of the world are comeLuk. 21.36.. But that which is here principally meant, is watching vnto praier, and thus we had need to watch, 1. to the meanes to get abilitie to pray, 2. to the opportunitie and occasions of praier, 3. to the successe of it, to take notice of Gods answer, and our speeding, waiting vpon God till he giue a blessing, or if God hide himselfe, to sue out an attonement in Christ.
Thus of watching.

With thankesgiuing.

Doct. 1. When we haue any suits to God for what we want, wee must carefully remember to giue thankes for mercies receiued, and particularly for all Gods mercies in praierPhil. 4.7. 1 Thes. 5.16.17..
2. In that the Apostle so often vrgeth the dutie of thanksgiuing, it shewes that naturally we are exceeding vnthankfull for the mercies of God, and that few of vs are carefull to yeeld God constantly this sacrifice.
3. There are diuers kindes of thanksgiuing, or diuers wayes of thanking God. For men giue thankes,
1. By receiuing the Eucharist, which is called the cup of blessing(...). 1 Cor. 10.16. Psal. 50. vlt..
2. By obedience of life, for hee that will truly offer praise vnto God, must order his wayes aright.
3. By opening our lippes to sound forth his praise, and thus Gods name is honoured, both by the thankes or praise.
1. Of celebration when we tell of Gods mercies to others.
2. Of inuocation when we speake of Gods praises to God himselfe in praier, this is heere specially meant, and of this I haue entreated before at seuerall times, out of other places of this Epistle.
Thus much of the manner how we must pray. The matter followes, and first of the persons for whom we must pray.

Praying also for vs.

In generall I obserue three things, 1. That wee ought to pray one for another. 2. That one great meanes to get a large heart in prayer, and the perseuerance in the practise of it, is to endeauour after tender and affectionate desires to helpe others by prayer. 3. That Christians should desire the praiers of others, as carnall men make vse of their friends to get their helpe for wealth, offices etc. So should Christians improoue their interest in the affections of their friends by seeking praier of them.

Also.] It is (...), together, and so notes that it is not enough to pray for others, but wee must pray with others, and mutually helpe one another by faith, knowledge and praier.
For vs.] Here I obserue 4. things.
1. That the greatest in the Church need the praiers of the meanest.
2. That in hearing praier God is no accepter of persons, hee is as well willing to heare the Colossians praiers for Paul, as heare Paul pray for the Colossians.
3. It is the dutie of the people to pray for their Ministers.
Note.4. It is to be obserued, that he wisheth them to pray for other Preachers as well as for himselfe; there may be a spirituall pride in desiring the praiers of others: he did not enuie that others should haue roome in the hearts of others as well as he.
Thus of the persons for whom.
The things for which are two wayes to be considered: 1. As it is briefly laid downe. 2. As it is more largely explicated.
It is laid downe or propounded in these words, that God would open to vs a doore of vtterance, and is explicated in these words that follow, by the subiect, reason and end.
A doore of vtterance.] There are diuers doores in the Scripture, in the metaphoricall acceptation of the word. There is the doore
1. Of admission into the functions of the Church, Ioh. 10.1.
2. Of life, and the doore of life is the wombe of the mother, Iob 3.10.
3. Of protection, and so to be without doores and barres, is to be without defence and protection, Ier. 49.31.
4. Of grace and regeneration, Ioh. 10.7.9. Psal. 24. vlt. Reuel. 3.8.
5. Of death and iudgement, Iob 38.17. Act. 5.9. Iam. 5.9.
6. Of glory, Reuel. 21.12.
Lastly, there is a doore of gifts, as of knowledge, Reuel. 4.1. Prouerb. 8.33. Of faith, Act. 14.27. Of vtterance, 1 Cor. 16.9. so here. The doore of vtterance comprehends 5. things. 1. Libertie and free passage to preach the Gospell. 2. Opportunitie. 3. Power of preaching. 4. Courage and boldnesse, with full vent to rebuke mens sinnes, and reueale all Gods counsels, without feare of any mans face. 5. Successe, euen such vtterance as will open a doore into the hearts of the hearers: so that to pray for the opening of the doore of vtterance, is to pray for libertie, opportunitie, power, courage, and successe.
Vse. Is first for Ministers, and then for the people. Ministers may see here what it is that specially makes a happie Pastor; not liuing, countenance of great men, etc. but libertie, courage, power, etc. And it greatly taxeth foure sorts of Ministers. 1. Dumbe Ministers, that vtter nothing. 2. Fantasticall Ministers, that vtter the falshood of their owne braines, that speake their owne dreames, and from the vanitie of their owne hearts, and seeke out for the people only pleasing things, dawbing with vntempered morter. 3. Idle Ministers, that vtter not all Gods counsell, for matter or for time, speake but seldome to the people, preach not in season and out of season. 4. Cold Ministers, that seeke not the power of preaching, striue not to approue themselues in the sight of God, and to the conscience of men.
The people also should make conscience of their dutie, they may learne from hence what to pray for, and should daily with importunitie beseech God to giue this wide doore of vtterance to their Teachers.
Before I passe from the matter hee pray^^ for, I must note a doctrine lies secretly lodged within the same: wee may finde in the end of this verse, that the Apostle was in prison, and yet he doth not desire to haue the doore of the
 prison open, but the doore of his heart open to vtter the mysterie of Christ, noting that it is a greater want to want the libertie of his ministerie, in respect of vtterance, then it is to want the libertie of his body in respect of the prison. We should take notice of this for diuers vses: 1. For thankfulnesse, if there be a doore of vtterance opened in Gods house. 2. For preuention of all things (as much as lieth in vs) that might stop the mouthes of Gods faithfull Ministers. There are fiue things that stop the mouthes of Ministers in generall: 1. Ignorance and presumptuous sinnes in the Ministers themselues;Fiue things stop the mouthes of Gods Ministers. for polluted lips are no lips of vtterance: the lips of the Minister should be touched with the coales of knowledge, zeale, and mortification. 2. The sinnes of the people many times put the Teachers to silence: the rebellion of the house of Israel made Ezechiel dumbe, that he could not preach, Ezech. 3.26.24.27. 3. The violence of persecutors preuailes often to shut the wide and effectuall doores of powerfull preaching, 1 Cor. 16.9. and therefore we should pray that God would deliuer his faithfull Ministers from vnreasonable and absurd men, 1 Thess. 3.2. 4. Discouragement and feare silence many a Minister in respect of the life and power of preaching, 1 Cor. 16.9.12. Heb. 13.17. Lastly, humane wisdome not only lets the people from the profit of hearing, but likewise it lets the Minister from the power of preaching.

God would.]

Doct. 1. The hearts of Ministers, yea of the best Ministers, are naturally shut; they haue no gift to profit withall, but they haue receiued it: and who is sufficient of himselfe for these things?
Doct. 2. Tis God only that opens vnto men the doore of vtterance; tis he that makes the heart of the Priest fat, and creates the fruit of the lips to be peace: he openeth, and no man shutteth; and shutteth, and no man openeth: and it should teach them lesse to feare men and their rebukes, and the lesse to care for the rage of the oppressor: for if he will giue libertie, who can restraine it? and if he will silence, who can inlarge?
Euen vnto vs.] This manner of speech notes either his humilitie, or his restraint in prison, or the difficultie of vtterance. His humilitie it may note in this sense, that howsoeuer he hath beene a blasphemer, or a persecutor, etc. yet that God would be pleased to honour him and his worke so much, as giue vtterance euen to him and such as he is. His restraint in prison it may import also, and so his desire is they should not pray onely for Ministers that were at large, and enioyed peace, but also euen for him and such others as were in prison; for a godly Preacher will not be idle, no not if he come into prison: and thus also it notes, that the wisest men of themselues are not able to teach with power and profit the simplest and meanest men; an Apostle cannot teach a prisoner, without Gods speciall aid and blessing. These words may note also the difficultie of vtterance, as if he should say, you had need to pray not only for ordinary, but extraordinary Ministers.
Thus of the thing praied for, as it is briefly propounded. Secondly, it is inlarged, 1. by the subiect, 2. by a reason, 3. by the end.
The subiect of the vtterance is the mysterie of Christ.
To speake the mysterie of Christ.] Christ is a mysterie to the Gentiles,Hovv Christ is a mysterie to 6. sorts of men. to the Iewes, to Heretikes, to Papists, to carnall men, yea to godly men. It is a mysterie to the Gentiles that there should be a Sauiour: To the Iewes, that saluation should be in the Carpenters sonne: To the Papists, that he should be the Sauiour alone: To the Heretikes, that hee should be a Sauiour in both natures: To the carnall man, that he should be a Sauiour in particular to him: And to the godly man, that he should be such a Sauiour.
But to expresse this more particularly, Christ is a mysterie fiue wayes:Christ a mysterie 5 vvaies. for there are mysteries
1. In the person of Christ: for what tongue can describe the supercelestiall vnion of his natures, or the treasures of wisdome and knowledge, or the fulnesse of the Godhead that dwels in him bodily?
2. In his life and death. The world could not comprehend the bookes that might be made of the wonders of his birth, life, and death. We may see in that that is written what to adore; for in this world a perfect knowledge we shall neuer attaine.
3. In his body, which is the Church: for who can declare his generation? or expresse the secrets of his power and presence, in filling her, who himselfe is her fulnesse, and filleth all in all things? or describe the manner of the vnion betweene Christ and his members? Is not this a great mysterie?
4. In the Sacraments of Christ. The holy inuisible presence of God is a mysterie: the communion of the body and bloud of Christ, not locally or by contact, and yet truly, is a mysterie: the seale of the holy spirit of promise vpon the hearts of beleeuers, in the due vse of the Sacraments, is a mysterie: the spirituall nourishment that comes to the soule by such secret and hidden passages inuisibly, is a great mysterie.
5. In the Gospell of Christ. And by the mysterie of Christ in this place I thinke is meant the Gospell of Christ: and it is called a mysterie because of the hiding of it. If you aske me where the Gospell hath beene hidden, I must answer,The Gospell hidden fiue vvayes. it hath beene hidden, 1. in the breast of God from all eternitie: 2. in the shadowes and types of the ceremoniall Law, which was the Iewes Gospell: 3. in the treasurie of holy Scriptures: 4. in the person, obedience, and passion of Christ, who was the substance of the Mosaicall ceremonies, and the quintessence of all Euangelicall doctrine: 5. in the hearts of Christians.
If you aske me from whom it was hidden; I answer, not from the elect, for God by preaching reuealed it vnto them in due time; but from wicked men, but with great difference:The Gospell hidden from the vvicked diuersly. for to some there is no Gospell at all giuen, as to the Gentile; to some not giuen plainly, as in those congregations of Israel, to whom this euangelicall loafe is not diuided, though in the whole lumpe it bee giuen: to some not giuen in the power of it, for though they heare the preaching, yet by reason of mixtures, carnall wisdome, or ignorance, and confusednesse in the Teachers, there is little power in it: to some not giuen internally, though externally they haue meanes in the plentie and power of it.
If you yet aske me what causeth this hiding of the Gospell from such as liue euen in the light of it; I answer, it is either
Why vvicked men cannot see the Gospell.1. The vaile of their owne ignorance.
2. The powerfull working of the God of this world to blinde them, 2 Cor. 4.4.
3. The custome in sinne, and customarie abuse of pleasures and profits.
4. The secret iudgement of God, either because hee will haue mercy on whom hee will haue mercy, or because men haue beene touched and reiect Gods call in the day of saluation, or because they haue presumptuously abused Gods promises, to make them bauds for sinne.
The vses follow. Is the Gospell a mysterie? It should teach vs,
1. To esteeme Gods Ministers, seeing they are dispensers of Gods mysteries, 1 Cor. 4.2.
2. To striue by all means to see into this secret, accounting it our wisdome and vnderstanding, to gaine the open knowledge of this secret doctrine, Ephes. 1.8.9. but because euery vessell is not meet to beare this treasure, wee should get a pure conscience to carry this mysterie of faith in, 1 Tim. 3.9.
3. To account our eares blessed if they heare, and our eyes blessed if they see:(...). it is a great gift of God to know the mysterie or secrets of this kingdome, Matth. 13.11. etc.
4. In compassion to the soules of many thousands in Israel, to pray for vtterance to publish more powerfully, not the common things, but the secrets of the Gospell, Eph. 6.19. there is need not of more preaching, but of more powerfull preaching.
For which euen I am in bonds.] Either at Ephesus, as Dionysius thinkes, or at Rome, as Caietan and others thinke. Here are 5. things to be obserued.
1. That the truth of the Gospell ought to be so deare vnto vs, that wee should be content to suffer for it.
2. Wee should be willing to suffer the extremest and basest things, as here euen bonds, and therefore much more the speaking against of sinners.
3. As any Ministers are more faithfull, they are in more danger to be troubled and molested.
4. Crosses should inflame vs so much the more to sinceritie: hee is more eager after vtterance now that he is in bonds.
5. The cause, not the suffering, makes the Martyr: not euery one in bonds is a Martyr, but when it is for the Gospell. Men may suffer for their indiscretion and sinne.



VERS. 4. That I may vtter it as it becommeth mee to speake.

THat I may vtter it.] (...), That I may manifest it.
Doct. Sound preaching is the manifesting of the mysterie of Christ. This doctrine as it shewes the profit we may get by preaching, so it maintaines plaine teaching, and reproues such as would be Doctors of the Law, and yet vnderstand not of what they speake, they darken the texts they speake of.
It, (...).] Doct. As good not preach, as not preach the Gospell of Christ: we doe nothing, if our people vnderstand not the mysterie of Christ, but remaine still ignorant of the fauour of God in Christ.

As it becommeth me to speake.]

Doct. It is not enough to preach, but we must so preach as becommeth the mysterie of Christ, and to preach so is to preach with power,Hovv Ministers must preach. 1 Thess. 1.5. with instance and all watchfulnesse, 2 Tim. 4.2.3.5. with patience and all constancie, with feare and fasting, 1 Cor. 4.9. 2 Cor. 6.4. 2 Cor. 4.8. with assurance of doctrine, 2 Cor. 4.13. with all willingnesse, 1 Cor. 9.16.17. with all faithfulnesse, 1 Cor. 42. with all zeale, knowing the terror of the Lord, perswading, exhorting, beseeching, 2 Cor. 5.11. 1 Thess. 2.12. approuing themselues in the sight of God, to the conscience of the hearers, 2 Cor. 2.17. and 4.1.2. with all holy, iust, and vnblameable behauiour, 1 Thess. 2.11.
Thus doe not they preach that are Neophytes, young schollers, rash, scandalous, or dote about questions, and logomachios, or fables and vaine disputations, which breed strife, and questions rather then godly edifying, nor they that come with wisdome of words, and the inticing speech of mans eloquence, 1 Corinth. 1.11. and 2.1.4.
All this may teach Ministers by reading, praier, and preparation to be with their God, before they come to speake to Gods people: it may terrifie carelesse Ministers, woe vnto thee if either thou preach not, or not as becommeth the mysterie of Christ, 1 Cor. 9.16. It may comfort good Ministers; for if God stand vpon it to haue his worke thus done, hee will certainly pay them their wages, yea if Israel should not be gathered, yet their wages should be with God, and their worke before him.
Lastly, if Ministers must preach as becommeth the mysterie of Christ,How the people must heare the people must heare as becommeth the mysterie of Christ, with attention, constancie, patience, reuerence, in much affliction, as the word of God, with sinceritie, hungring appetite, and fruitfulnesse.
Thus of the first branch of the exhortation.




VERS. 5. Walke wisely towards them that are without, and redeeme the time.

THese words are the second part of the exhortation, and concerne wise conuersation.
Walke.] This is a metaphor borrowed from trauellers, and notes both action and progresse; hearing, and talking, and commending of Gods seruants, will not serue turne, but we must both practise and proceed.
There is a double race in the life of a man, one naturall, the other voluntary, the one is the race of life, the other is the race of holy life: in the first men must runne whether they will or no, and come to the end of it; but the other will not be dispatched without great endeuour and constancie. As the most of vs order the matter, the naturall race of life is almost runne out, before we once enter the lists of walking in the race of holy life, yea Gods children are so apt to sleepe, and sit still, and tire, that they need to be excited and called vpon, and encouraged in their race.
Walke, (...).] A Christian is a peripateticke, so is Christ, so is the Deuill, so are Heretikes, so are Apostataes, so are worldly men. Christ walkes in the middest, Reuel. 2.1. The Deuill walkes in the circumference round about, Iob 1. his motion is circular, and therefore fraudulent and dangerous. The Apostata walkes backward. The Heretike walkes out on the right hand. The worldly man walkes on the left hand, enticed out of the way by worldly profits, pleasures, and lusts. Only the true Christian walkes forward.
Wisely.] Wisdome of conuersation must be considered two wayes: 1. Generally. 2. With limitation to the respect of them that are without.
In generall to walke wisely hath in it 4. things.
What it is to vvalke vvisely.1. To walke wisely is to walke orderly: and the order of conuersation hath in it two things. 1. A due respect of the precedencie of things, so as we must first prouide for heauen, and then for the earth, first learne to die, and then to liue; first serue God, and then our selues, and other men; first care for the soule, and then for the body; first seeke the kingdome of God and the righteousnesse thereof, and then outward things. 2. It hath in it a carefull attendance to our calling with diligence,(...). and constancie, and patience, 1 Cor. 7.17. 1 Thess. 4.11.12. and 2 Thess. 3.6.11. To walke inordinately is to walke vnwisely.
2. To walke wisely is to walke speedily: walke in the light while you haue the light, lose no opportunitie, delay no worke in haruest, Ioh. 12.35.
3. To walke wisely is to walke vprightly, and that for matter in the newnesse of life, Rom. 6.4. and for manner exactly, precisely, circumspectly, Ephes. 5.15.16.
4. To walke wisely is to walke surely, and he walkes surely,
Hee vvalkes surely that obserues 5. rules.1. That will liue where he may haue meanes for his soule as well as his bodie, he will not liue in darknesse, but desires to be where he may haue the greatest light.
2. That makes the word the rule of his actions, and is sure of warrant from the Scripture for what hee doth, Deut. 4.5.6. This is to walke in the Law, Psal. 119.1. according to the rule, Gal. 6.16.
3. That will not liue vnder any knowne threatning, will not venture to goe on with wrath hanging ouer his head, hee is none of those fooles that will not vnderstand though the foundations of the earth be moued, Psal. 82.5.
4. That walkes by faith, and not by sight, 2 Cor. 5.7. trusts not in things that may be seene, which are mutable, but labours to be clothed with the garments of Christs righteousnesse: hee walkes not wisely that walkes nakedly, Reuel. 16.15. And for manner of assurance, hee that is a wise man when hee
 sees how carefull the men of the world are to make euery thing sure, and what stirres there are for certainties in the things of the earth, he will not rest in probabilities for his soule, or in common hopes or presumptions, but will striue by all meanes to make his calling and election sure, hee will not be lead in a fooles paradise, and stand to the venture of his soule vpon carnall coniectures, Pro. 24.5.
5. That walkes in the way of the least, and not of the most, hee will not be lead by the example of the multitude, or frame his life according to the commonest opinions, etc. 2 Cor. 12.15. Phil. 3.16.
Thus of wisdome of conuersation in the generall: here it is limited to conuersing with one sort of men, viz. those that are without.
Towards them that are without.] Without are first all Infidels,Who are vvithout. that liue without the Church of Christ. 2. All Hypocrites, that minde nothing but the gilding of the outside. 3. All wicked men in generall, that liue without God, without Christ, without hope in the world, 1 Cor. 5.12.13. Luke 13.25. Reuel. 22.15.
Here are two things I will but briefly touch: 1. That a Christian should be more carefull how he behaues himselfe before wicked men then before godly men. 2. It is to be noted that he saith not with them, but towards them;Note. it is one thing to walke with them, and another thing to walke towards them: the one notes a voluntary consorting with them, this the Apostle allowes not; the other notes a behauiour that is well framed when through necessitie and calling we must haue to doe with them.
But the maine thing is,The rules of conuersing in respect of vvicked men. what wee must doe that wee may carry our selues iustly towards wicked men. That this may be distinctly vnderstood, wicked men may be two wayes considered; first, as spectators of our conuersation: secondly, as parties in conuersing.
As they are spectators and obserue vs, there are 4. things which in godly discretion we should make to shine before them.
1. All good faithfulnesse in our calling, 1 Thess. 4.11.12. 1 Tim. 6.1.
2. All humble subiection to those in authoritie, shewing all meekenesse to all men, Tit. 3.1.2.
3. A mortified course of liuing, the Gentiles will say of such, they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, Isay 61.9.
4. Concord and holy loue amongst our selues, doing all things without reasonings and murmurings, Phil. 2.15.19.
As they are parties in conuersing, they are two wayes to be considered.
1. As they are euill men, but not iniurious and euill to vs.
2. As they are both euill men and iniurious to vs.
Towards the first sort our wisdome of conuersation must be shewed,
1. In the due obseruation of the circumstances of lawfull things, for all lawfull things are not to be done at all times, and in all companies, and in all manners, indiscretion herein doth much harme euery where.
2. In the skilfull applying of our selues to winne them, making vse of all opportunities, and speaking to them with all reuerence, deliberation, compassion, instance, etc. as may become the maiestie of Gods truth and ordinances.
3. In the shunning of conceitednesse, peruersenesse, frowardnesse, and such like things, as doe maruellously prouoke a carnall minde, but approue our selues in all meeknesse of wisdome. It is a great wisdome in the vse of our knowledge, to expresse a constant meeknesse, Iam. 3.13.
4. In auoiding euill, 1. to them, 2. to our selues. To walke wisely in auoiding euils to them, is to be carefull that we put no stumbling blocke before the blinde, but cut off all occasions of reproaching or blaspheming. In auoiding
 euill to our selues by them, we must looke to three things: 1. That we be not infected or defiled by their company, either by needlesse presence, or by any kinde of consent to, or approbation of their euils. 2. That we be not beguiled by committing our selues to them, and trusting faire pretences, Ioh. 2.24. 3. That wee yeeld not to them to satisfie them in the least sinne; for tis not yeelding will draw them, but a pure conuersation with feare, 1 Pet. 3.12.
Towards the second sort of wicked men, viz. those that are euill, and are or are like to be iniurious to vs, our wisdome of conuersation lieth in two things.
1. In a wise demeaning of our selues when they doe wrong or persecute vs, shewing all firmnesse and vndaunted constancie, patience, reuerence, meekenesse, clemencie, and good conscience, 1 Pet. 3.13.14.15.16.
2. In a discreet preuention of our owne trouble as neere as wee can. This wisdome Iacob shewed in his dealing with his brother Esau, when hee came out against him with foure hundred men, Gen. 32. And Samuel, when hee went to anoint Dauid, 1 Sam. 16. And Hushai when he saluted Absolon, 2 Sam. 26.15. And our Sauiour Christ, when he answered the tempting dilemmaes of the malicious Iewes. And Paul in his answer to the people about the high Priest, Act. 23.4. And when in the mutinie hee cried out hee was a Pharisie, Act. 23.6. It is noted as a wisdome in the prudent, in euill times to be silent, Amos 5.13. Tis not good prouoking euill men, nor safe to pull a Beare or a madde dogge by the eares.(...). Tis the true ambition of a Christian, to meddle with his owne businesses, 1 Thess. 4.11.
For conclusion, as wee haue seene what it is to walke wisely in the affirmatiue, so we must be informed what this wisdome hath not in it. It hath not in it a relinquishing of pietie or holinesse in the whole, or any part, to keepe peace with wicked men, Heb. 12.14. It hath not in it a forsaking of fidelitie in the discharge of our duties. Amos must not leaue the Court, though Amaziah tell him it is his wisest way. Michaiah must not flatter Ahab because the 400. Prophets did. Lastly, to walke wisely is not to walke craftily and deceitfully; for such wisdome of Serpents is required, as may stand with the innocencie of Doues.
Redeeme the time.] To redeeme signifies either to recouer what is lost, or to buy what is wanting. It is vsually a metaphor borrowed from Merchants buying and selling of commodities. Time signifies either space of time, or the opportunitie of time: both may be here retained.
Six things obserued concerning the redeeming of time.In generall, as time is taken for space of time, there are diuers things may be obserued. 1. That time is a commoditie. 2. That a Christian is a Merchant by calling. 3. That as any are more wise, the more they know the worth of time, Eph. 5.15.16. 4. That a Christian findes the want of time. 5. That if he were prouident, time for holy duties might be bought. 6. Not to trade for time is a great fault, and yet an vsuall fault, and comes to passe because men haue no stocke of grace to imploy, or they haue neuer serued a prentiship to learne how to vse time, or else they haue had such extraordinary losses, they cannot set vp againe; they haue so often made shipwracke of time by misse-spending it, that they cannot now well set themselues in a course to vse it well.
Againe, if time be taken for opportunitie, we may obserue,
Foure considerations of the opportunitie of time.1. That there is a season, an opportunitie, a due time: God hath his haruest for iudgement, Matth. 13.30. his season for temporall blessings, as for the deaw of heauen, and the fruits of the earth, Act. 14.17. so he hath for the manifesting of his will by preaching, Tit. 1.3. for iustification, Rom. 3.26. for the testification of our iustification,(...). 1 Tim. 2.6. for mercy, and deliuerance, and the helpe of Sion, Psal. 102.13. and for saluation spirituall and eternall, 2 Cor. 6.2. Finally, there is a season both for man to doe good, Psal. 1.3. and to receiue good, Isa. 55.8.
2. That this opportunitie is not obuious, not ordinary, nor easie, and euery where to be had. Euery day in the yeere is not the Faire day, nor euery day in the weeke the Market day.
3. When opportunitie is offered, we must not neglect it, or lose it. Ministers must preach while the doore is open: the people must walke while they haue the light: so we must all pray in euery opportunitie, (...),(...). Rom. 12.11. Seruing the opportunitie. Eph. 6.18. Luk. 21.36.
4. We must aduantage our selues by spirituall opportunities, though it be with our losse and paines. We should not thinke much to be at some losse for Gods wares, as well as mens; and we must be content to trauell as well to the market of our soules, as of our bodies.
In particular, concerning redeeming of time, consider 1. what time is lost, 2. how time is to be redeemed, 3. how it must be vsed when it is redeemed, 4. the vses.
For the first, all time is lost, that is spent idly,What time is lost. or in the superfluous feeding of nature, either by food, or sleepe, or in ill company, or in the seruice of sinne, and the lusts of the flesh, or in the seruice of the world, or superfluous cares about profits, or ioyes about pleasures; yea the time is lost that is spent in Gods worship, where it is done idolatrously, superstitiously, ignorantly, carelesly, hypocritically, etc.
For the second, wee must distinguish of times, and the persons that haue time to sell, and the kindes of redeeming. There is time past: this cannot be brought backe againe by any price, but yet wee may contract with time present, for some allowance towards the losse of time past. There is also time to come. And here is first a time of glory to come,Hovv time may bee bought againe. and a great bargaine to be made: and for the buying of this, heauen must suffer violence, and we should throng and crowde into the market to procure it, by praier, hearing, faith, almesdeeds, etc. For though it be onely Christs merits that deserues it, yet these things we must doe for the assurance of it. Besides, there is a time of sorrowes to come: as sure as we haue had our dayes of sinne, we shall haue dayes of sorrow and torment. This time is to be bought out with repentance, watching, fasting, praying, strong cries, by all meanes endeuouring to make our peace, and flie from the anger to come.
But time present is the commoditie we are with all carefulnesse to redeeme. The deuill and the world haue time, our callings haue time, and God is a great Lord of time. Time out of the deuils hands and the worlds must be redeemed by violent ablation: time from our callings we must redeeme by permutation only, making an exchange, and allowing time for godlinesse. In the first and chiefe place, time of God we must buy, both the space of time to repent in, and the opportunitie of time, both for the giuing, and the efficacie of the meanes: and for this we must both offer and tender the sacrifice of Christ, to pacifie for time lost, and procure acceptation; and also wee must offer vp our selues, soules and bodies, vpon the seruice of opportunities, humbling our soules to walke with our God.
3. When wee haue bought time, wee must be carefull to vse it well:Hovv time must be vsed vvhen it is bought. and herein a principall respect is to be had vnto the soule; for all this merchandise is for the vse of the soule especially, and for religious ends. And thus we must spend some time in mortification, 1 Pet. 4.1.2. and some part in searching the Scriptures, lest that be said of vs which was said of the Iewes, that whereas concerning the time they might haue beene teachers, they did need againe to be taught the very principles, they were so inexpert in the word of righteousnes, Heb. 5.12. Much time should be spent in the workes of pietie, abounding in the worke of the Lord as wee abound in time. Some time should be spent in workes of mercy, both spirituall (instructing, comforting, exhorting, admonishing,
 etc. and corporall, (in feeding, clothing visiting, etc.) Generally our time should be spent in well-doing, Gal. 6.9. And as for time for world businesses, we should obserue the Apostles rule: They that haue wiues should be as they that haue none, and they that weepe as though they wepe not, and they that reioyce as though they reioyced not, and they that buy as though they possed not, and they that vse the world as though they vsed it not, for the fashion of the world goeth away, 1. Cor. 7, 29.30.
The vse of all is for reproofe of the most of vs: for some of vs sinne against the seasons and opportunities of Gods grace, some against the very space of time. Men transgresse against opportunitie two waies; first, by ignorance of the signes of the seasons, Matth. 16.3. secondly, by a wilfull neglect of the opportunitie of grace when we haue them. There are many things might moue vs to redeeme the time in this respect.Motiues to redeeme time. 1. We haue our times appointed, and the bounds of our habitation assigned, Act. 17.26. 2. The times will not bee alwaies faier; there are perillous times, times of sorrow, anguish, sicknes, tentation, want, losse, feare, perplexitie, yea wee may purpose, promise, expect time of healing and curing, when we shall be deceiued, and finde a time of trouble, Ier. 14.19. Besides, Christ in the opportunities of grace is but a litle while with men. There is a prime of mans life, yea a prime of euery mans ministerie, Ioh. 7.33. Further, the kingdome of God in the mercies of it may be wholly taken away, if we bring not fruit in time of fruit, Matth. 21.34.41. Lastly, this is a very prouoking sinne: for if God giue a space to repent, and men will not know the day of their visitation, most an end God casts such into a bed of affliction, after they haue stretched themselues vpon the bed of securitite, Reuel. 2.21.22. Luk. 19.43.44. Yea many of Gods children are greatly to blame, in neglecting the opportunities of assurance of grace: and therefore because they are so carelesse in making their calling and election sure, this forsaking of the promise of God, is scourged afterwards with comfortlesse sorrowes, arising from such a sense of their corruptions, as makes them for a long time seeme to be depriued of all grace and mercy, Heb. 4.1.
Againe, many men sinne egregiously against the very space of time, in that they haue much leisure and time, and fill it vp with litle or no good imploiment. Their estate, that haue meanes to liue without labour is vsually accounted an estate of great ease and happinesse. But in deed it is an estate of much danger: for the men that abound in time without imploiment, are liable to many temptations and lusts; besides, they are subiect to almost continuall hardnesse of heart and deadnsse of spirit: for it is the labouring seruant that enters into his masters ioy. Adde that men that abound with leasure, are easily drawne by the inticements of ill company, and much intangled with the sports and pleasures of the world. Sometimes such persons grow into great habit of suspitiousnesse, waiwardnesse, filled with wordly passions and discontentments: sometimes they prooue great medlers in other folkes businesse.
The remedie for these persons, whether men or women, is to exercise themselues in some kinde of profitable imployment, and to labour so as some way to see the fruit of it, to eat their owne bread; but especially they should bee abundant in the worke of the Lord, they should double their imployment in reading, hearing, conference, mortification, mercy, etc.
Thus of wise conuersation.

Let your speech be gracious alwaies, and powdred with salt, that yee may etc.

Godly communication is here exhorted vnto: and for order, here is a precept, Let your speech etc. 2. the end of the precept, that yee may know etc. In the precept concerning our speech obserue, first, the properties of speech, which are two: 1. they must be gracious. 2. powdred with salt. And then note the continuance how long the precept is in force, and that is alwaies.

In generall we so heare that we must looke to our words aswell as our workes, and therefore they are farre wide that say, their tongues are their owne who shall controule them, Psal. 12.4.
From Coherence I obserue, that he walkes not wisely that talkes not wisely, for euill words corrupt good manners, neither may he be accounted an honest man of life that is an euill man in tongue.
The vse is for tryall, for if God make vs new creatures, he giues vs new tongues, and if he turne the people to him by true repentance,Note. he doth returne vnto them a pure language, Zeph. 3.9. and therefore if any man seemeth to be religious and refraineth not his tongue, this man religion is in vaine.
Let] It is not arbitrarie (we may looke to our words if we will) but it is a flat precept, and so a matter indispensible.
Your] God is no respecter of persons, he forbids vngracious, wanton, and idle words, in Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, aswell as in poore men and labourers; he dislikes it in Masters and Parents, aswell as in children and seruants, it is as ill for the Master to spend his time in idle talke etc. as for the seruant.
Gracious] Our words may be said to be gracious three waies.Obseruations concerning gracious speech. 1. If we respect the cause. 2. If we respect the subiect. 3. If we respect the effect. In respect of the cause good words are well said to be gracious, First, because they flow from the free grace of God without our merit: for wee doe not deserue so much as to be trusted with one good word. Reason yeelds vs conceits, and nature an instrument to speake by,Note. but it is the God of nature that of his free grace giues vs good words. Secondly, our words ought to proceed from some grace of God in the heart, as from knowledge, faith, ioy, sorrow, loue, feare, desire, etc. and in this sense when they are in the tongue, carry still the name of the fountaine whence they flow. Againe, our words must be gracious in respect of the subiect, the matter we must talke of, must be of good things, or religious matters, words of instruction, comfort, faith, hope etc. but especially our words should be seasoned with the daily memorie and mention of Gods grace to vs in ChristPsal. 40.21.. Thirdly, our words ought to be gracious in respect of the effect such as tend to build vp and minister grace to the hearersEphes. 4.29., yea gracious words are faire words, and faire words are first gracefull words, words of thankfulnes. 2. Inoffensiue words, not railing, bitter, slandering, blasphemous or filthy words, nay not iesting words that are intended to prouoke, irritate, disgrace and bite. 3. Seasonable wordsPro. 15.23.. 4. Wholesome words, not filthy rotten communicationEph. 4.29. Vse..
Vse is for reproofe. And men sinne against this exhortation, 1. by omission of gracious words. But secondly they doe worse that vse euill words. And thirdly they are worse then the former two that vse their words to speake against grace and gracious coursesEphes. 5.6.. But they are worst of all that loue euill words, euen the words that may destroy either their owne soules, or the soules of others. 2. Here is instruction, we must labour by all meanes, to get abilitie for a gracious speech, either to God by prayer, or to men in conuersing with them: And to this end, first we must pray constantly and conscionably to God, to giue vs gracious words. Secondly, we must get the law of grace into our heartsPsal. 37.30, 31., yea we should striue to be examples one to another, not onely in faith, and conuersation, but in words also1 Tim. 4.12.; and if all Christians are charged to vse gracious speeches, much more Ministers, they should speake the words of God, they should keep the patterne of wholesome words, and stay all vaine bablings which increase to more vngodlinesse, and all words that fret as a canker. Thus of the first propertie.
Powdred with salt] These are termes borrowed either from the vse of the Temple, or from common and ciuill vse. In the Temple euery sacrifice was
 salted with salt,Mark. 9. vlt. so must euery Christian (who is Gods sacrifice) be seasoned. In the common life of man, meats that are to be kept long, must be powdred with salt, to drinke vp or dry out corruption, and to preserue sauour, so must a Christian be seasoned that will be kept to eternall life.
But first here is implied that the words of men are naturally corrupt, rotten, vnsauorie, and haue great neede of seasoning. The carnall mans words are much after the humor and infection of his minde. The talke of the Couetous is vsually of his mammon, farme, oxen, bargaines, wares, etc. The Epicures talke is vsually of his sports, dogges, cockes, horses, games, companions, or of his lusts.Note. The Superstitious man talkes of his Dagon, or the signes of heauen. The Wrathfull man of his aduersarie and wrong. The Ambitious man of his liuings, honors, offices, offers, hopes, or his owne parts and praises. To conclude, the talke of all naturall men is but of naturall things, and as they are of the flesh, so their talke sauours nothing but fleshly things.
Salt] There is the salt of doctrine, and thus Ministers are the salt of the earth. 2. There is the salt of mortification, and so euery Christian must haue salt in himselfe.Matth. 9. vlt. 3. There is the salt of discretion, and this is the praise of the wise; none of these three may be here excluded from our word. For first we must receiue lawes for our lips, euen from Gods ministers. We must learne of them not onely how to order our affections and life, but also how to speake, especially in matters of God and godlinesse. Secondly, we must mourne for the sins of the tongue aswell as for other sins: we must driue out the corruption that cleaues to our words with the salt of mortification. Thirdly, we must make conscience of discretion in our words, he is a perfect man that is discreet in his words,Prou. 10.20. Iam. 3.2. The tongue of the wise is as fine siluer, and his heart guideth his tongue wisely, and addeth doctrine to his lips. The Vse is both for instruction and reproofe.Prou. 16.23. For instruction, both to all Christians to season not onely their words of prayer to God, but also their speech in conuersing with men: and especially Ministers must haue salt in their tongues, with all discretion and heedfulnesse looking to their words, and with all authoritie and meete seueritie of rebukes driue out corruption out of the hearers; they may, they must cry aloud and spare not, they must powder them. Here likewise are those men to be reproued that haue beene often warned of their euill words, and mend not. Q.Quest. But what should be the cause why some men that haue good affections and desires, and yet cannot get the victorie ouer euill words. Answ.Answ. It comes to passe,The reasons vvhy some men cannot leaue their euill vvords. 1. By reason of their ignorance of better words. 2. By custom in euill speech. 3. For want of constant taking of words of praier and confession to God. 4. By defect of mortification in the heart, their hearts are not sufficiently humbled, they are too sleight in godly sorrow, out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh, and therefore their words are drossie and nought, because their hearts are litle worthProu. 10.20. What they should do to get victory.. That these men may get victorie ouer their euill words (which vsually are against the third or the seuenth or the ninth commandment) they must doe three things: First they must go to God constantly by praier, beseeching him to open their lips, and set a watch before the doore of their mouth. 2. They must not faile to mourne ouer their offences in speech, in secret till they haue subdued them, afflicting themselues with voluntarie sorrowes for them. 3. They must striue by all meanes to accustome themselues in good speech, and gracious words; yea many professors are to be reproued for their words, for many times they are either too many, or too vaine and idle, or too false, or too rash etc. Their words want much seasoning,Perseuerance in good vvords as vvell as good vvorkes. and it is a great fault to haue a heedlesse tongue. Thus of the properties of speech.
Alwaies] A Christian is bound to perseuerance in good words aswell as in good workes, he must talke gratiously, not onely at some times for a passion,
 as when hee comes newly from the Sermon, or on the Sabboth day, not onely in some companies, or in some arguments, but at all times, and in all places, watching to all the oportunities to glorifie God, or profit others by his words. Thus of the precept.
The end followes, that yee may know how to answer euery one. In generall I obserue here two things: First, that by speaking well we learne to speake well. Secondly, that the soundest knowledge is experimentall; he doth not indeede know how to answer, that doth not in practise exercise himselfe in gracious words, though he had all places of answer and arguments in his head.
To answer] To answer doth not alwaies import a question or demand going before, but is sometimes taken for continuing to speake, as Mat. 11.25. it is said our Sauiour answered, and yet no demand went before: Some thinke it is a part for the whole, and one vse of words put for all vses: but I take it in the ordinarie sense, as the word vsually imports, and so we answer either vnbeleeuers or beleeuers: concerning our christian answer before vnbeleeuers there are six things may be here obserued.Six things concerning ansvvering vnbeleeuers.
1. That true grace is sure to be opposed, and such as truly feare God are sure of aduersaries.
2. That mortified men are the fittest to answer aduersaries, especially in causes of religion, such whose tongues and pens are seasoned with salt. coher.
3. That euery Christian shall finde opposition. (yee)
4. That euery Christian ought to answer for the truth, apologie is the fruit not of learning or wit onely but of godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.10. (yee)
5. That the truth hath all sorts of aduersaries, open and secret, at home and abroad, learned and vnlearned, Ministers and Magistrates, rich and poore, euery one that is carnall hath a bolt to shoot at sinceritie.
6. That it is not an easie or ordinarie skill to know how to answer well,Seuen things required in ansvvering vvell. for thereunto is required first deliberation, hee that answers a matter before hee heare it, it is folly and shame to him. Secondly, prayer, Prou. 16.1. Hab. 2.1. 3. Faith in Gods fauour and promise, Matth. 10.19. Psal. 119.41, 42. 4. Discretion, considering persons, time, place, occasions, one kinde of answer will not serue euery sort of men: we answer in one manner to great men, in an other manner to learned men, in an other to ordinarie menPro. 25.11. and 26.4.6.. 5. Patience. 6. Humilitie. 7. A good conscience1 Pet. 3.15, 16..
Thus of answering vnbeleeuers: Concerning the answering of beleeuers, here are these things to be obserued.
1. That Christians should propound their doubts one to another.Foure things concerning ansvvering beleeuers.
2. That strong Christians should support the weake, and helpe them, and resolue them from time to time, Rom. 2.19.
3. It is not an easie matter to giue a gracious, seasonable, and profitable answer.
4. That custome in gracious speech, breeds by Gods blessing, an abilitie to giue wise and sound iudgment, aduise and resolution, it is not wit, learning, authoritie etc. that breeds this skill.
Thus of the exhortation.




Vers. 7. All my estate shall Tichicus declare vnto you, who is a beloued brother, and a faithfull Minister, and fellow-seruant in the Lord.
8. Whom I haue sent vnto you for the same purpose, that he might know your estate, and comfort your hearts.
9. With Onesimus a faithfull and beloued brother, who is one of you, they shall make knowne vnto you all things which are done here.


In these words and those that follow is conteined the second part of the
 conclusion. Before he hath handled the common doctrine both of faith and life, now he lets loose his affection to expresse in particular his loue to speciall Christians: In all the words there is to be obserued, first, a narration as an entrance* secondly, the salutations themselues.
The narration is in these three verses, and the summe of it is, that Paul being prisoner at Rome, to expresse his care for and loue to the Church, and in particular to the Colossians, sends Timothie and Onesimus, the one a Minister, the other a priuate man, both faithfull, to shew them of Pauls affaires, and to visit the Churches and comfort them.
Before I come to the particulars, from the generall consideration of all the verses to the end of the Chapter, these foure things may be obserued.
1. That religion extends it selfe to the behauiour of men, euen in these more ordinarie matters of life, so as men may sinne or obey euen in them.
2. That the loue euen of the best Christians needs (for the preseruing and continuing of it) euen these lighter helps and obseruances.
3. That piety is no enemy to curtesie, it doth not remoue but rectifie it: Piety doth prescribe to curtesie foure waies, 1. By forbidding and restrayning the arte of dissimulation, and the politike seruing of mens humors, and all the base courses of flattery. 2. By moderating the excesse of complements. 3. By preseruing the puritie of them, that they be not made the instruments of prophanenesse, and pollution, and wantonnesse. 4. By adding to them the seedes of grace and religion, Paul will salute aswell as the Gentiles, but yet his matter shall tend vnto grace and some good of the soule, as Col. 1.2. and in the rest of the Epistles.
4. Amongst Christians there may be a preheminence of affection, some may beloued more then others; the Apostle is desirous his doctrine may be a testimonie of his loue to all, but yet he cannot forbeare the mention of his speciall respect of some.
The first thing in this part of the conclusion is the narration, and out of the whole narration these things may be noted.
1. The generall care Ministers should haue of the Churches, Paul cares for the Churches farre remoued, yea when himselfe is in great trouble, and so it might be thought, he had cause enough of care for himselfe.
2. That the affections betweene faithfull Ministers and the people should not onely be conceiued but exprest.
3. That Church-gouernours should be carefull whom they imploy in the businesses of the Church, Paul will not send a letter, but makes choice of discreet and faithfull men, much lesse would he haue imploied about the worship of God or the censures of the Church, suspitious persons, men of ill fame, drunkards, or of scandalous behauiour: How can it be otherwise but that the graue censures of the Church should be loathed, and scorned, when such numbers of disordered and prophane persons are admitted to the denouncing, pleading, and executing of them?
4. Men should be carefull how and whom they commend by word or writing; to commend euill men is to beare false witnesse, many times to the great hurt both of the Church and common-wealth.
The first particular thing in the narration concerning Tichicus, is his praises. Here I obserue,
1. Who commends him, viz: Paul. And this shewes that Ministers should be carefull to preserue and inlarge the credits of their brethren. Especially this is a care should be in such as excell others in place or gifts. They are farre from this, that detract from the iust praises of their brethren, hold them downe with all disgrace, labour to destroy what they build vp, and plucke away the affections of the people from them; and when they haue occasion
 to speake to them, vse them contemptibly, and rate them as if they were rather their scullions then their brethren. And the sinne is the worse, when the same persons can countenance idle, euill, and scandalous persons.
2. To what end, viz: That his embassage might be so much the more respected: for the credit of the person winnes much respect to the doctrine it selfe.
3. In what manner. And here obserue two things: 1. That he giues him his full praise: for a man may slander by speaking sparingly in the praises of the well-deseruing. 2. That he praiseth him without any (but) to teach vs that we should not be easie in word or letter in discouering the infirmities of faithfull Ministers.
4. The particulars of his praises. And they may be diuided thus: Either they are common to all true Christians, (beloued brother); or proper to Church-officers, and that either in relation to Christ, (a faithfull minister), or in relation to Paul, (a fellow-seruant.(...))
There are foure things ought to be in euery good Minister.

1. He must be a good man, a brother.
2. He should be beloued of his people, beloued brother.
3. He must be faithfull. And his faithfulnesse stands in two things: 1. Diligence in labour: 2. Sinceritie in giuing euery one their portion of rebukes, comforts, directions, etc. in due season.
4. He must be a fellow-seruant, one that will draw in the yoke with his brethren.

This may smite the conscience of many sorts of Ministers.
Some because they are of wicked and scandalous life.
Some because they haue made themselues hatefull to their people by their indiscretion, couetousnesse, contention, etc.
Some because they are not faithfull: Either not true to the bed of the congregation to which they consecrated themselues: or not sincere in the vse of their gifts, being idle loiterers, indiscreet feeders, men-pleasers, or the like.
Some because they are proud, humorous, selfe-conceited, singular, and loue to goe alone.
Thus of his praises. The ends of his mission followes, and they are three.
1. That he might declare vnto them Pauls estate. 2. That he might know their estate. 3. That he might comfort their hearts.
For the first: If you aske what he should declare, I may answer, such things as these, the successe of the Gospell in Rome, the order of Pauls life, and his afflictions.
If you aske to what end: I answer, 1. For approbation; the greatest men neede the approbation of other Ministers, yea of other Christians. 2. For thanksgiuing, that so many praises might be giuen to God. 3. For praier for what was wanting, or hurtfull to him or the Church. 4. For consolation to them, who questionlesse would reioyce to heare from Paul.
Againe, it is to be noted, that he saith, his whole estate: for a godly man carrieth himselfe so as he cares not though all men see into all his courses.



VERS. 8. Whom I haue sent for the same purpose that he might know your estate.

THe state of the people ought to be knowne to the Minister:Doctr. not their worldly estate, but the estate of their soules, and consciences, and the working of the meanes vpon them, not onely for the satisfaction of the Ministers affection, but for the guiding of his priuate preparations and praiers, and for his publike doctrine. Which reproues the carelesse Ministers, that heed not the state of the people. We are watchmen for obseruation, as well as labourers
 in respect of preaching: neither can he be a good preacher, that is not a carefull Watchman.
Againe, it is a great defect in the people, when the minister wants intelligence. For though it be a base humour of any to bring false reports, and a weake part in any minister to make the pulpit a place to vent their priuate and personall businesses, yet in the generall he cannot be a good Physitian to the state of any congregation, that is not acquainted with their diseases.
Quest. But why doth the Apostle send to know their estate?
Answ. Because he would not credit reports concerning them: for he knew that wicked men out of their malice would raise monstrous slanders many times of the best deseruing people: and besides, the better sort of men are not carefull of their words in reports; matters grow with telling, and euery man according to his seuerall affection sets a seuerall emphasis vpon the matter he tels, so that after a while the tale will not be worth receiuing. This carefulnes should teach vs how to heare, especially we should be warie, and well aduised, and thorowly informed, before, by praier and fasting we take vp the name of God concerning the absent.
The third end is, that their hearts might be comforted.
Here in generall from the Apostles care to haue them comforted, obserue,
1. That Christians neede comfort and incouragement.
2. That comfort is the peculiar portion of true Christians; and contrariwise, nothing but sorrow and the curse is the portion of wicked men; and if any dramme of comfort be applied to wicked men, the truth of God is falsified.
Ob. But this is the way to make them despaire.
Answ. The blinde and dreaming world is mistaken. Giue mee an instance of one man in this place, nay in this age, nay in any age, (that I can remember) shew me any example in Scripture, or any instance in experience, of one soule driuen into despaire by the sincere preaching of the word: It is no great thing I desire.Note. That men haue despaired I know and finde, as Cain and Iudas did; but that it was seuere preaching that wrought it, I no where finde: and yet for one bitter word giuen by vs, the Prophets gaue ten, and yet this euent neuer followed. Not but there is enough said many times to make despaire, but that there is this prouidence of God, that it comes not vpon men by this meanes; but either of the melancholy of the body, or the speciall curse that God priuately powred vpon them, or by the speciall working of Satan by Gods iust permission. And yet I allow not indiscreet rashnes, or rude indiscretion in applying threatnings.
Doct. 3. That it is the dutie of euery Minister to labour to build vp Gods children in comfort, as the Apostle doth herein expresse his care. But yet consider whom the Apostle comforts.
1. Such as had the faith of Iesus, Col. 1.4. 2. Such as loued all the Saints, Col. 4.1. 3. Such as were fruitfull hearers of the Gospell, Col. 1.6. 4. Such as were constant, and laboured to bee grounded in faith and hope, Col: 1.23. 5. Such as accounted Christ their greatest riches, and the Gospell a glorious mystery, Col. 1.27. 6. Such as were circumcised with circumcision made without hands, and haue put away the body of sinnes, and had with painefull sorrowes put away, fornication, vncleanenesse, the inordinate affection, wrath, anger, malice, cursed speaking, filthy speaking and lying out of their mouths, Col. 2.10. and 3.5.8.
4. A question may be here asked, whether consolations doe barre out rebukes and directions?
Answ. They doe not, for Paul doth comfort, and yet he rebuked in the second Chapter, and directed in the third; nay many times rebukes, and directions
 are great doores of consolation.
Thus of Pauls care to haue them comforted.
Tichicus did comfort their hearts, 1. by his presence. 2. by bringing letters to the Church from Paul. 3. by his words, not of report onely, relating Pauls estate to them, but of doctrine, perswading them to patience vnder their crosses, remembring them of the ioyes to come, strengthning them against the gaine-sayings of aduersaries, the temptations of Satan, the rebellion of their owne flesh, and the inconuenience of Pauls imprisonment, and lastly instructing them how to goe on in holy life.
Thus of the first part of the narration.
In the narration concerning Onesimus I obserue two things: his praises, and the end of his mission. His praises are as they stand in relation to all Christians, or in particular to them; to all, he is a brother, faithfull, beloued to them, and so he is one of them: the end of his mission is in the end of the verse.
Onesimus] This Onesimus was the theeuish and fugitiue seruant of Philemon, who comming to Rome, was conuerted by Paul in prison, and is now for honours sake sent with Tichicus. From hence diuers things may be noted.
1. That hatefull and vnfaithfull persons may be conuerted, and made worthy, faithfull, and beloued.
2. That religion and the word doth not marre, but make good seruants. The word will doe that which rating and stripes will not doe.
3. That no mans sinnes, of which they haue repented before God and the Church, ought to be charged vpon them as any disparagement in subsequent times. Where God forgiues, men should not impute.
4. It is a good worke, to grace and credit such as by repentance returne from their former euill waies.
5. Repentance and true grace is the surest way to credit: the best way to lift reproch from a mans name, is to get sinne off his soule.
Now in the particular praise of Onesimus I obserue: First, that Christian loue respects not persons: Paul is not ashamed of a poore seruant, and he would haue the Church loue whom God loues. Secondly, that there is faithfulnesse required of priuate men as well as Ministers, and that faithfulnesse stands in three things, soundnesse in religion without error or hypocrisie, diligence in the particular calling, and fidelitie in promises and couenants. Thirdly, that naturall and ciuill relations are not broken or disabled by religion; they must not onely loue Onesimus as a Christian, but also as one of them, for he was a citizen of Colosse: there is loue should be in men as they are fellow-citizens, and of the same trade or profession, or the like.
Thus of the narration.




Vers. 10. Aristarchus my prison-fellow saluteth you, and Marcus, Barnabas sisters sonne, touching whom yee receiued commandement. If he come vnto you, receiue him.
11. And Iesus which is called Iustus, which are of the circumcision. These onely are my worke-fellowes vnto the kingdome of God, which haue beene vnto my consolation.


THe salutations follow, and they are either signified or required: signified verse 10. to 15. required, vers. 15. to the end.
The salutations signified are from six men, three of them Iewes, Aristarchus, Marcus, and Iesus, vers. 10, 11. and three Gentiles, Epaphras, Lucas, Demas, vers. 12, 13, 14.
Aristarchus is the first, concerning whom here is set downe, with his name, both his estate, a prison-fellow, and his salutation. This Aristarchus was a Iew
 of Macedonia, conuerted by Paul, who out of the deerenesse of his respect, would neuer leaue him, but accompanied him in his aduersities; for he was taken with him in the tumult at EphesusAct. 19.29, 30., and here he is his prison-fellow in Rome. Crosses abide all that will liue godly: if he will haue grace with Paul, he may perhaps lie in prison with him too. But here we see that aduersitie doth not lessen that affection that is sound, either to God or to Gods people: they that cannot endure the smiting of the tongue, would litle endure the yron fetters.
Marcus is the second. This is he about whom the contention was betweene Paul and Barnabas, Act. 13. because he had forsaken them, and the labour of preaching with them. Now he is commended by his alliance to Barnabas: Certainly the kindred of worthy men are to be regarded euen for their sakes, much more their posteritie. It is a great fault, that when men haue spent themselues in the labour and seruice of the Church, their posteritie should be neglected, and exposed to want and misery. And is it a credit to be Barnabas sisters sonne? What is it then to be the childe of God by regeneration?
Concerning whom you haue receiued commandment] Some thinke that Marcus brought to them the decrees of the Counsell at Ierusalem, and these read it (of whom yee receiued etc.) Some say the meaning hereof is not reuealed, and therefore they will not inquire. Some thinke, that vpon his forsaking of the Apostle, the Churches had notice not to receiue him if he came vnto them, and that he had written to them himselfe. Some thinke the latter words (whom receiue) are an explication, and so they shew what was commanded, viz. to receiue him.
Now for the obseruations we may note: First, that scandalous persons are not to be receiued. Secondly, that the greatnesse of the offences of men are not to be measured by carnall reason, but by the consideration of the person, manner, place, time, etc. A lesser offence aggrauated by circumstances may giue cause of priuate separation from voluntarie company. Thirdly, that an ingenuous nature is much affected with the distaste of discreet Christians. Fourthly, that repenting sinners are to be receiued, if vnto Gods mercy, then much more vnto our houses and companies. It is an ill qualitie to be hard to be reconciled. In generall tis our dutie and Gods commandement, that we should receiue one anotherRom. 15.7.. Thus Ministers must receiue their people, when they are with them, to speake to them of the kingdome of GodLuk 9.11., and the people must receiue their Ministers alsoAct. 21.17., and the people must receiue one another, euen the meanest Christians as well as the greatest, the litle ones that beleeue in ChristMat. 18.5., all the Disciples of Christ are to be receiuedMat. 10.40, 41..
Now because this point of receiuing one another is exceeding needfull, and there may be much mistaking about it, I thinke good therefore to giue out of seuerall Scriptures rules how we are to carry our selues in this businesse of receiuing one another.
Six rules about receiuing one another.1. That we entertaine with all heedfulnesse, so Act. 9. in Pauls case, and Act. 18.27. in Apollos case. This condemnes the carnall hospitalitie in the world, which promiscuously admits any of any profession, where the basest and vilest sort of people are soonest chosen for the table and company: yea many of the better sort are to be blamed, such as are ouer credulous, many times to their owne singular disgrace, and hurt of the Church.
2. That when we are assured of the faithfulnesse of any, we receiue them with all christian respect, freely and liberally, Rom. 15.17. bearing with their infirmities, Rom. 15.1. yea if need be, pardoning their offences, Phil. 12.17.
3. That in society with weake Christians, we take heede of intangling them with questions and controuersies, Rom. 14.1. as the manner of some is.
4. That great respect be had of our callings.
5. That the imployment be chiefly about holy things. Receiue them in the fellowship of the Gospell, not for recreation or idle discourse; either labour to strengthen them, Act. 18.26. or to be furthered in obedience by them, 2 Cor. 7.15.
6. That great respect be had of frugalitie, Luk. 10.8.
Thus of verse 10.



VERS. 11. And Iesus which is called Iustus, which are of the circumcision, etc.

THe third person that doth salute, is described by his proper name Iesus, and his surname Iustus.
Quest.Quest. May the name of Iesus be giuen to any man?
Answ.Answ. Before it was appropriated to the sonne of God, it was both lawfull and vsuall to giue it to men, as appeares by Ioshuaes name, which is the same,Whether the name of Iesus may be giuen to any man novv? and the sonne of Syrake. But now it is not expedient any way: and therefore the Iesuites may change their names, like Iebusites as they are.
The name Iustus was not giuen him by the Iewes, but by the Romans, as the varying of the language sheweth: and in all probabilitie, giuen in praise of his faithfulnesse and true dealing with all men.
Quest. What may we doe to winne the reputation of iust persons?What vve must doe to vvinne the reputation of iust men.
Answ. 1. Be peaceable and make peace, and doe all things without murmuring or reasonings, Mat. 5.8. Phil. 2.15.
2. Be watchfull vnto chastitie, and the honestie of the seuenth commandment, 1 Pet. 2.11, 12.
3. Let your conuersation be without feare, 1 Pet. 3.2.
4. Be not vaine in apparell, 1 Pet. 3.3.
5. Get a meeke and quiet spirit, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4.
6. In yeelding apologie, be constant, and vnmoueable with all cheerefulnesse, willing to giue answer, with all meeknesse, and reuerence, and good conscience, 1 Pet. 3.15, 16.
7. Shew all vprightnesse in thy calling: and this vprightnesse hath three things. 1. Diligence. 2. All true and faithfull dealing in words and promises. 3. A conuersation without couetousnesse.
Finally, to liue inoffensiuely is a strong inducement euen to the worst men, many times to draw from them a good testimonie euen of Gods children. Thus of their names.
In the second place they are described, 1. By their countrey, they were of the circumcision, that is Iewes. 2. By their praises, and thus they are commended, either for what they were to the Church in generall, they were labourers, fellow-workers; or for what they were to Paul, they were to his consolation.
Which are of the circumcision] This is added perhaps to note, that euen those men though they were Iewes did subscribe to the Apostles doctrine, concerning the abolishing of Iewish ceremonies.
But by this periphrasis the Iewes were noted, not so much because God did once hereby distinguish and separate them from the world as by a partition wall, but because of pertinacie in refusing (though they were Christians) to lay downe circumcision: This obstinacie of the Iewes should teach vs resolution for the truth, and to be more constant in all good courses then they obstinate in euill.
In the praise of their paines I note, 1. Their paucity or fewnesse, (these only) 2. Their labour, worke-fellowes. 3. The subiect about which they labour (the kingdome of God)
These onely] Here obserue, 1. That when God hath any worke to do, there are found few faithful men to do it. 2. That a people, that hath had the meanes
 and been conuinced, if they turne not speedily, proue of many others the most obdurate, and hard-hearted; thus almost the whole nation of the Iewes resisted Christ. 3. Persecution driues many hearers into apostacie: this was not the case of the Iewes in Rome onely, but would be our case if the times altered.
What hearers amongst vs are like to fall avvay if the times should change.Quest. What hearers amongst vs are like to fall away if the times should change?
Answ. 1. Such as heare without affection. 2. Such as haue only a temporarie faith. 3. Such as now forbeare societie with Gods seruants in the fellowship of the Gospell: For if now they shame their presence, how farre would they stand off in perilous times? 4. If these three onely of all the Iewes were faithfull labourers in Rome, where was Peter if he had been at Rome, either Paul much wrongs him, not to mention him, and his eminent praises, or else the gaining of a Bishopricke made him giue ouer his worke.
Worke-fellowes] Here consider, 1. Their labour, worke. 2. Their honor, fellowes. For the first obserue, 1. That Gods kingdome on earth is erected by mans hands, as the outward instruments, an honor done to man which is denied to the Angels. 2. Gods kingdome needs much labour and helpe, Ministers must worke, they may not be loiterers, yea they must worke hard, for cursed is he that doth Gods worke negligently; yea they must worke in their owne persons, not by substitutes: Magistrates also must helpe forward this worke by protecting the ministerie and good men, by compelling such as are by the high waies to come into Gods house, and by reforming abuses which hinder Gods grace and kingdome amongst men: Priuate persons must help by instruction, admonition, consolation, etc.
Fellowes] Here note, 1. The honor of these labourers, they are all one, fellowes, though differing in gifts, 1 Cor. 3.8, 9. 2. Their vnitie, some are workers, but not coworkers, for they preach not Christ purely. 3. Humilitie in the Apostle, imitable in all, though neuer so much excelling in place or gifts.
Vses of all. 1. For instruction. First, pray to the Lord of the haruest to send forth more labourers, though Clergy-men are very corrupt, and few of them faithfull, yet it is better our mouthes bee filled with prayers then with reproches.
2. Ministers must studie to approue themselues workemen that neede not be ashamed, 2 Tim. 2.15.
3. The people must take heede they hinder not Gods worke by disobedience, 1 Cor. 16.16.
Lastly, must Ministers in their callings labour, surely then must euery man worke in his calling also, else iust with God if pouertie attend sloth: yea weomen must worke and not destroy their houses by pride and idlenesse, and all both men and women must not talke of it as many do but set to it, Pro. 14.23. nor begin onely but perseuere, Pro. 18.9. but some are so settled vpon their lees in this point, that they are wiser in their owne conceit, then seuen men that can giue a reason.
Secondly, for consolation to all Gods workmen, especially ministers, though they haue not so great gifts as others, yet if they shew all good faithfulnes in discharge of their places, they are fellowes euen to Apostles; though all that wrought at the Tabernacle had not Bezaliels skill yet all were coworkers: yea Gods workemen differ from all the workemen in the world: For first God himselfe will worke with them, so will no Prince though the worke be neuer so princely. 2. Though their worke be not finished yet they shall receiue their wages,A threefold kingdome of God. though Israel be not gathered, yet their iudgement is with the Lord and their worke with their God, Isay 40.4, 5.
Vnto the kingdome of God] There is a threefold kingdome of God: First,
 of nat^re, Psal. 103.19. Secondly of grace, Math. 3.2. Thirdly of glory Iohn 3.3.
The kingdome of grace is here meant, here I obserue first the priuiledges of this kingdome. Secondly, the properties or signes of the subiects. Thirdly, the vses.
For the first the excellent condition of such as by true conuersion are admitted into the kingdome of grace,, may be three waies considered,The priuiledges of the kingdome of grace. for they are happy, first in their King, secondly in their lawes, thirdly in the personall prerogatiues of the kingdome.
1. They are happy in their King for he is nobly borne the son of the most high. 2. He comes rightly by the crowne, Psal. 2.7. 3. Hee is of eminent soueraignty, he hath a name written on his garments and thigh, The king of kings and Lord of Lords, Reuel. 19.16. Prince of the Kings of the earth, Reuel. 1.5. 4. He is a Prince of admirable qualities, wonderfull, counceller, the mightie God, an euerlasting Father, Prince of peace, on that keepes the gouernment vpon his owne shoulders, Isa. 9.6. 5. Lastly, he is immortall, 1 Tim. 1.17. in the earth if a Prince were neuer so good yet in this the subiects are vnhappy that they shall lose him, but Sions King will neuer die.
2. They are happy in their lawes, for they are not only cleerly digested in Gods sacred volume, but they are euery way most perfect to make men wise to saluation and absolute to euery good worke, such as neede no repeale nor addition, a perfect rule to all ages, and so are no lawes of man vnder heauen, 2 Tim. 3.3.15.16.17.
3. They are happy in the personall prerogatiues of the kingdome, for 1. Here is certaine safetie and quiet habitation for all the Kings subiects Isa. 33.20.21. Ier. 23.5.6. Secondly, to all the subiects it is giuen to know the mysteries of this kingdome, Math. 13.11. Thirdly, in this kingdome poore men may get aduancement as easily and as soone as rich, Iam. 2.6. Fourthly, if any of the subiects fall into desperate crosses that they be without all meanes, yet they are prisoners of hope, and shall be saued and deliuered by the bloud of the couenant, Zach. 9.9.11. Fiftly, the King doth quiet himselfe in the loue of euery subiect and doth reioyce ouer them with ioy, it is a great benefit to liue vnder a good King though the subiect be not knowne vnto him: but a great fauour that the King should take notice of the subiect by name; but exceeding great comfort it is if the King loue some subiect with a speciall loue: thus doth Christ to all his subiects, which no King can doe because his heart is finite. Sixtly, here all subiects are sonnes, Rom. 9.25.26. Seuenthly, they are all King, Reuel. 1.5.6. and 5.10. Rom. 5.17. Eightly, here if any two of the subiects doe agree on earth vpon any thing whatsoeuer they desire their heauenly father will grant it, Math. 18.19.20. Lastly the properties of the kingdome shew the felicitie of the subiects of this kingdome.
First, Is in power not in word, 1 Cor. 4.20. Secondly, Is not of this world but as farre more excellent as it differs in nature from the kingdome of the world, Ioh. 8.36. Thirdly, It is without end, Luk. 1.33. Heb. 12.28.
Thus of the priuiledges.
The second thing is the properties of the subiects or the signes by which they may be knowne, and they are sixe.
First, They are a poore and penitent people, Math. 5.3. and 3.2. Secondly,6. Signes to knovv the subiects of Christs kingdome. they doe gladly, and constantly subiect themselues to be ruled by the powerfull preaching of the Gospell, and esteeme the comforts thereof aboue all treasures, Math. 13.44.45. hence called the Gospell of the kingdome. Thirdly, They are a patient people, and doe willingly forgiue each other his brothers trespasses, Math. 18.23. vlt. Reuel. 1.9. ordinarily men cannot more darken their euidence then by their vnruly passions vnbridled, the King of Sion is
 meeke Math. 21.5. and so are the subiects. Fourthly, they may be easily knowne by their easie accesse to their King in their daily troubles, you may see them betimes euery morning at the court gates, Gal. 4.7. Psal. 5.2.3. where he giues his sonne he giues the spirit of his sonne into their hearts etc. Fiftly, They feare their King and his goodnesse, they are more affected with feare vpon the sense of his mercy, then vpon the sight of his iudgements, Hos. 3.5. Sixtly, they make conscience of the least commandements, feare aswell to sweare by lesser othes in common talke as periurie in courts of iustice; They make conscience of drinkings aswell as drunkenesse, of filthy speaking aswell as whoredome, Math. 5.19. and 13.33. they are new creatures, they haue not a new legge or an arme onely, they labour to abound in grace and duties, 2 Pet. 1.11.
The vses follow.
First for instruction, if the estate of Christians conuerted by the powerfull preaching of the Gospell vnder the regiment of Christ, bee so excellent an estate,Hovv men may get into the kingdome of God. and so happy and a king-like condition; it should teach, first all that are not yet conuerted to settle their hearts about this point, and that they may get into the kingdome of God, they must get an holy estimation of the happinesse of that estate, kingdome should moue them much, Sathan knew if any thing would preuaile with Christ it must be the glory of kingdomes; behold here God offers thee a kingdome. Secondly, pray daily and earnestly that Gods kingdome may come vpon thee, Math. 6. Thirdly, practise what thou praiest, and by practise seeke the kingdome of God first, Math. 6.33. and to this end obserue 4. rules.
1. Remoue what might hinder, that is by repentance cast off thy sinnes, no vncleane thing must enter here, and it is plaine it is required, Math. 3.2. Secondly, waite vpon the preaching of the Gospell, for it is the Gospell of the kingdome, and the keies of heauen, onely take heede thou neither betray it by security, nor choake it by care, Math. 13. Thirdly, remember to seeke it with all zeale and earnestnesse, for the kingdome of heauen suffers violence and the violent take it by force, Math. 11.12. Fourthly, take heed thou giue not ouer when thou come neere to the kingdome of God, Mark. 12.34. for the children of the kingdome may be cast out.
2. Take heed of despising poore Christians, for God hath chosen them to make them heires of the kingdome, they must not be accounted of according to their outward estate in the world.
3. Those that haue attained this excellent estate must be exhorted to three things.
1. By godly conuersation to walke worthy of the kingdome of God 1 Thess. 2.12. 1 Pet. 2.9. Secondly, to reioyce in their King, and speake of the praises of the great renowne of the sacred Kingdome that thus commeth in the name of the Lord, Psal. 145.10.11. and 149.2. Math. 11.10. for many Prophets and great kings haue desired to see such daies, and haue not seene them, in that cleerenesse we now see them. Thirdly, willingly to suffer for righteousnesse, 2 Thess. 1.5.
Lastly Ministers should here be informed and prouoked by all meanes possible, in season and out of season to exhort, perswade, beseech men, and turne themselues into all formes to preuaile, for it is about a kingdome they labour.
Thus for instruction.
2. It serues for reproofe, first, of such as can be so easily content either to want or lose the meanes, the kingdome of God is taken from them, Math. 21.43. Secondly, of the waiwardnesse of caueling hearers that can neuer be set downe but are still obiecting, against this word of doctrine or the estate of
 Christians, these are condemned, Math. 11.16. etc. Thirdly, it is a great terrour to rich men in speciall, who are threatned with impossibilitie to enter into this kingdome, if they doe not aboue all other men looke to themselues, Math. 10.23.24. Fourthly, of the discontentments of Gods seruants vnder crosses, is there no king in Sion? or is it no priuiledge that the first Dominion is come vnto them, Mich. 4.9. Fiftly, it specially reprooues those wicked persons that professe by their workes they will not haue Christ to raigne ouer them by his word, Luk. 19.14.27. Zach. 14.17. woe is vnto them, and woe to such as shut vp the kingdome of God before men, Math. 23.13.
3. For comfort to all Gods seruants. Did so great Kings and Prophets desire to see these things we see? what is it to enioy such a Kingdome? was it a great offer in Herod to offer halfe his kingdome, what is it in God to giue a whole Kingdome, better then any kingdome on earth? yea this comfort is the greater, in that such christians whose grace is but like the graine of mustard seede, may be possessed of this Kingdome.

Which haue beene to my consolation.

Doct. The labours of Gods seruants are a great comfort vnto good men, it is a comfort to see Gods worke prosper, and besides ioy in the holy Ghost is wrought in their hearts by the power of the word preached.
Quest. What should be the reason,Why many hearers haue no more comfort in hearing. why many that come constantly to heare Gods seruants, yet get not consolation, or not the comfort they desire?
Answ. The lets of comfort are either 1. in men, or 2. in God.
In men they are either of frailty without any great sinne, or such as arise of sinne.
The lets of frailtie are specially two. 1. Bodily distemper by sicknesse or melancholy, but this may be tried thus if they bee dead hearted in all other things aswell as hearing and praier, etc.
2. Waiwardnesse in the distresse of conscience when the soule refuseth comfort, Psal. 77.3.
The lets of comfort that arise of sinne may be considered two waies, first as they are in the worser sort of men. Secondly, as they are also in the better sort. In the worser sort these are the lets; First impenitencie, Ier. 8.6.8. Secondly, peruersnes, Ier. 6.10. Thirdly, vile affections, such as are:
1. Worldly griefe or fretting. 2. Worldly cares, these are thornes. 3. Rage and passion, Rom. 15.4. 4. Lust, 2 Tim. 3.6. 5. Enuie, 1 Pet. 2.12.
4. A spirit of slumber, Rom. 11.7.8. etc. 5. Contrariety or contradiction in opinions, Phil. 2.1.2.
In the better sort 1. want of preparation, plowing must go before sowing, Math. 17. Of attention, Isa. 55.3.4. Of estimation of comfort receiued Iob. 15.11. Of godly sorrow, Isa. 61.62.
2. Preuailing of other ioyes.
3. An ouer high expectation.
4. Presumptuous sinnes.
5. Spirituall satiety and fulnesse, when they seeme to haue grace enough, and want nothing, too like the Laodiceans, Reuel. 3.
Thus in men.
2. God doth restraine consolation, sometimes for reasons secret to himselfe, sometimes for reasons reuealed, but not to vs, as
1. To teach vs to know that comfort is his gift, and to draw vs to looke aboue the meanes. 2. To teach vs to liue by faith and not by sense. 3. To scourge vnthankfulnesse. 4. To compell vs to the vse of other of his ordinances, too much neglected.
Thus of the lets.
To passe from this point we may here obserue, 1. An imitable praise in the
 Apostle, he enuies not the labours of his brethren, he is so farre from it that he reioyceth in it. 2. We may see that the wisest and greatest men haue need to be comforted of meaner men. 3. Here is a reproofe of such workemen as by their labour grieue Gods people, and are as thornes and goades in their sides but comfort them they doe not.
Thus of the salutations of the Iewes.
The salutations of the three Gentiles follow, the first is Epaphras who (besides the report of his salutation) is described 1. by his office, the seruant of Christ. 2. By his relation to them, who is one of you. 3. By his loue to them shewed by striuing in praier for them. 4. By his zeale not onely for them but for the two neighbour Churches, vers. 13.
This Epaphras was the Cities preacher among the Colossians, he is kept back at Rome for a time that so Tichicus might confirme the doctrine before taught by Epaphras.
Quest. But why is the Apostle so long in speaking of him being so short in the mention of the rest? Answ. It is the Apostles discretion to honour him before his owne people.
A seruant of Christ] He was a seruant of Christ, first, as a man and so by the necessitie of creation he must serue Christ whether he would or not. 2. As a Christian man and so he serues him willingly and in religious workes. 3. As a Preacher of the Gospell, and so he serues Christ in a speciall function in the Church.
Doct. 1. Ministers are Christs seruants, whence followes two things, first they must doe his workes. Secondly, they must not be seruants of men.
Doct. 2, The estate of the Ministers of God is an estate of seruing not of raigning, they are not Lords ouer Gods heritage, nor must they thinke to be like the Prince of the Nations.
Doct. 3. It is a great honour to be Christs seruant; for all his seruants are freemen, and their wages is euerlasting: and therefore wee should loue to be his seruants, neither should it euer seeme euill vnto vs to doe his worke. Besides, it is a great comfort to poore Christians, though they cannot be Kings and Apostles, yet they may be Christs seruants which Kings and Apostles haue accounted their greatest honour. Thirdly, men must take heed of despising or abusing Ministers, seeing they are Christs seruants, yea it is not safe to abuse any Christian for that very reason. Lastly, seeing it is so great a dignitie to serue Christ, both Ministers and people must be carefull to performe Christs seruice, with obseruation of what Christ requires, for the manner or rules of his seruice.
Ministers must not seeke their owne things, Phil. 2.21. they must not bee giuen to wine, nor to filthy lucre, nor fighters, nor couetous, not prophane in their families, not young schollers, not scandalous, 1 Tim. 3.3.4.5.6.7. 2 Tim. 2.24. they must faithfully care for all the matters of the Church, Phil. 2.20. they must serue with all modestie and teares, Act. 20.19.
Christians in their seruice of Christ must remember to lay aside all immoderate cares for the profits and pleasures of this world: yee cannot serue Christ and mammon. 2. That Christ will not be serued but in newnesse of spirit: the old heart can doe Christ no worke Christ will accept, Rom. 7.6.
Who are Christs seruants.Quest. But who are Christs seruants?
Answ. If you speake of Ministers, it is answered negatiuely, Gal 1.10. He that preacheth mans doctrine, or goeth about to please men, he is not the seruant of Christ. If you aske of Christians in generall, it is answered, Rom. 6.16. His seruants ye are to whom ye obey. If ye conscionably endeauour to obey, the word of Christ, you are the seruants of Christ; otherwise yee serue sinne vnto death.

For conclusion, let vs so settle our hearts to serue Christ, that we remember to doe it, 1. constantly at all times, 2. sincerely by doing all his works both publike and priuate.
Which is one of you] Doct. There is a speciall loue due to fellow-citizens. This I haue noted before. But I adde, that the loue of Citizens must shunne fiue things, as great rockes to make the shipwracke of true affection vpon: 1. Opposition or quarrell and suits in matter of estate. 2. Enuie at the prosperitie or trade of others. 3. Faction or banding into sides in matters of gouernment. 4. Schisme in matter of Religion: but it is to be noted, that it is prophane and fleshly men that haue not the spirit of God, that cannot abide others because they runne not with them into the same excesse of riot, for Gods seruants would faine liue at peace, Iud. 18.19. 5. A reioycing together in euill. The loue that leads men from their calling to go from tauerne to tauerne, or from sport to sport, is not true Citizen like loue, it is base and vnwarrantable.
The third thing in the description is his loue to his people, shewed by praiing for them. In his praier note.
1. The action, that he doth pray. 2. The subiect, persons, for whom, for you. 3. The circumstance, he praies absent. 4. The varietie of his praiers, praiers. 5. The feruencie of his praies, striueth. 6. The constancie of his praiers, alwaies. 7. The matter he praies for, 1. their perseuerance, that ye may stand. 2. their perfection amplified, by the measure, (full) and by the extent of the subiect, (in all the will of God.)
Praier.] Doct. Praier is the vsuall remedie and refuge for Gods children in their griefes and desires: a remedie I say for all times, persons, and places.The force of praier. As for griefes and feares, it is of force and auaileable, 1. against the troubles and cares of this world, Phil. 4.6. 2. against the stings of secret tentations and preuailing sinnes, 2 Cor. 12.9. Math. 9. 3. against the shame of euill workes past, both the blushing and gnawing of the conscience inwardly, and outwardly the reproach of name, Zeph. 3.11. 4. against sicknesse, Iam. 5.15. 5. against ill tongues, Psal. 119.4. 6. against the feare of apostacie, 2 Tim. 2.19. And these are the most vsuall things that need to trouble any childe of God. And as for desires, it is a plaine proposition, that God is rich to all that call vpon him, Rom. 10.12. This shewes the felicitie of euery childe of God, to whom God hath giuen the spirit of his sonne into his heart as a spirit of praier; for we see he cannot be miserable that can pray: and it should teach vs that if wee would be counted Gods people to shew that we trust God, by pouring out our hearts before him in all places and at all times, Psal. 62.8. 1 Tim. 2.8.
For you] Doct. 1. Ministers must pray for their people, as well as preach to them. And as this may humble ministers vnder the sense of the neglect hereof, so it should teach the people to requite their labour in the Lord, by praying for them againe: but especially they should take heed they send not their teachers with hearts full of griefe to complaine of them.
Doct. 2. Praier for others is a principall signe of our loue to them. Hereby Ministers may trie whether they loue their people, and parents whether they loue their children, etc.
Doct. 3. In that Epaphras praieth for them absent, he is therein a patterne of a true pastor; no distance of place can make him forget the loue of his people,Sorts of praiers.
Praiers] There be diuers kindes of praiers: for they are varied first by the place, for there is publike praier, and there is priuate praier, either with our families, or alone by our selues. Secondly, by the manner, and that either for forme, or affection: for forme, there are not onely ordinarie set praiers, but eiaculations, short requests or desires, cast out vpon sudden opportunities; these be praiers, and accepted of God, though the words be few or abrupt. For
 affection in praier, there is praier vnto which is required the vsuall deuotion of the heart, and there is supplication which is with speciall instance and importunitie, Phil. 4.7. Thirdly, by the instrument, there is the praier of the mouth, and the praier of the heart. Fourthly, by the matter, for there is deprecations for turning away of iudgement, and confessions with acknowledgment of sinne, and petition in matters of request, and thankesgiuing for benefits receiued.
Striueth.] But why must we striue in praier? Because of the greatnes of our owne wants and necessities, and because it is a great losse to lose our praiers.
What striuing in praier imports.Quest. But what doth striuing import? It imports earnestnesse as it is opposed to coldnesse, when we draw neere to God with our lips, but our hearts are farre from him: or to spirituall fainting in praier, Luk. 18.1. Secondly, tendernesse of affection, both sorrowing and reioicing in praier, according to our occasions, and the matter of praier. Thirdly, a resolution to take no deniall. Fourthly, difficultie, for fighting imports opposition.
Eight things vve must fight against in praier.Quest. But what must we fight against in praier? Answ. 1. Carnall counsell. 2. Distractions by the lusts of the flesh or cares of the world, 3. The obiects of our owne flesh. 4. Our owne vnskilfulnesse to pray, striue to learne to pray better. 5. Hardnesse of heart. 6. Sleepinesse of our body. 7. The temptations of Satan. 8. Wee must striue against God himselfe, as Iacob did by wrestling to get the blessing.
Vse. For reproofe of such as neuer complaine of any impediments in praier, nor care how they speed: their condition is as farre from happinesse, as their practise is from duty. And they are to be blamed, that complaine of their lets and discomforts in praier, but yet they striue not. But wee should learne to harnesse our selues,Note. and conscionably striue against all that may hinder vs; and to this end set our selues in Gods presence, and beseech God to heale our infirmities, and helpe vs against all the lets of prayer, and stirre vp in our hearts the promises made to praier, obseruing fit times, and watching to all opportunities, to be importunate when any doore is opened.
Lastly, would one be feruent in spirit? They must then looke to 4. things. First, they must serue the Lord; for a prophane person can neuer be feruent. Secondly, they must labour to reioyce their soules with the hope of a better life; for such comfortable meditations inflame the spirit. Thirdly, wee must get patience vnder worldly crosses and tribulations, else the cares and vexations of the world will choake all true feruencie. Fourthly, wee must continue in praier, for vse and experience breeds feruencie.
Alwaies] We must be constant in praier, 1 Thess. 5.16. Luk. 21.36. To pray alwaies, is to keepe a constant order in the daily performance of this dutie, and besides to pray vpon all occasions and opportunities. The profit comes by this constancie in praier, appeares by the proofes to bee 1. much ioy, 1 Thess. 5.16. 2. they that pray continually, shall escape the last terrible things, and be able to stand in the day of Christ, Luk. 21.36.
Here wee may see the difference betweene a godly minde and a carnall heart. The godly minde is alwaies praying, but the carnall heart is seldome without a sense of tediousnesse, with a desire to be rid of the burthen of it.
The reason why Gods children be so willingly imploied in much and often praier, is partly because God commands them to pray alwaies, partly because they finde vnutterable benefit and refreshing in praier, and partly they daily get hereby what they desire, Mark. 11.24.
If any take vnto them the words of those wretched Iewes, Mal. 3.16. and say what profit is it to keepe Gods Commandements, or to walke humbly, and that they could neuer finde any good by it, I can soone answere that in their praiers and obedience there was no profit, for indeede they did not
 walke humbly, nor in the power of godlinesse did they keepe Gods Commandements.
Ob. But haue not the best of them all, their sinnes, distractions and wants, as well as others? how then can they be so bold and frequent in praier?
Sol. The children of God haue priuiledges, others haue not; for their wants are couered by Christs intercession, and their suites are followed in heauen by Christs aduocation, 1 Ioh. 2.1. and framed in earth by the spirit, Rom. 8.26.
Ob. But how can they finde matter for so much praier?
Sol. If men had by the law gathered the catalogues of their sinnes, and learned to see and feare the iudgements sinne might bring, if they had obserued the daily straits of a mortall condition, if they had considered the almost infinite occasions of praier for themselues and others, they would not thus obiect.
Ob. But there are some that doe pray, and that alwaies too, against their corruptions, and yet cannot speed, nor get strength against them.
Sol. If they haue constantly praied (which yet I doubt) then the reason is either they watch not in practise to cut off the occasions of euill, Luk. 11.36. or they striue not with importunitie to preuaile with God, Luk. 18 or else they cannot be truely affected towards Gods grace in others: for if enuie at the graces and estimation of others raigne in thee, it is iust with God to deny to giue thee that grace thou enuiest in others.
To conclude, if any man hitherto carelesse of this dutie, be now desirous to be instrusted how to pray as he ought, with words, affection, and successe, let such a man put on a minde to obserue the rules following.
1. Thou must forgiue all thine enemies,Rules for praier. and resolue to liue without malice, Math. 6.
2. Thou must constantly heare Gods word, else thou canst neuer pray, but God will abhorre thee and thy praiers, Pro. 28.10.
3. Thou must get and shew a mercifull heart to man, if thou wouldest preuaile to obtaine mercy with God, Pro. 21.13. Math. 5.7.
4. Thou must carry thy selfe orderly and quietly in the familie, 1 Pet. 3.7.
5. Take heed of hypocrisie in praying to be seen of men, Math. 6.
Ob. But I want words. Sol. Pray God to giue thee words, and minde thine owne way, by considering thy sinne and wants, by the law.
Ob. But I want the affections of praier. Sol. Search whether there be not some vile affections, lusts and passions vnmortified, Psal. 66.18. 1 Tim. 2.8. and pray God to giue thee the spirit of compassion, Zach. 11.12. Yet in all this take heed of securitie, rest not in beginnings: God will take that at the first, which he will not still be content with. Learne to pray better.
Thus of the sixt thing.
The last is the matter he praies for.
That ye may stand.] Concerning perseuerance here are foure things to be obserued.
Doct. 1. That in the visible Church there may be such as will not stand: and this is true both in true members, and in seeming members. The true members may fall either by infirmitie, and so the righteous falleth seuen times, and riseth againe, or by presumption, falling to the practise of grosse euils, out of which they cannot recouer, but with extreame sorrowes. The onely seeming members, not only may, but certainly will fall, and that most an end finally, without recouery. So Demas, Iudas, Ioash, and many moe. This should teach vs, not to thinke it strange if wee see apostacie in men that haue roomes in the Church, and haue acknowledged the truth according to godlinesse.

The miserie of such as fall avvay.Doct. 2. That it is a fearefull thing to fall away, a worse condition likely a man cannot chuse for himselfe, 2 Pet. 2.20.21. For Satan will re-enter, and gaine a stronger possession then euer he had, yea their dispositions vnto euill may seuen times more be enflamed then euer before; seuen deuils worse then the former may enter. It were better to be ground vnder a milstone, then thus to liue in apostacie, Math. 21.44. such persons are abolished from Christ, Gal. 5.4. They are in the power of Satan, 2 Tim. 1. last. Their latter end is worse then their beginning. It had been better for them neuer to haue knowne the way of righteousnesse, then hauing knowne it to depart from the holy commandement giuen vnto them. They are as hatefull to God as dogges and swine, 2 Pet. 2.20.21.22. yea they may so order the matter, that they may fall into such a condition as there will remaine no more sacrifice for sinne.
Quest. But what should be the causes of their apostacie?
The causes of falling avvay.Answ. The causes are either without them, or in themselues. Without them, are ill counsell, as in the case of Ioash, and the effectuall working of Satan, not only to glut himselfe in the bloud of their soules, but thereby to worke scandall in the weake, and scorne in the wicked.
Within themselues, the causes are in some vnbeleefeRom. 11.20., in some pride and the vanitie of our owne conceits1 Tim. 6. vlt., in some couetousnesse and ambition, so in Iudas and Demas, in some the very leuitie and vnconstancie of their nature, in some the concupiscences of the lusts of the flesh2 Tim, 3., in some certaine opinions wilfully receiued, as iustification by the lawGal. 5.4., or that the resurrection is past2 Tim. 2.16.17.18., or the like: but the generall cause is the want of practise of that we heareMath. 7.. And therefore let him that standeth take heed lest he fall, or by any meanes be turned away from the loue of the truth2 Pet. 3. vlt. 2 Cor. 10.11., and the rather, considering that many that are fallen, had great knowledgeHeb. 6.4., and great ioy in hearing the wordMath. 1 3., and great affections to the ministerie, (for so had the Galathians to PaulGal. 4..) and besides they were such as in reformation did forsake the filthinesse of the prophanenesse of the world2 Pet. 1.20., and had a taste of the heauenly gift, and were partakers of the holy Ghost, and tasted of the powers of the life to comeHeb. 6.4.5..
Ob. But some one may say, they that are fallen finde no such miserie in their estate.
Answ. Thou knowest not what they finde: 2. They are for the most part cast into a spirit of slumber.
Ob. But they fall not from religion: for they are Protestants still, and not Papists.
Answ. There is a totall apostasie, and an apostasie in part: they fall from the sinceritie of religion. Demas did not turne Gentile, or the Galathians, nay the Pharisies that committed the sinne against the holy Ghost, did not openly renounce religion. And therefore let men take heed of falling from the simplicitie that is in Christ Iesus2 Cor. 11.3.. And thus of the second doctrine.
Doct. 3. Perseuerance may be obtained: a man may stand and hold out to the endRom. 5.1.2.3. God is able to stablish vs1 Cor. 15.1.. And the word of God is Gods power, not only to regeneration, but to saluationRom. 14.4.. The weapons of our warfare are mighty2 Cor. 10.4., and great power is made knowne in weakenesse2 Cor. 12.10.: onely beleeue, and vse the meanes.
Doct. 4, Much praier is a great meanes to obtaine perseuerance, and will preuaile: though this be not the onely meanes, yet it is an effectuall meanes.
Hovv many vvaies Christians may be said to be perfect.Perfect] A Christian man may be said to be perfect diuers waies.
1. In the cause or fountaine of holinesse: so good gifts are said to be perfect, Iam. 1.17. viz. as they are from God.
2. In respect of consecration or calling, so the word that some translate to make perfect, is translated by others to consecrate, Heb. 1.10. and 5.9. which
 importeth that Christ may be said to be perfect, because hee was separated or dedicated, or called to perfection, or hath a perfect calling.
3. In respect of acceptation, not in respect of operation, the Lord accounting our confession of imperfection for perfection.
4. In respect of parts, though not in respect of degrees: hee is perfect in that he hath holinesse in euery part, though not in such measure. Thus to be perfect is to be sanctified thorowout.
5. Comparatiuely, not positiuely, comparatiuely I say either with carnall men, or ordinarie hearers, or infants in grace. A Christian that makes conscience of all his waies, and can loue his enemies, is perfectMath. 5.48. in comparison of carnall men, that follow the swinge of their owne corruptions and affections, and so hee is too in respect of ordinarie hearers, that seeke not the power of godlinesse: and as for infants in grace, it is perfection to be of ripe age, or strong in the grace or knowledge of Iesus Christ1 Cor. 14.20. Eph. 4.12. Hos. 5.14.. And so the doctrine that is to be propounded is called the doctrine of perfectionHeb. 6.1..
6. In respect of truth, though not in respect of absolutenesse: thus hee is perfect, because he desires and indeauours after perfection, though in act he attaine it not. Thus vprightnesse is the perfection of a Christian after calling.
7. In respect of men or common estimation, and so hee is perfect t^at is vnrebukeable.
8. In respect of the end, and so he may be said to be perfect three waies.
1. In intention, because he sets perfection as a marke to shoot atPhil. 3..
2. In respect of duration, because he holds out to the end.
3. In respect of accomplishment, because hee finisheth what hee vndertaketh in godlinesse or mortification, he doth it not by halfes, or in some parts of it, for so to perfect is translated to finishAct. 20.24. Ioh. 4.34. and 17.4..
Here then we see what we must doe to be perfect men: wee must confesse conscionably our imperfection, we must liue in vprightnesse, and not in any grosse or presumptuous sinne; wee must finish what wee vndertake in godlinesse, and we must striue after perfection; wee must loue our enemies,What vvee must do to be perfect. and rule our tonguesIam. 3.1. and 1.5., and let patience haue her perfect worke: hee that doth this is a perfect man.
But a man shall neuer attaine vnto this vnlesse he labour for much knowledge1 Cor. 14.20., and to that end exercise himselfe in the word of righteousnesseHeb. 5.14., and besides a man must withdraw himselfe from the world, and deuote himselfe to sincerity, and especially a man must get a great deale of loue, for that is the bond of all perfectnesseCol. 3.1.4..
Full] The faithfull are said to bee full both in respect of the number of faithfull persons added to the ChurchActs., and in respect of the plentifull performance of the rich promises of God2 Thes. 1 11., and in respect of holding out till their course be fulfilledRom. 11.25., but I take it to bee meant of fulnesse in graces, and duties, in both, fulnesse is required, in duties fulnesse is taken for abundance, and sometimes for the fulfilling of some particular, office or charge, both are requiredAct 9.36. Phil. 1.11. Act. 12.14.26., in graces there is a fulnesse of grace and knowledge, and of zealeAct. 6.3.5.8., and of ioyIoh. 3.29. and 15.11.. The fulnesse of faith is the confidence, and vndaunted assurance of it, the fulnesse of knowledge is the largenesse of vnderstanding and discretion, the fulnesse of zeale is the power of words and affections, the fulnesse of ioy is the truth and contentment of it.
Hence wee may discerne the state of the soule of a Christian, it is like a vessell vnder the conduit pipe of Gods ordinances filling more and more, by the influence of Christ till it come to be brim-full.
Hence we may see cause to be greatly humbled, because our workes are not full before God.
Now if any shall thinke this doctrine of fulnesse to bee a doctrine of discouragement,
 he may note these things for remoouall of that obiection.
1. That it is a kingdome men labour about, and therefore should not think much if much be required of them. 2. We may fill spiritually, though we do not discerne it. 3. God requires not fulnesse at first, but by degrees. 4. That the Lord hath in many Scriptures, promised to help vs, against all tentations and impediments, whether arising from our owne weakenesse, or from without vs.
In all the will of God.] Caietan a Papist makes a stop at, all, and reads it, in euery thing, by the will of God, and deliuers the sense thus: That ye may be consummate, in respect of your selues, and full in respect of others in euery spirituall thing, by the will of God, that is, not by your owne merits (note that) but by the grace of Gods will.
But I thinke it should be read, as ordinarily it is read, and so I obserue that we should take counsell for the informing of our faith and reforming and perfecting of our liues, at the will of God.
Which serues for great reproofe, of the course of the most men, who are aduised and guided, either by carnall reason, or by the lusts and wils of their carnall friends, or the lusts and tentations of Satan, himselfe1 Pet 4.2. Ioh. 8.44., or the inclination of their owne flesh, how are worlds of men swayed by these or some of these, almost in all matters of religion: if reformation and the practise of the sinceritie of the Gospell, may not get the consent of their owne carnall reason, or of such and such friends, etc. then it must neuer be gone about. But contrariwise, we should learne to sticke to Gods will in all things, yea we should pray earnestly, that we might neuer be beaten from this Anchor hold, but that in all estates, in prosperitie and aduersitie, in life and death, we might constantly exalt the glory of Gods will, to yeeld it for euer our acknowledgement of soueraignty ouer vsPsal. 40.8.10..
Secondly, note here that wee must respect all Gods will, and thus wee are tyed to respect all the will of God, both in respect of knowledge, and in respect of practise, for we should labour to be made rich in all things, in all kinde of vtterance, and in all knowledge1 Cor. 1.5., we should be expert in the word of righteousnesse, accustoming our selues continually, to exercise our wits about discerning of good or euill out of the wordHeb. 5. vlt.: in practise we must haue respect to euery commandement of God, and as Dauid did, we must labour to doe all Gods will, and not bee like Saul or Herod.
This may serue first for confutation of the Papists, that will not allow the will of God to be the onely rule, though they grant it to be a perfect rule. But let vs detest that subtle distinction, and in the simplicitie that is in Christ Iesus, acknowledge that there is a will of God, for euery opinion and worke of euery man of God, sufficient to make him perfect in all knowledge, and euery good worke2 Tim. 3.16..
Againe, if this doctrine were soundly vrged thorough euerie commandement, it would ransack the hearts of carnal men, and then manifestly let them see,The arraignment of the ciuill honest man. the vanitie of their false and wilde presumption of ciuilitie and Gods liking of them and their honest meanings; It is true, they dare not say with their tongues, there is no God, but is there not such talke in their hearts? or could they not wish there were no GodPsal. 14.1.. They worship not Sunne, Moone, nor Stars, but is there in them that warmth of loue to the true God, that they can loue him with all their hearts and all their soulesDeut. 6.5.? where is that liuely knowledge of GodIo. 17.3.? where is that trembling feare of GodHab. 3.16.? where is that glorying in GodJer. 9.24.? where is that cleauing vnto GodAct. 11.23.? doe these men euery day commit their waies and their workes vnto GodPsal. 37.5. Pro. 16.3.? These men vse to wonder at Hereticks, but what formes of God do they conceiue in their heads euery day? They will not blaspheme God to his face: it is true; but will they
 not murmure from day to day at the worke of his hands1 Cor. 10.10.? They place no diuinitie in the signes of heauen, but will they not feare them neither? yet this is condemned as well as the otherIer. 10.2.. It is true, popish Images are gone out of their sight in the Churches, but are the pictures of the Trinitie gone out of their houses? They thinke indeed it is too bad neuer to come to Church, or to giue God no worship, but do they make conscience of cold seruice of God, or luke-warmnesReuel. 3.15., and continued hypocrisie? For may it not be truly said of them, their hearts almost neuer come to ChurchEsa. 29.13., sure their soules will be indited in the day of Christ, and conuicted too for obstinate Recusants; witchcraft, coniuring and charming is naught, they say, but is going to witches and coniurers and charmers naught too in their opinionLeuit. 20.6. Esay 8.19.20.? To forsweare a mans selfe they hold it somewhat vile, if it may be discerned, but what conscience make they of swearing in their common talke, especially by petty othes, and that which is not goodMath. 5.34.37.? They dare not curse God, but they dare curse the creatures of God by the name or iustice of God: they dare not talke directly against God, but they dare vse Gods titles without reuerenceDeut. 28.58.. They say they know all comes from Gods blessing, but doe they daily seeke the sanctification of their callings and the creatures by the word and prayer1 Tim. 4.4.? Wee all say the Sabbath must be sanctified, but who makes it his delight? we condemne labour on the Sabbath, but where are those Nehemiahs, that will restraine this monstrous abuse in the Citie, of hyring labourers on the Sabbath? Though for many Sabbaths one after another, they trauell hither many hundreds of all sorts from all parts round abount, and fill the streets almost with tumults on the Lords day, from the morning till neere the euening, yet none seekes the reformation of this matchlesse abuse, or if any would restraine it, how are they opposed? The Lord giue repentance to those that haue sinned this way, and lay not the toleration of this damned abuse to their charge. Men say at length, it is naught to keepe open shops, or ride to Faires on the Sabbath day, but who repents of the idle and fruitlesse spending of the Sabbath? wee doe somewhat in publike duties, but who cares for the priuate duties in the family on the Sabbath? Men will not openly raile on Magistrates, but how licentious are mens tongues in priuate? or when doe men affectionately pray for their superiours? where is a well ordered Familie to be found? Say that men forbeare bloud, fighting, doe they forbeare anger, enuy, frowardnesse, bitter words? They auoide whoredome, but doe they shunne filthy speaking and lust? Some men shunne drunkenesse, but doe they shun drinkings1 Pet. 4.3.? Open stealth is abhord, but secret fraud and deceit is common1 Thes. 4.6. Deut. 25.13.. Couetousnesse is condemned, but in worldlinesse men are drowned, and see it not. Gaming for pounds and hundreds is easily censured, but for crownes and shillings, it is no offence. Men make some conscience of false witnesse in Courts, but at home they make no conscience, of euill speaking, or suspitions, or censures. It may be men would be loath to be found guilty, of raising slanders, but yet men loue lyesReuel. 22., if any body else will inuent them: and they will go about with tales and spread themLeuit. 19.16., they will discouer secretsPro. 11.13., they will slaunder by scoffing or iestingEph. 5.4., they will report part of mens words, but not all, or not in their senseMath. 16.61., and for euill thoughts and worlds of contemplatiue wickednesse, these men neuer care for.
Obiect. But some may say, what neede all this adoe,Ioh. 2.19. 11. Obiections ansvvered. it is precisenesse to be so curious. Answ. It is true it is precisenesse, and wee are commanded to walke precisely for so the word is Eph. 5.15. And besides there is that necessitie of it, that vnlesse our righteousnesse, exceede the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharises (who yet lead a ciuill life) wee cannot enter into the kingdome of heauenMath. 5.20..
Obiect. But we see the most men and those too, men of great place and learning,
 doe not fauour such stricktnesse.
Answ. What then; such is the calling of a Christian that not many mighty, not many wise, nor many noble, etc. will be drawne to deny themselues that they may be saued: But yet we must enter in at that streight gate that few finde o.1 Cor. 1.27. Math. 7.
Obiect. But there is none can doe as you require.
Answ. In many things we sinne all, but yet Gods children doe endeauour after the holinesse required confessing their failings, and no sinne hath dominion ouer them, but now other men allow themselues in these euils, and thinke all is well, and haue no desire or indeauour to shew their respect to all Gods commandements, but venture all to Gods mercy, yea they will not forgo such sinnes, as they can leaue if they list, they will continue in sinnes that neither bring them pleasure nor profit.
Obiect. But might some one of the better sort say, what are wee bound to respect all Gods wils, and to be perfect and full, and to stand so too? who is able to beare it? is it not a heauie yoake?
Answ. It is true that all this is required, and hereby wee may see whither sinne hath brought vs, and what impotencie is now in vs: It is true also that a mortall condition is a hard condition. Our Sauiour meant some thing when he said striue to enter into the straite gate. Yet a Christian needs not faint, for it is all good worke, and he is to obey no worse a will then Gods will, and for no worse an end then his owne good, and with no worse company then all the Saints.
Obiect. But the multitude of my former sinnes troubles me, that I cannot with that comfort addresse my selfe to vndertake this strickt course.
Answ. This is thy comfort that in Christ there is a propitiation for all thy sinnes past: and now that God calls for this obedience hee will accept thee as righteous by forgiuing thee all former accountsRom. 3.25..
Obiect* But if all were forgiuen me yet I cannot doe all that God requires of me in his law.
Answ. Thou art not vnder the law but vnder grace,Rom. 6.14. thou art freed from the rigour of the law, so that thou extend thy desire and indeauour to all the will of God, thy perfection is but vprightnes.
Obiect. But in my best seruices there is much euill.
Answ. Christ makes request for thee, and by the vertue of his intercession, the euill of thy good workes is hid and couered.
Obiect. But I am so weake I cannot finde strength almost to doe any worke of God, much lesse all and to hold out too.
Answ. As weake as thou haue subiected themselues to all Gods wills, of which some now sleepe in the Lord, who from small beginnings grew to great abilitie in Gods seruice: what may not grace like a graine of mustard seedeMath. 13. grow to in short time, besides Gods ordinances are mightie through God, to fulfill our obedience2 Cor. 10.4.6., and God will shew his power in thy weaknesse2 Cor. 12.9., yea it is his couenant not only to require all his will, but to giue vs his spirit to cause vs to do themEzech. 36.27.
Obiect. But if I were set in neuer so good a case, and had for the present neuer so good successe, yet I feare falling away.
Answ. God will keepe the feete of his Saints1 Sam. 2.9..
Obiect. But I haue tried a great while, and I haue great helpes, and yet I finde not any such graces or fulnesse, or any such likelihood to stand.
Answ. It is one thing what is, and an other thing what thou feelest. 2. Consider whether thou hast not desired to doe all Gods will, and endeauoured it as thou knewest it, and that with desire to doe all perfectly, certainly the will, study, care, desire is accepted with God. 3. Consider whether God hath not
 let thee see all this while that thou art accepted as full and perfect, what sinne hast thou begged pardon for, and not obtained it? what dutie or grace is it that thou hast praied for constantly, and God hath vtterly denied to answer thee? If God haue accepted thee, why doest thou charge thy selfe falsly?
Ob. But I know not all Gods wils, much lesse can I doe them.
Answ. It shall be to thee according to what thou hast, and not according to what thou hast not; increase in knowledge, that thou maiest increase in grace. What shall I say? Consider but the recompence of reward, God will reward euery worke, and should wee not then doe all his wils? Though the taske be hard, and labour great, yet the pay and gaine is exceeding great: if we had so many wayes to thriue in our estates, wee would refuse no labour. Oh why should we not seeke the gaine of doing euery will of God?
Thus of the twelfth verse.




VERS. 13. For I beare him record that he hath a great zeale for you, and them that are in Laodicea, and them in Hierapolis.
14. Luke the beloued Physician and Demas greet you.


IN the 13. verse the zeale of Epaphras (which is the fourth thing) is described, first by the testimonie of Paul, I beare him record: secondly, by the quantitie of it, a great zeale: thirdly, by the person for whom, for you, etc.
The Apostle vseth all these words to set out his zeale, because he was desirous to haue him in great respect with his hearers, for he knew if he were once contemned or suspected, his doctrine would be vnfruitfull, and his hearers made a prey to false Teachers. Besides perhaps he found the people inclining to grow to haue enough of him, or to suspect him, or to lessen their regard of him.
I beare him record.] Note
1. That the witnesse of one Apostle is a sufficient testimonie and infallible, which should incourage vs to studie their writings, seeing we are sure to finde nothing but truth there.
2. That the best testimonie is not our owne record of our selues. Let thy neighbour, not thine owne mouth praise theePro. 29..
3. Godly Ministers should be ready and forward to preserue the fame of their brethren, and in particular willing to giue record for them: but if wee would haue record from others, we must not be idle, or ignorant, or corrupt, or scandalous. Oh the miserie of these times! How are insufficient or wicked Ministers written for to the Patron, to the Bishop, to the congregation, concerning whom there can be no sufficient testimonie in the day of Christ? And happy were it if no Church-men had their hands in such records: the Lord pardon and purge the sinnes of the sonnes of Leui.
Zeale.] Doct. Zeale is needfull in a Minister: now his zeale is two-fold, either for God, or for Gods people: A Minister should shew his zeale for his people, 1. By praying for them. 2. By painfull preaching to them, in season and out of season. 3. By protecting them against the reproaches and scornes of the world, striuing by doctrine not only to comfort them, but to wipe away the aspersions cast vpon them. 4. By earnest rebukes and admonitions: hee must crie aloud, and not spare, not suffering them to sinne. 5. By suffering either with them, or for them.
The vse is to excite zeale in Ministers, and to awake them out of that coldnesse or deadnesse, especially in teaching: it is a wonderfull scourge to the people, and a dishonour to the glorious doctrine of God, where the Teacher is without life or spirit, in the enforcing of his doctrine.
And is zeale good for a Minister? then sure it is good for the people too:
 indeed it is of exceeding praise in all sorts of men of what degree soeuer, neither will it be a misse here a little to consider more seriously of zeale, seeing there is much neede of it in the world, and there is much mistaking about it.
12. Sorts of wrong zeale.Now if men will be rightly ordered in their zeale let them looke to these things.
1. Let it not be a pretended zeale as in Ioash. 2. Nor a superstitious zeale as in PaulGal. 1.14.. 3. Nor a passionate zeale, onely for a fit, as in Iohn at his first entrance. 4. Nor a malitious zeale as in persecutors, that thinke they doe God good seruice in vexing men wrongfullyAct. 7.9. Gal. 4.17.. 5. Nor a wrong intended zeale, such as is the zeale of merit-mongersRom. 10.2.. 6. Nor a contentious zeale such as theirs that make needlesse rents in the ChurchRom. 13.13. 1 Cor. 3.3.. 7. Nor a secure zeale that is a zeale not raised by godly sorrow1 Cor. 7.10., or that is carried without care or feare of falling away. 8. Nor an idle zeale that is all words without workes: the word is rendred labour sometimes, and it is certaine true zeale is spent about good workesTit. 2.14.. 9. Nor an ouer-curious zeale, shewed either by sticking too much to the letter of ScriptureAct. 21 20.21., or by prying into or harsh censuring of the lesser faults of othersMath. 7., 10. Or a bitter zealeIam. 3.13.14., that spends it selfe in rayling and fiery reproches, railers seldome stand long. 11. Or an ignorant bold zeale such as was in the IewesRom. 10.2., Or lastly, a selfe conceited zeale, when men trust too much to themselues, and their owne iudgements.
True zeale hath in it six things.True zeale hath in it 6. things.
1. The affections of worship and spirituall compassion, it will not rest in the bare worke done, either of piety to God, or spirituall mercy to men, it cannot bee cold or luke-warme, in praying, hearing, preaching, admonishing, etc.
2. An ardent loue to such as feare God shewed by desire, mourning and feruencie of minde, towards them2 Cor. 7.7..
3. An vtter hatred of the wickednesse and prophanesse, of the world, with a willingnesse to shew and maintaine, according to a mans calling a spirituall opposition against it.
4. An affectionate desire after Gods house, and the puritie of it, thus the zeale of Gods house should eate vs vp.
5. A great wrestling within a man, against the corruptions of his owne nature, expressed by indignation, sorrow, confession, strong cries to God, and reuenge vpon the flesh.
6. The coueting of all spirituall things as the best things in the world.
Lastly, obserue that he saith much zeale or great zeale, which sheweth that men ought to thriue in zeale, as well as in other graces, howsoeuer the world iudge of it, onely let men looke to themselues according to the former rules, that they deceiue not themselues nor the world.
For you and for them of Laodicea and Hierapolis] I will not trouble the Reader with the topographie of these townes, it is out of question they were neere bordering cities. Only obserue here 3. things.
1. That the care of faithfull Teachers, and their desire to do good extends to other Churches, also hence they are compared fitly to starres that giue light not only to the orbe in which they are, but to places further of, and this good Ministers may do by praier, example of faithfulnesse and diligence, or by counsell or writing, or confirmation of doctrine, by preaching as there is occasion. And this shewes the worth of painfull and sincere Teachers: they are a great benefit, to the whole countrey, where they liue, and therefore they should be protected, and incouraged, by all them that would be accounted louers of their countrey.
2. That Ministers owe a special loue and care to the neighbour Churches, for as neerenesse of habitation increaseth the strength of ciuill bonds, so
 should it much more in spirituall.
3. That the care of other Churches should not cause men to neglect the flocke that depends vpon them, it is not sufficient that men preach somwhere God cals for an account of their stewardship in their owne charge, they must tend their owne heards, he were a strange Husbandman that would plow his neighbours field, and let his owne lie vntilled, it is vile corruption, to be intent when we labour for others, and remisse when we labour for our owne people.
Luke the beloued Phisition] There is some adoe amongst Interpreters who this Luke should be, but I incline to them that thinke it was Luke the Euangelist, but whosoeuer it was three things may be here obserued.
1. That the Church of God hath alwaies consisted of men of diuers callings: so as no lawfull calling is excluded, nor yet any only taken.
2. That Phisicke hath beene of ancient honour and vse in the Church, we see it here in the Apostles time, and it was long before also for there were Phisi^ions in Iosephs timeGen. 50.2..
4. Sorts of men may be reproued concerning Phisick,4. Sorts of men reproued about Phisicke. or Phisitions.
1. Such as totally neglect them, though they haue neede to vse them, yet our Sauiour Christ saith the sicke neede a Phisition o: 2. Such as are waiward and will not be cured, that is such as through impatiencie will not be ordered by this meanes, in the manner they should be. 3. Such as put their whole trust in phisicke, as Asa did, neglecting to seeke vnto God for helpe: yea it is to be noted in Asa, that his disease being but ordinary yet to neglect the Lord in it was a great sinne, for though God hath allowed phisicke as an helpe, yet it was neuer his meaning to robbe himselfe of his owne glory. 4. Such as will out of pride and nicenesse, be tampering with their bodies in phisicke, when there is no need, contrarie to that of our Sauiour Christ, The whole neede not the Phisition.
Now in as much as many times it is manifest, phisicke doth no good to the diseased we are to vnderstand three things, first that this may be the fault of carelesse and ignorant Phisitians. 2. That as we grow monsters in the world by sinning, ouer-passing the deedes of the wicked, so the Lord sometimes by bringing in strong and new diseases doth ouerpasse the skill of the Phisitians.
3. God for sinnes or triall may restraine the blessing vpon the meanes, which else would be auaileable.
The third thing I note, is that the holy Ghost giues this praise to a godly Phisitian, importing that a Phisitian should be a man sound in religion, and zealous for the truth, and knowne and beloued in the Church, for as it is certaine, godly and religious Phisitians may doe much good, in the dangers of their patients, so miserable experience shewes that popish and superstitious Phisitians, doe exceeding much hurt, by working vpon those opportunities, to seduce and peruert men.
And Demas] This is that Demas that afterward forsooke Paul, and imbraced this present world, from the consideration of whose estate wee may obserue three things.
1. That the vices of men by the profession of the truth may bee restrained when they are not cured. This mans loue of the world was in him, when he was at the best, but it was curbed and held downe, and so it is with many hypocrites, and therefore men should be warned and looke to themselues, that they be not deceiued, by taking the restraint of the outward practise of some euill, for the true mortification of them.
It is many times a great hand of God vpon vnsound hearted men, that at their best they are seene into, and not greatly esteemed, it seemes it was so with this man, for if we marke it the Apostle not only reckons him in the last place, but he names him also without any manner of praise, as if he would import
 that hee durst not commend him to the Churches. Wee should here learne what to doe towards such from the example of the Apostle.
Now if any would know more fully what is to be done, and how they should carry themselues towards such as they iustly doubt and feare not to be right, though they make profession: there are three rules to be obserued.
3. Rules for our practise concerning such as vvee suspect in their profession.1. Pity them, pray for them, and admonish them. 2. Commit not thy selfe vnto them, but bee well aduised before thou conuerse inwardly with them. It is true that the practise of this rule is strangly censured, when those kinde of people, perceiue themselues, not to be regarded so much as they would bee, for vsually if in discretion, men prooue before they trust, they are taxed of pride and haughtinesse: yet considering the vile hypocrisie that is in many, it is better to be so censured without cause, then to be beguiled by men that make their religion but a cloake to their owne ends.
The third rule is that while they stand and fall not into open sinne, thou maiest not traduce them, but conceale thy dislikes, till God lay them open, vnlesse greater danger might ensue by the concealement, for the Lord may make him sound, and giue him repentance, Paul doth not dispraise Demas here, as he doth not commend him.
Thirdly, we may in this man note the propertie of many hypocrites, they will not be discountenanced, they are vsually impudent, this man thrusts himselfe into the Apostles company, and will be commended to the Churches: he will haue a place though it be the last place.



VER. 15. Salute the brethren which are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the Church which is in his house.

HItherto of salutations signified, now the Salutations required follow, and these are particular, vers. 15.16.17. generall, v. 18.
The particulars concerne either Laodiceans, v. 15.16. or the Colossean preacher vers. 17. who is not onely saluted, but exhorted, or rebuked by intimation.
In the salutation of the Laodiceans obserue two things: first, the persons who are to be saluted v. 15. 2. A speciall direction for the open reading of two Epistles, v. 16.
The persons are the brethren in generall, and Nymphas in speciall, and the houshold of Nymphas.

Salute the brethren which are at Laodicea]

1. Christian curtesie ought to haue in it a holy remembrance of absent friends.
2. It is not vanitie or weakenesse, but may stand with singular gifts and graces of minde to be industrious and large hearted in the many remembrances of all sorts of Christians.
3. It is profitable that men of great gifts and place should preserue their memory with others, though it be but in these lighter complements of salutation, for many times it may inflame much affection to godlinesse, in such to whom they send their salutations.
4. God hath his choice amongst men, for here he takes notice of the brethren in Laodicea onely. God doth not driue in whole townes of men into the field of his grace at once, for as it was then in turning men from gentilisme, so it is now in turning men from prophanesse, the Gospell doth not worke vpon all promiscuously.
And Nymphas] This Nymphas was not a woman, as Ambrose and Dionisius, and Catharinus, and the glosse would haue it: for it is (...) in the end of the verse, his house, not her house.

This Nymphas it seemes was some eminent Christian, whom Paul would specially honour before the congregation, and so it shewes that a speciall respect should be had of such as did excell in gifts amongst such as professe the sinceritie of the Gospell.

And the Church that is in his house.]

By the Church hee meanes those in the houshold that feare God, whether they were women, or children, or seruants.
Now here first I consider of these persons, and then of the title the Apostle giues them in calling them a Church.
In that the Apostle thus with honor remembers the houshold of Nymphas, it shewes his singular vprightnesse, in that he can respect grace in whomsoeuer hee finde it, hee loues a good seruant as well as a good master, and can commend good order in an houshold as well as in a congregation. This should teach vs not to haue the grace of Christ in respect of persons, and hereby also we may trie our loue to Gods children, by examining our selues whether wee can loue such as can neither profit or pleasure vs, nor grace vs in the world. And this may be a great incouragement to the young and meaner sort, in that they may perceiue from hence, that if they get true grace, they shall be respected both of God and good men.
Now in that the Apostle cals this houshold a Church, wee may note,A religious familie is a little Church. The vses of it. that a religious and well ordered familie is as it were a little Church. Here in one familie is prescribed what all families should bee: this familie is called a Church, because his people were godly, and the word of God was read there, and praiers made to God, and Psalmes sung, and the younger sort were catechized and instructed.
Now doe we learne from hence that our houses are Churches? Then these things will follow.
1. That Gods worship and pietie must be set vp in them.4. Orders in the familie. How can they be Churches of God, if God be not serued in them?
2. All must be done therein order, and quietnesse, and silence, for so it is or should be in the Church.
3. Euill persons that are incorrigible must not dwell there, but must be cast out, Psal. 101.
4. The husband or master of the familie must dwell there as a man of knowledge, and wiues, children and seruants must obey as the Church doth Christ.
Againe, are our families Churches? Why then religious families are in a happie case, for then God himselfe will dwell there: so as a stranger comming to such places, may say as Iacob did of Bethel, surely God is in this place.
Lastly, should our families be Churches? Oh then woe vnto the world of prophane housholds. Should a Church be without sacrifice? and can their families escape Gods wrath, seeing there is neither praier nor pietie in them, but in stead of Gods seruice, there is cursing, and swearing, and lying, and chiding, and filching, and whoring, and railing, and fighting, and what not? The most families are very cages of vncleane spirits, where not God or good men, but very deuils dwell, they are very sties of vncleannesse and vnholinesse.
Thus of the 15. verse.



VERS. 16. And when this Epistle is read amongst you, cause it to be read also in the Church of the Laodiceans, and that you likewise reade the Epistle from Laodicea.

THese words containe a direction for reading, 1. of his Epistle, and that both priuately and publikely: 2. of an Epistle from Laodicea.

Of reading the Scriptures.In the generall we may obserue, that the Scripture may be read, it is mens dutie to doe it, tis a flat precept, Search the Scriptures, Ioh. 5.39. And this may euidently reproue the prophane neglect of the most herein, in this great light. Many are so drowned in carelesnesse, that they haue not yet so much as a Bible in their houses, and others though for their credit sake they haue gotten them Bibles, yet they reade them not.
This Epistle.] In that this Epistle may not be neglected, but must be read, it shewes that whatsoeuer is reuealed to the Church, to be a part of the word of God, it must be read: so soone as this Epistle is written, it must bee read of all Christians, which shewes that euery part of Gods word is to be read.
Now for the persons that must reade the Scriptures, it is here set downe indefinitely (of you) meaning of all sorts of people, which is in other parts of the word of God distinctly expressed. For 1 Tim. 4.13.15. Ministers must reade the Scriptures; and Deut. 17.19. it is required also of Kings, and Magistrates also, none are too good or too great to be imployed herein: young men must studie in the word, Psal. 119.10. so must women also, Act. 17.12. Priscilla was ripe in the knowledge of the Scriptures, able to instruct others, Act. 18 27. What should I say? Euery good man must reade the Scriptures, Psal. 1.2.
The vse may be to stirre vs vp to doe it, and to doe it constantly, for the same word of God that requires it to be done, shewes it should bee done frequently: we must reade all the dayes of our life, Deut. 17.19. and that daily, Act. 17.11. day and night, Psal. 1.2. they reade 4. times a day, Nehem. 9.4.
The profit of reading the Scriptures.And the rather should we be excited to this daily reading of the word, considering the profit comes thereby, it would exceedingly comfort vs, Ro. 15.4. It would be a lanterne to our feet, and a light vnto our pathes, Psal. 119. The word is the sword of the spirit, Eph. 6. and how can wee resist tentations with It is written, if we reade not what is written? and without reading we can neuer be expert in the word of righteousnesse, thereby we are made acquainted with the mysteries of the kingdome, and come to vnderstand all the counsell of God, it will teach vs the feare of the Lord, and keepe that our hearts bee not lifted vp, Deut. 17.19.20.
Quest. But what should be the reason that many get no more good by reading the word, and cannot finde any great profit in their reading?
The causes vvhy so many profit not by reading the vvord.I answer diuersly: 1. Some men are poisoned with the inclinations of Atheisme and securitie, they come to the word to obserue it, not to let the word obserue them.
2. Many seeke not a blessing by praier: whereas it is certaine the flesh will not of it selfe sauour the things of the spirit.
3. Men bring not an humble and meeke spirit, whereas vnto the fruitfull meditation of the word, a heart quiet and patient, and a minde free from pride and passion is requisite, Psal. 25.9.
4. Men lay not downe their cares and lusts, they haue marred their taste before they come, they doe not empty their heads, and separate themselues to seeke the wisdome of the word, care or lust will choake the word.
5. Men reade not all Gods word, nor doe they reade constantly, they will not wait daily at the gates of wisdome: to reade seldome, or by starts and here and there, will doe little good.
6. One great cause of not profiting, is the not seeking of the Law at the Priests mouth, that is, want of conference and propounding of doubts.
7. In many, vnprofitablenesse is the scourge of vnthankfulnesse for the good they haue found in reading.
8. In reading men do not minde their owne way, for if men did propose vnto themselues what sinne of their owne they might finde rebuked, and what directions might be collected out of that they reade for their liues, or did note
 how the word did offer comfort when they need it, they could not but finde many excellent experiences of Gods prouidence and power in the word, they could not liue in any sinne, but either reading or hearing would discouer it, nor could they goe long without some word of comfort when they needed it, yea they might obserue how God in the word they reade did counsell them too when they were in distresse, therefore let him that readeth marke, and reade for himselfe.
Lastly, the cause is in the most, that their hearts are not turned to God, and so the vaile is not taken away, 2 Cor. 3.16.
Cause to be read.] Obserue here,
1. That it is not enough to reade our selues, but wee must cause others to reade, by exhorting, incouraging, commanding, etc. especially Parents and Ministers should see to it, so should Magistrates also.
2. From the coherence note, that we must cause others to reade, when wee haue read our selues: it is vile hypocrisie for a Minister or Parent to vrge their children or seruants to reade the Scriptures, when they neglect reading themselues.

In the Church.]

Here we haue a plaine proofe for reading of the Scriptures publikely in the Church, we see it was anciently both required and practised. Adde for the further confirmation hereof these places, Deut. 31.11.12. Neh. 8. Luk. 4. Act. 13. And this may assure vs, 1. That publike reading is no inuention or ordinance of man. 2. That the people of God haue found in all ages great need of this helpe. And therefore they are miserably transported with humor, that so vilifie or neglect this ordinance of God, and it may bee iust with God, that thou shouldst not profit by reading at home, when thou carest not for reading in the Church. Thus of the reading of the Epistle to the Colossians.
Epistle from Laodicea.] Here is a great adoe among Interpreters to finde out what Epistle this was.
1. Theophylact thinkes it was the first Epistle to Timothie, which was written from Laodicea, another towne of that name, not this Laodicea before mentioned.
2. Some thinke Paul did write an Epistle to the Laodiceans, which was Apocrypha: and so Dionysius tels of a third Epistle to the Corinthians. Iacobus Stapulensis caused such an Epistle to bee printed, but Catharinus could easily auouch that it was a bastard and counterfet.
3. Some thinke the Laodiceans wrote to the Apostle, and propounded their doubts, vnto which the Apostle hath answered in this Epistle: and therefore required that his answer might be compared with their doubts: this is the most publike opinion.
But in the generall it shewes vs thus much, that wee must reade other good bookes as well as Scriptures.
Thus of the 16. verse.



VERS. 17. And say to Archippus, take heed to the Ministerie which thou hast receiued in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.

THese words concerne the Colossean Preacher, who is not onely saluted, but exhorted.
This Archippus (as it seemes) was their Pastor, ioyned with Epaphras, who was now at Rome with Paul: it is likely he was growne negligent in teaching, and carelesse, and idle.Painfull Preachers many times grovv idle.
Many times it comes to passe, that men that sometimes were painfull in their Ministerie, doe afterward^ grow slacke and negligent.
1. Sometimes from very discouragements from their people, either because they profit not, or because they weary their Teachers with indignities and wrongs: thus the very Prophets haue beene sometimes so tired, that they could haue been almost willing neuer to speake more in the name of the Lord.
2. Sometimes this comes from the corruption of their owne natures, they grow soone weary of Gods worke, or else hauing taken more worke to doe then they are sufficient for, they grow to neglect all, or else they are drawne away with the loue of the world, or else forbeare of purpose to preach often, lest they should be thought to be too precise; or else to winne applause, they set out at first with such a strife to seeme eloquent and learned, that they quickly spend their store, and then rather then they will be obserued to want, they will giue ouer preaching.
3. Sometimes God himselfe for the wickednesse of their liues casts a barrennesse vpon their hearts, and blasteth their gifts.
In this exhortation foure things may be noted.

1. Who he is that is exhorted, say to Archippus.
2. The matter charged vpon him, see to thy ministerie.
3. The reason by which it is vrged, thou hast receiued it of the Lord.
4. An explication of the matter charged by the extent of it, to fulfill.

Say to Archippus.] Here I obserue 7. things.
1. The sinner must be told of his sinne, Leuit. 19.17.
2. Such as offend publikely, must be told of it publikely.
3. Ministers as well as others may be rebuked, though some Clergie men are so sore and so proud, that they may not be touched: and many times it is a iust iudgment of God, that no man should rebuke them, that their sores might not be medicined, but like vnsauorie salt, they should be cast out of God. No mans learning or greatnesse of place can so protect them, but that they may bee told of their faults: it is too commonly knowne they can sinne as well as others, why then should they not be rebuked as well as others?
Doth Archippus need to be told? The Lord be mercifull to the Land and Church. There bee many Archippusses in the Church of England, had neede to be wakened with a loud trumpet of rebuke, and to be told of their faults, euen of their ignorance, silence, sloth, pride, couetousnesse, simonie, dissolutenesse, ambition, contempt of their brethren, and soule-murder of many kinds.
4. The people may put their Teachers in minde of their faults: as they ought to incourage them in well doing, so may they admonish them for what is euill. Therefore Ministers should striue so to liue, and so to teach, as their people should not haue cause to finde fault.
5. Ministers must be told of their faults by their people, with great reuerence, and heedfulnesse, and wisdome, according to that direction, Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a Father; here they must say to Archippus, not directly reproue him.
6. They must say it to him, not say it of him: Ministers ought not to be traduced behinde their backes.
7. He doth not threaten him if he doe not, which implies, he hoped their exhortation would speed: certainly tis a great praise to profit by admonition.
Take heed to thy ministerie.] This take heed hath in it three things.
1. Consideration, a weighing and meditation of the greatnesse of the function, of the dignitie of it, and the dutie also, with the accounts he must make to God and his high calling and the great price of soules, etc.
2 It notes diuers of the worthy qualities of a Minister, as care, attendance, watchfulnesse, aptnesse to teach, and diuide the word aright, discretion, to giue euery one his portion, diligence, gentlenesse, in not marring the doctrine with passion, patience to endure the worke and labour of his ministerie, etc.
3. It notes caution, and so Ministers must take heed both of what is within them, and what is without them, they must take heed of their owne diuinations, they must take heed of sloth and idlenesse, they must take heed of the obiections of their owne flesh, and the tentations of the Deuill, without them they must take heed of the new errors, that will daily rise, they must take heed of the sinnes of the people, with all the methods of Sathan in deuising, committing, or defending of sinne, they must take heede of mens fancies: and for persons they must take heed of hypocrites, and open aduersaries, domesticall vipers, and forraine foes, false brethren and profest Idolaters.
The vse may be for great reproofe of our sleeping watchmen, and blinde guides, that take no heed to their ministeries; Oh the woes that will fall vpon them, who can recount the miseries that the bloud of soules, will bring vpon them.
Which thou hast receiued in the Lord] A Minister is said to receiue his ministrie in the Lord in diuers respects. First, because it is Gods free grace, that he is chosen to be a Minister, Rom. 5.1. Secondly, because hee is inwardly called and qualified by God. Thirdly, because hee receiued his outward authoritie, though from men, yet by the direction and warrant of Gods word. Fourthly, because he receiues it for the Lord, that is to Gods glory, and the furtherance of his kingdome, ouer the mysticall body of Christ.
The Vse is threefold, First the people should therefore learne to seeke their Ministers of God. Secondly, Ministers should hence learne, neither to bee proud nor idle, not proud for they receiued their Ministerie of God, it was his gift not their deserts, not idle for they are to doe Gods worke. Thirdly, Ministers may hence gather, their owne safety notwithstanding the oppositions of the world, that God that called them will perfect them.
To fulfill it] Ministers are said to fulfill their ministeries two waies. 1. By constancie, holding out in it to the end, to fulfill it is to go on, and not looke backe, when they are at plow. 2. By faithfull performance of it with a due respect of all the charge they haue receiued of God, thus to fulfill it is to shew the people all the counsell of God, it is to rebuke all sorts of sinnes and sinners, it is faithfully to doe euery kind of worke, that belongs to their ministerie whether publike or priuate.



VER. 18. The salutation by the hand of me Paul, remember my bonds, grace be with you, Amen.

THere are 3. things in this Verse, a signe, a request, a vowe or wish.
The salutation by the hand of me Paul] To write with his owne hand hee calls the token in euery Epistle, 2 Thess. 3.17. Here two things may be noted.
1. The great care that anciently hath beene to prouide that none but the true writings of the Apostles should bee receiued of the Church, it should cause vs, so much the more gladly to receiue and read these Apostolicall writings.
2. It implies that euen in the times of the Apostles, Sathan raised vp wicked men who endeauoured to counterfeit bookes and writings, and to father them vpon the Apostles themselues, or other eminent and worthy men, this continued successiuely as a most diuellish practise in diuers ages after.
Remember my bonds] The obseruations are. 1. Gods children haue beene in bondes.
2. It is profitable to remember the troubles and afflictions of Gods children, and to meditate of them, for 1. it may serue to confirme vs when wee finde like hatred from the world. 2. It is an alarme to preparation and the harnessing of our selues against the fight of affliction when one part of the
 host of God is smitten, should not the rest prepare for the fight. 3. It will soften our hearts to mercy both spirituall and corporall. And fourthly, it may learne vs wisedome and circumspection.
Hovv many vvaies men remember the bonds of others.Quest. How should they shew it that they did remember his bonds?
Answ. 1. By praying for him to God. 2. By shewing like patience vnder their Crosses. 3. By constant profession of the doctrine he suffred for. 4. By a care of holy life, that they might striue to be such, as he need not be ashamed to suffer for them. 5. By supplying their wants.
3. As any haue beene more gracious, so they haue beene more streitened, and opprest by the wicked.
4. The actions of great men are not alwaies iust, a worthy Apostle may be vnworthily imprisoned.
5. The people should be much affected with the troubles of their teachers, and therefore they are farre wide, that insteed thereof trouble their teachers.
Grace be with you] By grace hee meanes, both the loue of God and the gifts of Christ, as he began so he ends with vowes and wishes of grace, which shewes. 1. That in God we haue wonderfull reason continually to exalt the praise of his free grace and loue.
2. That in man there is no greater happinesse then to be possest of the loue of God, and true grace, it is the richest portion, and fairest inheritance on earth.
When he saith (be with you) It is as if he said three thrings, 1. Be sure you haue it, be not deceiued, nor satisfied till ye be infallibly certaine ye haue attained true grace, and Gods loue. 2. Be sure you loose it not, neuer be without, it matters not though ye lose some credit or wealth or friends etc. so you keepe grace still with you. 3. Be sure you vse it and increase it, imploy it vpon all occasions, be continually in the exercise of it.
Thus of the whole Epistle.
There followeth a postscript or vnderwriting in these words.

Written from Rome and sent by Tichicus and Onesimus.

There is difference about the reading, some coppies haue not Tichicus and Onesimus in some Latine copies read, Missa ab Epheso. But the Greeke coppies generally agree that it was from Rome.
But it is no great matter for the certaintie of the reading, for the Reader must be admonished, that the postscripts are not part of the Canonicall Scripture: But were added by the Scribes that wrote out the Epistles. If any desire to be more particularly informed herein, he may peruse a learned Tractate of this argument published by Mr. Rodulph Cudworth vpon the subscription of the Epistle to the GALATHIANS.



(...).



FINIS.


