


THE BOOKE OF THE CREATION AND FABRICKE OF THE WORLD.


The first Chapter. The scope of all Cosmographie.
IT is a common Axiom among those, who are in any wise elevated in the contemplation of the worke of this frame of the world, that God who is the Author thereof, is of an immense power, wisdome, and goodnesse, and it is impossible that a man should doubt of his power, who beleeveth that created of nothing, and that the matter thereof is not eternall. If there be any man, to whom this power and goodnesse of God doth not sufficiently appeare, as not having yet considered well the commendable, exquisite, and most wise ornament, and disposition of this Fabricke, let him then diligently enquire with us, so farre as the contemplation of the workemanship it selfe may perswade him, and as farre as is lawfull to know by the Word of God, and the experience of things. For this is the maine scope we ayme at, that in handling Cosmographie, the infinite wisdome of God, and his inexhaust goodnesse, may be knowne, as well by the admirable concordancy of all things to one and the same end of God, as also by his inscrutable providence in the composition, whereby wee may bee continually rapt up to reverence and honour his Majesty, and to embrace his rich goodnesse. God grant then, that he will be pleased, to enlighten our darke understandings with his light, and direct our mindes, to the finding out of this true wisdome. It is so then, that this immense goodnesse of God, not able to containe his owne glory in himselfe, by reason of superabundant fecunditie to beget, was willing to create man, to whom hee communicated the same, and having conceived in his wisedome, to invest him a body, such as we see, as his first Creation sheweth him to be, Created and brought forth the world by his Almighty power, and digested it into that order, nature, and proportion, according to that Idea, which he from all Eternity had conceived, furnished with all parts necessary for the use of man, so created. Therefore the cheife end of the workes of God, and his primary intention, was to communicate his glory. The second was the creation of man. The third, the disposition of all things in the world, and the last drift of his intention, was the beginning of the worke. It behoveth him then, that will undertake the description of the world, to beginne at its first exordium, who would profitably extend it to Phylosophie.
Curious men were wont to aske, first what God did before he Created the world, how and where he was then, when as yet there was neither place, nor time? secondly,

why he did not Create the world many Ages before? and wherefore he did not make man so perfect, that he could not fall? to which frivolous and rash questions, he will easily answer who hath knowledge as farre as the Scriptures and the worke of God teacheth us of the sacred Trinity, and who shall diligently observe the true definitions of time, and place: but this impiety, and wickednesse of men are not worthy the answering; for it is religion, not to pry further into the hidden secrets and judgements of God, then he hath revealed unto us in his holy Word, and to dispute of things that are out of our element, and before the world was, and of things that are above our reach and capacity, is meere madnesse and folly: seeing they beget onely opinions, not sciences, and therfore can bring no true wisedome along with them: but rather produce strange doctrines, which obscure and darken the truth. Let it suffice us then, to know the truth o^ ^hings, so farre forth, as history and sense reveales them to us, and not according to opinions, whereof there is no science, and in so doing, we shall not erre, if we onely proceed in a right order.

Du Bartas.Thou scoffing Atheist, that enquirest, what
Th' Almighty did before he framed that,
What weighty worke his mind was busied on,
Eternally before the world begunne.
(Sith so deepe wisedome, and omnipotence,
Nought worse beseemes, then sloth and negligence.)
Know (bold blasphemer) that before, he built
A Hell to punish the presumptuous guilt.
Of those ungodly, whose proud sense dare cite
And censure so, his wisedome infinite.
God was not voyd of sacred exercise
He did admire his glories, mysteries.
His power, his justice, and his providence,
His bounteous grace, and great beneficence;
Were th' holy object of his heavenly thought
Vpon the which eternally it wrought.
Jt may be also, that God meditated
The worlds Idea, ere it was Created:
Alone he lived not; for his Sonne and Spirit,
Were with him aye, equall in might and merit.



The Prolegomena of the Fabricke of the World; The second Chapter.
Of God, the beginning and Workemaster of all thing^, according to the Platonists.
THE Platonists from the communion of the Species, which is discerned in things, and in the order, which appeared in them, have ascended unto that one, who is the first, and the beginning of all things, that is (according as Paul saith. Rom. 1.20.) that in beholding the disposition, and most adorned harmonie of all things, perceived after some manner in them, the existence of some Providence and understanding them to be the worke of some one; have attained so farre, that they were drawne, as well to the meditating of them, as to the affirming their Creation. First of all, in that they make the intellect or Spirit Fabricator of the world, out of this one, and distinguish him entirely from him, and make him another afterwards. Againe, in this, that separating the matter it selfe from all forme, they understand it not to be the generation of any Idea: for Ideas are species or formes, which can engender nothing but formes, and so

consequently must of necessity follow, that they understand it, not to have beene Created, but that it is eternall. The originall of this errour is, because they beleeved the matter was onely susceptible of formes, and that it had no communion with the formes of nature, and therefore have not onely once dreamed, that it was in the seedes of formes, and that the force thereof might be conducted by the worker. Whence they were at length constrained to constitute a certaine perpetuall, and a formall beginning out of the matter. By the same reason, they were induced to set downe one selfe-same out of one, and diverse from him, so cutting too neere the quicke, and spoyling this one, and primary beginning of all things out of this one, begotten of one, but distinct in Essence and propriety of nature, from whom alone as from the Father, first, and immediately depended the first modell of the worke of the world, and of the immediate vertue formatrix of things. The traces of which doctrine Valentine following added other fancies unto it, having found out a meane, whereby one, whom he calleth Proarch and Bythum, hath proceeded to the generation of the Spirit, and by some generation comming betwixt afterwards. Finally, deducing it to the Creation, aswell of the matter, as of all things, and even mixing therewith this prodigious Philosophie of Pythagoras, whom his disciples following, taught the same doctrine in obscuring and adulterating the truth in all parts; more then with old wives fables, but seeing the raving of these men, vanished of it selfe, we will rather have respect to the Theology of the Platonists, and to the originall of the world, the which as it hath more appearance of divinity, then all others, and seemeth to come neere to the Mosaicall truth: so likewise it may more easily draw us to true and sacred Philosophy. And therefore in propounding a briefe summe thereof, we will oppose against it a true narration of things drawne as well from the secrets of the holy Scripture, as from nature, confirming the one, by solid reasons, and rejecting the other wherein it strayeth from the truth; to the end that under the colour of a more divine Theologie, the eyes of understanding be not dazled in the search of this philosophy, wherein much falsitie is contained. That it may also appeare to all men, that among the Ethnicks, there was never Schoole so holy, no care so fervent, no wit so excellent, that by their owne industrie could attaine unto the truth of things; considering also the most Religious among them, even the Platonists themselves wandred astray, and ministred matter of erring to others. Wherfore let us give thankes unto God alone, who is the beginning, the Creatour, the Animatour, the Conservatour, and the end of the worke of the world: And that it pleased him by Moses, and his other Prophets to reveale unto us the Fabricke of the vniverse, the beginning and fountaine of all Philosophy and of all truth.
This then is the Sum of the Platonists Theologie, they lay downe three beginnings,One of good. Simonides being asked what God was after three dayes deliberation said, that the longer hee thought what God should be, the lesse he understood him.And Plato, It is hard to finde a God, but to understand him unpossible. The Spirit. in things divine, to wit, one Spirit and Soule which are called in their fables Coelus, Saturnus and Iupiter: following one another in order. The chiefest whereof is he, whom they make to be their first and Soveraine God. Him they call one, in regard of his most simple essence, and good by reason of his superabundant fruitfulnesse to engender, and facility to communicate himself: they describe him to be, neither being, nor essence, neither intellect, nor good, adjectively: neither to understand no not himselfe, neither to live nor to move, but to be above all these things, that is, the beginning and originall of being, and essence of intellect, and of intelligence, of life, and of motion, and the first and supreme of all things, that may be apprehended, beside himself. Again, that he hath nothing in himselfe, that he differeth from all things, that he consisteth in himselfe, and cannot be mixed with things sequent, and yet neverthelesse that he is present in all things, and that he containeth all things, and in like manner he is every where and yet no where, that is to say, he hath no neede of any place, neither is he finite, nor determined, neither within, nor without, but is the power of all things: yea the greatest power of all powers, and yet is not all things, but above all things.
That this one or good, produceth from his owne abundance, not by consent of any cogitation, not by any counsell, not by any determinate will, not being moved by any meanes, but abiding in his owne habitude, by his owne peculiar perfection, accompanyed by a potentiall act, or an efficacious power, internally hee created a beame, which hee dispearseth almost like the Sunne, that abiding one and the same immoveable, spreadeth its light, which beame in asmuch that on a sudden, it is made that which it is, abiding in him, it becommeth a being, but in that it is converted naturally to the Parent, whence it received its motion, it is made living, from

whom being fortified, and replenished with power, and perfection, is enriched by it selfe, of the same Intelligence, and becommeth a Spirit, and Intellect, and as well in respect to his Father, as to himselfe becomes Intelligent: but in as much as regarding himselfe, and being well acquainted with his owne power (how farre it is extended, as that from whence the vertue, which is the Genetrix of all taketh her force) defineth to himselfe his essence, which hitherto was indefinite, and indeterminate, and maketh it explicate, not in applying thereto his Spirit, or in passing it into his understanding, as a man doth in seeking that which he hath not, or desireth to know, that which he is ignorant of: but by a sole and perpetuall Act of his understanding, which never slumbreth. An Internall act, (I say) of his essence, having evermore an eye to his power, and knowing determinately things, which were hidden, without addition of Intelligence, so (I say) he conceiveth in his understanding the Ideas, or formative species of all things, which they call intelligible gods, and engendreth them in some sort. Distinguished by a formall reason, but the same in essence, as many existents One. I say not One, and many, but One many, as Parmenedes will have it, for the lesse numerous unity, as well in the thought, as in the soule, and as the Intellect is replenished with power received from One: so likewise being full of Ideas, or the formes of all things remaine one and the same with them, all beings existing in this, and them true, because they are immutable and eternall, which as Saturne suddenly swalloweth them up, as being engendred from him, and in him, suffering them to fall into the matter of things naturall and fraile: but keepeth all things in himselfe, and containeth without dissolution or partition, and possesseth all things in one, being present also to all things, and in all places, and yet neverthelesse is not in them, but they in him, as depending of him, and consisting in him. Now as the intellect is One many, that is one being of himselfe all, and in identity of essence, or an unity impartible, but distinguished in himselfe, according to the parts, abyding together, and inwardly by an alterity, is not partible in sequent being, but remayneth alwayes with it selfe, as one is not distributed into sequents. For it is not dispersed distinctly into many things, according to his internall alteritie, but procreateth one onely, according to the seminall reasons, being already by act, and power many together, to wit, the Soule, whereof we shall come to speake immediately. They tearme this intellect, the great God, the second God, and besides not any, but All God, from whom as from the primary, and sole all-being, all beings immediately obtaine their essence, and therefore all gods. They call this also the word of God, and an act produced from the same good, and againe the Image of God, because it imitateth the goodnesse of his begetter, with all his strength, by a copious and a fruitefull propriety to engender, which forces seeing he receiveth them from his Begetter, are yet so conjoyned to him, that it seemeth onely to be distinguished from him, by a certaine alterity. And Plato calleth it Idea, because it comprehendeth in its essence the Patterne and sole individuall species of all things. He calleth it both the cause and the maker of the world, inasmuch as being made the first being, it afterward becommeth the Parent of all beings.
The Soule.The generation of this Spirit is the Soule of the world, the third God, no otherwise proceeded from thence, then it from one, for it selfe is the word of the Spirit. It is the light streaming forth by the Spirit Creatour of the world, it is an act, and the whole, produceth outwardly, and the life, which quickneth things inferiour, according as it is enlivened by conversion to one, and as being which looketh to its begetter is made intellect: so the Soule also having regard to the Spirit is made reason from the same intellect. Light and truth evermore depending from thence. It being likewise of the same conjunction, but comprehending from thence inferiour things, one and many existing together, according to Parmenedes: One, because that under a Common intellectuall essence, it receiveth the reasons of all formes, and is replenished, when it hath regard to its Father the intellect, and so manie together, because that when it is converted to it selfe, it conceiveth a part by it selfe, the seminall reasons of all formes, and their number by order, and by their exceeding great fecundity to produce, being heated within: it animateth them, and giveth them a beginning of motion, to engender formes, in the matter, to wit, to Create sense to living Creatures, Nature Vegetative to plants, Motion to caelestiall bodies, and besides all this, whatsoever appertaineth to order, Species, Nature, proportion, and the motion of things. Therefore, the

Soule being so constituted into her essence, that as the one, and the Intellect, the same may also be in every place, and being present to all things, it cannot be otherwise, but it must ordaine all things in this visible world: dispose, vegetate, animate, and conduct every thing as it were in hatching it to its proper being and forme: yet the Spirit abideth, not in it selfe impartible, but in some sort to all bodies, and insinuateth it selfe into them in every place, that is according to the reason of every Species, but not distributed into parts divided by it selfe: for it is both according to its substance, and according to all its essence indivisible, and is both together in all places, and things, but worketh diversly, in exercising its forces by the seminall and specificall reasons, which are many, and make one resemblance, to wit, of Species in things of it selfe, and therefore though that in its essence it becommeth divisible: yet neverthelesse, that is done by a proper necessity of division (for it abideth alwayes wholly in it selfe) but it is because that the bodyes by reason of their divisibilities, cannot receive indivisibility, so that this partition of bodies, is not a passion, or necessity of the Soule.
The Platonists then ascribe to Divine things, these three beginnings in the same manner, as I have declared them. As for the first, they doe not agree, that it is an act of some One (as it ought not to be) or that it hath any action: yet they grant that it is potentiall, that is to say, that it hath the power to produce; retayning the simplicity of One. But that the Intellect, is is an act flowing from one. And that the Soule also is an Act from this same intellect, and that both the one, and the other, are differing from him, from whom they proceed. That he also who begetteth is greater, and better then he which is begotten of him: and therefore the intellect is lesse, and worse then the One; but that it is better, and greater then the Soule, and likewise the Soule then the Species, which it produceth. This is the meaning of all the Platonicke-Theologie, against which we will heere oppose that which is more true.


The Prolegomena of the Fabricke of the World: The third Chapter.
The true Confession of God, and of the Trinity drawne from the secrets of the Scripture.
THE Word of God proposeth unto us one God,God is that one Spirituall essence, whose being is of himselfe from everlasting to everlasting. Againe God is one essence most simple, pure and absolute, and being essentially indivisible is personally distinguished into the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and is therefore called Vnity in Trinity, and Trinity in Vnity, or Vni trinity, or Triniunity. under three hypostases (or subsistences) distinct but not divided, or separated in himselfe, every of them hath their proprieties, whereby it is distinguished from the other. Now therefore the Father, the Word, or the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost, which are one: not because they are of one essence in number, for considering that they are inseparable in himselfe, and all the hidden sciences of the Father, shineth in the Word as by an eternall generation, in such sort, that the Word is the shining Character and expresse essence of the Father, and this same essence shineth from the Father by the Word, in all the universe, the splendour whereof is the holy Spirit. These three have one and the same Deity, omnipotency, vertue, wisdome, goodnesse, will, and may in no wise be called three. Seeing their force, power, and action, is but one in number, as the Sonne teacheth us. Iohn the 17. speaking thus of his Father. All mine are thine, and thine are mine, besides, the Father that dwelleth in me he doth the workes, Iohn 14.10. and Iohn 5. My Father worketh hitherto, and I worke also. It is also most manifest by the sacred Scriptures, that the holy Ghost, the Father, and the Sonne, worke all things. And in the first Booke of Wisdome, The Spirit is there said to have replenished the universe, so that of all these three, there is but one common operation, but according to their personall propriety, proceeding otherwise from the Father, otherwise from the Sonne, and otherwise from the Holy Ghost. Therefore, we doe not set downe three Gods, nor three beginnings of things, as Plato doth, but one individed, according to himselfe, present in all places, of whom, by whom, and for whom all things were created, existing by a triple reason: but one and the same essence distinguished into three

subsistances, or Persons, but which differ not in essence, neither are divided among themselves, neither by lesser consequents, are worser in order, as the Platonists make him, but all equall in Divinity, Eternity, Power, and efficacy; the Propriety of whose essence is neither lesse nor more then the other, but equally necessary to the Creation of all things. For in every worke three things are necessary in a worker, Power, or beginning of the internall Act, the Conception and the Disposition of the Act, or the Internall worker, and the issue of the Act. Even as in fire, the beginning of the heate, is the nature, or forme of the fire, the act of it, is the internall heate. The Action, or act proceeding is the heate, which commeth out of it. And the Soule is the beginning and motive power, it is the disposition, or will to move, it is finally the motion it selfe. But because that God hath not created the world, either by chance, or through ignorance, searching the meanes how, or wisedome, but with a great deale of Prudence, and wisedome, it cannot be denied, but that from all eternity, he had conceived some certaine determinate modell,The Creation of the world peculiarly belongeth to God the Father. and all the Idea's of his workes, to which we give not beginning in the Word, as Plato doth, but to the Parent of the world, considering that whatsoever the Sonne hath, he hath it from his Father, and for this cause we will place the Father first, as the Seminary reason of the world, the Sonne, the force vegetative, the Holy Ghost, the vertue Productive, and animative, the which with him proceeding from the Father, and being shed out by the Sonne, it passeth into a worke. So, the Holy Ghost, which is abounding in the Father, awakeneth this Almighty and inexhaust fountaine of the Eather, and the immense fecundity of the Sonne encites him (as it were) to budde forth, and by the quickning spiration of his holy Spirit, the Father begetteth the world, by a meane and seminall reason, having conceived it, gives it to his Sonne, as he who properly expresseth the Father, from the Sonne already by act the world is brought forth, but by the meanes of the Holy Ghost as being the Chariot, whereby the world spreadeth it selfe, through its parts, and is animated in all things according to the proper Idea of every one of them. Now the Spirit accompanyeth the worke alwayes, and in all things, to the end that that which is conceived by the impregnant activity, and formed by the quickning motion thereof, is also conserved by the same: It accompanies not then all things in such sort, that therefore it is divided into parts, but indivisibly, and in the same manner as the Platonists call it, the Soule of the world to be present in all things, and is not so severed from them, that it becomes, either the Soule, or the forme of every one, but abideth in himselfe, and in all things present, and divers, and separated from all, hee formeth all things at once by the Power of the Father, by the Act of the Sonne, every one in his essence, and forme, accomplishing by degrees, both the essence, and the matter, according to the reason of the modell, and afterwards appropriateth all things, according to the law, conceived of the Father.



CHAP. I. Of the Fabricke of the World. Of the Wisedome of the Creatour.
HAving purposed (Friendly Reader) to treate of Geographie, it is requisite for me, as the weightinesse and excellencie of such a worke requireth, to apply all the faculty of my understanding thereunto; that I may represent before the eyes of evidence, as well the species, as the order of all things created: that by this meanes I might the better conduct and leade the Reader to the contemplation of the universe, and the knowledge of the Fabricke of the world, for so it is written, O Lord how manifold are thy workes, in wisedome thou hast made them, the earth is full of thy riches! Now it is wisedome to know the causes, and the ends of things, which can never be better

knowne, then by the most excellent ordained frame of the world, drawne out by this great, and most wise Architect, according to the causes expressed, and noted by order. For as in creating, he gave to all thing their nature: so they also immediatly effected that, which was enjoyned them, and shall so continue, till the consummation of things. And therefore no thing is more sure, then to search out diligently his worke, as it hath beene wrought by this same Authour, and it hath beene left unto us in Writ by his holy Spirit, by the Ministery of Moses, faithfull in all his house. For we cannot so easily erre, in assigning the cause of things, when as we shall contemplate; the primarie, and principall lawes of nature, commonly knowne, and that we describe the like effects. So then nothing is more certaine, then that all things ponderous, fall downewards, and all light things ascend upwards, that nothing, which hath motion in the world is infinite, and that which is the subtilest, evaporeth from the grosser, whence we collect that heavie things, meete all together in the Center: that the world hath a speciall forme, or round. And the order of all its parts, and the difference of its subtiltie, and mobilitie. By the order of things, their causes, and their ends being demonstrated, we shall easily perceive, and soone convince the errors of the ancient Philosophers, touching the beginning and causes of things, that by this meanes, the truth may be firmely fixed and setled in the minds of men, to the end they may not be shaken nor seduced by diversitie of opinions, and ambiguous reasons, whatsoever appearance of perswasion they may have. And so by the site and nature of the Coelestiall bodies, marvellous things shall be declared, which as yet have not beene well sought into, nor well knowne: so there are many things yet to this day desired in the knowledge of the Elements, which by Art, and the diligent studie of the Learned, might be cleared by adding to the Fabricke of the world; the observations and lawes of many Learned men dispersed in divers kingdomes' and so in fine, some matter of truth may be found out; touching the increase, and decrease of the Moone, the admirable flowing and ebbing of the sea, and of the causes thereof, and so the search of things which concerne the art of Navigation, may be enlarged, wherein it seemes, some things of great consequence are yet deficient. And so by this meanes all Geographie might be accomplished, and made perfect, to the great good and commoditie of Princes, and of the whole world, the necessitie whereof is such, that without the helpe thereof, Merchants cannot have any accesse into strange and forraine countries, which might make them familiarly acquainted one with another; neither Princes themselves know well the large and long extent of their Realmes and Dominions: some yeares since, I have begun this Work in the description of the neighbouring parts most desired, before whom now, I set forth the first Tome of our Geographie, with the Septentrionall and Sarmaticke tables: being minded (God willing to describe by Tomes all the universe, according to that knowledge, which God hath given me.


CHAP. II. Of the Fabricke of the World, Of the beginning of the Creation, and of the matter created. The first Day beginneth.
A Little before the time of Moses, Saturne was borne, and before him other gods of the Gentiles; who being given to study naturall things, were the inventers of divers things, and sowed many heresies, which afterwards falling into the hands of Philosophers great disputers of the beginning of things, and of great variety of opinions, among themselves, produced divers sects: Moses therefore giving a true narration of these same beginnings, opposeth this most ancient veritie, against all their errors, and convinceth them taking his beginning from the first matter of things, whereof they had forged many leasings in their braines, and ending the whole Fabricke of the world, he speaketh thus in the second and fourth Chapters, of Genesis: These are the generations of heaven, and of earth, and not those, which the folly of men hath invented.

Herein wee will follow the text of Moses, considering it particularly, and diligently, according to the gift of grace which I have received from the Lord. In the beginning (saith he) that is, when as yet there was nothing created, and that the divine Majestie, by the counsell, and determinate lawes proposed to begin the Creation. In the first point (I say) and moment of their existence of things, which yet were as nothing, but a beginning onely of things, without any forme, or condition of things, or of existence, even (I say) in the moment of time, he begun to create: and after God created without any prepared matter, by his immense, and incomprehensible power this huge masse, which was without forme, rude, and confused, out of which hee afterwards drew all the parts and members of the world. In this creation of matter, as also in that which ensueth, three things were necessarie. The fruitfulnesse of the Paternall power, the effectuall and pregnant power of the Word, and the force fructifying, conceiving and quickning of the holy Spirit, for the matter extracted had the beginning of its existence from the power of God, as from a Seminarie reason, by the fructifying vertue of the holy Spirit, both formed it, and brought it into being, even as the fruit in the belly, and being at last hatched by the power of God, quickning, and nourishing, the same, is made manifest. So the onely God Almightie, conceived, formed, and brought forth into the light, out of nothing in the vigour of his triplicitie, and without the assumption of any subject, the matter of all things, which were to be created, not by the operation first of the Father, afterwards of the Word, and finally of the holy Ghost; but all working, and conspiring jointly together inseparably, and uncessantly, among themselves in the unitie of the divine essence. Now this which is said, In the beginning, ought to be so understood, as Esdras doth, lib. 4. Cap. 6. saying: O Lord thou hast spoken from the beginning of thy creature, saying, Let it be made, etc. Now in that hee saith from the beginning of the Creature, he sheweth sufficiently, that this beginning or originall, ought not to be understood of the Son of God, but of the first moment of the Creation, which is also manifest, as well by the preposition, as by the construction of the words, In the beginning, and Creature, for to joyne this verbe; Thou hast spoken, with that of creature, the thing it selfe contradicteth it: seeing the creature was not yet in being, to which God might speake. Moreover for as much as Moses (as I have said) wrote deliberately against the Gentiles, setting downe a beginning to the world. This beginning can be no otherwise understood, then as wee have interpreted it: for if he had said, to have created in his Sonne (which is also true) and meaneth thereby no other thing, whence then can we gather an argument against the Eternity of the world, or of its matter, seeing the beginning it selfe is eternall. Moses speaketh simply of a temporall beginning, and not otherwise.
By the heaven and the earth, he understandeth not two distinct and different bodies, signified at this day by the names of heaven and earth, for then neither heaven nor earth had their beings, according to their proper forme, but that heaven was made the second day, and the earth last appeared, the third day; the waters being separated, afterward the other parts of the world, created of this Primative masse were reduced into order. By the heaven and the earth then, he understandeth figuratively, this first masse without forme, wherof the heaven and earth were formed. Moses then had to do with the Gentiles, to whom he testifieth, that the heaven and the earth which we behold had heretofore beene created of God, as he will shew afterward, and useth names and things knowne, the better to leade men to the consideration of their beginning. For Moses meaning was, to pull out of all humane understandings, all Rapsodies of Philosophers, and their false doctrine, touching the eternitie of the world, and its matter, and by this way to submit it to the glory of God, as he silently sheweth in his second and fourth Chapter. But, he taketh the heaven and the earth figuratively for the matter of them. These Epithites following demand it, Thohu and Bohu, which hee attributeth to the same masse, created first of all: because it was without forme, vast, void, solitary and vacant, and doth not adjoyne those Epithites to the heaven and earth, but to the earth onely, carrying the Reader by this meanes, from the contemplation of perfect bodies, to their primarie matter, and hereby understandeth, not the earth onely in her forme; but this indigested and deformed Chaos, using neverthelesse the word earth, because it better resembleth the condition of the earth, when he continueth the description of this masse, and calls it The Hom, that is to say an Abisse. And so by degrees constraineth the understanding of a contemplating man; yet being void of all

determinate kinde of things, for the contemplation of the first matter of heaven and earth: neverthelesse in this word Abisse, he painteth out some certaine kinde of forme, of this primarie matter, to wit, that it was a liquid and fluid matter, and that bottomlesse, as that which in all things, was like and equall unto it selfe, as water to water, and clay to clay. Also in the 38. Chapter of Iob, verse 38. The first matter is called Aphar, that is clay, which God in the beginning reduced to a sollid earth. It is also called by the most ancient Graecian (...), that is clay, the first matter of all things. And againe, Chaos, from (...), because it is fusible, by which its first forme was undoubtedly made knowne unto them, and to all the world, from the first Hebrew Fathers, and Moses. That masse then first of all created of God, was clay, and a fusible matter, not of divers natures, but of one simple and undividuall substance and forme, having in it selfe the seminary vertue of a terrestriall, waterish and a coelestiall forme, and of all things which God was to forme out of this masse.


CHAP. III. Of the Fabricke of the World. To what end this Chaos was created, and of the foundation, and forme thereof.
NOw after that all things were made, all men may easily understand the end, which God proposed touching the Chaos, to wit, that he might divide it, and forme out of it, as many species of things, as he from all eternitie had pecreed to be necessary for the Oeconomy and government of the world, and gave and establish to all things at once, their force and law, that it might abide immoveable to the end for which he ordained all things. But, for as much as hee created all other things for mans use, and subjected them to him, till the time shall come when as hee will transport mankinde into his heavenly mansion^; as Paul teacheth us in the 8. of the Romanes. This most wise Architect, created and constituted them to such an order, that by a submissive service and a sweet harmony, they should all be serviceable to man: which harmonie chiefely consisteth herein, that the superior causes rule over the inferior, and that all effects passe the chiefe causes by the meanest and lowest. Afterward also in this, that there is a mutuall inclination in all things, according to the consequence of causes and effects and as it were a certaine love, whereby inferior things respect their superiours, as their Benefactors: and likewise the Superiour the Inferiors, as receiving also some benefit from them. And albeit it commeth to passe in these two conditions of nature, that there is some contrarietie and strife found in the meaner species of things: Neverthelesse, every one of them agree well together in their order, and have their recourse to the primary cause, as to their center, and yeeld their service, both to God their Ceatour, and to man: So that all things according to their proper office, agree together among themselves; but of these things we will speake more at large hereafter. For the present, I will advertise the Reader to observe well and diligently in the creation of things, to wit, that thou maiest know by what order, of what things, and how, and by what meanes God worketh; and so thou shalt learne that which ought to be first in all the government of nature; and that which ought to be last, what the causes of workes are, what the generations of all things are, and also the definition of things and their natures, their simpathies, and antipathies, their differences in strength, and debilitie, their nobilitie, and ignobility, what is of durance, and what in corruptible, with many others. For whatsoever may be disputed of the nature of things dependeth on their generations and primary creation. He that can comprehend let him comprehend. There are many things that are very difficult, in the searching of them out: neverthelesse, man by a deepe speculation can reach high, principally, when after having invocated the holy Ghost, his maine end and search be, to glorifie God in his workes. Thou maist here also well observe, the meaning of things naturall, and another order in the worke of nature, than that which the Philosophers have caught, which was impossible for them to conceive

by their naturall reason, the beginning of the world, in such sort, as Moses hath described them unto us: but let us put our Chariot againe into the right way. The Chaos being created, first it is to be thought upon, how God first of all did dispose thereof. Above all things it is necessary, first of all to assigne it a fixed place, for wee see that the heaviest of all bodies is the earth, to which this masse hath a better resemblance than to the heaven. Now had it not bin in a fixed place, it might easily have fallen into an infinite of pieces, the weight alwayes urging the motion. But to the end he may here marke well the beginning of things, let him well observe, that God of the most basest and grosest Element, of the most illfavouredst, and without any forme beginneth his creation by little and little, mounting up to the highest, to the noblest, and to the divinest things. Observe likewise, he beginneth with the most solid, and most firme bodies, that the things which ought to be prepared appertaining to the life and perfection of creatures, which are all fraile, and changeable, to the end (I say) that all these things might have a firme subject to which they might be fastened and made firme: he assigned them a place for the earth and the Chaos, to wit, a point in the midst of the void, upon which it rested, and beyond which it is not permitted to move. This is the greatest miracle of all nature, surpassing the capacitie of man, and humane credence: were it not that the wheeling course of the starres, and the navigations round about the world, did not manifestly witnesse the same for who could beleeve, that so ponderous a weight could subsist hanging in the midst of the Heaven? and yet the truth thereof makes us beleeve it, who is hee that could understand, that so huge and so heavie a masse can subsist, and without any supporter settle it selfe? What man is he that can imagine that it hath a foundation there where it hath no underpropping? Rightly did God then disputing with Iob, in the midst of his anguish demand of him, if he understood where he laid the foundations of the earth, he should declare it, Iob 38.4. Here is the inscrutable wisedome of God, and his incomparable power, therefore it is not possible for a man to give a sound reason touching this goundwork, but onely the will of God, who followeth the causes and reasons which are hidden in himself, and whom all things must obey. As he willed, so it was done, his will ministers him matter for the framing and forming of all things, his will from one sole body, from one onely forme, fashioneth many of divers formes; from that which is without life, and without any activity, hee produceth it immediatly into force and vegetative vigour, into life, motion, sense and intelligence, and which is more, all things which he created, are so tied, and agree together, by a mutuall love, whereunto all things tend, that hee causeth them by the sole impression of his will, to have a naturall affection, and a certaine inclination to that dutie which is imprinted in them, according to their Creators will, by the harmonious consent of the Ideas in the divine thought: So this Chaos, and above all that which is the heaviest in it, to wit, the earth desireth uncessantly the point which is assigned to it in this vacuitie, by an impression from the will of God, and is moved towards him, by a certaine desire in its ponderositie, till that it hath obtained a like resting place on all parts, supporting and sustaining upon it, the other parts of the world, as upon its shoulders. This then is the nature of the earth and so likewise of the Chaos, and the sympathy which it hath with all other creatures, which he subjecteth to all in the seate, which hee hath appointed to it, which is the Center of the world, and being setled firme round about the Center, resteth and beareth up all other things; and seeing it beareth up all other things, and seeing it is most imperfect, it seeks help and blessing from on high, to produce that which it is enjoyned to do. In this point then the Chaos resteth necessarily, because the Lord hath appointed this for its place of repose, and as a bound for the motion of its weight, which bound and limit it cannot nor will not passe; because the Lord hath spoken, it must be so: and this nature, this Sympathy is given to it from the Lord, as a necessary sustentation of all the Species, and individuals, for which reason, David saith Psal. 104.5. He hath laid the foundation of the Earth upon Bases, that it should not be mooved for ever. And Psal. 136.6. O give thankes to him that stretcheth a out the Erth above the Waters. Now because this Chaos is the mother of all Creatures, not only of the inferiour bodies, but also of the caelestiall, and of all things Created, as we shall heare anon, we ought not to doubt but all the Elements, yea, all the Heavens, up to the very highest, beare the nature of their mother, some more, some lesse, and have some weight for to encline downewards,

towards the midst, and exercise their Sympathy, as well towards the Earth, as among themselves, by a certaine cherishing, a gentle touching, and as it were by a feeling. Now experience also teacheth us that the weightiest things, by nature draw more easily, and neerest to the Center of the World, and the seate (I say) of ponderous things: Whence proceedeth a most certaine reason of order in the universe, that the things which are lightest, and subtilest have the superiour place, and not onely that, but also the Shpaericall figure of the Chaos, and of the whole world, take from hence their Sourse, for seeing the nature of the Chaos was floating, and so altogether, and that all sides of equall vertue and facility, was borne by its weight to this resting place, so that all the extremities were equally distant from the Center, and subsisted from every part of the Center with a like weight: for if the distance hereof had beene unequall from the Center, more weight had laine upon the one side of the Center, than upon the other. Suppose that in this Cube the Center be a, the extremities, b c d e and that thou beholdest b out of d, to the Angle d
cubea b c d
in the middle side, the line d a is much longer, than the line c a or e a. The matter then which should rest upon the Center, according to a b or d a would have much more weight upon it, then that which is according to c a, or e a the weight then of d a wou^d beare it downe, and it shoving it forward, it would fall topsie-turvie, upon c a and e a till it came together into a like weight, that is to say, of alike distance from the Center, the matter being liquid and sleeting. The Chaos then must necessarily consist of an equall weight under the Sphaericall figure, and no figure else could be so convenient for the world, since that the supreame and most perfect bodies, ought to march about the circumference of the Earth, for the helpe of generation by a perpetuall circumvolution. Iohn de Sacrobosco and some other Mathematicians, approve best of the Sphaericall figure of the Earth, by some apparent accidents: but it is much more excellent, to demonstrate every thing from the fountaine it selfe, and out of the causes (I say) because the sollid science proceedeth by this way. It is cleere then, that the point found out of these things all ready prooved, ought to be called the Center of the world; because of the weight thereof, and the setling place of all ponderous things. Now Physitians call it the lowest of all, and the other the highest, in affirming that the motion towards the middle, is made downward, but from the middle upward, and that rightly, because that ought to be called Supreme, which is most perfect, and which may conferre upon others some more excellent nature, but the lowest is the farthest from off them, as well in place, as in condition,
The first world yet was a most formelesse forme,A confus'd heape, a Chaos most deforme,A Gulph of Gulphs, a body ill compact,An ugly medley, where all difference lackt,Where th' Elements lay jumbled altogether.Where hot and cold, were jarring each with other;The Earth in Heaven, the Heaven in Earth was plac'd.Earth, Aire, and Fire, were with the waters mixt,Water, Earth, Aire, within the Fire were fixt,Fire, Water, Earth, did in the Aire abide,Aire, Fire, and Water, in the Earth did hide.For yet the immortall mighty Thunder-darterThe Lord-High Marshall unto each his quarterHad not assigned, the celestiall ArkesWere not yet spangled with their fiery sparkes.All, all was void of beauty, rule, and life,All without fashion, soule and motion quite.But this dull heape of indigested stuffeHad doubtlesse never come to shape or proofe,Had not th' Almighty with his quickning breathBlowne life and Spirit into this lumpe of death.



CHAP. IV. Of the Fabricke of the World. Of the nature and forme of the Chaos, or primary matter.
MOses sheweth most clearely; that the light which was Created out of the Chaos in the beginning, was the principle of al things made by God, producing out of the same all the workes of the sixe dayes: now his first proposition argueth evidently, that there was nothing Created by God before this matter, otherwise he would not have constituted therein the beginning of the Creation. Seeing then, that all things are made after this manner, and out of it, to search as is requisite the originall of nature, and to constitute the beginnings, according to the truth of naturall philosophy. It is necessary above all things to consider most diligently, what this primary matter was. The heathen Philosophers troubled themselves much in the consideration of this matter, they durst not deny, but that it was, and yet would in no wise grant it to be essence, they said it was neither quantity, nor quality, and that it had neither of them in it, and so made it naked of all quality and forme, when they testified it to be as a meere Privation. And some of them proceeded so farre in their impudency and temerity, as to say, that God laboured to subdue this matter, and to make it subject to formes. What can be said more foolishly, or spoken more villanously against the omnipotency of God? to wit, as if he, who was able to make and to induce formes elsewhere (much more noble then the matter it selfe, as they would have it) could not also Create a a matter, which he himselfe might subject to all the worke? But such is the obscurity and blindenesse of humane understanding, that without the guidance of the word of God, it cannot, as it ought, comprehend and know any thing certainely, of that which is so farre from sense; and which hath its originall Divine: Likewise this is a very great folly, to goe about to measure and search out of their shallow braines, the most deepe mysteries of nature, her primary originall (I say) and the extreame Abysse of the counselles and workes of God. Nature her selfe can teach us, that all things were created of a matter, but who dare be so bold, as to obtrude for Oracles, the manner and conditions of that matter, which are no where showne, either by Gods word, or any footestep of nature, yea which are contrary to the manifest Word of God? they spoile the first matter of all forme, and of all condition, and kinde of being, in such sort, that it cannot be said, what way it can subsist in it selfe. But Moses calleth it in Expresse words, Earth, Water, and the Deepe, before that the concreate forme, or any new Species was wrought upon it. And in Ecclesiastes 3.20, It is called Aphar, that is, clay, whence it appeareth, that the same had from the beginning some kind or forme of Earth and Water, and consequently greatnes and weight. But some one may object, that Philosophers to distinguish betweene things considered the matter by it selfe, and likewise the forme by it selfe, to teach more evidently the causes of things depending on qualities and formes, not on the matter, as also the generation or production of the kindes, which is wrought by the accesse of the forme to the matter, which is well said; and we also our selves affirme the qualities, and formes to be active, and begetters of Species, but not the matter voyd of them. But herein they erre grievously in two things, first of all in this, that ascending from the last and most perfect forme to the first of all, which can be imagined, they separate them all equally from the matter, and hold them as accessors, and induced from elsewhere, so that at length they leave the matter naked, whereas according to the true production of Species, described by Moses, it is not lawfull, to ascend above the definition of the Chaos, signified by Moses, for this having beene the first beginning of things, in this all things are finally resolved, according to Ecclesiastes. Chap. 3. Whether could they amount higher paring that, seeing they cannot proove it to be compounded? Secondly, they faile yet more grievously in this, when as they make all formes so estranged from the matter, that they deny it to have in it any seminary vertue,

or small note, but will have it to take its primary beginning elsewhere from without the matter, which we impugne, seeing it is manifest out of the generation of the world, and divine testimonies, that the primary matter hath had its owne forme, quality and quantity, and that out of the forme thereof, the formes of other things did proceed. Moreover, it is most absurd, yea, contrary to the nature of God, to Create something without forme, and without all vertue and quality, as well by reason of his purpose, as by reason of his Majesty; and Omnipotency; of his purpose, because seeing he hath appointed all things for the service of man, to what purpose should an idle mother serve, which neither can doe any thing of her selfe, nor is able to bend the qualities and vertues received, but rather slackens them, for if thou will say, she conferreth something to the qualities received, thou affirmest at once things contradictory. The matter not to be neither quantity nor quality, nor yet to comprehend either as her owne in her bowels, and yet neverthelesse to be endowed with some vertue, as she worketh something. Now in respect of his omnipotency, and Majesty it doth in no wise beseeme God, to create a matter wholly voyd of forme, for seeing that he is a forme forming all formes, a pure light, a pure vertue and efficacy, a pure life, and a breathing goodnesse; how can he produce any thing voyd, and dead, who hath directed his maine scope unto life? He who conceived to Create man after his owne Image, how should he beginne a sluggish and dead foundation, and forme man of that then of which nothing can be more unlike, yea, more contrary to, and estranged from God? He who maketh the beginning of such an excellent, and incomparable worke to be so vild, injureth the Almighty, and doth detract from his Majesty and Omnipotency. Empedocles, and Anaxagoras seeme to have had a better and a righter opinion of the primary matter, whom Plotinus reprooveth in his Booke de Materia, Chap. 7. For Empedocles did not so endlesly pare from the matter, nor denude it of all qualitie, but when he had learned by experience, that all bodies are resolved into the Elements, whereof they were composed, and did not find any further resolution, he ceaseth to search out any higher the beginning of the matter, as being ignorant of the first matter, whereof the Elements were produced. Now whereas Plotin objecteth against him the corruption of the Elements, it hath no place, because the Elements are not corrupted, but onely the mixtures, by whose putrifaction and resolution the Elements are repurged and restored to their integrity. But Anaxagoras comming neerest to the nature of the Chaos affirmed a certaine waterish mixture to be the primary matter, erring indeed in the mixture, but perhaps because the right name did not occurre he would describe it by a similitude the neerest to the thing, being taught by a most ancient tradition, that the first matter of all was APHAR and (...), he added that this same matter, had not onely a passive fitnesse to all things, as others would have it, that it might receive formes induced from elsewhere, but that it actually (supply not expresly nor potentially) contained in it selfe, or in its owne essence all formes, and all Species, wherein surely he erreth not farre from the truth, as it shall appeare in the progresse, but if we would have the Species to bee formed from the matter, as Plotin seemed to say, certainely therein he erred: for the most imperfect cannot produce the most perfect, but it selfe hath neede of one to perfect it. Now for to attaine to the true doctrine of the primary matter, omitting the dreames of the Pagans (I say) briefely, what I thinke ought first to be thought of it, and in the pursuite thereof will proove it out of the Word of God, and the consent of perceptible nature with it: such then is the state of this matter.
The Omnipotent God, Lord of nature, is able onely to Create whatsoever he willeth, whereof Iohn the Baptist gives testimony in the third Chapter of Saint Matthewes Gospell, and in the third likewise of Saint Luke. That God is able of those stones, to raise up Children unto Abraham, verse 9. And who without any subjected matter to worke upon, was able out of nothing to Create this visible world, much more could he then also in a moment, make out of all, all whatsoever he would. Neverthelesse he himselfe, hath followed in Creating a manner, and rule, which hee gave to nature as we shall see anon. Now nature being once ordained, and constituted by God, doth not all what she willeth, out of all that shee willeth, but she engendreth it out of the matter, which is the neerest to that, which nature proposeth, for such is infinite providence. So she engendreth not out of a stone Corne, but of an

earthly and waterish moysture, neither doth she produce fire out of water, but out of oyle, and yet more out of brimstone, A quality then accommodated to things, which are engendred, is required in the matter, and we see by this universall law of nature once constituted by God; that nothing is begot is out of nothing, nor out of a matter affected to the contrary, or improper to generation.
All opperation then of nature, in the matter affected to the contrary and improper, is violent, lesse neverthelesse in the improper, than in the affected to the contrary. Now that, which suffereth force, the operatour being taken away, it returneth to its naturall course, unlesse it be vanquished by an act of longer durance, and by little and little is drawne into the nature of the operator. All generation then in the matter is violent, if we say, that it was without all quality, and naturall affection, whereby it may be enclined to engender. Now the generation, and continuation of the species, their multiplication and their agreement, and sympathy of things among themselves, is necessary as it is said, in the fift Chapter, and as a may see manifestly, throughout in the Oeconomie of the world: It was requisite then that the matter out of which something was to be engendred, should first have some nature, and condition proper to it selfe, which might be meete to the Species intended,; which ought to be engendred out of it.
This same nature if in some sort, it had not had a roote in the primary matter, out of the Creation, how could it be enclined to that duty, whereunto God had appointed all things, to wit, to serve for the use of man? What sympathy could there ever be of things among themselves? which is so necessary to be knowne and observed by us, that the Holy Ghost, which sustaineth, and directeth all things created to this use (the Apostle Paul speaking in the eight Chapter to the Romanes describeth it amply) when he sheweth us, the incomparable greatnesse of the glory, which shall be manifested to us by the service of these Creatures, saying. The earnest expectation of the creature wayteth for the manifestation of the Sonnes of God in glory, that is, it doth the duty, which God hath imposed upon it cheerefully, sustayning carefully mankind in this life, with a desire that they might be saved, and be led to God their Creatour* And so this service of the Creature saith he is done to many vaine and unprofitable, and neverthelesse it is not subject to this vanity of its owne accord, that is, it is not all one, whether it is serviceable to the good, or to the bad, but asmuch as it is able doth the office which is enjoyned to it, to the glory of God, and the Salvation of man. Neverthelesse, God hath subjected it to this vanity, that it might serve also to the wicked, though in vaine, yet not simply, but by reason of him, who hath subjected the same in hope, if peradventure they might in groping, taste the benignity and benevolence of God, and be converted. And to shew, that it serveth to the wicked unwillingly; adding that it shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of God, after which the whole Creation groaneth, to wit, till Christ our Lord, and nature having finished the last propagation of mankind, shall bring his faithfull ones into the glory of God his Father: thou seest heere most manifestly, how great the Sympathy of all things is betweene them and man which were impossible to be done out of a matter without all forme, or void of any quality or affection. But thou wilt say out of the Philosophy of the Pagans, that God hath since given a forme unto the matter created, out of which thereafter generation and propagation is made. And to what purpose I pray you, hath he made in the second place, and by a second operation, that which he might have done at the first, and by the first Creation? might he not aswel from the beginning, have given the matter properly qualified, in its owne nature, as afterward to have given the quality, and that by force? Againe, can he which is al forme, vertue, a most perfect, a most mighty, and a most good Act, the beginning it self, and the fountaine of good, procreate something altogether without forme, and most alienate from all manner of affection and action? Now the Lord would create man his chiefe worke, after his owne Image, for otherwise how could hee enjoy the glory of God in dissimilitude? Things that are unlike, delight not in things unlike, but abhorre them, it is then requisite for man to have a great similitude with God, as he which ought to participate greately of his glory. But the holy Scripture witnesseth, that the universall glory of God shall be manifested to his Saints, and that we shall be like unto him, because we shall see him as he is, the greatest similitude then, betweene

man and God, shall be in the life to come, the beginnings of which excellency he hath received in the Creation, as Moses testifieth in Genesis, as he who from the beginning of his Creation, should converse with God, and serve him in this world in all obedience, untill he were accrued into the similitude, which God concreated with him, and should receive his highest perfection in the Heavens.
Seeing therefore that man is Created after the Image of God, and that also the other Creatures, for having a true sympathy with Man, to whom they ought to be serviceable; have likewise obtained some similitude with God in the Creation it selfe, especially, the primary matter, to wit, the Chaos out of which all things were created; yea man himselfe ought to have some similitude with his Creatour, for it had beene absurd (as I have said before) that God the fountaine of all goodnesse should have created some ill thing, and that he, who is all life, and quickning vertue; should create a stupid body, voyd of all quality or affection, which should be immediately reformed, to the end it might agree, aswell with the Species, which were to be created, as with man. For seeing the worke of every Artisan, sheweth the industry, wisedome, and the study of his Spirit, how much more then the workes of God, represent as well his intention, as in some sort his Image. He then, who from the beginning hath thus formed and ordained nature, that shee might bring forth a generation, no otherwise then from a matter properly qualified, hath also created and produced the first Species of things, out of a Chaos convenient thereunto.
We conclude then, that the Chaos was the first of all things, having in its essence, the seede of all qualities and formes, a nature (I say) simple, and not compounded, deducible and distributive into so many qualities and species, as there is now in universall nature. Also that it was like to its Creatour in this, that as God the Father is the beginning of all Deity, having all things covertly in himselfe, which are expressed actually in theThe Father worketh of himselfe by the Son and the holy Ghost, the Word his Sonne from the Father by the holy Ghost, and the holy Ghost from the Father and the Son. Word, his Sonne, and shed abroad by the Holy Ghost, and communicated with the Creatures, that so also the Chaos comprehended all the formes of things, substances and qualities, secretly within her bowels, and intrinsicke essence, according to the Seminary and Radicall power, which being by the Creator extracted out of it, perfected and distributed into severall Species, served man by an act of egredient. And as in God the Father, the multitude of Idea's, not as many, but comprised under one simple unity, is brought forth from God by the Creation into every Species, so the Chaos being a nature simple, and not composed, is produced, and made perfect by the Creation in so many substances and kindes, as is requisite for the body, and Oeconomie of the world. And like as the substance of God is not compounded, neither consisting of matter or forme, but an indivisible essence, yea in thought, so also the substance of the primary matter, or Chaos, is not compounded, nor consisting of matter and forme, introduced from elsewhere, or a new Created in it, but in a simple essence, Created from one act by a simple being God and a vitall substance and life, or a substantiall forme, or essentiall substance, or in any such sort, that the vnity of the matter and forme may be expressed existing: in this neverthelesse, before other differences the most distant from God, that it is corporeall, and grosse, actually finite in vertue and power, being onely a small beginning of these things, and divisible into different substances, yea even to contraries, not immediately, but by the degrees of generation, which are betwixt both. The ancient Philosophers have not given a sound division of the Primary matter, in having made two beginnings of things diverse, and not communicating, to wit, the matter, and forme. In things which are engendred, such a distinction brings with it some light to the understanding, when as we contemplate the matter out of which something is made, and the forme which it ought to be, introduced: and which as yet doth not exist in the severall parts, according as the cause of the thing requireth, but when as we make this in the first matter, and out of the cause of generation, we conceive a matter wholly without forme and voyd, and we wander astray from the true naturall beginnings.
The Chaos is then in things which are created out of God, essence of essences, forme of formes, substance of substances, not by act, but by power, and that not forraigne, but interiour, making the matter and the beginning of the forme, as a mother to all things. But first of all, God is the Worker, then the vertue specificall: ordained by God, in forming them, perfecting and preparing for the birth. Wee shall see then

this opinion of the primary matter, and of the Chaos to be confirmed by the Creation of the World, and the certaine experience of things.


CHAP. V. Of the Fabricke of the World. Touching the false and true understanding of the Idea's.
BVT forasmuch as through the sinister understanding and considerations of Idea's and formes, many absurd things are taught by the Philosophers, questions, and intricate disputes are moved, and the true order of the operations in nature is obscured, it behooveth us to search out more deepely the condition and nature of the Idea's and fermes, that not relying upon a false foundation, we doe not deceive our selves, and instead of true science, constitute so many vaine opinions as foolish dotages. When the Philosophers would that the formes should be brought elsewhere into the matter, they assigne unto them another beginning, and separated from the matter, to wit, a certaine eternall Idea, out of which they flow, and are joyned to the matter, so that every essence is not simple, but one compounded of divers things, and separated, and incommunicable of matter and forme, and therefore the matter and forme had not any similitude in the essence, nor any Sympathy betweene them, before the composition. It is well knowne and usuall, that every good workeman, before he beginne his worke, conceiveth a certaine Idea thereof, by the contemplation of which, he beginneth and accomplisheth it, but are many things oftentimes, which present themselves ever and beside the modell conceived, he addeth or taketh from it, and if diverse men shall undertake the same worke in Species, there will be as many differences, as workemasters. There is not then any Idea out of man, which conceiveth and frameth such a modell in his understanding, but he himselfe by the clearenesse of his understanding, and according to the knowledge which he hath of things, which are required, be it true, be it false, and according to the judgement of his reason, he imagineth and frameth the accident by experience, or elsewhere he amendeth it, after upon better knowledge. So God as by himselfe, being the most wise, most mighty, and the most skillfull Architect of the world, hath created all things no otherwise, than by a most good and exquisite reason. It is necessary therefore, that he of himselfe from all eternity had conceived an Idea most requisite for his worke; for it is not the property of a wise man, to make any thing without good order, manner and reason, for the things which are so made, are either made casually or rashly, and cannot promise a certaine good issue. But he tooke not this Idea, for the framing of his worke, out of a fore knowledge of things with a foreknowne rationation, and meditation as from a certaine modell after the manner of men, seeing he of himselfe, and without any motion of understanding, alteration, inspection, and auscultation, is all wise, Almighty, having in the vertue of his essence represented before his view, and pondered all the beginnings of things, the meanes, ends, manners, conditions, number, proportions, habitudes, and all whatsoever should appeare visible, a workemaster (I say) so perfect from the most internall Center, and fountaine of his essence, hath this increated Idea, shining forth in all things, and possessed it eternally; and this Idea is one, and simple, as the essence of God is one and simple, but proceeding by fruitfulnesse, as from the generation and propagation into branches and all formes and Species, according to the intention and scope of the Creation in the alone species of man. Therefore whensoever thou art desirous, to contemplate inwardly, the creation of things, and art willing to search out well their affinity and Sympathy, it is requisite for thee to contemplate the same, with all the subtilty, and force of thy understanding, by what order every thing is created, and whereof, and in what manner the one species exceedeth the other, for from thence the Creatures are knowne, and the order of subjection of every one of them, as farre, as may concerne man. It is now in no wise lawfull to place this Idea

out of the substance and essence of God, for it is most properly proper to God himselfe, and communicable to no other but to God onely, as his essence agreeth to no other, then to God: neverthelesse we desire with some, to make fooles of our selves, who have dreamed that all things have beene ingendred out of the essence of God, and are as parcels of him, and for this cause that the Soules of all returne againe unto him. Seeing therefore that this Idea, is inseparable from the essence of God, it is not lawfull for any man to thinke of any primary beginning of formes and species but in God. Now if any one should place the Idea's out of God, they should not be the primary, but secundary Idea's, created of the primary which is in God, the which when they are placed by the Philosophers out of things, and are said to enter into the matter, and to constitute things themselves, and the species compounded, what is that else, but to adde a helpe to the Creatour, which formeth all things, sufficient for all things? as if he himselfe had not beene able to doe that immediately, or at least, that he vouchsafed not, who is enflamed with such a great love to his worke, and that hee delighteth to be with the Sonnes of men. And if we grant him, who is all vertue, and a pregnant efficacy, and Almighty for most noble effects, to have created a matter without forme, idle and wholly imperfect, and of no quality of it selfe, why should we say it is created of formes, more worthy and noble than the matter, by strange and ministred Idea's? were not that to diminish the glory of the Creatour? or wilt thou that the matter be created by secondary Idea's? What Idea I pray can be fained from that which is nothing, and bereft of all essence? For (they forsooth) would have the Ideas to be effectives of formes. Now if any man should affirme these Idea's to be made, not onely in respect of the first Creatour of things, but for the perpetuall propagation of the Species, what difference then would there be, betweene the propagation, and the primary constitution of the thing? The Species, should it not be wholy compounded, the forme being induced into the matter? So then, God hath created the first man, and the same worke of the Creation is consequently renewed in every man; how is it said, that the Lord rested the seaventh day, and afterwards to create? Gen. 2. verse 2. As those who have beene cast out of the assembly of the faithfull, for Heretickes, who did affirme that the Angels were worldly Creatures, no lesse should such bee, who affirme the Idea's are placed out of God, to constitute the Species of things. For such Idea's are also Creatures, no lesse than the Angels: to this may bee added that which I have said before, that if thou dost constitute the Species, and the matter separated, and incommunicating (as it is necessary when thou makest the matter to bee wholly without forme, and that the same joyned with the forme, yeeldeth a compound not simple) it cannot be, that there is any inclination of the matter to the forme or appetite, or any Sympathy whatsoever, rising out of the different similitude. Many frivilous questions, and altogether, unprofitable, are sprunge out of these Idea's separated from God, and from things, the which in what manner soever thou resolvest them, yet shalt thou never attaine unto the truth of the Creation, and Generation, and therefore canst not affirme any thing certaine, neither of the beginning of nature, nor of the end and Sympathy.
We say then, that there is an universall Idea, residing essentially in God, which is the totall reason of all the things, which God was willing to Create, disposed and destinated, according to his infinite wisedome and will, and that this Idea is expressed by an eternall act, especially in the framing of the world, and that the species are multiplied and increased, into many individuals, without any Idea, co-operating out of God; in this act of every species, there is imprinted the character of the Idea of this species, existing in God, out of which impression, it is afterward enclined to the propagation of its species. We call also this Idea, or reason of all things, to wit, an internall act from the essence of God, to have proportion to the same essence: therefore the Creatures which are Images of the same Idea, are said to have some Analogie to the Substance and essence of God. From whence the most high mysteries of the Trinity, shine a loose off as through a grate, and the Catholike Doctrines may be illustrated excellently, against all the heresies of Trinity, and may in some manner be made more cleare, these obscurities being dissipated: and if any one having invocated the Holy Ghost, search with all his might and a pious zeale, the Analogie of the Creature to the Creatour. But seeing the particular reasons are excited in this universall

Idea, by the ligament of a mutuall dependency, and perpetuall harmony, in a most consonant melody: it is necessary also that the reasons creaturall assemble together after some manner in a Symphonie by a similitude, but not proportion, because there is no proportion betweene that which is finite, and that which is infinite. Out of this Symphony also of the Creatures, or the consent and concordance of nature and office, followeth a Sympathy, the which is necessary, because of the end of the Creation. The things which hitherto have beene spoken of, partly in generall, and also partly demonstrated touching the matter and forme of the species, ministry, and Sympathy, shine forth more cleerely, and shall be proved in the history of the Creation. Let us now then come to speake of them.


CHAP. VI. Of the Fabricke of the World. Of the time of the beginning of the Creation. The first Day.
WHen as the Lord beganne to Create the Starres, and their motion was not yet in being, and consequently, as yet there was no time, according to the Philosophers definition; neverthelesse in this darkesome space, which proceeded or went before the light, is accounted for a part of this day, and is called night and evening: Gen. 1.5. and constituted with the light following, unto its setting, a naturall day, equall to them that followed. This eternall space then is measured by God, by the first, and last, according to the greatnesse of the parts, and there is no difference, with the time of the Physitians, saving that it cannot be measured, but by the comparison of measure, borrowed out of the Creation; for this eternity going before the world, had neither as yet yeares, moneths, or dayes, or any such like accident whereby it might be measured. And if the time of the Physitians cannot be measured, shall it therefore cease to be time? for the measuring of a time is an accident belonging to time, it cannot be defined. Whatsoever is knowne to be, hath its definition in the nature of it, though it cannot be expressed by words. So eternity is truely knowne to be, because common understanding sheweth it: considering, there is not any man confesseth that to be, which never was, and that which is, sometimes not to be, and therefore that which is, there is no doubt, but that sometime, or in some time it was, and this is a common opinion, that that which was in no time, and which is no part, that that is not at al. For it is impossible to conceive the essence of any thing, without the circumstance of time and place. Therefore for the shunning of ambitious and captious tearmes, and many vaine imaginations, drawne from the definition of time and place, although at this day in use, and whereby deceiveable Sophisters obscure the understanding, as it were with a thicke mist, it is better to apply the spirit to the substances themselves of time and place, or if thou wilt may rather be called essence, and if ye cannot expresse their reasons, because expresse words are wanting, neverthelesse to contemplate them, after some conceived simile. So thou maist imagine time to be a certaine extention of durance, betweene the first, and the last, which after the Creation of the World, is exquisitely measured, by the constant and immoveable motions of the starres, and though there were no such measurings before the Creation of the World, yet it ceased not to have time in it, and if any speculation requireth the measuring, we will apply by this our thought the measures of this our time, touching the extension to the eternall parts thereof. As we would in some sort declare the eternity of God, we may say it was a thousand Ages (I speake of so great an extension) before the Creation of the World, and besides them, a thousand more also, and a thousand besides, and so foreward withous end. And so a common understanding may in some sort measure the parts of eternity, and what neede have we here of any subtile Tergiversations, and Labyrinths?

Things which are eternall and uncreated, are easily conceived by some such like conception, when they are not defined or well described. And the Word of God ascribeth often to him, eternall and infinite ages, from the first, to the last, accommodating it to the common capacity, which he likewise hath formed. Wee may also suppose the place to be a certaine space, wherein the thing is, which we will divide into three species, into that which exceedeth the comprehension, into the equall, and into the lesser, not determining of any thing touching the greatnesse of the comprehension. According to the first, man is in a house; for the second, every body is in the water, or aire, comprehending on all sides the extremities: according to the third, every thing, and God principally is also in the very least place: the Creature according to the figure Synecdoche, but God according to his whole essence. If any one, these things being thus determined, should doubt that something was ordained eternally besides God, he must consider, that time and place are brought in God, yea from his essence, considering that essence cannot be without time and place. For God (as Iohn Damascene speaketh excellently. lib. 1. cap. 10.) is place of himselfe. In the like manner, and by the same reason may one imagine, that he is also time himselfe. And Tertullian against P^axea writeth thus: God, before all things were Created, was alone himselfe to himselfe, and the World, and place and all, Page 675, if he searcheth any other substance of time and place, hee will be swallowed up into a bottomelesse pit inscrutable, and goe astray into obscure speeches, because the depth of God surmounteth exceedingly all understanding.

Before all time, matter, forme and place
God all in all, and all in God it was.

Let us say then with Moses verse the fifth, that the beginning of the Creation, and first naturall day, was made by night, and that the night is the first part of the day, and that we ought to beginne the time of the world, from the first motion of the Creation, and that God therefore hath not onely ordained a weeke of dayes, as a memoriall of the Creation, but hee would also have us, that wee should take likewise the beginning of every day, from the setting of the Sunne, and from the evening, and that those judge amisse, who would have that the ancient Hebrewes did beginne the day, from the rising of the Sunne, perswading them thereunto by some passages of the holy Scripture, misunderstood and perverted in Exodus, chap. 12.18. The solemnity of the passeover is commanded to be celebrated for seaven dayes, the beginning, and the end whereof is appointed in the evening. And the Lord ordained the first and the last day solemne ver. 16. So that the first of Iohn, the 19. ver. 31, it is called the High Sabbath, and the Hebrewes call Parasceve, that is, the preparation, the fourteenth day of the moneth, in which the Lambe was sacrificed, betweene two Evenings, and distinguished from the Passeover immediately following, as appeareth. Matthew 27.62. Marke 15.42. Luke 23.54. Iohn 19.31. These are then, two dayes, and two evenings following one another. The first is the end of the fourth day, the other after Sunne setting, of the night following, which appertaineth to the day following. Betweene these two evenings, he commandeth in the sixth verse, that the Lambe should be prepared and slaine, but that could not be done in a moment, dividing the one, and the other day; therefore the evening is taken more largely, for the vespertine time, and enclining to the end of the day, or next ending the day, and following incontinently. So ver. the eighteenth, when he commandeth them to eate the unleavened bread, upon the fourteenth day from the evening, he meaneth from the evening ending immediately, the day being shut up. For seeing that the setting of the Sunne, distinguisheth the dayes, as the night in which the paschall Lambe was eaten, and the part of the day before the Sunne-setting, in which they slew the Lambe, may be referred to a day? In Marke the sixteenth it appeareth more cleerely, that the night was the beginning of the naturall day. When the Sabbath day was past (saith hee) the women brought sweete oyntments, which was not lawfull for them to doe upon the Sabboth, they did this then on the evening, the Sabbath being ended, because he addeth, that very early in the morning, the first day of the weeke, they came unto the Sepulchre. The Hebrewes then began their naturall

day, from the evening and the setting of the Sunne, because the first day of the creation began from the night.


CHAP. VII. Of the Fabricke of the World. The Workes of the First Day.
THe first thing which God created, was this Chaos, whereof hitherto we have discoursed, to wit, this huge undigested masse, the matter and mother of all things that were to be created, which hee calleth Earth, because it approacheth nearest to the nature and condition terrestriall, for the earth was first finished, and brought forth her fruits, and incontinently after, the Chaos being not yet divided, he calleth it waters, not because that then the waters were separated from the earth, but he sheweth, that as soone as the water was created, the distinction of the Elements was begun, and therefore before he nameth it Water, hee nameth it Abisse, as some meane thing betweene a masse without forme, and the first distinction beginning to appeare, or rather he gives us to understand, the nature of this masse, that it was Aphar, a fleeting matter, inclining to the generation of Waters, which he purposed first to separate from the Earth. Now all this masse, how great soever it was, was an Abisse, because that yet it was uniforme, not formed into any species. The living creatures were not yet, the plants, the bright heaven, yea the Elements themselves, the Earth, the Fire, Water, and Aire (but there was saith Moses) solitude, vacuitie, or solitary unprofitable, and void, according as we doe call the Earth uninhabited, barren, and producing nothing for the use of man, Desert. So, this masse was a pure solitude, having neverthelesse in it the speices, from whence all things which are now might be deduced and formed, which speices is specially understood, under the farme of Aphar, of clay, and Abisse.
He addeth that this Chaos had not yet, that which was necessarie for the constitution of nature, generative and procreative of all things, to wit, the life. Two things ought principally to be observed in the creation: First of it all, that it proceede, by the order of things most imperfect, and most ignoble, to the most perfect and most noble, as first of all from the Chaos, to the Earth, then to the water, from thence to the heavens, and so consequently. Secondly, that it institute the nature of all things, their power, actions, order, the manner of doing, the beginnings and the end, and the periods of either of them, and the universall law of nature, such in the creation, which hee would have to be perpetually. Willing then, that the inferior world, to wit, the Earth, the Water, and the Ayre, was the mother of all things, which ought to be engendred, and that the superiour, was the father endowed with masculine vertue, that is willing to ordain a seminarie reason in the Elements, but the prepatartixe, and excitratix to engender power in the heavens, presently after that hee be began to extract the Elements, he extracted withall the matter of the heavens, to the end, that the father, and the mother might grow up together, that the power, and all the vertue of the one and the other, might receive engendring, his lawes and rules in the same creation. And therefore from the beginning of the distribution of the Chaos, hee ordained two orders of creatures, and proceedeth by little and little in the one and in the other, to the most perfect, and most noble, and then when hee began to distinguish the masse into Elements, he produceth with the Aire, a Celestiall and lucent matter, of which afterward the Firmament and the Starres were to be formed and collected, and as in perfecting his worke, he divided to every one his speices apart: so also hee gave to all of them the proper lawes of nature, to the Elements Elementary, and to the Coelestiall, matter Coelestiall. It is to be understood neverthelesse, that as well the Elements, of the Aire, as the heaven it selfe, wherein the Stars are, have beene noted afterward in the sacred Scriptures, under one and the same name, as for that then which concerneth the name, which was ordained to them by God, these two were in the beginning of the one,

and the same condition, and were created together, without distinction, but presently began to be separated, to wit, when it was requisite to forme the Firmament, and the Starres of the noblest part of it.
Observe now, what the matter of the Coelestiall substance was. The Element of Water, began now to appeare, and be gathered together in the arch of the Chaos, ere there was there light, which was necessary to the operations of nature. And behold (saith he) the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters, he stirred up a vehement wind out of the Chaos, to move the Waters, not yet separated from the Earth, and to make them mount up into higher waves, that by this agitation, the Water might begin by little and little to separate it selfe from the most grosse substance of the Earth, and the most subtilest being stirred out of this waterish part of the Chaos, was made Aire, and the more part of the Aeth eriall Aire, or Coelestiall substances. This blast made of these three things, the first day, which without all doubt, made the agitation to endure longer, and it became more forcible, and vehement, a greater abondance of this windie spirit being stirred up, till such time, that at last, the Earth began to sustaine it selfe, and to gather it selfe more together, it allayed by little and little this agitation, and this windie agitation being somewhat exhaust and consumed, it began, by degrees to rest. When then thou beholdest the heaven to be extracted, and formed of Water, not yet separated, thou maist easily from thence understand, that it hath some affinitie with the Earth, much more with the Water, from whence the Hebrewes call it Shamaim, from the word ESH, which signifieth Waters, because it is made of waters, and carrieth the Starres about it, as enflamed waters, according to that which Egibine writeth, touching the Etymologie of the nowne. But seeing that the Chaos had heavinesse, as well as greatnesse, and whatsoever hath beene made thereof, resembleth in somewise the nature of a mother, the heavier, and the more ignoble, setled together in one, but the lighter and more noble substance, which as it were the fatnesse of all the Chaos, being carried upward, was a long time coupled with the superiour, whence it came to passe that the heaven was created of the more noble part of the one, and of the other Elements, before they were separated every one into his place, hence it is the heavens excell in beautie, noblenesse, and vertue; all the other Elements, as having beene created of the more noble substance of the Chaos, yea likewise in the heaven, the higher things are more excellent than the inferiour: Moreover, the Coelestials have a perpetuall simpathy, affinity, with the Elements, by which they are mutually enclined, the one to the other, likewise also the higher things of the Heaven to the lower of them, in such sort, that there is nothing in the world, which by the simpathie given to it, serveth not in some stead, and order for the use of man; so the Heavens and the Starres, by reason of the inclination, which they have to inferiour things, their forme being round, and resting upon the center of the universe, make their motion circular and divers, that they might communicate their vertues to inferiour things, as much as is necessary for generation. Now this Heaven was yet in the first day, of one and the same nature and condition with the other things, and without any difference, and therefore had onely one sole motion, which distinguished the day and the night.
But as the workmanship of the creation continued, the most lucent matter of the heaven began to be gathered apart, into divers Spheres, and Globes of Starres, and Planets, and as every thing began to grow to perfection, and to have its owne proper nature and motion, so also every one of them, obtained their owne sympathie, and operation. So the light, or most resplendent matter, ordained for the Sun, began immediately to gather it selfe, into the demy part of heaven, and to enter within the Globe of the Sunne; so that about tenne houres after the creation (for it began to come into the signe Leo, as hath beene demonstrated probably in the Chronologie) it gave light to the world, and foureteene houres after, by the daily motion of the heavens it set. This light in the beginning, was also more feeble, and weake, because the matter of the Sunne was as yet dispersed, untill that in the fourth day it was shut up and gathered togethered into its greatnesse. This speculation of the gathering together of the Starres into the Globes, and encreasing of the light cannot be in vaine, considering it was needefull, that there should be light the first day, which made the day, seeing the Sunne was not perfected, till the fourth day: considering also that God had not ordained any other light to make

the day, but the Sunne; likewise we must not thinke, that the Firmament of heaven, the col^ection of the Waters, into the matter, the drinesse of the Earth, the production of hearbs, fruites, and trees, and all things which God commanded to sole nature, having beene made in a moment, as the commandement seemeth to impart, but by degrees and in the same order and manner which hee afterward willed that nature should use, and therefore, that all, and every worke began then to be, when the matter proper to its nature, was prepared, but principally, on that day in which the commandement was given. So then, the separation of the waters, began the first day, and was finished on the third. For if all things had beene created in a moment, God should have seemed rather to have intended to produce things, then to ordaine the lawes and natures of them. The contrarie whereof we shall see in the third day. It being so then, that every thing ought to be made, with its proper nature, and naturall law, immediately when every thing began to be created, the efficatious vertue thereof began withall, the meane and rule of working, whereby it ought to serve God in his creation; so that all things in their beginning have had in their creation, as their fore-exercises, and by nature once ordained, have served their Creator in the disposition of others. So having made the weight in the Chaos, and the Center and seate of all things being setled, the disposition and order of things have followed naturally: So the masse being moved by the winde, made naturally the separation of the Earth, and of the Water, and the exhalations ascended upward. The things which were formed of a Coelestiall condition by their Creatour, have also exercised a Coelestiall operation in the generation of hearbes, trees, and living creatures: so the creation went forward, the naturall operation followed it, and these two afterwards concurred in the other workes of God. Seeing then that this is the order of things, wisely ordained, and brought to the scope of the whole intention of the Creatour; the lover of true Philosophie, may diligently observe the order, whereby all things have beene created, what nature of matter, the Creatour gave first of all to them, and what he added to their nature, how farre the speices is extended in forming the things: Moreover to know if the things environing this creation, did give any helpe thereunto, this is not to be despiced, for by how much the more we consider things that are more high, so much the more we shall attaine unto the knowledge of the things created, the efficacie and the communion thereof with other creatures, and consequently its sympathie, and all its operation. Now to the end that the matter of every thing, may be knowne, wee must begin with the first matter which is the Chaos, for as much thereof as may be knowne, according to the forme and qualitie thereof, so much the better also may be knowne the things which are first created of it, and as of them so of all others. As for the rest, what matters are added by the Creatour for the establishing of the speices, and the nature of the thing, this primary nature created cannot teach it, but it must be sought out by the latter, as by the apparent greatnesse of the thing, the weight, lightnesse, firmenesse, rarietie, fleeting figure qualitie, colours, office, and such like accidents, and proprieties. The causes efficient whereof neverthelesse, are knowne by long study and experience. I give chiefely of these things, because they are the first foundations (whereunto a Philosopher ought above all to bend his studies,) to finde out the causes and Oeconomy of things. Let every man doe as he pleaseth, but for our part, wee will follow the parts of the world, its seate, its proportion, and locall motion, and other things appertaining to Geography, the rest we will leave to the co^templation of spirits more divine: When Moses saith, God said, he doth not shew a sentence given for some peculiar time, but the perpetuall will of him which speaketh and effecteth the things without words or expresse speech, and produceth them in time definite. So also in the actions of God, when he saith, God divided the light from the darkenesse, hee intendeth not an externall action, but the perpetuall will of God, whereby alone he beginneth and perfecteth all things preordained in time. Now I will not say that in this day; this division was compleate, after which the fourth day, the Sun and all the Stars were finally perfected, but he giveth the wise not obscurely to understand this collection of light, whereof I have spoken, and that the same proceeded thus farre this day, that the light gathered together in one part of the heaven, might have power to set, leaving behind it the night, and darkenesse. After the workes of this day ended, hee addeth this light to have beene approved, and testified by God for good, which he did

not of all Creatures, but of these onely, which above all others bringeth to man an excellent benefit, and illustrateth, and recommendeth excellently, the worke, and the intention of God. So in things following he extolleth with the same praise the drynesse of the Earth, the generations of Hearbes, Trees, and Fruites, the offices of the Sunne, Moone, and the Starres, the waterish living Creatures, after also the terrestrials. All which thinges, man being finally created, he approoved them to be very good, as those which were most convenient for his service, for whose sake they were created. The workes of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. Psal. 111. verse 2. Light being then brought into the world, the first day was accomplished, which he saith consisteth of the evening, and of the morning, or of the night and of the day, he calleth it naturall from the Latines. Hee placeth the night before, because that from it the Creation began, for the light could not be created the first of all things, according to the Idea of all things conceived in the understanding of the Workemaster, but the matter was requisite before, out of which it ought to be formed. The end of the first day.


CHAP. VIII. Of the Fabricke of the World. Of the Heaven. The second Day beginneth.
AFter the couching of the light, followed the second day, wherein the firmament was Created. But he addeth not out of what matter, God would it should be made: but this is manifest by the Creation of the light. For seeing the light was produced out of the waters, such as we have said, and all light commeth from the firmament, it is certaine that that lucent substance which brought forth the day, and obtained the circular motion, was made this day into the firmament. Whence the firmament in the holy tongue is called Shamaim, because it is of the same substance with the light; to wit, waterish, though a little more ignoble. For the light, as being the more noble, required also the more noble part of the same substance, wherefore the species, and nature thereof, was also later perfected; to wit, the fourth day. This firmament Moses calleth RAKIA, by which word diffusion, extension, expansion, and distension, are signified. The reason therefore of this name is taken out of the worke of the Creation, which was made in this order, and successe. By and by so soone as the wind fell to blow upon the deepe, it exhaled upward, and the ayrie and celestiall substance was diffused, wherein whatsoever was proper to light (digested into a luminous essence) straight begunne to be gathered together, to make up the day: as also the substance of the future firmament, wherein the light was gathered together, and permanent, elevated on high from the element of the ayre; diffused, extended, and displayed, as a saile or tent about the whole inferiour world, and having diurnall motion, even from the first day, and carrying about with it the light. This firmament therefore by reason of this diffusion, extension, and expansion, is properly called Rakia, not for the sollidity, or compact force of the substance, which Rakia doth not signifie. Neither doth the matter, whereof this firmament is made, nor that expansion which here Moses attributeth to it; and also Isay. 42.5. and 40.22. Also Psalme 104.22. carry with it necessarily such a solidity, and such a force of substance; nor is to be supposed to carry with it; unlesse some argument thereof in the word of God did cleerely appeare. The comparison taken from a saile spread and extended with the winds, and a tent firmely set up and displayed; doth rather declare the stability, immobility, and incorruptibility of it: such a firmament would God signifie, and have to be, that it might be a perpetuall ayde, and upholder, of fraile and corruptible things. And what profit, I pray you, should be there of the rigidity and force of yron, or hardnesse of

the Adamant, where there is no wearing nothing that can corrupt. God also called this firmament, Heaven, or Shamaim, that we might understand it to be of the same substance with the light, and together with it to have beene Created. Heere is to bee observed that Esdras lib. 4. cap. 6. repeating the Creation of the world, saith of this firmament; And on the seaventh day (saith hee) thou createdst the spirit of the firmament, and commandedst it etc. The order of the Creation teacheth, the proportion of ponderous and heavie things teacheth, the rarity of substance and experience teacheth that by how much higher from the Center of the world bodies are distant, they are more rarified, lighter and more spirituall: and therefore it necessarily followeth that those things that reside highest of all, are most spirituall. Now this firmament is much higher than the elements, wherefore it is also much more spirituall than the ayre, and most of all in the extreame sublimity of it, where so many starres have a perpetuall, most constant, and lesse variable motion. Now it was necessary such a Heaven to be made, after that the masculine force, which subsisteth in the spirituall substance, was to be inserted into it: to helpe the imperfect power of engendring of these inferiour things. Neither did it suffice, the substance thereof to be such equally throughout the whole, that is to say, homogeneall, but according to the variety and nature of things, a variable and turgent fecundity was also required, which should extend it selfe abroad by a naturall inclination to ripen the fruites, of the inferiour world; and as it were to doe the office of a midwife in helping them to bring forth. But that fecundity lyeth in the exundant spirituall essence, and fortitude thereof, wherefore there neede to be made a collection of this spirituall substance, which is in every heaven or part thereof, into one body sphericall, as a member genitall. So in the Heaven of the Sunne, the cheife force of the Spirituall substance is collected into the Globe of the Sunne: Mercury, and Venus adjoyned to it for the helpe of generation. So the Moone and the Starres, from the first beginning of the created light, according to the exigence of their office, were collected, every one into their severall Globes: and the fourth day finally perfected. Also the heate and splendour of the light, or rather irradiation was necessary to the act of the generation of the spirituall vertue, production and intention: wherefore when God created the light, he made light also the spirituall substance of heaven. Now if it were possible for any one to know the naturall cause, and originall of light in substance, he should attaine unto a great mistery to enquire after, and in some sort to finde out, the nature of the Starres, which without doubt follow their efficient and materiall cause, for if thou doest apply all the subtilty of thy minde, thou shalt see the creation of things almost follow the naturall order of causes, and from causes to deduce causes, untill it come to the effect proposed. And this is the incomprehensible wisedome of God, that of one first created, he did so forme and institute nature, according to the universall Idea, that he may be thought no lesse to have imitated, than Created or ordained it. For creating by his will and power the universall Idea of nature, most exactly conceived, he doth also most exactly imitate and expresse, that both in the Idea and Fabricke, the same naturall successe of things, and of causes should appeare.
Oh the most wise, and most powerfull wisedome of God, above all admirable! How great ought the affinity of nature be unto its Creatour! He spake the word, and it was made, his will is the essence of it, wherefore as he willeth, so is it, and he willeth it for the same. God willed, and willed with delectation and study, that the Heaven, and every Starre in it, by a variable motion, should serve man, and for man every Creature.
This will, this study, even with a certaine delectation, remaineth imprinted in the Heaven: the Heaven willeth the same, is enclined to the same, and executeth it diligently, with a certaine delectation: the affection of God therefore toward his Creature, is made the affection of one creature towards another. This is the first and cheife cause, and the originall of all Sympathy, whereby every thing is excited to the execution of their duty. It is not needefull that we should attribute to the Heaven any other cause, or the Angels to be moovers, as though it were of it selfe immoveable, and dispersed his beames idely and without any affection and Sympathy to inferiour things, wheresoever it hapneth, and much lesse that we should say, that it is perpetually mooved of a divine Spirit, but by a perpetuall nature, according to his will once

imprinted in it, yet in the meane time if thou wilt perfect this Philosophy concerning Sympathy, thou must enquire what similitude, what Analogie with the Creatures, and with which of them, he hath given to the Heaven, whereby it is enclined unto them: as also from whence, by what order, and after what manner that similitude and Analogy was inducted into it.
But when thou hast ascended upon this theater, thou wilt cry out, Oh the profundities of the riches, wisedome, and Knowledge of God; how incomprehensible are his Iudgements, and his wayes past finding out! which if thou findest nothing, yet it shall be a great gaine unto thee, to have learned this imperscrutability; to the end thou maist learne more highly to admire the infinite wisedome of God, and with a more ready minde to reverence his Majesty.
This also shalt thou easily gaine, that thou shalt find, there is nothing created of God without cause, and just reason, tending to one scope or end. And now I hope thou understandest what Esdras meaneth, when he saith, Thou hast created the Spirit of the Firmament, and commanded it: to wit, that the coelestiall matter, which is most spirituall, perceiving the Word of God, or the impression of his will, doth with him put on the same affection towards man: to wit, that for his cause waxing hot, is extenuated, is made spirituall, doth elevate it selfe on high, above the Element of the ayre, extend it selfe, and there remaine fixed; dividing the waters from the waters. Therefore, the celestiall matter, having from the will of God and his impression, obtayned this Sympathy, as yet mixed with the Aire, and turned into a more spirituall essence, by its owne inclination mounted upward; and this is that which he saith. The second day was created the Spirit of the firmament, though as yet there was no contraction of the Starres, and Planets, into Globes. It executed also the rest of the Commandement, to wit, the division out of the same Sympathy, and inclination the same day; and remayneth in the same office, untill the will of God (from the which the Sympathy thereof hath dependance) be accomplished, as witnesseth that of David Psal. 148. He hath established them (the celestiall things) to endure perpetually and for ever, he hath given them a statute, and they shall not passe it.
This Firmament was not any particular heaven divided from others, but one machine of the heavens, as is manifest: for that the fourth day he set the Sunne, Moone, and Starres in this Firmament, comprehending all the Heavens which appeare unto us. But because these bodies which God hath set in the Firmament (and according to the testimony of David, established with certaine lawes) are found to have divers motions. It appeareth that this heaven is divided into moe heavens, but how many they are we shall probably discourse in the Astronomicks. But the manner of the division appeareth in the precedent, when as perpetually the superour things (as more extenuated, dilated and lighter) have ascended from the inferiour, as the Water from the Earth, the Aire from the Water, the Firmament from the Aire. So without doubt in the common substance of the Firmament, by little and little such an extenuation being made, discretion and subduction on high: first, in the lowest place was the sphere of the Moone left, and rested. Secondly, the sphere of the Sunne, with Mercury, and Venus. Thirdly, Mars, then Iupiter; and there after the rest: in manner that the last separation of the supercelestiall waters, the same remaineth and is the highest part of the machine of the world. The universall and perpetuall nature of things, as is the law of things, heavie and light ordained of God, requireth the Oeconomy of the distribution of the heavens. For seeing that all things are created and formed of the first, and one self matter, and therefore do resemble the naturall disposition thereof, the superiors would be no otherwise affected among themselves, than the inferiors among themselves: except we will say, that when hee came to forme the Heavens, he did make againe the first matter, and gave it another much differing essence, nature, and law, but this what were it, but to extenuate the wisedome and power of God, as though he had not made the first matter fit for the Creation of all things. This being granted, what communion of natures could there be, between the coelestiall and elementary things? What sympathy? Were not this to disturbe all order of things, and to overthrow Gods scope and intent in his creation? When therefore the universall law of nature doth so comport it selfe through all things, communicating among themselves,

it can be no doubt to any, but that those things which proceede from one, conformable in it selfe, and not discordant obtaine the same reason unto that one, as the Sonne to his Parent, and every thing engendred, to his progenitor expresse in some sort the nature thereof, and be enclined unto him, as to his beginning bound with the bond of love: Therefore there will be the same reason of coelestiall things among themselves, as of Elementaries, seeing that all things were created successively of the same masse, conformable and concordant in it selfe, and the superiours out of their noblenesse and perfection, will embrace these inferiours, as their beginnings so much the more strongly, by how much they doe more communicate in nature and serve man to their utmost power. The superiours also being more purified, more distilled, and excoct, having a more noble forme superadded, will be also the more noble instruments of God, unto his scope, and end, and will more strongly performe their office thereunto. Wherefore in my opinion, that which the Astrologians perswade themselves of the malice of Saturne, and of Mars, is most absurd, as we shall discourse more at large in the Astrologicks.
The Firmament being created and set in his place, was made (saith Moses) from the evening and the morning, the second day, to wit, beginning from the evening as the first, and ending againe at the setting, and couching of the light: The reason of the day is the same as before, the which serving all the time of the Creation, it signifieth, that we ought perpetually to retaine the remembrance of the creation. But hee called this Firmament, Heaven; in Hebrew, SHAMAIM: if he called it by a vocall distinction, he so called it for Adam: otherwise that which I have said, for God to say, to be: this is the very same as to call; to wit his eternall Will whereby he willed the Firmament to be out of the Waters and made it.


CHAP. IX. Of the Fabricke of the World. Of the supercelestiall waters, and the Creation of Angels.
OF the Supercelestiall waters, there is no where any open mention made, but Gen. 1.7. Psal. ^48, and 4. Esdras 6.41. Of them the opinions of writers are divers. Iacobus Zeiglerus imagineth very foolishly, that the first matter of God was created infinite, least there should be thought any thing to be left without the world void: and that in Creating the world out of that matter, he did not exhaust the infinity thereof, but onely assumed so much as sufficed for the Creation, and left the rest as it was, which he calleth the celestiall waters, void, and darkenesse, which he affirmeth to be excluded from the World, by the Firmament: which opinion is too absurd.
For how can it be admitted that the infinite wisdome of God should create any thing in vaine? For that is done altogether in vaine which is left voyd without the world, and of no forme or use. Which if thou wilt say was done to fill up that vacuum; I will demand, whether there was any vacuum there from Eternity, and whether also this was not created? It would bring an inextricable Labyrinth of questions, nor any measure, order, and law, in the deduction of the parts of the World, out of the Chaos should appeare, but all things should be done without reason, and without naturall consequence: for there should be no place of extenuating the matter, dilating, and ennobling it. Others, and truely not a few, thinke the Supercelestiall waters, to be the Clouds, which are carryed in the middle region of the Ayre, and that they are separated by the inferiour aire, which is also comprised under the name of Heaven from the Sea and from the Rivers. But hereunto is contrary the holy Testimony of Moses, which giveth the division to that Firmament, wherein the Sunne, Moone, and Starres are placed. For the Aire which is under the Clouds, and subject to great mutabilities, cannot be called the Firmament: which if they will call the Firmament, because of the perpetuall and immutable scituation of it in its place, then should the

water also be the Firmament, but another firmenesse is required. Such a Firmament was requisite (as I have said) which should subsist immutable in substance and vertue for ever, to sustaine the generation and multiplication of things, according to their Species: but this was made after the light, and therefore after the Aire, for the light could not be without the Aire, which ought to environ the Masse, and to cary the light, and to make the Day and the Night. Wherefore seeing that this Firmament, and perfected one day after it, without doubt it is another different from this inferiour, and more perfect than it, above the which also David placeth these waters. Observe (Psal. 148. his order in praising of God. First, in generall he citeth celestiall things to praise him: then summoneth all in a just order, and distinctly. First, those that inhabite the Heavens, to wit, the Angels and the Spirits of the blessed, then the parts of the Heavens: the Sunne, Moone, and Starres, that is to say, the Firmament. Thirdly the Heavens, of heavens, to wit, the Heavens which are the Firmament, and comprehend it within themselves: or the Heaven of Heavens, as it is Psal. 113. Last of all hee mooveth the waters which be above the Heavens.
Thou seest how he proceedeth in order from the basest, and lowest, to the supremest and highest: adding also a singular and speciall cause wherefore they ought cheifely to praise God: to wit, because God hath established them to endure for ever, and hath given them a law and office which they cannot passe unaccomplished. After the celestiall things, he passeth to the terrestiall, wherein he comprehendeth the winds, lightnings, haile, clouds, foules of the Heaven: to wit, all elementary things, thou seest then two orders of praisers: the celestriall and the elementary. Seeing then he placeth the Super-celestiall waters, among things celestiall, and immutable, we may in no wise beleeve them to be the Clouds. And Psal. 104.3. God is said to make continguate, to touch one another, to lay the beames of his high chambers (that is to say, of the world) among the waters: which can be no other but these waters which are above the heavens.
Now whereof these waters are created, and to what end, it doth not appeare out of Moses. For seeing they are not visible, cannot be perceived with the eye, and do not reprelent any thing which might be taken of Gentiles, as matter of Idolatry, and further seieng they are the most hidden things, and the highest of the universe Creature, which cannot be searched out by any man, it imported not much to explicate their originall and end, or scope, wherefore also Moses concealeth them, and the holy Spirit doth not openly reveale them. Yet doth he not make mention of them in vaine, but offereth to godly minds, matter of conceiving something higher, and intimateth the wisedome of God highly to be admired, and his inexplicable power, where the most sharpe of the understanding is dulled, and is not able to prosecute any further, the wayes and profound depth of them. But the originall and matter of them, from hence may be comprehended, in that he nameth them waters, for he sheweth that they are conformable and co-naturall, of the same nature with the Firmament. As also David when (Psal. 148.) he attributeth, together with Moses, the highest place in all the universe unto them. For seeing all things which hitherto, (after the waters mooved, and light created) were made, by order of extenuation, and of perfection, were carired up on high, and fixed in their place, it may not be doubted, but by the same continued order, it was come to the extreame (as I may so say) distillation, and sublimation, in those supercelestiall waters. Then these waters are the most cleare, and pure heaven of all; which the divines rightly call empyreum, for seeing there is so great light in the Firmament, and collected out of the same substance of the Firmament, which representeth to the eyes and sense, pure fire, the substance also of this last, and most purified heaven, must be a fire much more noble and resplendant, of an equall clearenesse throughout: as in the which there is made no contraction of the light into Globes, which appeareth to be so made, for that God would terminate the Oeconomie of whole nature, with the connexity of the Firmament, and therefore writeth that division of waters to be committed to the Firmament; to the end that we should understand, that the workes of nature are there terminated, and doe not extend higher than the supreame extremity thereof: to wit, the convexity of the first moveable; but that they are wholly contained within it, and that without that convexity, all things are quiet and immoveable.
Now for what end this Supercelestiall water, and this most cleare Heaven was created. I will say which to me seemeth probable. That the Angels were created there is no man that doubteth, seeing there is nothing eternall except God onely, all the rest are Creatures, and have a beginning. But when these Angels were created, it is not easy to say. That they were not created before the world, it may be convinced and prooved, for that it is said, in the beginning God Created the Heaven and the Earth, that is to say, that Masse without forme, the mother of heaven and Earth. Now if the Creation did beginne from that Masse, then could not the Angels be first created. Yet when the lucent, and bright Starres were placed in the Firmament, from that time they tooke their being: for so doth the Lord speake to Iob chap. 38. v. 6. Who laid the corner stone thereof (to wit, of the Earth) when the morning Starres sang together; and all the Sonnes of God shouted for joy.
The Sonnes of God could be no other than the Angels, for man as then was not Created: Now if the Angels sang praises to God the Creatour, then when he established the Earth upon the corner stone, and together with them, the bright shining Starres gave praise: therefore the third day the Angels were, and also the Starres were, although as yet imperfect. For the first day in the morning they beganne to be created, and the fourth day were perfected, therefore they were much more then halfe perfected, and begunne to shine, the light being extended, and to praise and glorifie God in his service and obedience. But that place in Iob 38.6. hath relation to the third day of the Creation, thou mayest easily understand, if thou comparest the two precedent verses. For in the first, he speaketh of the first Foundation of the Earth, that is, when God gave it a place of rest, the Center of the universe: which is the very basis of the Earth.
Of this foundation speaketh David, Ps. 104.5. Saying, thou hast established the Earth upon her Bases, that it should not be mooved for ever. In the other he speaketh of the figure which the Earth hath obtained by its weight, on every side equally affecting the Center; to wit, Sphericall. But in the sixt verse, first, he maketh a most profound question, to wit, how that Center which is the basis of heavy things, should be fixed: seeing it hangeth of the fluent, and moveable Ayre? Immediately after he speaketh of the superstruction which is accustomed to be elevated on high, and presseth chiefely unto the Angles, or corners of the edifices. Who (saith he) hath laid the corner stone, which sustaineth the Masse, ascending up on high? Thou seest three parts of the earth brought in question, to be setled and established, in that order wherein they mutually succeeded one another in the Creation, For first the Chaos being created, the Earth began to settle into the Center. Secondly, in the setling received a Sphericall figure. Thirdly, the Earth at length becommeth dry, shewed it selfe above the waters, and was there established, yea, the most high Mountaines thereafter hanging above the waters. Of which establishment David speaketh thus (Psal, 24.2.) For he hath founded it upon the Seas, and established it upon the Floods. The sixt verse demandeth in the second part, who hath raised these most high hilly tops, so great a distance above the waters, and so established them, that they fall not, and returne not to their owne naturall place? Seeing therefore the firmenesse and stability of these was made the third day, when the Earth was made dry, solid, and firme, it is altogether manifest, that the Angels were created before this scicity, and firmitude was accomplished: to wit, the second day. And with this agreeth most elegantly, the Creation of the Super-celestiall waters, made the second day: out of which it is very likely the Angels were created. For there was no substance in the whole Creature more fit hereunto, then that cleare and ardent Aire, in the which the Creatour pleased that they should have their seate, and habitation. Neither was there any other element more convenient for their bodies, than from whence they should take their spirit. And Paul. Heb. 1. testifieth that the Angels are Spirits, and a flame of fire, that is to say cleare spirits, like the most cleare flame, as is almost the substance in the Empyreall Heaven: So that the Angels seeme to be created of the supercelestiall waters; as the Starres: but animated rationall, and mooving themselves up on high, and downe below for the service of God: whereupon they are called Angels of light, that is to say, light shining Angels, created out of the light, and dwelling in heavenly light, and doe appeare unto men with great clearenesse of light: as to the Shepheards.

Luke 2.9; And to the women Matthew 28.3. And to Peter, Acts 12.7. The end of the second day.


CHAP. X. Of the Fabricke of the World. Of the Congregating of the elementary waters: and preparation of the Earth for generation. The third Day beginneth.
THE third Day God said, Let the waters which are under the Heaven be gathered together into one place, and that which is dry appeare. Moses minded not to say, that finally the third day he said this, and began to separate: but that his eternall will was that this third day, the division of the earth and water should be perfected, and the earth be dryed up, and should appeare more high above the waters, having received the waters within her bosomes, to be the seate and habitation to all future living creatures, and a storehouse to afford all sustenance: What things soever are in God are eternall: his will of dividing, as well as of creating was from eternity; and also of accomplishing the division, this day was eternall: and it was finished he willed it to be made from eternity, and approoved of it eternally. His sentence standeth fast, whereof he cannot repent, it cannot be redargued, reprooved, amended, nor better conceived, because his wisedome and prudence is infinite, and doth admit no change of counsell and will. Therefore seeing this day the division was compleate: God said, (saith Moses) that is to say, from all eternity, that the division should be made, and that which is dry appeare, that is to say, that the division should be made untill that which is made should appeare. And when did the dry appeare? even now the third day of the Creation: for he addeth and it was so, to wit, even now incontinent after the second day, which a little before he said was compleate, and before the end of the third day, which he will conclude after in the third verse.
Now if any one would comprehend together, the division begunne, and perfected in one day, what constitution there was of the order, and law of nature, in the creation, when as now we see it to worke successively, and by causes, and consequent meanes? It will then necessarily follow, that God hath created all things without any order, and law of nature, and that after he ordayned and gave these things to nature: which were very absurd, and impious to thinke: for things ought to bring with them their nature, and law of working from the Creation, unlesse we should thinke that God in creating wanted either counsell, or was not of power sufficient. When therefore in the second verse he mooved the waters with a strong blast; wee understand that he instituted the naturall cause, in the workes following, and that from the time the Earth was begunne to be separated from the water: but that the third day this separation was perfected, and compleate.
This naturall cause of separation being observed, the cause also of the inequality of the Earth, and of the Gulphes of the Sea may be knowne. For this by this violence of the winde, this Aphar created in the beginning, it so came from diverse parts, that it elevated very high, and from hence cellected the low setled earth up aloft, but thereupon made deepe, and great valleyes. Thou wilt thinke then that in that part in the which is now the Atlanticke Sea, a most vehement wind to have fallen upon Aphar, and in like maner in that part where now Asia, and new India are divided: and that the same winds have made in the same place vast concavities of the low setled Earth, and have heaped and raised it up on high into the firme lands: also that from hence are raised divers boisterous winds, wch have caused the lesser concavities, and the waters being on both sides carried on high, have congested the earth into mountaines, so by the callission, repercussion or beating of the waters one against another, thou maist understand, that the

earth was separated from the Waters, and collected through the middle region into most high mountaines. So through Africa the hill Atlas, and the hils of the Moone. By Asia, the Mountaine Imaus, and the Caspian Mountaines, and other Mountaines every where produced. Now the waters after a long agitation being purified from all earth, and collected into those places, resided where the Lord set unto them abound: as David saith, Psal. 103. ver. 9. to wit when as all heavie things approach as neare as ever they can to the center of the world, and the water which is fluent, and gliding not able to consist accumulated as the Earth can; it doth alwayes glide downeward to the neather place, untill it come to the very bottome, the plummet, or lead, from whence it cannot ascend againe, unlesse a more heavie thing possesse the bottome. Thereof it commeth, that all waters not being opposed, or stopped by higher barres, doe runne into the sea.
Now here it is to be thought, the Sunne, the Moone, and the other Starres, to be so farre forth collected and compacted together, that in the nature which is given them, they begin to have more vehement forces. For now they encreased unto the third day, in clearenesse of light, and naturall vertue, wherefore it is certaine that it helped much in drying up of the earth. The Wind also in some sort as yet blowing through the aire, drew out of myre and dirt, humors perfectly excocted, and extenuated by the Sunne: that for two causes the earth might be dried up, and grow into a greater soliditie without the which it had remained fluxative, and (relapsed to the deepe places) had, according to its nature, setled under the Waters: to wit, as being more heavie; and therefore forcing them upwards. But wee must understand this siccitie of the earth, not to be absolute, but in mediocritie: so great as sufficed for the establishment of the earth, and creation of Plants. For the hearbes were created before it ever rained, which have neede of moisture, and man was formed of clay the sixth day. But withall consider this, if the earth had beene altogether dry, it could not have beene raised into high mountaines, and remaine firme. For there is a certaine moisture which bindeth the earth, whereof comming to be deprived, yet glideth away as the sand; neither had it beene fit for the engendring of those things, which God would produce in the bowells thereof. Here is also to be observed, how great the wisedome of the Creator was in making hollow these bayes, and channels, as receptacles of the Waters; for so hath he distributed the sea throughout the whole world, that all the kingdomes of the world may have commerce one with another, and what things soever either nature or art affordeth, may transport whether they will. And (which is most of all) that the Earth, with the Waters collected together, making one sphere, might remaine in one equall ballance: for otherwise the Earth should not be established upon the Waters, but the more heavie weight being collected into one part, should presse downe all the masse of the Earth, towards the center of gravitie, and of the world, and that depression of the Earth, having elevated more high, and aloft, the Waters lying on the other part, would have caused them to overflow, and possesse the next adjoyning Ilands. For after that the Earth in the same quantitie is heavier than the Waters, it is necessary that the body of the Earth consist by it selfe in an equall ballance: And also that the Seas environing the orbe of the Earth, and communicating together, should be so distributed, that on every side lying in an equall ballance, they should not bring more weight into one halfe of the sphere, in what circle soever you compasse it, than in another thereunto opposite.
If the Seas did not communicate together, but some remained shut up within their owne bayes and chanels, the Earth could in some sort (although not throughout, and in it selfe) consist equally ballanced. For what weight wanted in one halfe thereof the Waters would supply shut up in it. But seeing the use and office of the Seas, required a communion of them among themselves, for the necessary circuit of Navigation: the same also the exoncration and disburthening of Rivers requireth, which by the onely communication of the Seas equally, and according to an equall ballance, may be distributed into all the parts of the Sphere; it was first and chiefely necessary (as I have said) that the Earth should remaine in an equall ballance, neither could that be supplied by the Waters: for they should be raised, and heaped up higher, in the lighter, then in the heavier part: and therefore should flow downe, till they had obtained an equall height on every side from the Center. Now if we grant, that these

waters supplying that equall ballance, are shut in, that they cannot flow out: yet two inconveniences would follow; the one, that being subject to corruption, they would infect those things next unto them, and should not be so usefull for humane things as they ought: the other, that the earth having drawne their substance into her bowels, or being by little and little extracted by exhalation, they should abandon their place, and take away that equality that retaineth the whole, that it cannot budge one way nor other. Which if any one will maintaine that the Waters may be there conserved, wee will answer that in vaine are employed a great number of meanes (wherein there is more operative labour, and to the rest unprofitable) to doe that which may be done without the same: and indeede both more compendiously, and more profitably. Whereby then the sentence standeth fast, that the machine of the earth is in it selfe equally ballanced without budging one way or other, and consequently also the Sea, which is contained within the bosome of it. And also that the Sea is in continuall motion, lest it should be corrupted and infect the aire, and kill the fishes. Moreover, it washeth the Earth both within and without, that all things should be cleane and wholesome: all corruption being consumed and dissipated by motion and attrition. The constitution of the weight of the Center, and of the world importeth all these things: which if they had beene knowne, and examined by the ancients, they had judged almost true, that which is of the situation, and greatnesse of the continent of the new land found out in our age: and the Meridionall continent, not yet discovered situate under the Pole Antarticke. For seeing that the lands knowne to the continent, and comprehended in a hundred eightie degrees of longitude, that is to say, doe onely possesse the one halfe of the Sphere, it was necessary there should be also as much land in the other halfe. And seeing that Asia, Europe, and Africa, for the greater part, are situated beyond the Equinoctiall towards the North, it was necessary as great a continent to remaine under the Pole Antarticke, which should be equivalent in the other lands, with the meridionall parts of Asia, or new India or America.
God (as saith Moses) called the dry land EREZ, separated from the Waters, and prepared for the life of living creatures, that is to say, the Earth and the Waters gathered together, MAIM, that is the Seas. But it is not to be thought, that so soone as this separation was made, he gave these names no more than before, the names of the day, of the night, and of the heaven. For to whom should hee have told them, when as man (whom it chiefely concerned to know these workes) was not yet created? Vnlesse any will maintaine, that they were told to the Angels. But I hold for an assured truth that here is insinuated another, and a very great mysterie, to wit, a testimony of the immense love, and most loving and bountifull conversation of God with man, whom with a singular purpose, and affectionate study he created. For I thinke that this manifestation of names, signified not that present day it was, but after in a familiar conference with Adam. For when God brought the creatures to Adam that he should give them names, there is no doubt but he had longer speech with him, and treated with him amply of the Creation: naming the light, the day, the night, the heaven, the earth, the sea, the Moone, and principall parts of the world: by meanes whereof hee might leave to his posteritie the true History of all this great worke; as also to be conserved in some measure after Adam, even to Moses.
This word EREZ (that I may use the words of Augustine Eugebine) properly signifieth that which is trampled and troden upon, derived of the word RAZAZ: the letter Aleph added according to the proprietie of the Hebrew tongue, which demonstateth the counsell and intention of creating the earth. For it was created, to the end that the most excellent creatures, for the which all things were created might tread, and walke upon it. MAIM, which is as much to say, as reasounding, braying, tumultuating; commeth of the verbe Hamah, which signifieth, to bray, cry, and make a noise. From this deduction therefore of the said Augustine, it appeareth, that EREZ and MAIM, signifie such an earth, and such waters, which is now the earth that serveth as a payement to terrestriall creatures, and a stay to them which walke and rest upon it; and the vast sea, which being gathered together by the exaggeration of the Rivers, hath a perpetuall fluxe and refluxe roaring and making a great noise. And truely, seeing the Latine word Terra, is derived of tero, it answereth very properly to the word EREZ. Note this also, which the same Augustine admonisheth,

that the word TEHEMON, is derived from the same verbe HAMAH, and signifieth, the resounding, or tumultuating Abisse, or deepe: therefore by the signification of the name, thou understandest that separative winde, which in the seventh Chapter I have declared to have beene incontinent from the beginning in the Chaos: nor any other spirit but this blast, to be understood to have agitated the whole masse; and therefore the distinction of the water from the earth, to have beene made partly in a naturall manner.


CHAP. XI. Of the Fabricke of the World.
Of the fourefold degree and order of things created.
HItherto hath beene no other creation but of those things, which pertained to the generation of things necessary to the life of man; and might serve them for their habitations, to wit, the Elements, of which, or by the which these things ought to be engendred and sustained. Common sense divideth all things created into three classes, or rather degrees; into those things which have a being; those things which have life or facultie vegetive; and those things which have sense. Which division well understood and considered, agreeth very elegantly to our subject, and aideth greatly our speculations, and giveth understanding. In the first degree, it behoveth not to understand one naked essence, without all forme, qualitie, and efficacie, such as the Philophers dreamed the first matter to be: for I have shewed that God never created any such thing, but it behoveth to understand the things, the which whatsoever they are invertue and power, yet are they without all motion: that in whatsoever place they are, there they rest, there hang, there by themselves they remaine immoveable, neither doe assume to themselves any augmentation, or, to speake more plainely, which have not in themselves force of encreasing: but as nature first formed them, so they are, and remaine, not having in them any life. In the second degree are all things which have in them the first degree of life, to wit, facultie vegetative, and vertue of encreasing, and aspire no higher unto life. In the third degree are those things which (besides vertue vegetative) have also sensitive, and move themselves by their owne proper vertue, according to the condition of their sence. Hitherto the degrees of the Creation proceede from the first matter: and because the vulger opinion is, that the spirit of man (by which onely hee differeth from bruit beasts) is not created of the first matter, but particularly and singularly of God: they doe put man himselfe in the number of other living creatures, and comprehend him in the third degree of creatures. But when I shall have shewed in his place, that even the spirit of man is extracted out of the first matter, by intermediate degrees of perfection, it will appeare that wee must constitute in him a fourth degree of creatures. Therefore the first degree is of those things which are. The second of those things which are, and have a vegetative vertue, which is the first degree of life. The third, of those things which are, which live, and have sence: and by sence move voluntarily. The fourth of those things which are, which live, have sence, understand, and discourse: for the superiour degrees comprehend the inferiour. To these foure degrees it behoveth a Philosopher diligently to apply his minde, and ascending, and proceeding by these degrees, to observe the order of the Creation. Neither yet is it to bee imagined, that all those things which are of the first degree were procreated before things which are of the second: for it was not necessary that precious stones, and mettalls should be before hearbes. For we must set downe this in the first place: that those things were first to be created, which were first most requisite for the use of man. Pearles and mettalls, though they had beene created long after man, could bring nor cause no discommoditie at all unto him. But thou wilt say unto me, it was necessary those things to have beene created before the seaventh day; thou saiest well, but understand, it is to be judged, those things then to have beene created, when God commanded

the earth to engender them: for the earth is ordayned to be the mother of these things, and remayneth mother, and in her selfe, and of her selfe conceiveth seed, whereof she produceth perpetually these things, and according to her fecundity perfecteth them in their time. But the tardity and slownesse of the perfection of a new species, doth not hinder generation; because it is the last and doth not engender consequently. For if one pearle should procreate another pearle, and one mettall another like unto it selfe, then was it necessary a specificall and seminary vertue to have beene given to mettall, and pearle: which was the proper worke of the Creator, and not of the earth. So had it beene also necessary, that pearles, and mettals should have been perfected, and received from God into them, a specificall vertue before the seaventh day. So that we observe the order expressed in the generation of the world, it seemeth that it behooved to have beene made, the third day; for there should have beene a like manner of engendring, both in the one, and the other: and both the one, and the other, should have beene numbred in the same degree: to wit, of things vegitative, and alike increased in growth, the one, as the other. Therefore seeing that the Seminary faculty of these things consisteth in the earth; although some asistant, and (perhaps) formative vertue come from the celestials; it is to be thought that the Creation of these things was then perfected, when the seminary property, and generative vertue was given of the Lord to the earth which neverthelesse according to the naturall progresse of things it is credible was done the third day, when as the earth was sufficiently made solid, and the starres now next had received their compleate forme. No inconvenience therefore doth from thence arise if mettals, and pearles, and all things which in like manner are engendred of the earth, have not a proper vertue of propagating their species: they are said to have beene procreated certaine yeares after, when as the seminary property, and specificall vertue, which maketh the generation compleate, was in the beginning given to the earth.
Heere now is presented a double consideration of generation, which must be prudently distinguished, to the end that the just order of the Creation, manifestly represented in Genesis, be not disturbed: and that the reason of the order may be throughly knowne. There is one property of the generation of the same species, which alwayes produceth his like, as a horse produceth a horse, a sheepe a sheepe etc. to the very end of the world, because it is done of its proper substance, and by its proper vertue of engendring, Of the admirable mystery whereof we will speake in the Chapter following. Another generation there is which engendreth not his like, but differing in species, according to the quality of the Spirits of a divers kind which concurre together. So the Earth engendreth gold, sulphur, lead, and such like things, unlike unto it selfe and of another Species: the vertue whereof it hath in it selfe from the Creation, and not after, not doth acquire it any where else; but from the workemaster the Creator.
You see then a double generation of Species, of the which that which is made of the same Species, requireth also the perfection of the species within six dayes of the Creation: whereby it may receive from the Creatour this specificall faculty of engendring, which neither the Earth, nor the heaven, nor any species before created can give: it only belongeth to the Creator, to communicate this vertue to the species that are created. And therefore although that the waters had produced the first species of fishes, and flying foules, yet he did not make the same specificall vertue perpetuall, and proper to them all, but perfected the same vertue begun with the living Creatures, in the proper matter of the same species, taken from the waters, and imprinted in it, and gave it unto them, saying, Encrease, and multiply, and fill the waters of the Sea, and let foule multiply in the Earth. But whatsoever species received not this benediction, they could not be multiplyed of themselves, but have a certaine accidentary generation other where: to wit, of a certaine element, or elements, whereunto God hath imparted that vertue of generation, then no doubt when every of them, having obtained a perfect species, received also his proper nature, and his proper spirit, as also he communicated this same vertue to perfect living Creatures. And therefore seeing that the specificall vertue of these species was imprinted in the elements already perfect, it was not necessary to produce stones, pearles, mettals, and such like to be conspicuous before the seaventh day; for their Creation was already effected in the elements. Neither had they neede of any

further creation; their generation depending now naturally from the elements.
Now these degrees of things being constituted, let those who are studious of the farther secrets of Philosophy, take diligent heed, which of these are most noble, and by what order, by what also, and how many meanes they are brought to the perfection of their Species. But because the understanding, and reason, adde something above sence, and motive vertue, and this hath more than the vegetative: and againe, that this is the first accesse of those things which are unto life, it is easie to be understood, that by the same order that these degrees are numbred, they are also formed and enabled by nature. We have an example of all in the generation of man, in whom the specificall vertue imprinted by the Parents in the seed, and therein produced, first, formeth the body, and the entralls, which all the while till the heart be formed, consist in the first degree; but so soone as the heart is formed receive a vegetative nature, and beginne to attract to themselves nourishment, and to grow, but in the end almost of sixe weekes, having obtained the third degree, they moove: and then truely, can a man discover no appearance at all of understanding, or of a reasonable soule in the fruite, even from the first conception: if we grant that the soule was engendred of the Parents, but then as yet it is formed, and finished last, as being the most noble. All generation then proceedeth from the ignoble to the more noble, and is perfected by the soveraigne degree of every Species, nor doth ascend further. For nothing is able to overpasse the bound of his species, because further forces of extending it selfe, are not given to it, but the benediction of generation is terminated in the same species. So those things which onely are, although in nobility they excell others in their kind, yet they cannot attaine to the power of growing. Of those things which have the faculty vegetative, some are more noble than others: but they cannot attaine unto sence: and living creatures, whose marke in their species is sense and motion, doe not attaine unto understanding: for this surpasseth all things, and representeth the Image of God.
The same order (now Reader) thou wilt observe to have beene kept in the creation of things: for hitherto God hath created the things which are: hereafter, (the more noble substance being taken from these) he will create those things, which are of the second degree, to wit, hearbes, and plants; that done, living creatures, which are of the third degree, and among them; first, those things, which come from the waters, and more ignoble, after the terrestrials, which being endowed with a more subtle, dry, and warmer spirit, are also more subtile in sense, and approach something to the understanding: Finally man himselfe, who should have the dominion over the other in reason and wisedome: So the more noble are last after all created, because they have neede of a more noble matter, and more purified and digested, and therefore they are later perfected: nature, which was first created, alwayes working according to the spirit, and manner given him from Gods Idea. But the Idea of God, is the worke of his wisedome, the will of order, vertue, and proportion of things to be created, and sustained. In summe, if any man will search more diligently the order of things, and consider the communion and difference of Species, he will perceive that the Creation of things (beginning from the more base and ignoble Species) so almost ascended upward, as a tree hath at first but onely a truncke, wherein all things which are from the roote to the very top, are but one and the same thing by the communion of Species, every of the parts in the meane time having their veines therein: but when they beginne to have any difference among themselves, the first division of the truncke is made into branches, after (every branch remayning a certaine time untill their veines divide themselves one from another) is made the second division, and so consequently untill we come to the last branches and fruits. So the Chaos is the onely truncke of all the Species to be created, having his roote and beginning in the universall Idea Creatrix, which is in the mind, and divine will. In this truncke all things as yet are one, lying hid and communicating in the seminary propriety of the Chaos. Furthermore, as this universall Idea, creatrix of things, by the division of the species into their determinate number and forme, ascending by little and little, doth divide it selfe, so of one simple species of Chaos without forme, the difference of species by little and little doe arise, for so long the substances of all the destinated species remaine one, untill they tend perfectly to the difference in that wherein they

communicate. Whence those things which as yet communicate, being contained in one branch, doe cohere and sticke together, untill they come into the way of their proper species, every one following their owne high, and extreame, and perfect species. So there being of all the parts, as through all the branches of the Creature, made all excoction, distillation, purification, extenuation; sublimation, or after what else soever this last act, tending to the extreame end of operation, is to be named, at length we come to all species conceived. But that is to be remembred, that those things which are of a most high degree are more slowly perfected. Seeing they ascend by intermediate degrees. So a living creature seeing he ascendeth by three degrees, to wit, by being, and by a vegetative species, even unto sense and motion, it is necessary that that which is vegetative be perfected in one degree first. For so it is to be thought of that universall Idea, which is in God, that it doth so make its impressions in the Creation, that beginning from the truncke by inconfused order, and right way, it doth by little and little goe by the lesse noble, and more noble species, to the production of the highest, and perfecteth together those that are of the same degree: after those which are of a sequent, and more noble ranck, as we see in the creation of plants, living Creatures, and of man.
Now the species, which consist in one degree, or are of one kind, as in the kinde of plants, the willow, and the Oake; are distinguished by certaine degrees, or by a kind of excellence, and noblenesse one from another, wherefore there is some thing more perfect, and more noble, and later effected in the one than in the other, thence it commeth that the Oake groweth and increaseth more slowly than the willow, yet neverthelesse the Creation of the Oake was finished the third day, as well as that of the willow. For (as we shall anon see) the specificall vertue is brought forth together with the bud of the hearbe, and imprinted in the plant by the Idea formatrix. For the creation of things which are like to engender like to themselves, is finished by these two, to wit, by the same species, and by the specificall vertue, that is to say of propagating the species: the encreasements which follow after, and the generation of fruits are naturall workes of the same species, which follow that vertue and the Creation. But heere it behooveth to remember what we have said in the seaventh Chapter, which is, that so soone as the matter of any thing was prepared, there withal together the species of things to be created was brought forth; although the thing it selfe was of later growth, as the Sunne begunne to be Created the first day, when God Created the light, and yet was not perfected till the fourth day. So the waters being prepared, the species of fishes begunne to be created the third day, and the earth being dryed up, the species of terrestriall living creatures: and yet these things were not perfected till the fifth day. So the third day the species also of hearbes, and plants began to be created, and yet were not finished till the fourth day. For Moses onely noteth the time when the workes were finished. The species therefore of plants, and of terrestriall living creatures, were brought forth when the earth, the mother of them, was perfectly finished: but the things of a more solid substance were finished, as the Oake the fourth day did grow later than the hearbes. These things concerning the degrees and order of things to be created and considered, come we now to the creation of plants, which is the other part of the worke of this third Day.


CHAP. XII. Of the Fabricke of the World. Of the Creation of Hearbes, Trees, and of the spirituall substance.
AFter the separation of the waters (which are under the heaven) from the Earth, during the blast, as yet followed the other worke of this day, the Creation of hearbes, whereof now we will treate. Forasmuch as man, and the other living Creatures, were to live of hearbes and fruites, the creation passeth to the second degree of things, which is the first of life,

and because they were to serve for their nourishment, God found out a meanes whereby they should be multiplyed by seed, and specificall vertue, or propagative, which God blessed that they might suffice unto all living Creatures. For although the benediction of multiplication be not added, a man may well understand that it was done, because he hath annexed it to other Creatures and vers. 29.30. of the second of Genesis. he giveth these things there for foode to all living Creatures. But the benediction which is expressed, of fishes and of foules, is ver. 22. Encrease, and multiply, and replenish the waters, and the Earth, and to men he saith, ver. 28. Encrease, and multiply, and replenish the Earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the Sea, and over the foule of the ayre, and over every living thing that mooveth upon the Earth. The Earth then being prepared for generation, God said, Let the Earth put forth her bud, every hearbe producing seede, according to its kinde, that is to say, from whence may grow the hearbe of the same species, and every Tree bearing fruite, yeelding fruite according to its kind, whose seed is in it selfe upon the Earth: that is, let it bring forth fruite wherein the seede of the same species may spring in the meane time, while the tree groweth upon the Earth out of which another tree of the same species may spring. When he saith, Let the Earth put forth her bud, it is certaine that the hearbe and the tree had not their perfection in the same instant that he said it, but both the one and the other, by the specificall Idea, and benediction of God, from one point, and at once (as it were) of the Earth; no otherwise then from a seede (which being but small, hath yet all its vertue in the least part, and bud thereof, which is contained and lyeth hid in one of the ends) commeth to burgeon, bud, and by little and little to grow into a great plant, or tree.
Now that we are come to the first degree of life, it is necessary first to search diligently, and prosecute the nature and condition of the Spirituall substance, from whence life taketh its beginning. As I have said from the sixth Chapter, that all things are come by evaporation, and exhalation from the Chaos: afterwards the elements being so prepared for generation, and the celestiall things for influence, the omnipotent Creator tooke the Atomes of vertues, or the least particles of the water and the earth, whereinto he put a specificall vertue according to the Idea's, and according to the number of the Idea's comprehended in his wisedome, and withall added the benediction of engendring their like, to the end they might multiply the same species, being perpetually conserved. But the spirituall substance is the more noble part of element or generative body, which attracting nourishment, converting it into its nature, and protruding it forward to the increase and growth of the body, hath vertue from the benediction, and from nature. So the Earth, the water, the ayre, and other bodies, exhale from themselves a spirituall substance, by meanes of the heate, which by the specificall substance of the seede is converted into the same nature and species, and affordeth encrease, and growth, or motion, and sense, according to the condition of the species. The like substance when it is engendred in the bowels of the earth, and produceth its species within the earth, doth not bring any encrease at all to the species, but is coagulated, curdled, and bound together into it indissoluble, not possible to be disjoyned from it: neither doth exhale otherwhere, diffusing its odour, or vertue, but onely by contraction and operation of the permanent quality. So Gold is coagulated and joyned together in the quality of the Spirituall substance, and receiveth not encrease, but rather is contracted by the sulphureous heate, that it may be made more ponderous, and weighty. Stones are in like manner engendred. Hearbes and trees, seeing they are to grow and increase, have a more soft nourishment, apt to extend: therefore also they exhale and yeeld odours and vertues, and at length by little and little are consumed, being come by growth to maturity. This spirituall substance is that alone which preserveth its species (I meane that which is in the plant, not that which is without) for this being first attracted, and drawne from that, is changed into the species and afterward doth nourish it, and conserve it: and doth nourish it so long time, as there is nothing which corrupteth the same species, conserving alwayes the same characterismes, and markes of leaves, of flowers, branches, and fruites; the odour, savour, colour, and other accidents, so firmely, that if but a little slip, or bud, be graffed into another plant, there also will it follow its owne naturall property, changing all its nourishment into its owne species. But all the nourishment

so attracted; is changed into the forme of that part whereunto it last commeth. So the juice of a tree being come to the fruite, is changed into the species of fruite; being come to the leafe, is changed into the species of the leafe. And the nourishment of the living Creature, when at last it is attracted to the liver, is converted into the liver, when to the rootes of any musile, it passeth into its substance, and so of all others: and every member draweth unto it selfe, that which is most fit for it selfe. But some things which are unfit to nourish the body, nature expelleth, some into haire, some into nailes, some into scabs, others otherwise: or quite out of the body. Some things which by a hidden vertue are appropriated to some part of the entrals, doe strive thitherward by a naturall property. Therefore this seminary and spirituall substance, is a thing very divine, wherein there is from the Creation all specificall faculty and vertue formative, wherein is stirred up by meanes of the heart all motion of the body necessary to the living Creature, that the vertue thereof might be still ready to assist all the extreame parts of it: and doth afford like seede for generation, that the continuation of the same species may remaine to the end of all things. But wee must know and consider this, that the same species doth not come by influence from the starres, but from that into the which God first put it, and whereunto he gave the benediction of generation: the Starres surely are a helpe, but the originall and roote of all species, is in these inferiour things. But seeing that this world is (as it were) one body, having harmonious parts among themselves, and conspiring together in one, as also all living creatures, to the image whereof, and of God, man (as a little world) was created, bearing the Image of God, and having like Oeconomy of parts; it is credible that the world hath also the Sunne for its heart, as the beginning of all life, and that it had its being from the beginning, when the light was created, and that it performeth the same office in the world, within the Concavity of the Firmament; that the heart doth in man, cherishing all things above, and below, by its heate and light, and that therefore it hath beene placed in the middle of the world, or a little higher, even as the heart in man.


CHAP. XIII. Of the Fabricke of the World. Of the Tree of Life.
GOD hath given such a seminary species throughout the whole world, where the temperature of the element was proper thereunto, that the vertue of that species was never anywhere wanting; for the Plants do not change their place, nor walke upon the earth like living creatures, but abiding in their place, doe there cast mature seede: neither was care of transplanting them imposed to man, as to whom all things necessarie presented themselves voluntary and of their owne accord. And seeing that the wisedome of God hath created nothing in vaine, and without cause, which is not profitable to some necessitie of life, it was most certaine that there is not any disease, nor defect of nature, for the which hee hath not provided a most propitious remedy. Wherefore he hath caused to bud and spring so many species of Plants, as was needfull for the conservation and sustentation of the life of man, and of all living creatures, and placed the tree of life in the midst of Paradise, to the end that man by the use thereof, might preserve his life in health, untill, being made more divine by the exercise and obedience of the commandement, he might be translated into heaven.
So also the bruit living creatures seeke succour for their nature: the Swallow, the Chelidony, the Catineppe, named the hearbe, from the Cat, the Toad, the Plantine, and Sage, the Dogge-grasse, called Dogges-tooth, the Torteise marioram, the Weesell rue, the Storke origan, the Partridge parierary, called also perdicium, the Hawke hierac, the Dove vermine, the Pye also being sicke, is said to carry baye leaves into her nest, that she may chase away her sicknesse by them. So beleeve that the Harts have

shewed, that the hearbe dictamnum healeth them being wounded with arrowes, the weapon ejected by eating thereof, wee suppose that the Hindes have demonstrated the hearbe called Saselis, and that the Serpents have made Fennell in high estimation: for wee know that by the tasting and eating thereof, they have stripped themselves of old age, and by the juice thereof, regained the sharpenesse of their sight. Which also a man might shew more at large, seeing that beasts themselves instructed by nature, have shewed to mortall men the vertues of many hearbes knowne unto them. But hee hath created in every region such species of Plants, as are most agreeable in temperature to men, and living creatures there borne, which by experiments is often proved; so that by the onely abundance of Plants which one seeth spring, a man may almost perceive to what popular (that is to say, ordinarily diseases) every region is subject. So among the Danes, Frises, Hollanders, who are much subject to that disease, commonly called Scorbut, there is in abundance the hearbe called Cochlearia, as a proper medicine to that disease; so in marish places. So the Tamariske acknowledgeth the native soile: the inhabitants are exposed and subject to the indispositions of the spleene, as their pale colour sheweth, which is discovered in their swelling skinne, and puffed up Hypochondries. In like manner is observed that in those quarters where Wormewood groweth about hedges, in courtyards, the inhabitants are ordinarily affected with the obstructions of their entrals, weakenesse of the stomacke, and suffusion of the gall, that if the passages of the entrals be not opened by the use of the said herbe, and strengthened, and made firme by the evacuation of the gall, they come first to have the Iaundise, and after, by little and little, endender water betwene the skinne and the flesh. And although that some things are contrary and venimous to some, yet being used in their kinde, they are healthfull; so of the very worst poison, is made the noble treacle, and there is nothing created so averse from the nature of man, the use whereof is not some way or other profitable. Now let us treate of the seede. God created the hearbes and the plants of the Atomes of the earth, by the worke of the wisedome, Idea, and benediction of God; but so he created them as they now spring of seede, for there is the same operation of the first generation, as of the second seeing the same species is, and remaineth.
As then out of the seede groweth the plant, so it is produced of the Atome of the earth, formed by the Idea into a certaine species: and on the contrary. And from the seed a little young bud, contained in one of the ends thereof: in what part it maketh the point of the seede, it attracteth the humour of the Earth, or of the water, and formeth one little roote or more, according to the property of the species, and the nourishment being attracted by them into the other end of the seede produceth the trunke, and thereafter the branches and leaves, that adhere unto it. But the specificall vertue is in this little young bud, which changeth into its nature and species, all the nourishment which it attracteth. The same reason is in the terrestriall Atome, formed by the Idea, for it produceth its buds no otherwise then doth the seede. Furthermore, as this nourishment attracted, is carryed higher, so is it more and more changed into the forme of that which springeth from it, into branches divided from the truncke, into leaves, into flowers, and into fruites. The most perfect of all is the fruite, wherein is perfectly accomplished the seede which is given for the multiplication of the species. And the higher things excied to encrease by the heate; doe attract juice from the inferiours, but the roote not able to administer sufficient nourishment to the higher, taketh new attractive rootes: whereby it gathereth nourishment more copiously. Hence it followeth that those plants which have more rootes* their higher parts have neede of more nourishment, and their fruites are more moist, except the rootes be of greater use then their fruites: wherein the divine wisedome hath provided for the use of the living Creatures, So the hearbes, the rootes whereof are ordayned to be eaten, attract more juice, and their rootes are more succulent, and more grosse: nature procuring encrease principally to rootes, and not to hearbes: those that are more long, are ordinarily of a more dry and a more fat substance: as those which seeke a more dry nourishment at the bottome. From the accident, and properties of rootes, many things may be observed, which appertaine to the search of nature, and of those hearbes. But in hearbes, the juice attracted is carryed upward by the parts not yet changed: but in trees, by the barke, as being more spongious, till

that (having stayed there a certaine space of time) it be changed from the neerer part, and that which is most noble, and more purified, is then carryed upward into flowers, into fruites, and for seede. Many speculations will present themselves heere to one that will search after them. Now that the juice attracted is so carryed upward, as I have said, the graffings of young scienes in trees, teacheth us sufficiently; for in them the humour attracted is first communicated to the barke of the young scienes, there staying some space of time, doth unite the barkes of the young scienes to the barkes of the stemmes, and after conjoyneth wood to wood: but the species which is in the stemme, is changed into species of the young sciene, which is engraffed. So according to the commandement of God, the same species produceth alwayes the same things, whether from the seede, or from the young sciene engraffed, and consequently bringeth forth branches, leaves, fruites, and seed, according to the nature of the species. It is not unprofitable also to consider, in how long time, and how long space from the earth, the fruit and the seed come to their growth, and with what humours the plants are delighted above the rootes, and what they avoyd: and (if it be possible) after what manner the juice is changed through every degree, in the roote, in the trunck, in the leaves, in the flowers, in the fruite, and in the seed: for so the nature of the species may be more exactly knowne. This at leastwise is acknowledged, that the nourishment of the plant, is much more noble in the fruite, than in the plant: but most noble in the seed, as that which is the end and scope of the Creation of all this species.
Now by those things we have already said, a man may gather, that divers hearbes and trees have beene created in divers regions, and experience teacheth, that there be some in America, or new India, which are found no where in this our continent, Asia, Affrica, and Europe; which have not beene in the use of men untill some travelled thither, which I suppose was after the time of Christ and his Apostles. In like manner there be there living Creatures, which are not at all found in our continent, which without doubt have beene there from the Creation of the world. Whereupon I presume that these lands were not overwhelmed with the Flood, when God would destroy mankind, Gen. 6. unto vers. 7. For no men at all were there, and therefore the living Creatures there Created, and there inhabiting, ought not to be destroyed, as man was to perish, whom it repented that he had Created, seeing that in living creatures he found no cause wherefore they ought to be destroyed, But in this our continent the living creatures ought to perish; except some had beene preserved in the Arke, for they were not able to live in the waters.
When therefore God Created heere and there throughout the world the vertue of the tree of life, by one and the same meanes he provided, both for the one, and the other estate of man; for that of innocency, and the other of sinne; and the vertue of the tree of life in paradise, or dispersed throughout the world was not for nought. For the world comming to be replenished with men, all should have had accesse to the tree of life: but the hearbes and the plants growing heere and there; had beene equivalent and man had a certaine choise, and the benediction had diverted all sicknesse. Seeing then that they were most wisely created for the use and service of man, aswell in the superiour, as in the inferiour world, what a faire harmony was there then? when the lower things did accord with the highest, and expected helpe from them; and the highest communicated their gifts to the lowest, and all things served man, untill he should be translated of God into his heavenly habitation. This correspondency, this beauty of state had continued immutable if Adam had not sinned, yet this same harmony, if one consider it more diligently, is as yet discovered in the traces of their first nature, for there is nothing so little which doth not serve to something, and which doth not depend of one more perfect: all things are for man.
Seeing therefore all things tend to their end and scope, and that scope (that is to say man) consisteth of divers parts, which yet keepe among themselves a most agreeable harmony, as that wherein life consisteth: of those some serve to the stomacke, some to the liver, some to the heart, some to the blood, some to the reynes, etc. wherefore there are so many simples, or plants, as there be entrals in man, and affections of them. And seeing that every thing changeth into its species the nourishment

that it attracteth, and that there are divers stations in mans body, and divers wayes to every extreame station, by the which the nourishment passeth, as in the ventricle, the liver, the blood, the spleene etc. those simples are stronger, or passe sooner as friends by the middle stations, which carry their vertue, entire even to the extreames, and there worke: and as for those which cannot be there changed by nature, either they are venemous, or noysome to nature. Those things which are changed in the first stations are friends to nature, or of small vertue. Those which of an entire vertue penetrate, unto the extreame stations, being friends to nature, are they which are more appropriate to that member, or to that part of the entrals, and have certaine characters, whereby they may be knowne, if a man take diligent heede. For we see that those which resemble nature, greatly communicate also in figure, as Onyons, Garlike, and such like, have a forme of a small scallion for their roote, and produce almost alike hearbe upward, if their flowers differ in colour this commeth to passe by a certaine difference and peculiar property that is in them.
So there are many hearbes and trees which have dented leaves about like a Sawe, which for the same cause so bud, and therefore they have something alike in nature, wherein they doe agree. Many hearbes also and plants have their leaves not dented about, but terminated equally; many that are dented, grow pointed, many round, as rue, many sharpe edged, hard, and pricking, as the yewe tree. All ought diligently to be observed, for they are not such by casualty, but by nature so producing them perpetually: wherefore seeing nature produceth nothing temerary, rashly, and the cause of the same figure is created to be perpetually the same, it is necessary that many things, by a certaine law of species, are alike, and have a certaine communion of nature. Moreover seeing there is a conspiration, and society both of celestiall and terrestriall things, tending to the same scope and end, which is man: and the celestiall are eternall, and the species also in this inferiour world are eternall, having alwayes the same generations in forme, and in figure, and depending every one of their proper celestiall causes; it is necessary that taking heede to the characters of the plants, a man doe gather, and observe many things which have respect to one and the same Starre, and many things also participating of the same nature (among the Physitians) in which things they have a mutuall correspondence, as in figure, colour, taste, and other qualities: for so, by the resemblance, a man may learne to judge of the nature of things. For every nature hath its proper character, which it ever keepeth alike, nature in the Heavens communicating its vertue thereunto. These things according to my speculation (such as it is) I was desirous to admonish the Reader, that he might advance by his studies, a thing above all other most profitable, wherein Salomon obtained much praise, 3 King. 4.33. For why may not a man search by study and industry the things which are before his eyes, and follow perpetually in figure, and in forme, the same law of nature? It is a laborious worke indeed: but labour overcommeth all things.
I have heard the most learned Reinerus Solinander, Physition to the illustrious Prince Iuliers, discoursing most accurately and pertinently touching the charecters of hearbes: who I would God he would proceede to take some paines in so necessary a part of Philosophie (if there be any able to doe it, it is he, being of that great dexteritie of judgement, in the searching out of the nature, and causes of things) we should have in briefe the demonstrations of the characters, and hidden apparitions of them to every part of the entrals.
Therefore while God doth constitute every where the vertues of the tree of life, the Psalmist saith well, Psal. 111.2. The workes of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein: he doth alwayes direct to his scope or end, the worke which he had preordained: be it that Adam obeyed the first commandement, or not obeyed, and that in soveraigne wisedome, mercy, goodnesse, and justice.
After that, according to my small understanding, I have treated of the nature and varietie of Plants, there is one soveraine miracle of nature very remarkeable; which is that so many things which are in every species, as for example, the greatnesse, the forme, the figure, the odour, the taste, the colour, the leaves, the sinewes, the rootes, the barke, the vertue; and infinite things which are in one onely plant, are hidden in one so small graine of seede as I have said. For all the vertue of the species is hid in one

so small a graine, when as that little graine hath nothing in it like unto all that, no not any appearance at all, but is wholly homogeneall, of the same kinde, and appeareth altogether of the same nature. Wherefore me thinkes I judge aright that the most simple Idea which in the beginning formed the seede accompanieth as yet the species, and continueth the same worke untill generation cease. And this is that which Christ saith, Ioh. 5.17. My father worketh hitherto, and I also worke. Whence it appeareth that there be a Sabbath, or rest from the creation, yet is it not from the sustentation of the Creatures, but that this worke endureth even to the end of all things: I doe not see what other thing can be here said.
He that is curious of this speculation, let him consider chiefely what accidents are proper to every species, and search out the causes of them if he can: in the first place that he give good heede to the figure, and that he observe by what order the growth thereof is made from the roote unto the top: in what manner also it doth proceede, and is distributed by the barke, by the veines, and by the sinewes, even to the compasse thereof, and so at length without doubt, he shall finde out the proper character of all nature: The end of the third Day.


CHAP. XIIII. Of the Fabricke of the World. Of the Creation of the Lights. The fourth Day beginneth.
ALthough the creation of Lights was not perfectly finished till the fourth Day, yet they begun to be created the first Day, that is, evident, because there is no other light that distinguisheth the day from the night, than that of the Sunne: as verse 14. that property is ascribed unto it: and now three dayes are already passed, wherefore that light which distinguished the first day from the night, without doubt was that light of the Sunne to come, dispersed as yet, but contracted into the Hemisphere of heaven, environing the whole Chaos, and which from the beginning turned upon the Poles of the world. So that the first day, the heaven and the motion thereof, together with the light begun to be created. For in the fourth verse it is said, that God separated the light from the darkenesse; which could not make the day and the night, but by the collection of the light into one part of heaven, and extending it to Paradise. Therefore, seeing the day followeth the night, the creation of the light fell to be in that moitie, which was under the Horizon of Paradise, where becomming more strong and more collected, by its motion towards the West, ascended from the orientall part of Paradise above the Horizon thereof, and made the Day. But the collection of the substance of the Sunne, of the Moone, and of the Starres, was not perfectly finished, till the fourth day; for Moses describeth the time when the workes were fully finished, which dependeth, and is defined from the perpetuall Will of God. Yet the Sunne (which I have said before, Chapter the twelfth, to be the heart of the world, even as the heart is in living creatures) ought to have beene created before all things: therefore he begun with the first Creation of the light. But the Sunne having received a most cleare, and lucide substance, obtained the dominion and rule of the day; the Moone of the night, as not illuminating the night by its owne light, but very little, yea in the whole Ecclipse thereof when the aire is cleare, yet appeareth the circle of it, but the light very small. But the Starres and constellations, seeme to have a stronger light, but farre inferiour to that of the Sunne.
That is to be observed which he saith, that the lights were placed in the firmament of heaven: and verse 8. He calleth the firmament heaven, whence a man may gather, that the Chaos was created much lesse than the world now is, and from Aphar, and (as it were) a slimie Abysse of the Chaos, the matter being educted and extenuated,

was elevated upward, and by little and little, as it departed farther from the Center, being made more and more subtile and noble, as it extended it selfe, begirded and composed the more grosse Elements. And so the Empyriall heaven was made the most subtile and noble, as being the throne of God, and the habitation of the blessed. Vnder that the Primum mobile, the first moveable, a heaven a little more grosse, and lesse noble. Vnder that the other Heavens and Planets, which by how much nearer they are to the earth, by so much they are of a more grosse and lesse noble substance, lesse extended. So that the heaven of the Moone is the most grosse, and next in condition to the elements. This expansion or entending, maketh the superiour things lighter, and the separation of them from those that are more grosse; maketh them more noble. Moreover, the luminous matter which was prepared for the substance of the Starres and lights, was not extended, but contracted, that they might shine more strongly, and become more conspicuous. So it commeth that the Starres are of a thicker substance than the rest of the heaven, yet equally light, because it is fierie, and also thicker, that the light might be the more strong and powerfull, and the reflexion of the beames; cast from the other Starres, which doth illuminate the night: especially that which is reflected from the Moone; but that light which is directed from the Sunne, doth divide the day from the night.
Besides these offices of the two lights, it is added, that they may be for signes, and for seasons, and for dayes, and for yeares. Here the Astronomers by signes understand certaine aspects of the Starres, whereby things to come are betokened: but they erre greatly, for that wherefore the lights were created, is of farre greater moment than the divers divinations of the Astrologers, to wit, that men, whom God had lodged in this edifice, might learne to know the omnipotencie and goodnesse of their Creator, which David sheweth very clearely, Psal. 19.1. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament sheweth his handie worke. And Saint Paul, Rom. 1.19. That which may be knowne of God is manifest in them, for God hath shewed it unto them: for the invisible things of him, from the creation of the world are clearely seene, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternall power and God-head. These two lights therefore are for this cause chiefely set in heaven, that by these workes of God, the omnipotency, majestie and divinitie of the Creator might be made knowne unto men, and not to the intent they should serve for the vanitie of Astrologers. Moreover, they are given for the designation of times, when they are to be changed. So they will demonstrate the end of times, and judgment of the world, when they shall be obscured, and desolved. So at the time of the passion of Christ, when the time of the Law was to be changed, Dionysius the Areopagite saw the admirable ecclipse of the Sunne. And Ioshua perceived the admirable hand of God by the Sunne, Josh. 10.13. They are also set to define the dayes and the yeares. The Starres also, which by night adorne the heaven above, doe also illuminate the earth below, and by their position shew the annuall circuit of the Sunne. The end of the fourth Day.


CHAP. XV. Of the Fabricke of the World. Of the Creation of Fish and Foule. The fifth Day beginneth.
THE second degree of things having beene treated of, now is handled the third, concerning things which are, which have vegetation and motion: and first of those which come from the waters, which are of a lesse solid substance, doe more easily encrease, and are not so long lived, which are divided into many species, and every one of them engender among themselves the seede of their species from the which species comming to maturitie, and dispersed, the same species groweth: but the individuals

of every Species, have alwayes the same characters or markes. So that there is alwayes the same number and figure of the bones, the same colour, the same forme of body and of other members, the same force, nature and savour, as also in hearbes and in plants, but divers species have also divers impressions of characters; differing in figure, or some accident: of which difference, if thou canst gather the cause, thou mayst contemplate more nearely the proper nature of every species. For the proper nature of every species maketh different impressions of the Characters, and this doth follow the other as from the effect a man may gather the cause, and from the cause, the nature. In the contemplation of foules, the same things offer themselves to be considered. But because that the substance of foules is more solid, and consequently longer lived, therefore also the workemanship of them was later finished this day: although they begunne to be formed together, when the waters were gathered into the Seas. For the matter of every thing being prepared, incontinent the Creation proceeded, and ceased not till all things were fully finished, and the Sabbath, or rest from all the worke of the Creation was come. For there is no cause wherefore the matter being once prepared, the Creation of things should be suspended. God Created many things as well as one, and the naturall order of creating things, is elegantly observed. The Starres also, which served more neerely unto life, were now also the precedent fourth day perfectly finished, that they might the more powerfully conferre their aid, than when the hearbes were created. So the nature of things Created, so soone as it was prepared, began to exercise its office, and all things co-operating together, the Fabricke of the world went forward. Oh admirable wisedome! which sufficed for the creating of the order, the nature, the ornament, the perfection, and the vertues of so many different things, and all without study or reasoning! for he speaketh the word, and they were made. It shall be good heere to make an anatomy of every one of the species, that it may be knowne in what things the impressions of the characters of every one are different, and in what manner, and by how many stations the nourishment is changed into the species, in what station the blood is created in fishes. Thou shalt find also in fishes, by the admirable providence, a little bladder full of aire inclosed in it, which taketh encrease together with the fish, whose office is to sustaine it pendant, in what part of the water soever it be, least by the weight of the body it sinke to the bottome. Thou shalt find also in females many egges, which being broken against the rockes, or otherwise by the vertue of nature forced out, come to multiply their species, and even as the seede of the plant, being cast beyond its mother (seing it hath a specificall vertue in it selfe) produceth the same species in its element: be it in the Earth or in the water. So also these egges of fishes being cast into the water, there receive life, and shew the same species, and the same character of their mother. Neither shall it be unprofitable also to rip up the severall species of birds, and to consider their inferiour parts, and the functions of every one of them, that the causes of the impressions of the characters, and the originall of their proper nature may more rightly be knowne. In the which are procreated egges one at a time, and are excluded, having for there coverture a shell somewhat hard, least the specificall vertue should more easily come to exhale: the which also being separated from their mother, keepe their specificall vertue, and being hatched by the heate of the mother, or also by stoves, as is used in Egypt for the space of sixe moneths, or a moneth produce birds of the same species. Moreover, they are conceived by the copulation of the Male and Female, as other living Creatures. But heere heede is to be taken principally to the difference of fish, and of foules, that though they were perfectly finished in one and the same day, yet doe they not consist of the same matter: but foules because they resemble more terrestriall living Creatures, as is manifested by the blood, and by the whole constitution of their body, they have more terrestriall substance than fishes, that they seeme to come of muddy water, and fishes of more pure water. Foules therefore are of a middle rancke betweene terrestriall living Creatures, and fishes; nearer to the nature of terrestriall living Creatures, than of fishes: and therefore later this day finished. But there is one thing most worthy to be observed in all living Creatures, that is, that they doe imitate in some sort the shape of man; whole nature (as it were) tending to the forming of man, and not having its entire perfection but in man, for although

they have a longer head, they are furnished with all instruments in some sort alike, for sence, and motion; the bones of the head are alike, their backe bone answereth in some sort to the backe bone of man, and their ribbes to his ribbes, and all the members are formed according to the nature, and operation of every one. The end of the fifth Day.


CHAP. XVI. Of the Fabricke of the World. Of the Creation of terrestiall living Creatures. The sixth Day beginneth.
WEE have seene two sorts of the third degree of things created, Fishes and Foules; now followeth the third kinde, terrestriall living Creatures, which how much the later they were created, so much the liker are they unto man, both in sense and motion; but in reason man surpasseth them all, they being destitute heereof. But of terrestriall living Creatures some are more like man then others, as they write of the Elephant, that it is a docible beast, and commeth neere to man in understanding; What shall we say of the Ape, which sporting imitateth mans actions? is angry, laugheth, applaudeth, seriously smelleth, warily beholdeth a thing, as deliberating whether it be good to eate; crackes nuts with her teeth like a man, and while she is busie about her owne worke, lookes upon the by-standers what they doe: she hath head, feete, and hands very like those of man, and in all things, is that amongst living Creatures, which commeth neerest the characters, and nature of man. For this cause it were not amisse diligently to consider the anatomy of this Creature, and to examine how much and in what, the interiour disposition thereof differeth from that of man; that the animall vertues may be knowne by the inward impressions. For I thinke that those depend upon these, or being after a speciall manner engraffed by nature, are by impression of the character, as by a fit instrument stirred up unto action, which yet seemeth ambiguous and doubtfull. For it appeareth that every thing hath in it selfe a certaine principle of its owne nature, which dyeth with it, so that the cause of the nature of every thing is created together with it, and is not from elsewhere. But we must anatomize every species, that the inward difference of all living Creatures amongst themselves, may be perceived, and the difference of the animall vertues may appeare, from the diversity of the impressions of their characters, so shall you finde out, for what reasons, the vertues animall are more excellent in foules, than in fishes, in beasts than in foules, in men than in beasts, and understand a most excellent order, from things lesse solid; from the lesse perfect, to the more perfect, from the lesse lively, to the more lively; from things temporall to those eternall.
All living creatures are nourished of such things as the earth bringeth forth, every one choosing naturally what best agreeth with his owne nature, and this is profitable to be knowne. For although the nature of every one changeth his nourishment into his species, yet is there some vertue in hearbes, and fruites, which turneth and altereth the said aliment into their owne nature, especially where there is affinity of natures, and easie digestion, yea they can also change venime, and corrupt it: but by the force of a contrary nature. Birds also feed on fishes, as being in kind nearer them, and every thing delighteth in that which comes nearer the nature thereof, except that which is of the same species, which every living Creature loveth, man onely excepted, who hath forgot his originall. Venimous beasts, besides their nature good for something, have this commodity, that they every where sucke up the vemine, and are nourished with it, but other beasts devoure them without harme, so well hath nature provided for the safety of living Creatures. But heere remaineth one question to be answered: whether that the same condition of living creatures which

now is, had beene the same, in case man had not sinned? without doubt they should have dyed, their life being worne out, and should have beene food one for another, otherwise the world could not have contayned their multiplication. And to what end should they have beene immortall, when they were onely ordained for the service of man? seeing such infinite encrease should have beene for no use: They had reverenced man undoubtedly, and beene obedient to him, for God, Gen. 1.28, 29, 30. made Adam Lord of all things under Heaven. And Gen. 3.21. God made Adam and his Wife coates of skinnes, which doubtlesse were taken from bruite beasts, for God had before made an end of Creating.


CHAP. XVII. Of the Fabricke of the World. Of the Creation of Man, and the first and principall end of the Creation.
THE fourth degree of things created, and the most perfect is man, for use and service all things were hitherto created, and as all those things among themselves have a kinde of order, and harmonie, for their mutuall assistance; so all these together have a certaine conformitie, and harmonie unto man, in nature, qualitie, and operations, and therefore man is of the Greekes called the little world. But this conformitie, and hermonie, is so farre as concerneth the animall part of man.
Furthermore, there is a thing farre more noble in man, that hee exceedeth the dignitie of all creatures, to wit, the reasonable soule, according to which he was created after the Image and the similitude of God. And because man, according to his substance is a reasonable creature, and received a blessing that he should encrease and multiply by the generation of his species: there is no doubt but from that blessing, he hath also received power to beget a reasonable soule, which is the chiefe part of the species. Which that it should be new created in every man, is not agreeable, seeing God the seventh day ceased from all the workes of his Creation, and then kept the Sabbath.
And there are yet in this inferiour world, the reliques of that matter, of which the celestiall and supercelestiall things were created, so that there is a naturall inclination, and sympathie, of the superiour world, unto the inferiour, and a respect and desire of the inferiour unto the superiour. For from hence also dependeth the proclivitie and cooperation of things superiour, unto the inferiour. The thing most noble, that is in the higher world, is the Empyriall heaven, or those supercelestiall waters, out of which I have shewed the Angels to be created. So that the reasonable soule may be begot of the reliques thereof, in this inferiour world: and why may it not, seeing gold which is corruptible, is begot of the farre more grosse and ignoble matter of the earth? Therefore the eternall and immortall soule, may much rather be begot of the reliques of the supercelestiall waters, that it may be like unto Angels, and the blessing and commandement of God gave power to beget the soule of such reliques, to propagate and multiply the species. Now see what gifts of the holy Ghost or God are in his soule. Here are understanding, reason, judgement, memory, love of what is truely good, justice, joy in the holy Ghost, free election of will, and what else. For in these things he beareth the resemblance of God and his Image, in the immortall substance of the reasonable soule. For man was created in this order and manner, first he formed the humane shape of Aphar, or clay, in which undoubtedly those bowels which are first made in generation begun to be formed, as the heart, then the liver and those things which depend immediately upon the heart: Which being formed he breathed into his face the breath of life. All living things draw breath through the mouth and nostrils, whereby the heart is kindled with life and motion; so through the mouth and nostrils he breathed spirit, which was without question of the reliques of the supercelestiall waters; or some part of them was first conceived in the masse or lumpe

of the body, of which the reasonable soule by the holy Ghost accompanying it, was at length formed: but first the animall life was produced by the common aire. For the reasonable soule; seeing they have different offices the one from the other: and the animall soule going before, the rationall remaineth, and the animall soule is a certaine harmonie, and common operation of the interiour entrals, conspiring to the life of the animall; as for the rationall, it is the Image of the divine essence. But that the animals have obtained life, it commeth to passe undoubtedly by the Spirit of God working with the like blast of aire; although it be not said so, for it is easily understood, that in like things God hath wrought after a like manner. The gifts which the reasonable soule, brought with it, were necessary in man, if he ought to be the Image of God; that he might contemplate the workes of God, and might acknowledge, adore and worship his Creator. For the knowledge of God was required unto the scope of the creation of man; for what blessednesse had he had with God, without the knowledge of him? Seeing therefore he knew the chiefe power and goodnesse of God, and that the contemplation and familiarity of God was pleasant to him, God would trie him, whether he that was enriched by him with greatest gifts, whereby he could obey God, would acknowledge and reverence God his Creator: for so bountifull a father required voluntary and willing obedience and love, whereby to be worshipped, and condigne service received from him. He gave him an easie command, that he should not eate of one tree, where there were so many full of the best fruits, for sight and taste, that hee should onely abstaine from that, and it is credible, that he obeyed God awhile, for as many thinke, he remained not in Paradise one houre, or some dayes or weekes.
It is likely rather that he remained some yeares in the obedience of God, as George Cedrenus thinketh, that being sollidly taught the workes of God, by the helpe of the holy Ghost, and longer contemplation, he might declare them to his posteritie: And seeing men then lived long, the true doctrine of God, by the tradition of a few, to wit, three (Adam, Methusalem, and Noah) came to Abraham, by whose holy covenant with God, it was easily preserved in the posteritie of Iacob, even unto Moses. But idolatrie too much prevailing about the time of his birth, God would by the description of the chiefe of his workes by Moses, reduce men to the acknowledgement and worship of one onely God. Here then is propounded to our contemplation, the generation of the world, which he described partly by tradition, and partly by the revelation of the holy Ghost; whereby we may attaine the true and perfect description of the whole world which we seeke for. He had without doubt frequent talke with God, wherein he was taught concerning the creation, the nature of things, Gods counsell, and other things, which were necessarie for man to know. God brought to him the living creatures, that he might behold them every one, and give them names according to ther nature; which could not be done in a small space of time. George Cedrenus in the abridgement of Histories, saith, some ancients were of opinion, that Adam sinned not, nor was cast out of Paradise, untill the seventh yeare, and makes it probable by good reasons.


CHAP. XVIII. Of the Fabricke of the World. Of the fall of Adam.
IN the meane time whilst Adam dwelt in Paradise, being made more familiar with God, perhaps not seriously considering Gods command, he lent his eares unto Sathan, and heard him long with patience, who being become Gods enemie, because by his just judgement, he was cast out of heaven, laid waite for man, perswaded him that Gods commandement was given him for some other end, than he had heard from God, when neverthelesse hee knew that God his Creator was true and just, and had not given his commandement

in vaine, but that the Serpent was a lier, and justly throwne downe from heaven. For it is not to be doubted, but that he had much conversation with God in Paradise, and divers discourses whereby he was instrctued concerning the Creation, and nature, and the end of all things. Yea acknowledged the power of God from so wise a Creation, and the right judgement given against the Serpent, that of right he should not have given eare to the Serpent, and that it was folly for him so to doe: neverthelesse in this he did not sinne against God, because God had not forbidden it. For it made for the greater glory of God, if Adam had not sinned: for then had man given a certaine testimonie of himselfe, that he was well created, as all things were very good, Gen. 1.31. He could have interrupted the serpents speech, and rejected him, and he had not sinned. It was the beginning of sinne, but it was not sinne that he gave eare to Sathan, for God had not forbidden this, and as yet he had power to contradict him: but his longer patience and familiarity caused consent, and he forthwith sinned by transgressing the commandement, wherewith the holy Ghost offended, left him, and spoiled him of his gifts, which he had received in the Creation, and were preserved in him by the holy Ghost, so long as he did not sinne, God considering the event, but not approving it, because he had forbidden it, and Adam so making experiment of his constancie. Of this lapse Ecclesiasticus writeth most plainely, and most truely, Chap. 15. verse 14. God created man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his counsell, giving him these ordinances and commandements, if thou wilt thou shalt keepe the commandements, and testifie thy good will. He hath set before thee fire and water, put forth thy hand to which thou wilt. Life and death are offered unto man, good and evill, which he pleases shall be given unto him. But now, since God knew before that he would sinne, why did he not create him such a one, as could not fall? God did all things well and like a father. It was his favour that man was adorned with such excellent gifts of minde, that he might easily obey so small a commandement, and man of right ought to have beene thankefull for so great gifts by obeying his Creator. He could therefore as Ecclesiasticus saith, have stood if he would, but that he fell it was not of God predestinating or willing, for God had created all things very good, and Fatherly ordred them. So when he sinned, he was deprived of the holy Ghost, which dwelt before familiarly with him, from whom he had life not mortall, if he had not sinned, who had sustained him in holy life by the grace and favour of God: being destitute therefore of the familiar presence of the Spirit of God, he perceived nothing in himselfe but carnall affections, whereby his minde being drawne away, (as is evident by Paul, Rom. 7.15. and the verse following, and 24.) he also was made carnall, that is, addicted to the concupiscence of the flesh, as being constituted in the same subsistence, for he saith, there is another law and necessitie in the flesh, than in the spirit or understanding; and that it draweth the spirit captive into servitude. And that which is captive, is not in its owne power, but is subjected to the power of another. He sheweth then that the spirit in the beginning was not carnall but became such when it was made captive to the flesh. It is altogether necessarie to know, and observe this originall of originall sinne, that the spirit from the beginning was not created carnall, or fraile, or unable to resist evils, for this would argue the impotencie of the Creator, that he could not create man fit for that end which he had conceived, and would violate his authority. Now what calamities are accrewed unto mankinde from this sinne, learne from that place of Saint Paul, Chap. 7. for if the flesh could doe so much against the Spirit, adorned with so many abilities, and preserved by the holy Ghost, what shall it not doe against the same spirit made captive thereunto, and forsaken of the familiaritie of the holy Ghost. Heare what the Apostle saith, Rom. 3.12. of all, both Iewes and Gentiles, They have all gone out of the way, they are all become unprofitable, there is none that doth good, no not one. He speakes of mans natures alone, but when it is Christ, and man is helped of the holy Ghost, he is not such, the naturall gifts of the minde, understanding, reason, judgement, memory, and other gifts suffice not, if the spirit be not present, the supporter and governour of these. But the concupiscence of the flesh is not onely a privation of righteousnesse, but a true inclination to those things which please the flesh, from whence all sinnes arise, and therefore that inclination is called originall sinne. Now if it were onely a privation of righteousnesse, Paul had no occasion to exclaime: Wretched man

that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Rom. 7. For a regenerate man is freed from his minde. But in the regenerate sinne originall yet abideth, which is an argument, that originall sinne is more then a privation, and an evill which cleaveth to nature, and is propagated by generation. In sinne (saith the Psalmist) my mother conceived me. But God foreseeing that this sinne would come upon man, said, In that day in which thou shalt eate of the tree of the knowledge of good and evill, thou shalt die the death; for this sinne was to be expiated with the death of the body. Therefore it is a law unto all once to dye, to the end, that that which is come upon them besides the creation, may be abolished in those that are to be saved. As for Paradise, where it was, and what the Rivers thereof, I will shew in the ancient reformed Geography. Man having beene created out of Paradise, was transported into it.


CHAP. XIX. Of the Fabricke of the World. Of the second and subordinate purpose of the Creator in Creating Man.
BEcause God foresaw that Man would sinne, lest so wise a Creation of all things, and the end whereunto it was ordained should be in vaine, which Adam violated by sinning, it pleased him therefore to repaire the fall of man, by a new benefit, ordayning a meanes whereby being delivered, he might be restored to his former condition, and that the intent of his first Creation might take effect, he promised his Sonne should take flesh upon him, who should satisfie for the sinne of Adam, with which all men were taynted from their birth, that he should appease God the Father, and obtaine the helpe of the Holy Ghost againe, which being promised, and beleeved, they might by the same intention, as before attaine to eternall life. From this foreknowledge, God using his wonderfull providence, so finished the Creation of all thing, that in both estates, of obedience, and the fall, he preserved for man the meanes to obtaine eternall life, so that nothing was made of God in vaine, onely the death of the flesh remayned, which was due to originall sinne, untill that was taken away from man altogether, and he being wholly pure, as he was Created, might come to God, according to the end wherefore he was Created.
Moreover, because all men were guilty of orignall sinne, as I shewed in the former Chapter, so that they could not by the gifts of nature, come unto Christ, God therefore ordayned Repentance, Baptisme, and Communion, the chiefe Sacraments, whereby man before all the world, might yeeld himselfe unto Christ, and by faith might approove and accept his sacrifice for the sinnes of man, whereby he might be armed against the force of sinne, be delivered by this onely meanes, from the power of originall sinne, and obtaine the helpe of the Holy Ghost against the force thereof, yet the fight with sinne remaineth so long as wee live, till it be abolished by the death of the flesh, on which the originall thereof dependeth, and therefore the death of the flesh was enjoyned of God, because of the fall of Adam, that that sinne which is besides the Creation, might be rooted out: by meanes whereof, man is saved, yet is there no accesse unto God the Father, but by Christ. It is written, Iohn 3.13. No man ascendeth up to Heaven, but the Sonne of Man, who descended from Heaven. The way was to be opened by Christ: And it behooved Christ to suffer, and to enter into his glory, Luke 24, 26. That therefore I may adde that which of many is not rightly disputed, before the incarnation of Christ, none of the holy Fathers ascended into Heaven, but were reserved in a certaine place of joy and happy expectation, untill the comming of Christ. This place, the Fathers called Limbus, not that of Hell, but as I suppose, that of the Heavenly Paradise, in which Abraham, as Father of the faithfull, was most eminent, into whose bosome or Congregation Lazarus after his death was carryed by the Angels. But after the death of Christ they were brought into Heaven, according to his testimony. Father I will that where I am my Servants may be

also. So that Christ Iesus in his time, ascended with his spoyle, and captivity into Heaven. Therefore this originall sinne and fight therewith, continueth unto the death of the flesh; but by faith in Christ we are armed and preserved against it, by the helpe of the Holy Ghost, as Adam had beene preserved if he had not sinned. Because of the sight thereof with the Spirit, Paul cryeth out Wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this death? (to wit, that is assayed thereby) I thanke my God (saith he) by Iesus Christ, whom the Father hath given me for a Saviour, and an Helper by his Spirit, till this sinne be utterly abolished in the death of the flesh.




An Introduction To Vniversall Geographie, as well moderne, as ancient.

CHAP. I. What Geographie, the Globe, or the round earth is.
GEography is a discription of the whole Earth, as much as is discovered to us. This Greeke word Geography, is compounded of the Noune (...), or (...), instead whereof this word (...) is used in composition, that is to say, Earth, and of the verbe (...), I write, whence is made this compound word (...), that is to say, a discription of the Earth.
Geography is differing from Cosmography, as the part from the whole, and is also distinguished from Chorographie, as the whole from the part: for Cosmographie is the discription of all the World, which is derived from the Greeke Noune (...), that is to say World, and from the verbe (...), that is to say, I write, when one speakes of the whole world, we understand the world, as well elementary, as Celestiall.
Corography is the particular description of some Region, or Country, and commeth also from this Greeke word (...), or (...), that is to say, Region, and from the verbe (...), which is to say, I write, as the discription of Spaine, Italy, Germany, France; etc.
Topographie is the particular description of a certaine place, as of a Countrey, of a Territory, or of a Towne, or of a village, under which are comprised Manured Land, Medowes, Trees, Places and buildings, represented by writing. This is also a Greeke word, and compounded of the Noune (...), that is to say, a place, and of the verbe (...), that is to say, I write.
But Geographie is properly the description of the situation of the Earth alone, where in first is to be marked, that in the terme of Geographie, this word is not onely taken for one of the foure elements, as in a Physicall terme, but thereby we understand conjoyntly, the earth moistened with the waters, which are showred upon it, making both together the Center of the whole world, which because of the round figure is called Orbis, or the Globe of the Earth. For the Globe is a solid body round on all sides, contained in a Superficies, having in the middle thereof a Center or point, whereof all lines which are drawne from thence, unto the superficies, are equall: this then is a sole Globe, compounded of the one and the other Element, from whence rebounds one onely convex or Superficies, that is to say, which appeareth without concavity.
The Geographers distinguish diversly the Globe of the Earth, into certaine Circles and parts whereof we are to treate in order.



CHAP. II. Of the parts of the Globe or of the Sphere, and of its Circles.
IN the first place the Axletree is set in the Globe which the Latines call Axis, or a right line, which passeth through the Center of the Earth, and is the Diameter of the whole world, called by the Greeke Diameter, compounded of the preposition (...), that is to say per, or through, and of the verbe (...), that is to say, I measure: as a measuring through the middle, about which the whole world wheeleth, and turneth about.
The extremities of the Axletree are called the Poles of the world, so called Poli from the Greeke verbe (...), that is to say, I turne, whence they are called by the Latins, vertices, as turnings and hinges, because all the round frame of the world wheeleth about them, whereof the one of them is called Arcticus ursalis, or the Beare-pole, from the Greek word (...); that is to say, a Beare, which is a constellation in Heaven, neere unto this Circle, the other is named Antarcticus, because it is right against, and Diametrically opposite to the Pole Arcticke.
The Pole Arcticke, is that which appeareth alwayes in the places, where we inhabite, and hath divers names, as Borealis, or Boreas, and also Aquilonaris or Aquilonius, from the wind Boreas, or Aquilo which bloweth from this corner, and is called also Septentrionalis, from the seaven Starres, which the Latins call Triones, and which are commonly called Charles Waine.
The Pole Antarcticke, is termed also by the Latins, Australis, and Austrinus, and Notius, from the winde called Auster, and Notus, and Meridionalis, which is the Southerne windes, taking the name from that Region of the world, and is never seene in this our Hemisphere, but lies hid under the Horizon. Moreover, the Globe of the earth is accompanied with eight principall Circles, doubly divided. First, into an equall number, the greater and lesser: the greater are these which have the same Center as the world hath, and which cut and divide the Globe, or the Sphere into two equal parts. They are called in this manner Aequinoctiall or Aequator, Zodiaque, Horizon, Meridian. The lesser circles are those, which have a different Center, and other then that of the Globe, or of the Sphere, and part the Sphere or Globe into two equall parts. These are the two Tropickes, and the two Polars, or the Poles of the world.
Againe among all these aforesaid Circles, some of them are termed, Rights, or Parallels, that is to say distances, which have an equall space the one from the other, because they have the same Poles, as the world hath, and in regard that they are of an equall distance among themselves in Latitude. These are called the Aequator, the two Tropickes, and the two Polars, the other three called Oblique, or byassing, because they have their Poles differing from the Poles of the world.


CHAP. III. Of the foure great Circles.
THese great Circles are distinguished into fixed, and mooveable. The fixed. immoveable are those, which alwayes hold one and the same place in the Globe, or in the Sphere, and hence it comes, that they are pointed out upon the superficies or upper face of the Globe. These are the Aequator, and the Zodiaque. The moveable are those, which are not alwayes setled in one place, but change their place diversly, and according to the variety, and change of places and Countries, and for this cause are placed, without the Superficies of the Sphere, these are they which are named Horizon, and Meridian, but it behoveth us to speake of each of them in particular.
(...), Horizon, by the Latins is called Terminator, Finitor, and Finiens, a Bounder. a Finiter, or Finishing, which is a great Circle, moveable, which separateth the visible

part of the world from the invisible, that is to say, the inferiour Hemisphere from the Superiour. It is very well represented upon the covercle or upon the upper face of the Globe, for the superficies thereof, which is the upper part, maketh the true office of the Horizon, when it divideth the whole Globe into two equall parts. Now the said Horizon is of two sorts; the one which is conceived by reason, and understanding, the other, which is knowne by the sense. That which is comprehended by the Intellect hath it extention unto the Sphere of the fixed Starres, and divideth into two equall parts, the whole Globe of the world, so that one of these Hemispheres appeareth above the Earth, and the other is hidden under the earth, and is divided againe into two sorts, the one right, the other oblique; the right is that which passeth a thwart from the two Poles of the world, hath its Pole, or point verticall under the Aequator, which cutteth betweene them in forme of right angles. The oblique is called that, whose pole, or point verticall meeteth either on this side, or that side of the Aequator, and cutteth the Aequator by oblique angles. The one being elevated on high from the Poles of the world, the other altogether declining downeward. Those which have this Horizon, perceive the rising, and the setting of the Sunne, and of the other Starres by oblique motion. But the Horizon we know by sense, is that which being bounded and terminated by our sight, extendeth as farre as our sight can pearce, separating the visible part of the Globe, from that which is invisible, the Diameter whereof, is a hundred and fourescore furlongs in length, that is to say, two and twenty thousand paces, and a halfe, or five thousand of Germane, with the five eight parts. And is thought that it passeth no further; because that our sight cannot extend any further. The Horizon is called moveable or divers, because one cannot change the place, to any place whithersoever he goeth, besides, if one move out of his place never so little, which wayes he will, even in that instant he changeth also the Horizon, the Heaven, and the Region, and by this meanes one may imagine an infinity of Horizons. It is likewise to be knowne, that the Horizon hath two Poles, whereof one of them in the Arabicke tongue, is called Semith, and by the vulgar corrupted, Zenith, and is no other thing, than a point which is right over the crowne of our heads, the other is commonly called Nadir, but to speake more properly Nathir, Diametrically opposite to the other, and is right over the head of the Antipodes.
Equinoctiall is a word borrowed from the Latine Aequinoctialis, which is also called Aequidialis, and in Greeke, (...), from the word, (...), that is to say, alike, and from (...), that is to say, day, and besides is tearmed by the Latins Aequator. This is a Circle of the Sphere, the greatest of the five Parallels, and which divideth the Globe into two equall parts, the Septentrionall, and the Meridionall, distant by an equall space from the two Poles, whereunto, when the Sunne is once come, it maketh through the whole world, the night and the day of an equall length and durance, whence likewise it taketh the name of Aequidiall, and Aequinoctiall. The Aequinoxe, or Aequidiall, as the ancients call them, happen twice a yeare, the one in the beginning of the signe Aries, or the Ramme, which is called vernall, and the other in the beginning of Libra, or the Ballance, called Autumne. But Navigators commonly call the Equator, the middle line, or simply the Line, by a certaine Emphasis, or by prerogative and excellency.
The Zodiaque is one of the greatest Circles of the Sphere, placed crosse-wise betweene the two Poles of the world, which toucheth with the one side the estivall Tropicke, in the beginning of Cancer, or of the Crab, and with the other the Hyemall Tropicke, in the beginning of Capricorne, cutting the Aequator in the middle, and is likewise by the same Aequator, cut in the beginning of Aries, and Libra, so that the one halfe thereof boweth towards the Pole Arctique, and the other on that part of the Pole Antarctique: it is divided into twelve parts, which are co^monly called the twelve signes, from whence commeth the Latine word Signifer, that is to say, Signe-bearer, and the Greeke (...) from the Greeke word (...), that is to say, Animal, or Beast; because there are represented in it the twelve signes of living Creatures, the names whereof, the Poet Ausoinus hath comprised in this Distique.



Sunt
Aries @
Taurus @
Gemini, @
Cancer, @
Leo, @
Virgo, @
Libraque, @
Scorpius @
Arcitenen, @
Caper, @
Amphora, @
Pisces. @


The first of these verses containe the sixe Septentrionall signes, and the second the sixe other Meridionall. To every signe there is attributed thirty degrees, which make together 360. degrees, and make also the division of the whole Globe of the earth.
The Meridian circle called by the Greekes (...), from the Greeke worke (...), that is to say, Demi, or halfe; and (...), that is to say, Day, as the Meridionall circle (to wit, that which passing through the Poles of the world, and the point verticall of every place) cutteth athwart the Aquinoctiall circle, and divideth the whole earth into two equall parts, leaving one of its parts to the Eastward, and the other to the Westward, and is so called, that when the Sunne is ascended up to the highest point of our Hemisphere, it maketh alwayes with us mid-day, or the halfe of the day, and all those which are under one and the same Meridian, situated towards the North, or towards the South. And on the other part, maketh alwayes midnight, or the halfe of the night, when it commeth to the same point in the inferiour Hemisphere. This is because the principall office of the Meridian is, to shew the mid-day, and the mid-night. Now the verticall point is nothing else, but the top, or the highest part of heaven being right perpendicular over the head of every one. The Meridian is called moveable, because that if you, or any other, stirre never so little towards the East, or towards the West, you presently have another Meridian; in such sort, that it alters with us continually, according to the change of places, or of countrey wherein we are, and by this meanes, a man may see there is an infinite number of Meridians, for looke how many right points may be given over our heads, so many Meridians there may likewise be given.


CHAP. IV. Of the foure little Circles.
THE Tropicks are two circles, distant one from another; of an equall distance from the Equator, whereof the one of them nearest to us, is called the tropicke of Cancer, the other lying Southward, is called the tropicke of Capricorne. The Latines call them Solstitiales, that is, Solstices, because the Solstices are in them: for the Sunne never passeth beyond them, but when it commeth to one of them, it returneth backwards: from whence they have taken their name from the Greeke verbe (...), that is, to turne, or from the reversion. The tropicke of Cancer, or the Crab, which is also called Estivall, is nearest to the North among all the circles, through the which the Sunne maketh his course; to which when it commeth, it goeth no further towards the North, but returnes againe to the other part of the world, towards the South, taking againe his Estivall course, in which time, the dayes are at the longest of all the yeare in our Hemisphere, and the nights the shortest: and this name, the tropicke of Cancer was given to it, from the signe Cancer, or the Crab, which is in the Zodiaque, instantly, whereupon, the Sunne beginneth to returne. The tropicke of Capricorne, which is called also Hybernall, is the circle nearest to the South of all other, thorow the middle whereof the Sunne passeth, whereunto the Sunne being once come, goeth no further toward the Meridionall part, but makes his returne in the Winter towards the Septentrionall part, which makes us to have the longest nights of all the yeare, and shortest dayes. It is called the tropicke of Capricorne from this signe, when the Sunne comes to passe it.
There are two polare circles farthest of all, and next neighboures to the Poles, being equally distant from their Poles, whereof the one of them, is that which we alwayes see, and is called Arctique, as the Pole it selfe is, from the Greeke word (...), that is to say, Beare; because it is marked neare the feete. with the little Beare: it is called

also Septentrionall, Boreall, and Aquilonian, from that part of the world, under which it is situated.
The other polare circle, equall and parallell to the Pole Arctique, is called Antarctique; because it is diametrically opposite to the Arctique, it is wholly hidden under the earth, by the opposition whereof we cannot perceive it. It is also called Austrine, or Australl, and Meridionall.


CHAP. V. Of the Zones.
THE foure lesser circles, divide all the superficies of the earth into five distances, spaces, or regions, which the Geographers call Zones, the Greeke word (...), signifies a girdle, and is taken for a space and internall, which is in the globe of the earth, betweene two small circles, or else closed betweene a little circle, and the Pole.
The Zones receive sundrie denominations, according to the qualitie and the nature of their situations; the one is called the Torride, or burning Zone, the two others are called cold, and somewhat temperate: that which lies in the middest betweene the foure others is called the Torride, because of the heate of the Sunne, which is perpetually hot and burning in this place, over which he passeth, and the way through which it goeth, for which reason the ancients thought it unhabitable.
This then is the Torride zone, which is a space of place situated, betweene the two Tropickes, which containeth 47. degrees in latitude, and over which the Equinoctiall circle that cutteth it, and divideth it in the middle is situated. The two others, which are situated in the extremities of the Globe, next to the Poles of the world whereof the one of them lieth next the Pole Arctique, and the Northerne part, and the other towards the Pole Antarctique, on the other side of the South, are called friged or cold, because they are extreamely distant from the course and way which the Sun holdeth, and for this cause, by reason of the extremitie of the cold, the ancients held them not habitable. Their bounds are limited one from another by their proper Pole, and are also called Polars from the said Poles, touching their extention in latitude, it is three and twentie degrees and a halfe.
The other two Zones remaining are called temperate, and accounted habitable, because they are placed betweene the cold and the hot, and participate of the temperature of them both; the one whereof is called Septentrionall, shut in betweene the circle Articke, and the tropicke of Cancer, or the Crab: the other is called Australl or Meridionall, bounded with the circle Antarctique, and the Tropicke of Capricorne, both which containe 43. degrees.


CHAP. VI. Of the Parallels, and Climats.
THere is another way also to divide the superficies of the earth, to wit, by the change and the diversitie of the length of dayes, for those who inhabit right under the Equator, have perpetually the day and night of an equall length, just twelve houres long, but as much as is gained on this side, or on the other side of the Equator, lying towards the one, or the other Pole: So much in Summer the dayes encrease in length, and on the other side the nights are made the longer in Winter; for this cause the Geographers, according to the encreasing of the dayes, have diversely distinguished the regions, or parts of the earth, which they call Parallels, or Climats.
Parallels are circles equally distant one from another drawne from the West to the East, any man may see them at his pleasure, delineated upon the Globe of the earth. But Ptolomy, who was followed by a great number of other Geographers, hath made twentie one Parallels, in that part which extends it selfe twards the North, keeping

this proportion, and internall; so that one of the longest dayes of a parallell surpasseth the longest day of the parallell precedent. The climate is a space of the earth, between two parallels, in which on the longest day it maketh the change, or encrease of halfe an houre. But the word climate and and parallell signifie sometimes a space, comprehended betweene two circles.
Moreover the climats are distinguished into those, which are Septentrionals, and the Meridionalls, either of them taking their beginning from the Equator, extending towards their proper Pole. Hence it comes to passe, that where the climate lieth furthest from the Equator, so many halfe houres, the longest day exceedeth the day equall to the night, to wit, which is twelve houres, and going backward giveth you to understand, under what parallell, or climate every place is situated, you are to marke well the number of houres, of which the longest day in the same place, exceedeth the day of the right sphere (which as is said) is alwayes twelve houres; for this number being doubled, sheweth the number of the Climates, and being quadruple, giveth you to understand the number of the parallel.
Moreover, antiquitie knew onely but seaven Climates, being of opinion, that that which was beyond the seventh climate, could hardly be accounted habitable, being not as yet discovered.
These climates tooke their denominations from the most renowned places, over which the middle place of the climates extended, namely, the first was called per Meroen or dia Meroes, which was an Ile lying upon the river of Nilus, and a city in Africa^ The second, per Sienem, a towne of Egypt. The fourth, per Rhodum, or dia Rhodes, an Iland well knowne. The fifth, per Romam, or dia Romes. The sixth, per Pontum Ex^inum, or dia Ponton. The seventh, per Boryst henem or dia Borysthenes: some others adde unto them two more, that is, per Ripheos, the eight, and per Damam the ninth. But our moderne Authors, who have found out by experience, that the earth was inhabited beyond these above said climates, have supposed five and twentie climates, reaching over the 67. degree of the elevation of the Pole; the first was over Meroes, the second over Syena under the Estiuall tropicke, the third over Alexandrino, the fourth over Rhodes, the fifth over Rome and Hellespont, the sixt over Millan and Venice, the seventh over Podolia and Tartaria the lesser, the eighth over Wittenberge, the ninth over Rostocke, the tenth over Ireland, the eleventh over Bohoja a fortresse in Norway, the twelfth over Gutie, the thirteenth over Bergin a towne in Norway, the foureteenth over Viburgh a towne in Finland, the fifteenth over Arotia a towne of Sweatbland, the sixteenth over the mouth of the river of Dalenkaul, and the other which remaine over the other places of Norway, Sweathland, Russia, and the places bordering upon the next Iles by the like internall. Now it is certaine that from the Equinoctiall circle, to the place where the longest day is limited to twentie foure houres, it hath the extension of twentie foure climates, but from this place to the Pole, the climates cannot be certainely distinguished; because that from thence afterward the dayes encrease in such a sort, first not by halfe houres, but from the beginning by whole dayes: after by weekes, and in time by moneths, so that under the Poles, one of the Hemispheres is enlightned and dried by the light of the dayes, which last sixe moneths: the other by the like space of time, is overcast with a thicke darkenesse and a continuall night.
For the rest the same consideration, which hath beene made of the climates from the Equinoctiall towards the Pole Arctique, the like also must be observed from the same Equinoctiall on that side, which lieth towards the Pole Antarctique, in making alike number of them, neverthelesse, the Authors have given no other proper appellations to such climes, but named them by those which were opposite to them, adding this Greeke preposition (...), to them, as (...), that is to say, opposite to that which is over against Meroe, and so of the others, as (...), which is opposite to that which passeth over Syena, notwithstanding, a man may call them by the same proper name, as the others: as the first Climate, by the mountaines of the Moone, and the sources of Nilus; the second, by the Promontory commonly called Cabo de Corientes, under the Hybernall tropicke, and so of others: but for the more easie conceiving of the latitude of the Climates and Parallels from the Equinoctiall, the distances of the one from the other, and the length of the longest dayes, we have prefixed this following Table.



A Table of the Climats, Parallels, and Longitude of the dayes.


Climats.


Parallels.


Dayes longer. Order of houres.


Latitude. Order of degrees.


Internals of Climats.



0
0 1
12 12
 
0 15
0 4
0
18
4
18


1
2 3
12 12
 
30 45
8 12
34 43
8
25


2
4 5
13 13
 
0 15
16 20
33 73
7
50


3
6 7
13 13
 
30 45
23 27
10 36
7
3


4
8 9
14 14
 
0 15
30 33
43 45
6
9


5
10 11
14 14
 
30 45
36 29
30 2
5
17


6
12 13
15 15
 
0 15
41 43
22 32
4
30


7
14 15
15 15
 
30 45
45 47
29 20
3
48


8
16 17
16 16
 
0 15
49 50
1 33
3
13


9
18 19
16 16
 
30 45
52 53
58 17
2
44


10
20 21
17 17
 
0 15
54 55
29 34
2
17


11
22 23
17 17
 
30 45
56 57
37 34
2
0


12
24 25
18 18
 
0 15
58 59
26 14
1
40


13
26 27
18 18
 
30 45
59 60
59 40
1
26


14
28 29
19 19
 
0 15
61 61
18 53
1
13


15
30 31
19 19
 
30 45
62 62
25 54
1
1


16
32 33
20 20
 
0 15
63 63
22 46
0
52


17
34 35
20 20
 
30 45
64 64
6 36
0
44


18
36 37
21 21
 
30 ^5
65 65
49 36
0
36


19
38 39
21 21
 
30 45
65 65
21 35
0
29


20
40 41
22 22
 
0 15
65 65
47 57
0
22


21
42 43
22 22
 
30 45
66 66
6 14
0
17


22
44 45
23 23
 
0 15
66 66
20 28
0
11


23
46 47
23 23
 
36 45
66 66
28 30
0
5


24
48
24
 
0
66
31
0
0


 
Moneths.
 


 
1
67
15
 


 
2
69
30
 


 
3
73
20
 


 
4
78
20
 


 
5
84
0
 


 
6
90
0
 






CHAP. VII. Of the division of the earth into three hundred and sixtie degrees, with the Longitude and Latitude thereof.
THE circumference and roundnesse of the whole circle, according to the Geometritians, is divided into 360. parts, and this same division is received into the section of the Sphere and of the Globe. The earth then, as the sphere is divided into 360. parts which they call degrees. Every degree is divided into 60. scruples, which make a thousand Romane spaces, or an Italian mile, or an ordinary Almaine mile: so that every degree containeth 15. Germaine miles, and the whole counted together, make five thousand and foure hundred: which is the whole circumference of all the Globe of the earth: and its Diameter, or the halfe part thereof equally in two, is a thousand seven hundred and eighteene Germane miles, with two elevenths: the semi-diameter, from the superficies of the center, eight hundred fiftie nine, with one eleventh.
Moreover, the degrees by which the earth is measured, are of two sorts, the one of Longitude, the other of Latitude. The longitudes are distinguished by the Meridian circles, and the Latitudes by the Parallels. There are thirtie sixe Meridians, which are fastned upon the Globe, every Meridian having tenne degrees, which number being multiplied, maketh three hundred and sixty Ptolomy hath placed the first Meridian in the fortunate Iles, which at this day are called the Canaries, since the Spanish Pylots have placed it in the Ile of Gos-hawkes, which their language is called Assores, and some of them placed it in the midst of Spaine. From the Equator to the one or the other Pole, are marked out nine Parallels, each of them containing tenne degrees: then multiplying this number by foure, ye shall finde in all thirtie sixe parallels, as in the Longitude: Now wee must hold that the Longitude is a certaine space or internall of the Equator, closed betweene Meridians, the one from the Iles called Assores, from whence it taketh the beginning, the other from that place or Region, whereof we would know the distance. As touching the breadth or elevation, that is, a going backeward, or the length of a place or of a Countrey distant from the Equator, either towards the one or the other Pole. Also the elevation of the Pole is the same as is the Latitude from a place. But this Latitude is of two sorts, the one is Septentrionall from the Equator, to the Pole Arctque in our Hemisphere; the other is Meridionall or Austral, from the Equator in the inferiour Hemisphere to the Pole Antarctique.


CHAP. VIII. Of the foure quarters of the World, and of the Winds.
THis whole, which beareth the name of the world, and of the heaven, is no other than a body, which in its owne circuit, boundeth and enfoldeth all things, it receiveth difference in the parts thereof, which are called the Regions of the world, or the points and places from whence the Sunne ariseth, and that part is called Orient or Levant: where the Sunne goeth downe, that is called Occident or Couchant. The space through which the Sunne maketh his course of the one side, is called South, and the part opposite to it, is called the North* to these foure there are added foure other Regions and parts of the world, interposed and interlaced betweene the foure first. Betwixt the Septentrionall or North, and the Orient and the Levant Equinoctiall, the Oreant of the Summer is called the Orient of the Sunne in Summer: betweene the Levant Equinoctiall and the South, the Levant or Orient Hybernall or Winter. Betweene the North or Septentrionall and the Occident Equinoctiall, the Occident or the Couchant Summer. Betweene the Occident Equinoctiall and the South, the Couchant or the Occident Winter. Moreover, in the foure principall parts or hinges of the world, there are attributed foure principall Windes, which

from thence are called Cardinalls. Their names and their Regions are represented in this sort by Ovid. lib. 1. of his Elegies De tristibus. Elegie 2. l. 1.


Nam modo purpureo vires capit Eurus ab ortu
Nunc Zephyrus sero vespere missus adest.
Nunc gelidus sicca Boreas bacchatur ab arcto.
Nunc Notus adversa praelia fronte gerit.


Now straight takes Eurus strength from purple East.
Now Zephyrus at night is ready prest.
Now boysterous Boreas from North doth blow.
Now Notus in his fore-head wars doth shew.




SEPTENTRIO
ortus Aestinus Oriens Solstitialis
ORTVS ORlens
Ortus hipe^^us Oriens brumalis
MERIDIES
Occasus Hibemus Occidens brumalis
OCCASVS Occidens
Ocasus Aeshuus Occidens Solstitialis


BOREAS
Coecias
EVRVS
Vrlturnus
NOTVS
Africus
ZEPHIRVS
Caurus siue Corus


But the names of these aforesaid Winds, being described unto us by the Poet in Greeke termes, the Latines have given them proper names in their language, and have called that which bloweth from the North Aquilo; that which commeth from the East Subsolanus; from the South, Auster; and from the West, Favonius, which may easily be knowne by the figure here represented, B.
But of all these windes distinguished by their names, as well ancient as moderne Authors have ordered the situations so divers and variable, that a man can scarcely compose thereof a certaine figure, to gather all their sundry opinions. It is true that the Italians, who ordinarily saile upon the Mediterranean sea, which is called the interiour sea, and hath its extention betweene Europe, Asia, and Africa, have made 16. sorts of windes, which are divided according to this manner following, C.
But the Europeans, English, and all the Germanes, who saile upon the enteriour sea, or the great Ocean, have given proper names to the windes, as seemed best unto them, and have made of them two and thirtie; which they call by names, as is demonstrated in this Table.


CHAP. IX. Of Dimensions, or measuring of places.
THE Romanes measured the distance of places by the number of a thousand paces, which they called milliare, and because they marched every space of a thousand paces with a stone: thence they called their miles, or milliaries, lapides. As for example, when they said, ad decimum lapidem, that was, ad decimum milliare, ten thousand paces, or the tenth milliar. Foure thousand paces make a common Germane mile, hence it is that one degree of the Globe of the earth, containeth sixtie thousand paces, miles, or Italian milliers, but are fifteene thousand ordinary German miles. The Grecians measured the distances of places by furlongs, the furlong is an hundred twentie five paces, whereof eight furlongs make an Italian mile, that is a thousand paces; and two and thirty furlongs make an ordinary Germaine mile. The Persians measured the length of their lands by that which they called Parasanga, every one of them containing 30. furlongs. The Egyptians had also that called Schoeni,

that is Cortles, which French word is yet in use in many places of France: but the Schoeni of Egypt were not alwayes of an equall distance and length; for some allowed sixtie furlongs to the Schoenus, others
TRAMONTANAGreco TramontanaGRECOGreco LeuanteLEVANTESirocco LevanteSIROCCOOstro SiroccoOSTROOstro GarbinoGARBINOPonente GarbinoPONENTEPononto MaestroMAESTROMaestro Tramontana
NORTHNorth and by EstNorth North EstNorth Est and by North.NORTHESTNorth Est and by EstEst North EstEst and by NorthESTEst and by northEst sorth Est.Sorth Est and by Est.SOVTHESTSorth Est and by sorthSorth Sorth EstSorth and by EstSOVTHSorth and by WestSorth Sorth WestSorth West and by sorthSOVTHWESTSorth West and by WestWest Sorth WestWest and by SorthWESTWest and by NorthWest North WestNorth West and by WestNORTHWESTNorth West and by NorthNorth North WestNorth and by West
fortie, some gave them only thirtie. At this day the thousand or milliers are verie commonly used among the Germanes. The Danes, the people of Norway, Sweds, English and Scottish use the word mile or meile, the same also doe the Poles, Bohemians, and other Nations, as Slavonia, which have their mila, or mile. Also the Italians use this word, and call it in their language, niglio. The French and Spaniards measure the distance of countries per leguas, or leucas; the one call them lieues, the other, leguas. The Italians also and the English, speaking of the length and distances of the Countries of Germanie, Slavonia, France and Spaine, distinguish them by miles. The Italians call them leghe, and the other leagues. The Russians and Muscovites measure their land by certaine spates, which they call in their language, vorest. But all these sorts of measures and dimensions may easily be knowne by the figure, which is hereunto applied, E.
Neverthelesse, we must here observe there is not a Nation, but hath and keepeth alwayes their owne measures and dimensions, and of places equall: for the Germanes according to the diversitie of their countries, have great miles and little; and others common, whereof fifteene make a degree in the Globe of the earth. There are also in France and Spaine miles unequall, as are the miles among other Nations, and some English Mathematicians, as the Italians make sixtie miles for a degree.

FJNJS.



The Preface upon ATLAS.
ATLAS King of Mauritania, was borne of a Royall race, and had for his father Serrenus, or Indigena (as Eusebius witnesseth out of the most ancient Historians) whose surname was Coelus, and whose mother was Titea, surnamed Terra; his great Grandfather on the fathers and mothers side was Elius or Sol, King of Phoenice, who with his wife Beruth, dwelt in Biblius, both of them excellently versed in Astronomy, and in natural disciplines, so that for their learning sake, they were accounted worthy of the names of Sol and of Coelum; undoubtedly this Atlas, as the Ancients report (namely Diodorus in his fourth Booke and fifth Chapter) was a most skilfull Astrologer, and the first among men that disputed of the Sphaere. He had many brethren to the number of fortie five, whom Coelus begat of divers women, whereof 17. of them he had by Titea, a most prudent Matron, that did many good offices to men, whom he after their mothers name called Titanes. Hee had also sisters, among whom the principall were Basilea, who in favour of her mother, brought up all her brethren, and therefore they called her Grandmother, and Rea Pandora. Now after the decease of Coelus, Basilea being the eldest, and excelling the others in prudence and vertue, by the common consent of her brethren and the people being a Virgine and unmarried, shee obtained the kingdome. Afterwards being desirous to leave an heire behind her, she was married to her brother Hyperion, and she bare him two children, to wit, Sol and Luna, whose prudence Hyperions brethren admiring to the intent the kingdome might not be setled upon his issue, they massacred him, and drowned Sol his Sonne, being yet an infant in the River of Eridanus. Then the Sonnes of Coelus whereof the noblest of them were Atlas, and Saturnus, shared their Fathers kingdome, betweene them. Atlas had for his part, those Countries, which lay next unto the Ocean, and Lybia, and the straights of Gibraltar; whence Mount-Atlas, and the Atlanticke people in Mauritania tooke first their name, and Saturnus obtained Sicilia, and Lybia, who being afterward hated of his people, for the crueltie he used against his father Coelus, fled into Italy, where by Ianus he was made partaker ef the kingdome. Now for as much as Diodorus alleageth, that Coelus was the first King that reigned amongst the Atlantickes, the people being before dispersed up and downe in fields in Colonies, he admonished them, to gather themselves together, and to build Townes. Without all question these Kings were very ancient, because Atlas, sonne of Atlas, having chased away his brother, Hesperus was King of Iberia, which afterwards in the yeare 738, after the universall floud was called Spaine. Hesperus flying into Etruria, where he was made tutour to Ianus. The Grandfather of Atlas (Elias) reigned in Phoenice, anno 662. after the deluge. And Diodorus witnesseth, that those Kings out of the nature of things, and the contemplation of them, attained to excellent knowledge, and withall became pious, and more humane, that as Diodorus truely saith, the Atlantiks bore away the Bell for their pietie, and humanity to strangers, from all other Nations whatsoever, when there were scarcely not above 22. or 23. generations compleate, and many parts of the earth not yet inhabited. Atlas had many sonnes, but among the rest, one famous for his piety, justice, and courtesie to his subjects. His name was Hesperus, who ascending up to the top of mount Atlas, to search out diligently the courses of the starres, was on a sudaine violently carried away with winde, and appeared no more. So much Diodorus speaketh of him: but in my opinion (as I have said) I find he was King in Iberia, into which at last, he came with a prosperous winde, where he lived so prudently, and religiously, that when he fled into Etruria, being driven from thence by his brother, for his excellent wisedome and prudence, he was made Tutor to Ianus, and administrator of the Kingdome, which offices Atlas his brother undertooke. My purpose then is to follow this Atlas, a man so excelling in erudition, humanity, and wisedome (as from a loftie watch tower) to contemplate Cosmography, as much as my strength and ability will permit me, to see if peradventure by my diligence, I may finde out some truths in things yet unknowne, which may serve to the study of wisedome. And as the world containeth the number of all things, the species, order, harmony, proportion, vertues and effects; so beginning from the Creation, I wil number al the parts thereof, so far as methodical reason requireth, according to the order of the creation, and will contemplate physically, that the causes of things may be knowne, whereof consisteth that science of sciences wisedome, which directeth every good thing to a good end,

by a provident wisedome, which doth facilitate the way to the ends. This is the maine scope I aime at. Afterward J will handle coelestiall things in their ranke: then the Astronomicks; which appertaine to conjecture by the Starres. Fourthly, treate of things Elementary, and lastly, the Geographicks, and so as (in a mirrour) will set before your eyes, the whole world, that in making use of some rudiments, ye may find out the causes of things, and so by attaining unto wisedome and prudence, by this meanes leade the Reader to high speculations.

The Race of ATLAS.
Drawne out of the Evangelicall preparations of Eusebius, Lib. 1. Cap. 7. which he noted out of Sachoniaton a Phoenician Historian, translated word by word, by Philo Biblius, and partly out of Diodorus Siculus.
Elius or Sol King of Phoenice
Terrenus, or Indigena, surnamed Coelus, to whom by his sister Titea were borne.
Illus, which also is called Saturnus, his wife, his sister Rhea. Iupiter OlympiusIapetus, to whom by Climenea, daughter of the Ocean were borne.
Prometheus Deucalio^Epimetheus.Basilia.Boetilus.Hyperion, his wife was his sister Basilia.
Sol being an infant was drowned in Eridanus.Luna.Dagon the god of the Philistins, called Iupiter Aratrius, whom the people of Azotus adored.Atlas, to whom by Pleion daughter of the Ocean were borne.
Hesperus.Atlas.Alcyone.Merope.Electre.Celeno.Tayete.Sterope.Maia of whom by Iupiter was borne. Mercurius.Titea his daughter otherwise called Terra.




THE TYPE OF THE GLOBE OF THE EARTH.
WHereas by the Necessitie of Nature, Order doth alwayes require, that Universals should bee set before Parriculars, and the Whole before the Part, for the better understanding of the present Matter: I also, being bound by this Law, ought to set before this first Volume of our Geographie, an universall Type of the Globe of the Earth; and of the foure Parts thereof, Europe, Africk, Asia, and America, that so I may more happily follow my intended matter: and also, that in the severall following Tomes hereafter, he that shall desire to have the Delineation of his owne Country, may have a perfect Worke before him, being not deprived of this so profitable a speculation. For the contemplation of Generals is pleasant, and very necessary to him, who desireth to have the least knowledge of the World and naturall things. For if you please to consider the manner of the rising and setting of the Sunne, what is the cause of Summer or Winter, whence is the inequality of the Dayes and Nights, or lastly, what hath beene the originals, or propagations of things, what hath beene the actions, the atchievements, the mutations, and conversions happening in any place, even from the first Creation, you shall learne all this no where better, than out of these five adjoyning Tables, without all danger, and with honest recreation of minde. And even as it is not sufficient for any one, though hee have a large dwelling-place, to know the severall parts of his house, as the Porch, the Wine-cellar, and Butterie, the Kitchin, the Parlour, the Supping-roome, the Bed chamber, the Closet, the Studie, etc. whereby hee may use them conveniently; but also it is fit and necessary, that hee should know, in what part and street of the Citie his house standeth, and thence hee may straightway discerne, if any fire or tumult happen in the Citie, how neare or

how farre he is from danger: So it is no lesse necessary to know in what part of the world thou dwellest, what people are neare thee, and which are farther off, that when warre approacheth, thou mayst know when to feare, and when to be quiet in minde. Lastly, though Cosmographie be the light of all Ecclesiasticall and Politicall Historie, and that the beholder may learne more from thence, than the Traveller by his long, tedious and chargeable labour, who often changeth hisCaelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt. Horat. Climate, onely, but not his condition; yet you shall receive little benefit thereby, if you doe not joyne the Generall Tables to the Particular. Now these Generall Tables are gathered out of the great description of the Globe of the Earth (whose beginning of Longitude, or position of the first Meridian wee have followed in every one of them) and out of my great Europa, which I published at Duysburg. In the meane time, Reader farewell, and enjoy this worke, and diligently consider with the Poet Buchanan, the glory of this thy habitation granted unto thee only for a time, who doth so compare it with the heavens, that he may thereby lift up those mindes which are drowned in these earthly and transitory things, and shew them the way to more high and Eternall matters.

How small a part that is, thou mayst perceive
Which we into proud Kingdomes here doe cleave
With stately wordes; we part it with our sword,
And buy it with our bloud that forth is powr'd;
We make great Triumphs when that we have got
Some part of this same little earthen clot:
For this same heape it selfe being view'd alone
Is large, and of a great extention:
But it will seeme a Point, if that it be
Compar'd with Heavens starrie Canopie.
Or like unto a seed, upon which ground
Ancient Gargetius many worlds did found:
This is mans seate, and this a house affordes
Vnto wilde Beastes, and to all sortes of Birdes.
And how much from this prison house of clay
Doth the Seas flowing water take away.
And that which breakes through the Herculean boundes,
And parteth Europe from the Lybian groundes,
With Seas, which limits to Arabia yeelds,
And those which straighten the Hyrcanian fields.
Then adde to these the Lakes that are beside,
With Moores and Marshes being large and wide;
And Rivers which the Mountaines downe doe throw
From their high tops, or those which stand below
In Lakes unmov'd; and while with hastie course
These take part of the earth away by force;
And these with deepe gulfes drowne the world again,
The greatest part of land that doth remaine
Is cover'd o're with water, and doth seeme
Like a small Island in the Sea to swimme.
In this againe what barren sands there be,
And great vaste Mountaines without fruite or tree?
How much of it is scorch't with too much flame?
Or how much is benum'd with cold againe?
Or how much lies unfit for to be till'd?
Or how much is with mortall poysons fill'd?
O shame, O madnesse, of a fond desire!
How little cause hath glory to aspire!
Anger doth rage; feare troubles, griefe doth fret;
And want even by the sword doth riches get;
By treacherie, fire, nor poyson doth it spare:
Thus humane matters full of troubles are.




OF THE WORLD.
THis Universe, which rather presents it selfe to the contemplation of the minde of man, then to the sight of the Eyes, for the perfect elegancie, and absolute puritie thereof, is called in Latine Mundus. This Pliny, in the 11.The name by whom, and why given. Lib. Cap. 1. of his Naturall Historie, calleth, That which covereth all things with his Circumference. And Apuleius painting forth an admirable picture of it calleth it, That which consists in the societie of heaven and earth, and of those things which belong unto their natures. The same Apuleius more elaborately describes the world thus; or to this purpose. The world (saith hee) is a garnished ordinance of things, the just charge and custodie of the Gods, whose pole, (for so I call the Center) beeing strong and immoveable, passeth through the earth, the Mother and nourisher of all living creatures. All the higher parts, as may be seene, being enclosed and hidden with the moistnesse of the aire in manner of a covering: Beyond is the house of the Gods, called Heaven, which wee see is full of divine bodies, as the faire and shining lights of the Sunne, Moone, and the other Starres, with which it is carried about by the diurnall and nocturnall motion in such a perpetuall course, as shall never have an end. Now that the forme thereof is gathered round together like a Globe, the name thereof doth declare, and the consent of men calling and painting it in manner of a Globe; besides diverse arguments that prove the same: As because such a figure is most capable, most simple, and doth bend in all parts towards it selfe, sustaines it selfe, includes and containes it selfe, wanting no joyning together, nor having any end or beginning in any of its parts: as also because wheresoever you behold it, it hath a circular forme in all its parts, which cannot happen in another figure. Therefore it was a ridiculous imagination of them who supposed that it had not aLactantius lib. 5. Institut. cap. 24. de^ideth those that say the Heaven is Sphericall. Sphericall round figure, but either an angular, or ovall, or some other forme. There be two parts of the World, the Aetheriall or heavenly, and the Elementary or sublunary. The Aetheriall is that cleare part which containeth all the celestiall Spheeres, and is free from(...). Aristot. de Caelo lib. ^. cap. 3. alteration. The Elementary is that which is placed beneath those Orbes, and it admitteth generation and

corruption, and containeth not onely simple Bodies, as Fire, Aire, Water, Earth: but also those which are compounded of them, whereof wise men have delivered five kindes. For some are imperfectly mixt, which we call Meteors, as Hayle, Raine, Snow, Thunder, Lightning, Winde; others perfectly mixt, but without life, as Stones, Mettalls, etc. There are others which have a vegetable soule, as Plants; and those which have a sensible soule, as Brute Creatures: Lastly, there are some in the highest and last degree of compound things, which beside all these have a reasonable soule, as Men. We, leaving those things which belong to Astronomers and Philosophers, will chiefly consider the Globe of the Earth. The whole Earth being diversly divided by Seas, Rivers, and Marshes, doth make altogether an absolute Globe. Homer for no other cause calleth it Orbicular. And Numa Pompilius for the same consideration, did consecrate a round Temple to Vesta, the mother of Saturne, whom Poets take for the earth. And that the figure thereof can be no other, both Aristotle hath demonstrated by the reason of heavy things making towards one certaine point, and also Mathematicians prove by the Eclipses, and shadowes of Dyalls. Besides it is found out by the long and certaine observations of Travellers, that the longitudes and latitudes of places doe varie according to their severall distances, so that it is most certaine without any farther demonstration, that there areSo called fro^ the Greek (...). i. habito c^rcum. Perioeci, that is to say, those that dwell under the same Parallel, andSo named from (...). i. ex adverso habitaere. Antoeci, that is, those that dwell alike distance from the Aequator, but the one Northward, and the other Southward, andSo stiled from (...) and (...) q. d. adversa vestigia figentes. The compasse of the Earth. Antipodes, that is, people dwelling on the other side of the earth, with their feet directly against ours. Antiquitie sheweth that the compasse of this Globe, where it is largest, is 360 degrees; and this latter age doth affirme the same, wherefore if to every degree you allow 15 Germane miles, or 60 Italian miles, it will be easie to finde out theThe circumference according to this account is 5400. Germane miles or 21600. Italian miles.The qualitie of the Earth. circuit of the whole earth. All the parts whereof (as Plinie saith in his 2d booke of Naturall Historie, Cap. 68. and as others also have delivered) are but a point in respect of the World, for the whole Earth is no better. This is the matter and seate of our glory, here we beare honours, here we exercise government, here wee covet riches, here men doe make tumults, and wage civill warres, thereby to make themselves roome upon the earth by slaughtering one another. And (that I may passe over the publicke furie of nations) this is it in which we drive forth our bordering neighbours, and by stealth encroach upon their Country, so that hee that hath most enlarged his territories, and driven the adjoyning inhabitants from their bounds, in how small a part of earth doth he rejoyce? or when hee hath enlarg'd it to the measure of his owne covetousnesse, what portion doth hee obtaine for all his labour? Thus farre Plinie. And let this suffice concerning the earth as it does make one Globe with the Sea. Now as it is distinguisht from the waters, and called in the Scriptures drie land, it is the proper habitation of men. And for the great desert thereof, we give it the name of Mother. This receiveth us at our birth, nourishes us being borne, and being once brought to light, it doth alwayes sustaine us: Lastly, when we are cast off and forsaken by nature, then chiefly like a mother shee hides us in her bosome. This also is to be added, that aThe outmost end whereof is called a Cape. Promontorie is called a part of land lying out farther than the rest, and

map of the worldOF THE WORLD.TYPUS ORBIS TERRARUMDomini est terra and plenitudo ejus, orbis terrarum, and universi qui habitant in eo. Psalmo 24

is contrary to a Bay. Such are the Lacinian and Sephyrian in the farthest part of Italie, the Lilybaean in Sicilie, and the Sigaean in Asia. That is called an Iland which is washed on every side with the Sea: such are Crete, Cyprus, Sicilie, etc. ASo called, quasi Pane Insula. Paninsula is that which is joyned to the Continent by a narrow ridge of Land, which the Greekes call Isthmos, and the Paeninsula it selfe,Chersonesus is a compound word of (...) and (...) q. ^. Insula deser^a aut inculta. Chersonesus: such are the golden Chersonesus; the Cimbricke, the Dacike, the Tauricke, and others.
In this place something also is to be added concerning the Sea: one Sea is called theThis Sea some Writers call Mare magnum, others Mare internum^ Eustathius calls it Mare Hesper^um; and because of France Spaine, Germanie, Brittaine, etc. it is toward the East, the Spaniards call it Mar de Levante. 1. The East Sea, although in holy Scripture it bee called Mare Occidentale, as being West fro^ Hierusalem. Mediterranean, the other theThe Ocean is so called from the Greek word (...). 1. velox as Solinus affirmeth, and hath beene called Mare Atlanticum, or the Atlanticke Sea: as it is evident in Tullies Somnium Scip. where it is said, that every Country that is inhabited, is compassed about with the Atlanticke Sea, which we call the Ocean. Ocean. The Ocean, which the holy Scripture doth call the gathering together of the waters, doth exceed all the other Seas in bignesse and largenesse, and is spread abroad through the whole earth, and wandring with a winding course by diverse coasts of the world, and by the Shoares, Iles and Promontories of severall Nations, it changeth its name with those places As in one place it is called the Westerne Ocean, in other places the Easterne, Aethiopian, Spanish, Atlanticke, Scythian, French, Brittish, Germane, Northerne, and Frozen, and elsewhere by moderne observation it is called Mare del Sur, or the peaceable Sea, the Archipelagus of Lazarus, the Indian Sea, Lantchidol. There are many Bayes belonging to it, as the Arabian, the Persian, the Gangeticke, the Great, the Sarmaticke, the Mexican, and the Vermilian. There are two famous Streights of the Ocean, the one ofThis Streight is by diverse diversly called, sometime Fretum Herculeum: Plinie lib. 3. cap. 5. calleth it Fretum Gaditanum: Avienus, Herculis viam; and Herma, Strabo, Fretum columnarum; Livie, Fretum Oceans: Florus, Ostium Oceani; Ausonius, Fretum Iberum, etc. Gibraltar, the other ofThis Streight deriveth its name from one Magellanus a Spaniard, who first discovered it about the yeare of our Lord 1520. Magellan, to which may be added Ania, which lyeth between the farthest Westerne parts of America, and the Easterne parts of Tartaria. The Mediterranean Sea divideth Africke from Europe, and hath diverse names according to the situation of diverse Countries. As the Iberian, the Balearick, the French, the Tuscane, the Sicilian, the Adriatick, the Ionian, Cretian, Aegyptian, Pamphilian, Syrian, Aegean, Myrtian, Icarian, and the Sea of Propontis. Concerning the motion of the Sea, which they call the Tide, seeing it is a matter most worthy of admiration, we are to speake something of it in this place. The Tide is said to be a motion of the Sea, wherby it floweth upward, and having finished his course, ebbeth backe againe. As there is one cause thereof so there are many events and effects concerning it. For in some places there is little or no Tide at all. On the Northerne Coast of the Pacificke Sea, there is none. In the Tuscan, Tyrrhene, and Narbonian Sea, in the Celtiberian Sea at Barchino, and in the Mexican at Cuba, with the neighbouring Islands there is none at all. But elsewhere it is great; as at Bengala in the Indies neere to Ganges, in the Gothicke, Germane, Brittish, and Portugall Ocean, and so great in the Erythrean, that the despisers of holy Scriptures have fained, that Moses used to passe over on dry-land by the opportunitie of the Ebbe, which could not be, because even to Sues, which lyeth backward, the Sea covereth that Shoare; neither going backward doth it leave it so naked as that by its ebbing it should discover the lower parts, over which the Hebrewes passed. The Tides in the Ocean are alwaies greater then those in Bayes, yet are they more discerned about the shoares, then in the deep.

But concerning them we will speake more in another place.The commodities of the Sea. The Sea is not altogether barren, but bringeth forth Fish, Plants, and pretious stones, and it is to be noted how Nature, with Dedalus cunning, hath represented in the Sea all the chiefest things which are seene either on the Earth, or in the Aire. I let passe the Sea-Elephants, the Sea-Hogges, the Torteises, Dog-fishes, Sea-calves, Sea-horses: I omit the Falcons and Sea-swallowes, seeing Nature hath exprest even man himselfe, in the Mairman, in the Siren, and Nereides: and also in the Monke-fish: as for the Corrall, the Pearles, the Amber, Gumme, Sponges, and infinite other things. Whom do they not worthily draw into the admiration and adoration of Gods power? But of this wee have spoken sufficiently. Let us come now to the distribution of the Globe of the Earth. The Ancients have divided the Globe of the Earth sometimes into two parts, sometimes into three: the division into three parts, Europe, Asia, Africke, or Libya, is most famous among the Ancients, to whom the new World was not yet knowne. But America being found, our age hath added that for the fourth part. Our Mercator doth distinguish this Globe of the Earth into three Continents: hee calleth that the first, which the Ancients divided into three parts, the second that which we now call America: the third, the Southerne, or Magellanicke land. But we will divide the whole Globe into five parts, Europe, Africke, Asia, America, and the Southerne Land.



EVROPE.
EUROPE, though it be least of all, yet with the chiefe Delineators of the terrestriall Globe, we will describe it in the first place, either for the excellencie of the soyle, or the company of the inhabitants, or in regard of their famous acts, who have hitherto possessed it. Pliny calleth it the Nurse of a People conquering all Nations, and the most beautifull part of the Earth: besides, though other parts be greater, and larger, yet they are lesse inhabited; and therefore for these and other causes wee may justly begin first with Europe, which was the most noble inheritance ofAnd therfore by some called Iapetia.Europe, whence so called. Iaphet (who being Noahs eldest sonne enlarged his Territories even to the Land of his brethren, Sem and Cham) so much concerning the order: in the next place we must shew the Etymologie of the name. Herodotus noteth, that the originall of this name was not knowne: some say it was called so from one Europa aWhence also called Tyria. vid. Herod. l. 4. Tyrian, the daughter of Agenor King of the Phoenicians, of whom it is an ancientVid. Ovid. l. 3. Metamorph. fable, the Jupiter having transformed himselfe into a Bull, and having set her on his backe, carried her from Sydon into Creete, or Cyprus. Others rejecting fables, do thinke she was carried away in a ship built in the forme of a Bull: Others say it was a ship which had the protection of Iupiter, and the image of a Bull upon it. Palephatus of Creete writeth, that it was a ship called the Bull, which brought away from the Tyrian Countrie, Europa the Kings daughter as captive, with other maids: Some do suppose that it was a militarie Legion, which among other Ensignes had one Standard with the figure of a Bull in it. Some say it was so called in regard of the beautie of this Region which may be compar'd to a Virgine, carried away for the love of her beautie. And some (not unlikely) have said, that it was called so from Europus, who, as it is left to memory, had heretofore a Kingdome in this part of the World. Becanus, beeing unwilling to be persuaded that Europe hath a Greeke name, seeing the Cimmerians did inhabit it before the Greekes, and the former had a different Language from the latter, thinketh that it was so called from the excellencie of the people. For the monasyllableHeylin in his Geographie. pag. 29. derides this derivation with Oh the wit of man! VER, being pronou^ced by the dipthong, signifies some great and excellent thing; and HOP, doth denote a multitude of men. The Asiaticans do generally at this day call the Europeans Frankimen: the Turkes call those of the Romish Religion Franki, and those Romei who are addicted to the Greeke Religion. The Abyssines in Africke, which divers Records do testifie, do call us Alfrangues, and the Christians Countrie Frankia. So much for the Name: the Situation and Quantitie followes: concerning which it is to be held, that Ptolomy, and other Ancient Writers did place Europe betweene the 4. and 9. Climes, between the 11. and 21. Parallels: betweene the Degrees ofLatitude is the distance of a place, North or South from the Aequator or middle of the World. Latitude 36. and 54. and ofLongitude is the distance of any place, East and West, from the chiefe Meridian, and is measured by the Degrees of the Aequator. Moderne Geographers place the first Meridian, not as the Ancients in the Canaries, or Fortunate Ilands, but in the Iland of S. Michael, one of the 9. Azores in the Atlantick Sea. Longitude 17. and 61. but in our age, seeing the Declination of the Sunne, as it is observed, is changed, and many places are added to this our Europe, for they have now discovered to the 72. Degrees of Latitude

map of EuropeEVROPE.

toward the North; a further description of Climes and Parallels hath beene devised, so that Europe is situated betweene the 4th and 18thA Clime is a space of the Earth comprehended between three Parallels, lesser innominate Circles which compasse the Earth from East to West. Climes serve to distinguish the length of dayes in all places; in the first 24. from the Aequator, both North and South, every one lengthens the day halfe an houre, afterward they encrease by Weekes and Moneths, till it comes to the length of halfe a yeare. Climats; and betweene the Parallels 11. and 36. Lastly, betweene the degrees of Latitude 36. and 72. but almost betweene the degrees of Longitude 17. and 71. If it be considered from the Promontorie of Spaine, which is called at this day Cabo S. Vincentij, even to a right line drawne from the head of the River Tanais to the Northerne Ocean: but the shortest Longitude is betweene the 17th and 58. degrees, counting it from the same Promontorie of Spaine, even to Malea a Promontorie of Peloponesus, and excluding the Islands of the Aegean Sea, which may bee reckoned as part of Europe: so that the most Southerne parts of Europe are in the 36. degree of Latitude, as the Mountaine Calpe in Spaine, one of Hercules Pillars, the Southerne Promontory of Sicilie, heretofore called Odyssia, and the head of Peloponnesus, or Morea, anciently Taenaria, and now Cabo Maini: in which places the longest day is 14. houres, and 30. minutes. But the most Northerne limits of it are in the 71 degree and a halfe, as the Promontory of Scandia, the farthest Land Northward, now called Wardhuys, where the longest day is 2. moneths, 22. dayes, and 7. houres. Moreover, we make account that a line drawne straight forward from the head of Tanais to the Northerne Ocean is the Easterne limite of Europe, following the common account. For ancient Writers doe not agree concerning the Easterne boundes of Europe. Aristotle, Plato, Herodotus, and others who are of their opinion, doe divide Europe from Asia by the River or Isthmus of Phasis, which is betweene the Euxine and Caspian Sea. Dionysius, Arrianus, Diodorus, Polybius, Iornandes, doe divide it by the River Tanais. AbrahamSee Ortelius in his Theatrum orbis terraram. Ortelius makes the bounds of Europe toward the East to bee the Aegean Sea, the Euxine Sea, the Maeoticke Lake, the River Tanais, and the Isthmus which lyeth straight forward from the head Springs thereof towards the North; and others make other bounds. Ptolomaeus doth part Europe from Asia, by the same River of Tanais, and a line drawne from the head thereof toward the Northerne Sea. Now (wee subscribing unto him with other most skilfull Geographers, and descending from the Line and River of Tanais towards the South) let us with others place the Easterne bounds thereof in the Maeoticke Lake, the Cimmerian Bosphorus, the Euxine Sea, the Thracian Bosphorus, the Propontis, and the Aegean Sea even to the Mediterranean Sea, which parts it from Africke Southward: on the West, the great and wide Ocean beates upon it. Lastly, on the North it is encompassed with the Northerne Sea. Strabo doth attribute to it the forme of a Dragon, of which Spaine doth represent the head, France the necke, Germany the body, Italie and the Cimbrian Chersonesus the right and left winges.The temperatenesse of the Aire. For the most part it enjoyes a temperate Aire, and milde Weather. Whence Europe is every where inhabited, although very incommodiously and hardly in those places which are beyond the 60th degree of Latitude, in regard of cold. And it doth not onely farre excell the other parts of the World in the wonderfull temperatenesse of the Climate, temper, pleasantnesse, and great company of the inhabitants;The fertility of the Soyle. but also in the abundance of Fruits, Trees, Plants, all kinde of living Creatures, Mettals; and in the plentie of all

other things which are necessarie to sustaine mans life. Yet it hath not vines everywhere, but where wine is wanting it supplies the defect thereof with drinke made of fruits.The governme^t of the Ancients, and their successours. This (for here I cannot refraine from praising it) is the mother of the Conquerours of the World. Here Macedon did heretofore bring forth Alexander, Italie the Romanes: who in a certaine succession (God in his Eternall Providence so decreeing) did conquer the whole World, so farre as it was knowne: and Germany doth at this day bring forth Princes of great Prowes. Have not here beene borne many noble Heroes, which have added to their Empire America unknowne (as the most do suppose) to the Ancients, and the better and stronger parts of Asia, and Africke? Is it not the onely mother of many Kings and Princes fighting in Christs cause? This ourSee Ortelius in his booke before cited. Europe, besides the Romane Empire, hath above eight and twentie Kingdomes instructed in Christian Religion, if we adde the foureteene, which Damianus a Goes reckons to be in Spaine, whence wee may estimate the dignitie of this Countrie: what shall I speake of the populousnesse, and renowne of the cities thereof. Heretofore Africa hath beene proud of her Carthage, Asia hath beene puffed up with her three Cities, Babilon, Ninivie and Hierusalem. America doth glory at this day in Cusco, and new Spaine in Mexico: but who seeth not in these times the like and greater, almost in every Countrie of Europe? Let any one in his minde onely walke over Italy (for this doth afford an example of all the rest) the sumptuous magnificence of Rome, the Royall wealth of Venice, the honourable Nobilitie of Naples, the continuall commerce and traffique of Genoa, the happie and fertile pleasantnesse of Millaine, and the famous wonders, and commodities of other places. So that the other parts of the World may be silent, for none are equall to Europe. The Countries in it (as they are now called) are Spaine, France, Germanie, Italie, Hungarie, Transilvania, Dalmatia, Greece, Poland, Lithuania, Moscovie, Russia, Denmarke, Swethland, Norway: besides the Isles in the Northerne Ocean, which are, England, Scotland, Ireland, Island, Frisland, and others in other places; and those in the Mediterranean Sea, as the Baleares, which are two Isles in the Spanish Sea called Majorica and Minorica, also Corsica, Sardinia, Sicilia,The Lakes and Rivers. with the Isles of Malta, Corfu, Creete, and many others. And as for the Lakes, standing Pooles, Rivers, and Waters having diverse vertues in them, which (beside their fish, whereof they yeeld an incredible company) are as it were a wall unto Countries, who can number them? What should I mention the Seas?The Seas. it would be tedious in this place to reckon up their commodities, profits, and delights, these things shall therfore be unfolded in their proper places. Europe doth not want Mountaines, among which the Pirenean hills, and the Alpes, are alwaies white with continuall snow,The publique and private workes: The Lawes and Institutions. and it hath many woods and forrests, which afford pasturage for cattell, and have few harmefull beasts in them. What should I speake of the private or publique workes, both sacred and profane that are in this part of the World? Here are innumerable magnificent Temples, innumerable Abbies, many famous Pallaces of Kings, innumerable faire and magnificent houses belonging to Noble-men and Princes: and many rare buildings, both publique and private. We have here Justice and Lawes: we have the dignitie ofIt is observable that there is no part of Europe, whether Continent or Island, that hath not long since beene Christened. Christian Religion, we have all the delights of

mankinde,The company of Senators. we have the strength of Armes, innumerable Senators, Men venerable both for Wisedome and Learning: and if you please to compare famous men together, there was never so great a company of Heroes, and Noble men in other parts of the World, as in any one part of Europe. Besides, this part of the World is so studious of Arts and Sciences, that for the invention and preservation of many things, it may worthily be called,The Vniversities the Mother and Nurse of Wisedome. In this are many excellent and flourishingWho number it no lesse then 78. Universities, but in other Countries there is nothing but meere Barbarisme. It would be too much to reckon up the vertues of the Inhabitants; but as for the vices (as who is without some?) they are noted in some short sayings, which I will here adde: The people of Franconia are foolish, rude, and vehement. The Bavarians are prodigall, gluttons, and railers. The Grisons are light, talkative, and braggers.The manners of the people. The Turingi are distrustfull and contentious. The Saxons dissemblers, craftie, selfe-willed. The Low-country-men are horsemen, delicate, and tender. The Italians proud, desirous of revenge, and wittie. The Spaniards haughtie, wise, covetous. The French eloquent, intemperate, and rash. The People of Denmarke and Holsteine, are great of stature, seditious, and dreadfull. The Sarmatians great eaters, proud, and stealers. The Bohemians inhumane, new-fangled and robbers. The Illyrians unconstant, envious, seditious. The Pannonians cruell, and superstitious. The Greekes miserable. And there is another saying no lesse pleasant. A Bridge in Poland, a Monke of Bohemia, a Knight of the South, a Nunne of Suevia, the Devotion of Italie, the Religion of Prutenicks, the Fasts of Germans, and the Constancie of Frenchmen are nothing worth.


AFRICKE.
AFRICKE followes: which was so called, if we beleeve Nisias, from Afer a companion of Hercules, who accompanied him even as farre as Calis. But if we trust Iosephus, and Isidorus,The name by whom and why given. from one of the posteritie of Abraham, whose name was Afer: or (as Festus doth suppose) from the Greek wordAnd a pr^vativum. (...), which signifies cold, for it is free from cold, because the most part of it is situated betweene theThe Tropicks are two, nominate Circles that be Parallel to the Aequator, fro^ which the Northerne Tropicke, called the Tropicke of Cancer, is distant 23. degrees @ and the Southerne, called the Tropick of Capricorne, as much. Tropicks. The Arabians doe call it Fricchia, from the word Farruca, which with them signifies to divide: for Africke is almost divided from the other parts of the Earth. Or else it was so called from Ifricus a King of Arabia Foelix, who (they report) did first inhabite this Country. The Greekes call it Libya either from Libya the daughter of Epathus, or from the Greeke word (...), which signifies stonie, or because Libs or the Southwest-wind bloweth from thence. In the Scriptures it is called Chamesia; the Arabians, and Aethiopians doe call it Alkebula, and the Indians Besechath. TheSo stiled because when the Sunne is under that Aequinoctiall Circle in the Heaven, which answers to this on the Earth, the daies and nights be of one length. Aequinoctiall Circle doth almost cut the middle part of Africke. The
So called, from Cham the sonne of Noah, who inhabited this Country, See Psal 105.23.

map of AfricaAFRICKE.

Tropicks passe not beyond it,The Situation. either Northward or Southward, but it is stretched out beyond either of them ten degrees and more. It is bounded towards the North, with the Mediterranean Sea, and the Streights of Hercules; towards the East with the Arabian Bay, or the Erythraean Sea, and with the Isthmus which is betweene the Mediterranean Sea and the Arabian Bay; to the South it is washed with the Aethiopian Ocean: and on the West with the Atlanticke. It hath the forme of a Peninsula, which is joyned to Asia by the Isthmus above mentioned. And though the length thereof which lyeth from West to East, is shorter then the length of Europe; yet the length thereof from the North, toward the(i.) Habassia, or the higher Aethiopia. South is such, as Europe can hardly be compared with it: for it taketh up almost 70 degrees, but Europe scarce 35. Beside, Europe is full of windings, but Africke is uniforme and continued. Europe (as I said before in the description thereof) is every where inhabited; but this is full of Deserts and inhabitable places. That was formerly knowne, but not this: where it is inhabited,The fertilitie. Africke doth excell in fruitfulnesse. But for the most part, it is not inhabited, but full of barren Sands, and Desarts, and troubled with many kindes of living Creatures. It is reported that the fruitfulnesse of the fields is very wonderfull, and doth give the tillers such a harvest, as doth requite the labour with a hundred-fold increase for that which is sowne. That is wonderfull which is spoken of the fertilitie of Mauritania: viz. that there are Vines which two men cannot fadome about, and bunches of Grapes a cubit long. There are very high trees neare to the Mountaine Atlas, plaine and smooth without knots, and leaved like the Cypresse tree. Africke doth bring forth Elephants and Dragons, which lie in waite for beasts, and kill them with winding about them: besides, it hath a great number of Lyons, Buffs, or wilde Oxen, Libbards, wilde Goates, and Apes. Herodotus reporteth, that Asses with hornes bred here, besides Dragons, Hyenaes, rough Wolves, begotten of the Wolfe and Hiena, Panthers and Ostriches, and besides many kinds of Serpents, as Aspes, and Crocodiles, to which nature hath made theOr Ratt of India, who stealeth into the Crocodiles mouth when he gapeth and eating his bowels killeth him. Ichneumon an enemie, etc. But, as the same Author witnesseth, there is neither Stagge nor Boare in it. Africke bringeth forth the Basiliske: and although many things are thought to be fabulous which are reported of him; Yet it is certaine that Leo being Pope, there was a Basiliske which infected Rome with a great plague by his noysome breath. There are also divers kindes ofHence came the old proverbe, Africa semper aliquid apportat monstri. Monsters, whose diversitie and multitude they ascribe to the want of water, whereby the wild beasts are enforced to come together at a few Rivers and Springs. The Romanes divided Africke into sixe Provinces. The Proconsularie Province, wherein was Carthage; Numidia, under the jurisdictin of a Consull; Bizacchius, Tripolitana, Mauritania Caesariensis, and Mauritania Sitiphensis.The Division. Ptolomie in the beginning of his fourth Booke doth reckon twelve Provinces or Countries, Mauritania Tingitana, Mauritania Caesariensis, Numidia, Africa properly so called, Cyrenaica or Pentapolis, (for so Ptolomie calls it) Marmarica, Lybia properly so called, the Higher and Lower Egypt, the Innermost Lybia, Aethiopia under Egypt, and the Innermost Aethiopia. Leo Africanus doth divide all Africke into foure parts, Barbarie, Numidia, Lybia, and the Countrie of Black-Mores. But in this Leo

is deceived, because hee hath not made the Red Sea the bound of Africke, but Nilus; whereby it comes to passe that hee joynes Egypt and the Easterne part to Asia. Let us therefore, besides those foure parts reckoned up of Leo, place in Africke, Egypt, the Higher Aethiopia, the Lower and outermost Aethiopia, and the Islands. Egypt is stretched forth in a long tract of Land, from the South unto the North. The bounds thereof, on the West side are the Desarts of Barca, Lybia and Numidia beyond Nilus, together with the Kingdome of Nubia. On the South it is bounded with the Country of Bugia and Nilus, where it runneth a little from the West Eastward. On the Eastside there are the Desarts of Arabia, which lye betweene Egypt and the Red Sea; and on the North side it is enclosed with the Mediterranean Sea; Other things concerning Egypt wee will unfold in the particular Description thereof. At this day they call all that part of Africke, which reacheth from Egypt to the Straits of Gibraltar, and is included with the Mediterranean Sea and the Mountaine Atlas, Barbaria: and it containes the Kingdomes of Morocco, Fesse, Tremisen, Tunis, and Barca, of which wee will speake more largely in the Description of Barbarie. At this time it shall be sufficient to shew the Reader the division and bounds thereof. The Kingdome therefore of Morocco is divided into these Provinces, Hea, Susa, Guzala, the Land of Morocco, Ducala, Hoscora, and Tedletes: it is bounded with the Atlantick Ocean, with the Mountaine Atlas it selfe, and the Kingdome of Fesse. The Kingdome of Fesse hath on the West the Atlanticke Sea, on the North the Straits of Hercules, on the East the River Mulvia, on the South the Kingdome of Morocco. The Countries therein are Temesna, the Territory of Fesse, Asgara, Elhabata, Errifa, Garetum and Elchausum. The Kingdome of Tremison, is bounded on the South with the Desart of Numidia, on the East with the great River, on the North with the Mediterranean Sea. The Kingdome of Tunis doth containe the whole tract of Land from the great River, to the River of the Countrie of Mestata. The Countries thereof are five, Bugia, Constantina, the Territorie of Tunis, Tripolis, and Ezzaba,Barcha now called, but that it was anciently called Barca is evident out of Virgil, when hee saith, Late^ne furentes Bar^ai. Barca, or Barcha is stretched forth from the borders of Mestata to the confines of Egypt. Numidia is called at this day Biledulgerid; the bounds thereof are the Atlanticke Sea on the West side, the Mountaine Atlas on the North, the confines of Egypt on the East, the Desarts of Libya on the South. The Regions thereof are Tesset, Tegelmessa, Seb, Biledulgerid, Dara and Fezzen. Lybia was called by the Ancients Sarra, because it is a Desart. It beginneth from the Kingdome of Gagoa neere Nilus, and is extended toward the West, even to the Kingdome of Gualata, which lyeth neere to the Atlantick Sea, on the North the Kingdome of Numidia doth border on it, on the South the Kingdome of the Nigritans or Blackmoores. The Nigritans are so called either from the blacke colour of the inhabitants, or fro^ the black river which glideth through their Country. They have on the East the Confines, or the Borders of Nilus, on the West the Westerne Ocean, on the South partly the Aethiopian Sea, and partly the Kingdome of Manicongus; but on the North the desarts of Libya. The Kingdomes therof are five and twentie, namely, Galata, Gumea, Melli, Tombutum, Gago, Guber, Agadez, Cano, Caseva, Zegzeg, Zanfara, Gunangara, Bornum, Goago,

Nubia, Biro, Temiamo, Dauma, Medra, Gora, the Territorie of Anterot, the Territorie of Giolosa, the Coast of Guinea, the Territorie of Meligens, and the Kingdome of Benin. The Abyssines do inhabit the higher or innermost Aethiopia, whose Prince is calledAbusively so called, but rightly Preste Iohan or Gyam, which in the Aethiopian tongue signifies Great or Mightie Prince. Prester Iohn. His Country is large, and doth almost touch either Tropicke, and it is extended betweene the Aethiopian and theSo called fro^ the rednesse of the sands. Red Season the North it hath the people of Nubia and Bugia that borders on Egypt; on the East the Red Sea; on the South the Mountaines of the Moone, on the VVest the Kingdome of Manicongus, the River Niger, the Kingdome of Nubia, and the River Nilus. These Kingdomes are subject to him, Barnagnes, Tigremaum, Tigraim, in which is the Cittie Caxumo, Angote, Amara, Xoa, Goyami, Bagamedrum, Gueguere, Fatiagar, Damar, Dancali, and Dobas. The lower or outermost Aethiopia is the Southerne part of Africke, unknowne unto Ptolomie. The beginning thereof on the East side is above the River Zaire not farre from the Aequinoctiall, and it doth contain all the littorall part of Africk, and beyond the Aequinoctiall, even to the Straits of Arabia. The Regions thereof are five, first the Country of Ajana, in which are the Kingdomes Del, and Adea Magaduzzum. Secondly, the Countrie of Zanguibara, the Kingdomes whereof are, Melinda, Mombazza, Quiloa, Mozambique, Manoemuci, Cephala, Manomotapa, Torra, and Butua; the Kingdome of Cafria, and Manicong, in which there are sixe Provinces, Sunde, Pango, Songo, Bamba, Barra and Pemba, to which are added the Kingdomes of Angola, Loangi, and Anzichi. There are some very great Lakes in Africke, which seeme rather to be Seas, the^ Lakes, of which the chiefest is Zembre, which is fifty miles in compasse, and out of it there flow the Rivers, Nilus, Zaire, and Cuama. Besides, this part of the VVorld hath great Rivers, as Nilus, Niger, Senaga, Cambra, Zaire, Cuama, and the River called the River of the Holy Ghost, all which by their overflowing do wonderfully water it, and make it fruitfull. It hath many great mountains,The Lakes. Rivers. Mountaines. amongst which the chiefe isSo called fro^ Atlas, in times past a K. of the Moores, whom the Poets faine to have beene Metamorphosed into this Mountain: this hill is novv called Anchisa: the inhabitants that dvvell about it name it Adiris; Solinus, Darius; others call it Astrixis, or Astre^xis. but Dioscorides calleth it Tmolus. Atlas, who rising out of the vast sands lifteth up his high head above the clouds, so that the top thereof cannot be seene. The inhabitants call it the Pillar of Heaven. It beginneth from the VVest, where it gives the name to the Atlanticke Sea, and from thence by a continued winding ridge it extendeth it selfe towards the East: towards the borders of Egypt it is round, rugged, steepe, and unpassable by reason of steepe rockes; also wooddy, and watered with the breaking forth of springs. The top of this Mountaine is covered even in the Summer with deepe snow: yea sometime the backe thereof (if the North wind be sharpe) is covered with a snow deeper then the highest tree, whereby both men and cattell do perish. There is another very high mountaine calledThis Mountaine is called by Ptolomie, Pliny, and others, Deorum cursus. Sierra Liona, whose top is alwaies hid with clouds, from whence a terrible noise is heard at Sea, so that it is called the Mountaine of Lions. The Mountaines also of the Moone, much renowned by the Ancients, are here placed under the Tropicke of Capricorne: they are very rugged, of an incredible heigth, and inhabited by wild people; and neere them there are such low and deepe valleies, that it may seeme that the Center of the Earth is there. Lastly, there are the Mountaines Gantaberes in the Kingdome of Angola, verie rich in silver mines, and other which wee will mention in our particular Descriptions. The chiefe Islands about Africke are these. In the

Atlanticke Ocean, there is the Isle called, Portus Sancti, or the Isle of the Holy Port: Madera, the Canarie Islands, and Caput Viride, or the Greene Cape. The Isle of the Holy Port was so called from the discoverers, who having sailed thither with much danger and difficultie, would have this place so called in memory thereof. The compasse of it is about fifteene miles. Madera tooke his name from the great plenty of trees that grew here. The circuit of it is about an hundred and forty miles. The Canaries were so called from the multitude of dogges that were found there: they were called by the Ancients, theSo named either fro^ their fruitfulnesse or goodnesse of A^e as Stephanus thinketh: Fortunate Islands. Pliny doth mention sixe: Ombrio, Innonia the greater, and lesser, Capraria, Navaria, and Canaria. Ptolomie calls them Aprosuum, Hera, or Autolala, Pluitalia, Casperias, Canaria and Centuria, and doth place them all almost in a right Line towards the North. Cadamustus maketh ten, seaven tilled, three desert: the names of those that are manured are the Islands of Fracta Lancea, Magna Sors, Grand-Canarea, Teneriffa, Gomera, Palma, and Ferro. Cape Verde, or the greene Cape is planted with greene Trees, and from hence it hath that name. The Isles thereof toward the West, doe lie in the midst of the Ocean: as the Islands of S. Anthony, S. Vincent, S. Lucia, S. Nicholas, the Island of Salt, Bonavista, Maggio or May, Saint Iames, and the Island called Insula del fuego. In the Aethiopian Ocean are the Islands, called Insula Principis and Saint Thomas his Island. Behinde the Promontory called Caput Bonae spei, or the Cape of good Hope, there are other Islands, but none inhabited except the Island of Saint Laurence.



ASIA.
The name by vvhom and vvhy given.ASIA succeeds Africke in my division. This name was allotted it from the NymphDaughter to Oceanus and Tethis. Asia (as Varro witnesseth) of whom and Iapetus Prometheus was borne: Others say it was so called either of Asius the sonne of Atys, or from Asius the Philosopher, who gave the Palladium of Troy to the custodie of the Citie, for which, that they might gratifie him, his whole dominions (which before was called Epirus) they called Asia. And from hence afterward, as from the more noble part, all the whole tract of Land began to bee calledOvid. lib. 9. Metamorph. calleth it Asis. Asia. Moreover, as Lybia doth both signifie a third part of the World, and a part of this part: So it is observed, that Asia doth signifie both the whole Continent, and that part which is hem'd in with the Mountaine Taurus, wherein doe dwell the Lydians, the Carians, the Lycaonians, Paphlagonians, Ionians, Aeolians, and others; which part, for distinction sake, is commonly called Asia the Lesse: the Turkes call itFrom the Greeke word (...), which signifieth the East, because it lyeth Eastward of Asia the Great. Natolia. There is saith Varro, Lib. 4. an Asia which is distinguisht from Europe, in which is Syria: and there is an Asia which is called the former part of Asia, in which is Ionia, and our Province. But all Asia is called in the Holy ScripturesFrom Sem the sonne of Noah. Semia. It is almost wholly situated in the Northerne part of the World from the Aequinoctiall Circle, to the 80th degree of Northerne Latitude, except some Ilands pertaining to Asia, some whereof are stretched out beyond the Aequator Southward.The Situation. Hence arises a great difference through all Asia, in the length of the artificiall dayes. For in the last Parallel, which is drawne not farre from the Aequinoctiall, the longest day is almost twelve houres. About the middle of Asia, the longest day is fifteene houres, and in the most Northerne Parallel their light continually endureth almost for foure whole Moneths in Summer. According to the Longitude, Asia is stretched forth from the Meridian of 52. degrees, even to the Meridian of 196. according to some: but if we follow the description of Mercator, the most Westerne Meridian thereof passeth through the 57th degree neare to the furthest Westerne part of Asia the Lesse; and the most Easterne Meridian through the 178th degree. On the North it hath the Scythian Sea, on the South the Indian, on the East the Easterne Sea, on the West the Bay of Arabia, or the red Sea; the Mediterranean and Euxine Seas. And as in the higher part it cleaveth to Europe, so in the Southerne part it is joyned to Africke by an Isthmus: yet Pliny and Strabo with some others doe stretch out Asia even to Nilus,The temperatenesse of the Aire. and doe reckon all Egypt to Asia. In Asia the face of the skie is both pleasant and wholesome, the Aire milde and temperate. Yet all Asia doth not feele this temperatenesse: for the right hand and left hand parts thereof are exceeding hot and cold. The pleasantnesse of this Country is so great, that it became a Proverbe: All the Land is so renowned both for the fertilitie of the fields,The fertilitie of the Soile. the varietie of fruits, and large pasturing of cattell, and for the abundant plenty of those things

map of AsiaASIA.

which are exported, that it doth easily excell all other Countries. Here is wonderfull plenty of Fruits, Spices, and Mettalls. Hence we receive Balsam, sweet Canes, Frankincense, Myrrhe, Cassia, Cinnamon, Gariophylus, Pepper, Saffron, sweet Woods, Rozine, Muske, and all kinde of precious stones. Here we may behold many different sorts of living Creatures.The various kindes of living Creatures. For it bringeth forth a number of Elephants, Camells, and many other living Creatures both tame and wilde: we may here also admire the wits, riches, and power of the Inhabitants. Here Man was first created by God; here was the first Seat of the Church of God; here Artes were first invented; here were Lawes first made; here the Doctrine of the Gospell first granted to miserable mortall men, with the hope of Salvation through Jesus Christ the Sonne of God. Here the confusion of Languages was sent downe amongst men, in the destruction of the Tower of Babel.The government of the Ancients. Here first Dominion over inferiours began. Here Nimrod began to raigne, of whom we reade inGap. 10. vers. 8.9.10. Genesis. But the first Monarchs of the whole Country of Asia were the Assyrians, the last whereof was Sardanapalus, a man given to wantonnesse, and effeminate softnesse, who being found bySee Iustin. lib. 1. and Diodorus Siculus. lib. 2. cap. 7. Arbactus amongst a crew of whores, and not long after being overcome by him in battaile, hee made a great fire, and cast himselfe and his riches thereinto. Afterward the Empire came to the Persians: Among whomWhom Iunius saith, the Scripture calles Abasuerus. Esther 1.4. Xerxes the sonne ofThis is meant of Darius the son of Histaspis. Darius did maintaine a warre, begun by his father, five yeares against Greece, and he brought out of Asia into Europe an army of ten hundred thousand men, and passed them over a bridge which he built over Hellespont: he came also accompanied withHerodotus reckons all his forces by Sea and Land to be 2641610 men, besides Concubines, Eunuchs, women bakers, and other officers an infinite co^pany. ten hundred thousand ships, but with a vaine endeavour; for he that durst threaten God, insult over the Sea, put fetters upon Neptune, darken the Heavens, levell Mountains, and shake the whole World, was faine, his army being put to flight, to passe over the narrow Sea in a fisher-boate, the Bridge being broken by the tempests of Winter. Darius was the last Persian Emperour, whose being conquered and overcome by Alexander, made way to the Monarchie of the Macedonians, for Alexander did first translate it out of Asia into Europe. All Asia, according to the severall government thereof, may thus be divided. The first part is under the Turkes command, the originall whereof is from Mahomet, and is a large Territory. The Duke of Moscovia doth possesse a second part, enclosed with the frozen Sea, the River Oby, the Lake Kitaia, and a Line drawne thence to the Caspian Sea, and to the Isthmus which is betweene this Sea and Pontus. The Great Cham Emperour of Tartarie doth possesse the third part, whose borders on the South are, the Caspian Sea, the River Iaxartes, and the Mountaine Imaus; on the East and North the Ocean: on the West the Kingdome of Moscovia. The King of Persia, called the Sophie, hath the fourth. This hath on the West side the Turke; on the North the Tartarian; on the South it is washed with the Red Sea, but on the East with the River Indus. The fift part doth containe India, both on this side and beyond Ganges; which is not governed by one alone, but by many Rulers, for every Country thereof hath almost a severall Prince, some whereof are tributarie to the great Cham. The sixt part contayneth the large Kingdome of China. The seaventh containeth all the Islands scattered up and

downe in the Indian and Easterne Sea. Among which are Tabrobana and Zetlan, the two Iavae found out not long since by the Portugalls, Borneo, Celebes, Palohan, Mindanao, Gilolo, with the spice bearing Moluccoes, also Iapan, with Nova Guinea lastly found out; concerning which it is not yet known whether it be an Island, or joyned to the Southern Continent. But the Ancients, as Strabo and Arrianus, have made many divisions of it. Ptolomie doth divide it into 47. Countries and Provinces, the description whereof hee delivers in his fift, sixt, and seaventh Bookes of Geographic, and doth set them forth in twelve Tables. It hath three Cities famous through the whole World, Babylon, Ninivie,The Cities. and Ierusalem. It hath great Lakes full of fish,Lakes. and the Caspian Sea in manner of a Lake, which never commeth to the Ocean. Also many Rivers,Rivers. among which the chiefest are Tigris, Euphrates, which Moses mentioneth in Genesis, Iordane, Indus, Ganges, etc.Mountaines. Here are also great and wonderfull Mountaines, among which is the MountaineEustathi^^ affirmeth that this Mountain was so called by the reason of its magnitude, for, saith he, among the Ancients all great and strong things were called (...), and as it is called Taurus, and many other names by humane Writers: so the Scripture calleth it Ararath, if we shall beleeve Arias Montanus and Becanus. Taurus, which comming from the Easterne shoare, divides all Asia; on the right hand where it first riseth from the Indian Sea, it beareth Northwards: on the left hand, it is Southerne and bending toward the West, untill the Seas meet with it: as here the Phaenician, and the Ponticke. There the Caspian and Hyrcanian Seas, together with the Meoticke Lake; as if Nature on purpose had opposed it: But though this Mountaine bee shut as it were betweene these bounds, yet with many windings it runneth forth even as far as the neighbouring Cliffs of the Rhiphaean Mountains, being famous wheresoever it goeth; and knowne by many new names. At first it is called Imaus, and by Emodus, Paropanisius, Circius, Chambades, Pharphariades, Croates, Oreges, Oroandes, Niphates, and Taurus: where it doth as it were exceed it selfe Caucasus, where it spreadeth its armes as if it would embrace the Sea, Sarpedon, Coracesius, and Cragus, and againe Taurus. But where it openeth it selfe, it taketh its name from the Havens, which are sometimes called the Armenian, elsewhere the Caspian, and Cilician. The bredth of it in most places is three thousand furlongs, which is 5625. ItalianHeylin saith, that reckoning its severall bendings in and out, it is 6250. miles long, and 375. miles broad p. 519. The publicke workes. miles: that is, from the Coast of Rhodes, even to the farthest bounds of China and Tartaria. But of these things enough. I passe now to the publicke workes, which have beene heretofore very stately and magnificent, and worthy to bee numbred among the seaven Miracles of the World. Amongst them the first were the walls of Babylon, whichSee Iustin. Hist. lib. 1. Semiramis built, or at least did repaire being ruinate, with brickes joyned and laid in a pitchy kind of mortar, they were two hundred foot high and fiftie broade, so that Chariots might meet thereon; they had three hundred Towers, and should have had more, but that in some parts the Marshes were insteed of walls. It is reported that for this so great a worke three hundred thousand workemen were employed. Herodotus reporteth, that the walls of Babylon were fiftie royall cubits thicke, and two hundred high, and round about there were placed in them a hundred brazen Gates. The second was the Temple of Diana of Ephesus, which was built by all Asia in two hundred and twenty yeares, as Histories doe testifie: And it was seated in a Moorish place, least it should be endangered by Earthquakes; And least they should place the foundation of so great a building

upon unfirme ground, they strewed it over with coales trodden downe, and on it they laid fleeces of wooll. The length of the Temple was 425. feet, the breadth 220. The Pillars in it were an hundred and seaven and twenty, all made by severall Kings, of which 36. were carved: Ctesiphon was the overseer of the worke. There was also a Monument which Artemesia Queene of Caria did erect in memory of her deceased husband, which is to bee counted among the wonders of the World; it being 25. Cubits high, and compassed about with thirty Pillars: it was sixe and thirty foote wide Northward and Southward. Lastly, there was that magnificent Temple, which Salomon began to build in the fourth yeare of his raigne, not unfit to be reckoned with the seaven wonders of the World. First of all,Read 1. King. chap. 5. and 6. thirty thousand men were set to cut trees, as Cedars and Cypresse in Lebanon: and there were fourescore thousand stone-cutters. The bredth of the Temple was twenty Cubits, the length sixtie, and the height an hundred and twenty. The matter of the nethermost building was of white stone: the largenesse of the Porch was ten Cubits, there were twenty secret chambers, passing one into another, and others placed under these. The beames were of Cedar, the roofes of Cedar guilded over, and the walls in like manner: The Sanctuary of the Holy place was distinguished from the body of the Temple with a wall, in which were carved gates, with drawing Curtaines enterwoven with many flowers and winding borders: besides two Cherubins of pure gold, the pavement under foot was beset with studdes of gold: the gates were twenty Cubits in height, and twelve in compasse. There was a brazen vessell of so great a bignesse, that it was fitly called the Sea; round about which stood twelve Calves, three together, and looking severally toward the foure corners of the World. This vessell did hold three thousand measures containing 72. Sextaries. There were also other figures, which it would be too long to rehearse. There was a brazen Altar of ten foot height, and double as much in length. Also one golden Table, and ten thousand golden Pots and Dishes, etc. But let these things suffice which have beene spoken of this part of the Word: I come now to America the fourth part of the World.


AMERICA.
America, whence so called.WHen Christophorus Columbus hadIn the yeare 1492. found out this fourth part of the World unknowne to the Ancients; some call itBut improperly, for the true India is a part of Asia, and deriveth its name from the River Indus, which this Country cannot. India, others for the largenesse of it Novus Orbis, or the new World: for it is as great and bigge as all our World, that is, Europe, Africke, and Asia, being joyned together: as it may appeare by viewing our generall Table. It is called also America from Americus Vesputius a Florentine, who next after Columbus discovered the Easterne part of the Southerne America: in which are the Countries of Paria and Brasilia; but it is uncertaine when America began first to be inhabited: certaine it is, that for many ages it lay unknowne;

map of AmericaAMERICA.

for that which some suppose concerning the Romans, is more easily said then proved, and that fiction is accurately refuted by Gasparus Varrerius. Some suppose thatVenient annis secula seris, quibus oceanus vincula rerum laxet, and ingens pateat tellus, nec sit terris ultima Thule. Seneca by Poeticall inspiration did sing some raptures concerning it in his Medea: but it is madnesse to suppose that these parts in that age were knowne either to him or any other. Christophorus Columbus ofBorne at Nervs in the Countrie of Genoa. Genoa, after it had beene many ages unknown unto us, did first finde it out being employed by the King of Castile, after hee had learnt it out, (as some beleeve that would detract from the glory of so famous an enterprise) from a certain Spanish Marriner, who had long endured foule weather on the Atlanticke Sea; it was performed in the yeare 1492. After him Americus Vesputius did attempt the same for the King of Portugall, and brought backe the reward of his enterprise, because (as we said) the whole Continent is called from his name America.The Situation. The whole Country from the North to the South, is stretched out in the forme of two great Peninsulaes, which are joyned together by a slender Isthmus: the one of them is called Northerne America, the other, Southerne America. The Longitude thereof is extended betweene the Meridionall degree 190, and the Meridionall degree 67. The terme of its Latitude towards the South, is the Straits of Magellane, that is, under the degree 52. and towards the North, it is not knowne higher then 67. It hath therefore on the East the Atlanticke Sea, which they commonly call Del Nort, on the South, the Southerne Land of Magellane, disjoyned from it by a narrow Sea flowing betweene: on the West, Mare Pacificum, or the Peaceable Sea, called Mare Del Zur; and on the North it is doubtfull whether there bee Land or Sea. The whole compasse in sayling round about it, is about 32000 miles, as the most approved thinke. For it hath beene sayled round about, except that Country which lyeth Northward, whose coasts are not yet discovered. The whole Country is changeable and full of varietie; at first it wanted both Corne and Wine: but instead thereof it bringeth forthRead Heylin. pag. 770. MatZ, a kinde of pulse, for so they call it; as they call Wine Chichia, boates Canoas, their Princes Cacicos. They do not plough the ground to reape, but having digged ^renches of a small depth, they put three or foure granes in one of them, and so cover them with earth. The severall stalkes doe beare three or foure eares, and every one of the eares doe beare three or foure hundred graines and more. The stalke of Mayz doth exceed the height of a man, and in some Countries it is gathered twice in a yeare. They have also another kinde of bread, beside that which they make of Maiz, which they callOr Cassader. Cazabi. This is made of Iucca, which is a roote of the bignesse of a Turnep, which sendeth forth no seed, but certaine knottie, hard stalkes, cloathed with greene leaves like Hempe. Those stalkes when they are ripe, they cut into peeces of two hands length, which they bury in heapes under the earth; and as oft as they would make that kinde of bread, they digge up of them as much as they thinke good, because they will soone be corrupted and grow naught. Moreover, there are two other kindes of rootes, the one they call theOr Potatoes. Battata, the other the Haia, almost alike in shape, but that the Haiae are lesse and more savory: they eate the fruite of them within sixe Moneths after they are planted, which though they have a kinde

of sweet taste, yet such as will soone cloy one; beside, they have but little juyce, and doe procure winde in the stomacke. Those Countries have also a great number of trees, which doe bring forth wilde Grapes. Their Grapes are like Sloes which grow upon thornes and bushes, and are covered with blacke leaves: but because they are more woody then juycie, therefore the inhabitants doe not make wine of them. There are in this Country Trees bearing Olives, but such as are of an unpleasant smell, and of a worse taste: and diverse other kindes of fruits in great abundance, as those which they call Hovi, Platani, Pineae, Guiavae, Mamei, and Guanavanae; it bringeth forth Sugar, Cotton-wooll, Hempe, and other things as with us, beside divers sorts of strange Trees and Herbes. It hath sweet Spices, Pearles and pretious stones; it aboundeth with incredible plenty of Gold and Silver, and with other Mettalls, and Mineralls. But it had not when it was discovered, either Oxen, Horses, Mules, Asses, Sheep, Goates, or Dogges. Wherefore it is no wonder if the inhabitants were strucken with amazement at the first sight of a Horse. Mice were first brought thither by a Ship of Antwerpe, which sayled very farre through the Straight of Magellane. Since which time either by the fruitfulnesse of the Country, or of the Creatures themselves; they are multiplyed and increased in so exceeding a manner, that they spoyle the fruits of their harvest by knawing the hearbes and trees. It doth bring to us divers living Creatures, partly knowne to us, and partly unknowne. Among other things there is found a prodigious Beast, which hath on her belly another belly placed in the likenesse of a purse: and as often as she changeth her denne, she hides and carries her young ones in that bagge. This Creature hath the body and snowte of a Foxe, the feete and hands of a Monkey, and the eares of a Batte. There is also another kinde of Creature (which the inhabitants doe call Cascuij) like a blacke Hogge, hairy, hard skinned, having little eyes, broade eares, cloven hoofes, armed with a short trunke or snowte like an Elephant; and having so terrible a cry or braying, that he makes men deafe: but his flesh is sweet to eate. Here is found a great company of wilde Boares, and fierce Tigers; and Lyons also, but those very fearefull, and such as will runne away at the fight of a man. Here are also Peacocks, Phesants, Partridges, and divers other kindes of Birdes, but farre differing from ours: But of these wee will speake more largely in our particular descriptions. All America is divided (as wee said before) into two great Peninsulaes, whereof the one, which lyeth on this side of the Aequinoctiall, is called the Northerne America; the other the Southerne, because the greatest part of it is stretched out beyond the Aequinoctiall: although some Countries of it are neare unto the Aequinoctill. The Northerne America is divided into many Regions, as namely, Quivira, Nova Hispania, Nicaragua, Iucatan, Florida, Apalchen, Norumbega, Nova Francia, Terra Laboratoris, and Estotilandia. There are many parts of the Southerne America, but these are the chiefest which have already been gotten and taken from the Savages: as Castella aurea, Plopaiana, Peruvia, Chile, and Brasilia: It doth glory especially in two Cities, Cusco and Mexico. Cusco is the Metropolis or chiefe Citie of Southerne America, which, both for bignesse, strength and magnificence,

for the invincible fortification of the Castle, and the great company of nobility; for the order and placing of the houses, and for pleasantnesse of situation, may worthily compare with the fairest Cities of France or Spaine. No common people are admitted into it, but it is the seate of Noble men and great Princes, who in that Country doe live in great numbers, partly within the w^^^ of the Citie, and partly in Villages neare the Citie. Here are foure especiall Pallaces of Noble men, who doe governe the Common-wealth, which are stately and with great cost built with square carved Marble stone. And all the streets being straight, in many places make the forme of a Crosse, and through every one a pleasant River runneth in a channell walled on each side with stone. The forme of the Citie is foure square, lying sweetly on the side of a hill: on the steepe ascent of a Mountaine, a wonderfull faire Tower doth adorne the Citie, whose beauty or largenesse if you consider, those which have viewed many Countries, have seene few in all Europe like unto it. Mexico or Temistitan is a rich and famous Citie in Nova Hispania, whereof wee will treate hereafter in the description of Nova Hispania: now we proceed to other things. This part of the World is watered with many famous Rivers,The Lakes and Rivers. the most whereof doe bring downe gold; and it is full of Lakes and Springs. In the Lakes and Rivers there are great plenty of fish: among which there is one kinde of them of chiefe note, which by the inhabitants of Hispaniola are called Manati. This Fish is somewhat like a Trout; he is five and twenty foot long, and twelve foote thicke, in his head and tayle hee resembles an Oxe; he hath small eyes, a hard and hairy skinne, of a light blew colour, and two feete like an Elephant. The femalls of this kinde of fish doe bring forth their young ones, as Cowes doe, and doe let them sucke at their two dugges.The Mountaines. Here are also very many Mountaines, among which, as Benso witnesseth, is a fire-vomiting Mountaine, which out of its hollow mouth doth send forth such great flakes of fire, that the blazing of it in the night doth cast forth a light which may bee seene above an hundred miles. Some have supposed that the gold melting within, doth afford continuall matter to the fire. For a certaine Dominican Frier, when he would make tryall thereof, caused a vessell of gold to bee made with an iron chaine: and afterward going to the Mountaine with foure other Spaniards, he let downe the vessell with the chaine into the hole of the hill; and there by the heate of the fire the vessell with part of the chaine was melted: and having tryed it againe with a bigger chaine, it hapned to melt againe in the same manner. Here the Cities generally are stately built, the wayes paved, and the houses very faire and beautifull. It is reported that here was a Kings garden, wherein herbes and trees, with their bodie, boughs, and fruits did stand of solid gold, and as bigge as those which grow in Orchards. And it is reported that here was a Kings Conclave, in which there were all kindes of living Creatures, made of precious stones, partly painted, and partly inlaid, and engraven. That which is reported concerning the two wayes in this Country is worthy of memory, the one whereof lyeth through the rough Mountaines, the other stretcheth through the plaine fields, from Quito a Citie of Peru, to the Citie Cusco, for the

space of five hundred miles. The beauty of this worke is encreased, by many wonderfull heapes of stones, which were not brought thither by the strength of Horses, or Oxen, (both which the inhabitants wanted) but by the hands of men. The field way is defended on both sides with walls, and it is five and twenty foote broade, within which little streames doe runne, having their bankes planted with shrubby trees, which they call Molli. The other being hewed out of stones and rockes, passeth through the middle of the Mountaines, having the same bredth: Moreover the way in the uneven and lower part of the Valleyes, is fortified with fences, as the nature of the Country requires. These wayes King Gninacava (who lived not long since) caused to to be clensed, and the ruinous walls to be repaired and adorned, otherwise the worke is more ancient, and there were placed all along by the way side Innes both faire, and pleasant, (they call them Tambi) in which all the Kings traine were received. And let this suffice concerning the foure parts of the World in generall: now our method doth require that we should describe particularly the partes of Europe, which was set before in the first place.



THE NORHTH-POLE: AND A DESCRIPTION OF THE COVNTRIES SITVATE ROUND ABOUT IT.
HAving made (courteous Reader) a Generall Description of the whole Globe, and the foure parts thereof methodically, and according to the order of nature; I purpose, in Imitation of Ptolomie the Prince of Cosmographers, to begin the Geographie of particular Countries from the Pole it selfe and the Countries lying round about it, that so descending from the higher to the lower parts, and proceeding from the left hand to the right hand, I may by degrees joyne the North with the South, and the West with the East, which I pray God may be profitable to the Common-wealth. The Pole is the extremitie, or end of the Axis, which is a Line drawne through the Center of the Globe, the Latines call it vertex. There are two Poles, the Northerne, and the Southerne. The Northerne is that which is alwaies beheld towards the North, and therefore also it is called the Northerne andSo called for its nearnesse to a constellation in the North Hemisphere called (...) which signifieth a Beare. Articke Pole. The Southerne, is that which appeareth to those onely which dwell toward the South, and therefore it is called the Meridionall, Southerne, andSo called because it is opposite to the Articke Pole. Greenland, whence so called. Antarticke Pole. And thus much in this place shall suffice concerning the Poles. I come to the Countries situate round about the Articke Pole: which are Groenlandia or Greeneland, Frizlandia, or Freesland, Nova Zembla with some others, of which wee will entreat briefely as farre as they are knowne.The London Marchants call this Island K. Iames his new Land.The qualitie of the Aire and Soyle. Groenlandia, or Greeneland is so called from the greennesse thereof, and is an Island for the most part yet unknown, it is situate betweene the Northerne Circle and the Pole, the farthest paralels therof towards the South are the Degrees of 65, and towards the North the Degrees of 78. In this Island, if wee beleeve Nicolas Zenetus (who in the yeare 1480. endured much hard weather in the bordering Sea) there is continuall winter for nine Moneths, all which time it doth never raine there, neither doth the snow, which falleth at the beginning thereof, melt untill the end, yet is not this harmefull to the grasse, for here is a great increase both of grasse and fodder. Therefore here is great store of milke-beasts in regard of the great plentie thereof, so that they make store of Butter and Cheese, which they sell to those they traffique withall. There are onely two inhabited places knowne unto us in Groenland, Alba and the Monasterie of Saint Thomas, of which wee will speake by and by. The Slow Sea, which is also called the frozen Icie Sea, doth touch upon Greeneland. There is in Greeneland a Monasterie of the Preaching Order: and not farre from it a fire-vomiting Mountaine like Aetna, at the foot whereof there is a fountaine of running waters, by whose great heat

map of the North PoleTHE NORTH-POLE.

they do not onely make hot all the roomes of the Monasterie like a hot-house, but also they bake their bread and dresse their meat, without the helpe of fire. The whole fabricke of the Monasterie doth consist of brittle sandie stones, which the Mountaine doth cast forth in the midst of the flames. This fountaine doth warme the neighbour gardens so that they continually flourish with divers kindes of flowers and herbes. And the Sea neare unto it, by the vertue of these waters, is never frozen, but lyes continually open both for the fish and the use of man: which makes so great a concurse of fish to resort hither from colder places, that not onely these Monkes,Freezland. but also the Inhabitants round about do live plentifully. Frislandia or Freezland was an Island altogether unknowne to the Auncients: being greater thanHeyling saies almost as bigge as Ireland. Ireland. The Climate is very intemperate. The Inhabitants have no fruits, but live for the most part upon fish. The chiefe Towne thereof hath the same name with the Island, and it belongeth to the King ofAnd therefore now subject to the King of Denmarke. Norway. The Inhabitants for the most part live by fishing. For in the Haven thereof so great a plentie of all kind of fish is taken that many ships are loaded with them, and so carried to the Islands lying neare it, as Zieglerus writeth. The same man writeth that the Sea next to the Island on the West being full of rockes and sands, is called the Icarean Sea, and the Island in it is called by the Inhabitants Icaria.Nova Zembla. This Island in our time beginneth to be known again, and that by the Discoverie of the English. Nova Zembla is an Island situated under the 76 Degree. Here the aire is very sharpe, and the cold most vehement and intolerable. It is a wild, woodie, and rugged Country, where neither leaves nor grasse grow, nor any living creatures, but those which live by flesh as Foxes, and Beares, whereof there is great store not onely in this Island, but in most of the Northerne Countries. There are Sea-monsters here whose bodies does exceede the bignesse of an Oxe, and are commonly called Walruschen: they are headed like a Lyon, their skin hairy, they having foure feete, and two teeth sticking forth of the upper part of their mouth beeing smooth, hard, and white, and are worth as much as Elephants teeth. The Bayes here are called Weggates Bay, Forbishers Bay, and Davises Bay; Weigates Bay is streitched out towards the East even to the place called Crucis Angulus, toward the Aerctapelietes to the place called Dissidii Angulus, a a little enclining to the East. On the Southerne side of the Continent of Weggats Bay, William Barendson found some wild men called Samiutae. The shape of their cloathes which they use, is like that which our Painters do bestow on woodmen, or Satyres, but yet they are not wild men, but endued with a good understanding. They are cloathed fro^ head to foot with the skins of beasts called Rangiferi: for the most part are ofPigmies are here supposed to inhabit. low stature, broad faced, small eyed, short and splay-footed, and very nimble both to runne and leape. They have coaches unto which they put one or two of these Rangiferi, which will draw it with one or two men in it with more speede then any of our Horses can do. Forbishers Bay was so called from Martine Forbisher an English man, who in the yeare 1577. seeking a passage to Cathaia by the North, arrived at this Bay, in which hee found both Islands and many men, concerning which wee will adde some things. The men thereof being strangers to all civilitie,

do eate and feed upon the raw flesh of beasts and fishes. They are cloathed with the skins of wild beasts taken in hunting, and they eate raw hearbes like beasts. Their Tents are covered with Whales skinnes; the cold being continually very sharpe in these parts. They use Dogges which are like unto our Wolves, and having yoked them together, they do make them draw things over the ice. Their weapons are Bowes and Arrowes, and slings. There is no wood there, but much Deere. The men do not plough the ground, as beeing content with that it bringeth forth of its own accord: they live by hunting: their drinke is the warme blood of wild beasts, or else ice water: there are no Rivers nor Springs, because the violence of the cold doth so shut up the Earth, that springs of water cannot breake forth. The men are very laborious, strong, hunters, and cunning fowlers: they use a certaine kinde of boate made of leather, wherein one man can but sit, who maketh use but of one Oare, his right hand holding his bow wherewith hee shoots at the birds. The like hath beene seene in England. Davises Bay also was so called from Iohn Davis an Englishman, who in the yeare 1585. and the two following yeares did search along the Coasts of America, or rather the Southerne Coasts of Greenland from the 53. Degree to the 75. to finde out a passage that way unto China. Concerning the foure Euripideas in the table those things which you see are taken out of the Register booke of Iames Cnoxen Buscoducensis, who doth report that a certaine English Minorite Frier of Oxford, being a Mathematician, did describe the Countries lying neare unto the Pole, and measured them with his Astrolabe in this following shape, as Mercator hath gathered them out of Iames Cnoxens Booke. Hee saith that these foure Seas are carried with such violence to the Innermost Gulfe, that ships being once entred can never be driven backe againe with any winde, and that there is never so great a winde, as that it can drive about a wind-mill. But these things are as true as Lucians fables, seeing they who have viewed these places in which those seas are said to be, do finde no such Euripi, or swift flowing Seas at all, namely the Hollanders who have discovered the Sea even to the 81. Degree of Latitude. But concerning the habitation of the Northerne people, let us heare Iulius Scaliger in his 37. Exercitation, where he thus speaking concerning a voiage from the Northerne Sea towards China. There are (saith hee) divers arguments brought by divers men on both sides, and it is diversly judged of, whether it be possible to saile by that Sea. But these are ours. They would have us to saile from the mouth of the River Duvina, all along that Countrie which encompasses all Scythia even to the East corner: in which winding course wee are to change the Northerne wind for the Westerne. But those which speake thus, it is certaine they do not know the nature of this Sea, nor of the Windes and Coast: For the West and East windes are so rare in this Sea that they are almost scarce knowne. But so many North windes are there here that it seemes Nature hath committed the government of these parts unto them alone. There are many foards blinde and muddie. In winter, which continueth ten moneths, the superficies or upper part of the Sea, is as hard as any pavement. In Summer there are continuall mists, which in the afternoone as fast as one is expelled another rises. Besides, the Ice is very dangerous, the great pieces whereof floting up and downe, are like moving Islands running one amongst another. It is certaine that by the late Navigations of the Hollanders in the

yeare 1594. and in the two following yeares, it was hoped, that wee might saile out of the Northerne Sea to the Eastern parts of the World. But very difficultly, in regard of the Ice, and long winter nights. William Barentson did denie that it was possible to saile by the Bay of Nassovia to China, not onely for the Ice, but also because hee found by divers observations, that it was not a Sea but a Bay, and especially because hee found there was no Tide nor Ebbe: and yet hee was in great hope that a way might be found out by the most Northerne part of Nova Zembla. But seeing there are every day new voyages made to discover the passage that way to China, experience will teach them at last whether it can be done or not. It is manifest that our ships have sailed even to the 81. Degree of Northerne Latitude, and yet found the Sea open: but yet afterward at the 76. Degree they have beene hindred with great pieces of ice, and the night comming on, so that they could proceed no further. The Sunne left them the 4. of November in the yeare 1596, and was seene again the 24. of Ianuary in the following yeare, all which time these valiant Argonautes, for so I may call them, hid themselves in a little shed which they built up in Nova Zembla, untill the 14. of Iune. For though the voyage of theIason and his Companions, who sayled to Celchos to fetch the golden fleece, of whom reade Valerius Flaceus Lib. 1. Argonautes is made so famous by posteritie, yet if it be compared with this it will seeme but a toy; for who hath beene, for the space of 13. Moneths separated from the societie of men, before the Hollanders, who wanting all necessaries, and enduring extremitie of cold, did even under the 76. Degree of Latitude, build themselves houses to receive them, and defend them from the violence of the weather, in which they lay buried and covered over with deepe snow almost ten whole moneths? I conceale that which they suffered in returning, being compell'd to leave their ships and betake themselves to their boate. I omit to speake of the cruell, fierce, and great Beares, and Sea-Monsters, with which they oftentimes were enforced to fight. All which troubles, labours, and difficulties they most valiantly by the protection and favour of the Divine power did overcome.





ISELAND.
ISELAND is the greatest of all those Ilands in the Westerne Ocean, which are subject to the Kings of Norwey; it takes this name from the cold,The name by whom, and why given. wherewith it is partly frozen. It is also called Suelandia, from the Snow: Also Gardartsholme, that is, the Iland of Gardart. The most doe suppose this to bee that Thule mentioned by the Ancients, which also Ptolemie doeth call Thule; the middle whereof he placeth in the 30. Degree of Latitude, and 63. of Longitude. Solinus placeth it five dayes and nights sayle from the Orcades. An Island the most famous of all other with Poets, when by this, as being the farthest part of the World, they would intimate any thing farre distant. Whence Virgil saith, Tibi serviat ultima Thule, may the farthest Thule serve thee. But Sinesius doubteth whether there were ever any Thule: and Giraldus writeth, that it was never seene, and the more Learned are doubtfull in their opinions.See Heylin. p. 8. The most doe affirme (as wee said) that Iseland was heretofore called Thule: yet Saxo the Grammarian, Crantzius, Milius, Ionius, and Peucerus are of a contrary opinion unto them. But of this enough: I returne againe to Iseland. It is situated not under theWhich is a great circle rounding the Earth from Pole to Pole, and passeth through the Islands called Azores: See marg. pag. 10. first Meridian,The Situation. as one hath noted, but in the eigth Degree from thence. The length of it is an hundred German miles, as the common Writers have it, and Ionas addeth to these foure and fortie. The Latitude or breadth is sixe and fiftie German miles. It hath an ungentle ayre, and for the most part it is unhabited, especially towards the North, by reason of the vehement Westerne windes, which will not suffer the shrubs (as Olaus writeth) to rise up. The Land is unfit for tillage, neither doth it beare any graine; but all that have written of this Isle doe report, that it hath such abundance of grasse, that unlesse the Cattell were somtime driven from the pasture,The quality of the Soyle and Ayre. they would be in danger to die, and be choak't with their owne fatnesse. Ionas himselfe confesseth, that they have no labouring beasts, but Horses and Oxen: and here all the Oxen and Kine have no hornes, nor their Sheepe likewise. They have little white Dogs,The varietie of living Creatures. which they very much esteeme. They have abundance of white Faulcones, and white Crowes, which prey upon the young Lambes and Hogges. Also there are white Beares and Hares. Also (as Islandus witnesseth) there are Eagles with white traines: which Pliny (as he saith) called Pygargos. Velleius reporteth, that this Island beareth no tree but the Birch and Iuniper trees: so that there is great scarcitie of wood through the whole Island, unlesse by chance (which somtimes happens) some great trees being rooted up by the violence of the winde, are brought out of the Northerne parts, and like wracks cast upon these moores, which the Inhabitants use in building houses and ships. It hath beene subject to the King of Norwey, (as Ionas reporteth) from the yeare 1260. in which they first did homage to him: In regard whereof, the King of Denmarke and Norwey doth yearely send thither a Governour, who keepes his residence in the Castle called Bestede, whom they now obey, as heretofore they did their

Bishops, by whom they were converted to the Christian Faith, under the reigne of Edelbert. In the time of Harald the Faire-haired, the first Monarch of Norwey, some thinke it began to be inhabited: for when hee had expell'd a great company of Noble men out of Norwey, they (forsaking their owne Countrie) came with their whole Families and dwelt here. It is likely, that these things happened a thousand yeares after Christ; but as Islandus Ionas writeth about the yeare 874, who declareth the succession and names of these Bishops. Crantzius nameth Islephus to be the first Bishop. But it seemeth, as we may collect out of the Eclogues of Nicolas Zenius, that it was under the command of the Norwegians two hundred yeares before, where we reade, that Zichmus King of Frisland did attempt to get this Island by force of Armes, but was repuls'd by the King of Norwey's Garrison Souldiers, placed in this Island. The whole Island is divided into foure parts. The Easterne part they call Austlendingafiordung, the Westerne Westlendingafiordung, the Northerne Nortendingafiordung, the Southerne Suydlendingafiordung. They have no Cities,The Fountaines. but Mountaines in stead thereof. Here is a Fountaine, the exhalations whereof will change any thing into stone, and yet the shape thereof shall still remaine. And there is a Fountaine of pestilent water, which will poyson any one that tastes of it. There is water that tastes like beere. The Northerne Ocean, in which this Island is situate, doth afford such great plenty of fish,The Sea. and is so commodious to the Common-wealth of Iseland, that all the Inhabitants doe live and maintaine their Families by it. I should want time to reckon up the severall kindes of Fish that are in the Sea, yet it will not be amisse, to remember some of the rarest. Among which there is a kind of Fish called Nahual, whereof if any one eate, he dieth presently; and he hath a tooth in the innermost part of his head, which standeth forth 7 cubits in length, which some have sold for an Vnicornes horne, and it is beleev'd to have a great vertue against poyson. This Monster is fortie yards long. The Royder is an hundred and thirty Elles long, and hath no teeth; his flesh is most sweet and pleasant in eating, and his fat doth heale many diseases. There is the Brittish Whale, which is thirty Elles long, having no teeth, but a tongue seven Elles in length. And there is a kinde of a great Whale, which is seldome seene, being rather like an Island it selfe than a Fish. In regard of the hugenesse of his body, hee cannot follow the lesser fishes, yet hee takes them by cunning and craftinesse. There is also an other Fish called Stantus Valur, all grisly, and something like a Thornback, but much greater; when he appeareth he seemes like an Island, and overturneth Ships with his Fins. There are also Sea-Oxen, called Seenaut, of a grisly colour, and divers other fishes. I come now to the Mountaines.The Mountaines. In Iseland (saith Georgius Agricola) there are three very high Mountaines, whose tops are alwayes white with continuall Snow, the bottomes doe burne with continuall Fire. The first is called Hecla, or Hecklfort; the second, the Mountaine of the Crosse; and the third Helga, that is, the holy Mountaine. Not farre from Hecla there are Mynes of Brimstone, which is the onely commodity of traffique, that belongs to the Inhabitants of Iseland. For Merchants doe fraight and loade their ships with it. The Mountaine when it rageth, doth send forth a

map of IcelandISELAND.

noise like thunder, casteth forth great stones, vomiteth out Brimstone, and fils all the ground with ashes round about it, so that the Countrie cannot be inhabited for two entire miles round about it. They which draw neere to this Mountaine to consider and view more curiously the causes why it burnes, are somtime swallowed up alive by some hidden breach in the Mountaine, for there are many, and those covered so with ashes, that no man can beware of them: therefore they call this placeThe Papists thinke, that here is their feined Purgatorie. Carcer sordidarum animarum, the prison-house of uncleane soules. Besides it happeneth, that the yee being loosed, doth in great peeces for 8 moneths together beat against the shore, and maketh such an horrible sound, that the Inhabitants say, it is the crying and howling of those soules. There is an other Mountaine of the same nature called Helga: this Mountaine in the yeare 1581, (as Ionas witnesseth) did cast forth fire and stones with such a thundering noise, that foure score miles from thence, they thought some great pieces of Ordnance had beene shot off. In one part hereof, strange Spirits are seene in the liknesse of men, so that those who doe not know them to bee dead before, would thinke they were alive: nor doe they finde their errour before the ghosts doe vanish away. But these things Ionas thinkes are fabulous, or else the delusions of the Devill. Crantzius and Olaus doe write, that the Islanders, for the most part, doe dwell in Caves, which they digge in the sides of the Mountaines, especially in the Winter time. But Ionas, on the contrary, saith, that there are many Temples and houses built of wood very faire and costly. The Island hath two Cathedrall Bishopricks, as Holar, or Hallen, under which are the Monasteries Pingora, Remested, Modur, Munkeniere; and Scalholt, under which are those Monasteries Videy, Pyrnebar, Kirckebar, and Shieda. Yet wee understand by the writings of Velleius the Authour of this Table, that there are nine Monasteries in it, and three hundred and nine and twenty Churches. The Bishops are sent thither out of the Universitie of Haffnia, the only University in Denmarke; one of them governeth the Northerne part of the Island, the other the Southerne. And each of them hath a free Schoole joyned to his house, in which hee is bound to be at the cost of the bringing up and teaching of foure and twentie Children.The manners of the Inhabitants. The Inhabitants live, eate, and lodge in the same houses with their Cattell. They live in a holy simplicity, seeking nothing more than what Nature grants them; for the Mountaines are their Townes, and the Fountaines their delight. A happie Nation, not envied by reason of their poverty, and so much the happier because it hath received the Christian Religion. Yet the English and Danish Merchants doe ^ouble their quiet, not suffering them to be content with their owne; for they frequenting this Island, to bring away fish from thence, have brought among them their vices together with their wares. The memorable acts of their Ancestours, they doe celebrate in Verse, and doe keepe them from oblivion by engraving them on Rocks.Their foode. They live, for the most part, by Fish, which being dryed and beaten, and so made into a kinde of meate, they use at their Table instead of bread. But the wealthier doe eate bread twice baked. Heretofore they dranke water, and the richer milke, but now they have learned to mingle corne with it, which is brought hither from other places, and

they scorne to drinke water, since strangers have begun to traffick with them. For those of Lubeck, Hamburrough, and Rostoch comming every yeare with their ships to this Island, doe bring thither corne, bread,Their Traffick or trade. beere, wine, honey, English cloathes, linnen cloth, iron, steele, gold, silver, womens coyfs, and wood for building houses and ships: and they doe expect for these, Iselandish cloth (commonly called Watman) great store of Brimstone, dried fish, butter, tallow, hides, skins of wilde beasts, foxes, white faulcons, horses, and the like. Here is so great plenty of fish, that they lay them in great heapes out of doores, and so sell them, the heapes being higher than the tops of their houses. There is also so great store of salt butter, that they put it up in sweet chests of fortie foot long, and five foote deepe, besides that which they barrell up. And here we will adde Erasmus Michael's Verses concerning Iseland, as hee hath them in his third Booke Of Sea matters.


Vltima Parrhasias Islandia spectat in Arctos, etc.
The farthest part of Iseland looketh North,
And Westward some Degrees it is streight forth,
Which hath not onely a rich pleasant soyle
While as it doth the yellow Brimstone boyle
Within its cavernes blinde, which at the last
All mingled with sand, it forth doth cast:
Or when the Meddowes bring forth fodder store,
And all the vales with grasse are clothed o're;
But when upon the shore it fish doth heape,
Whose number can't be told, it is so great:
Or be distinguisht every severall sort,
Which it by shipping doth abroad transport.
For though here plenty of all things is found,
Yet most of all in fish it doth abound.
'Tis rich, the Inhabitants are stout of minde,
And where it lyes against the Southerne winde
Hecla still burneth with continuall flame,
Which it at open holes sends forth againe.
It casts forth ashes with a fearfull sound,
While pitchie flames doe to the Starres rebound.





THE ILES OF BRITTAINE. ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, AND IRELAND: WITH THE ILANDS LYING ROVND ABOVT THEM.
BRITTAINE containeth all those Islands which lying betweene Spaine and Germany, are stretched forth in a great quantitie of Land toward France. Lhuyddus saith that not long agoe it was called Prydanium;The name by whom, and why given. Sr Thomas Eliott would have it called Prytania, being incited thereunto through the love of contention rather then truth, against the authority of Aristotle, Lucretius, Iulius Caesar, and other ancient Writers. But because heretofore all the Brittaines did paint themselves with woade, which gave them a blewish colour, that so their faces might be more terrible against their enemies in war; and in regard that in their ancient Language they did call any thing that was painted and coloured, Brit: some doe rightly suppose that the Graecians, understanding that the inhabitants were called Brith and Briton, did adde to Brith Tania, which signifies a Country, and thereforeIf this bee true, then did it not receive its denomination from Brutus. See Heylin pag. 455.The temper of the Aire.The fertilitie of the Soyle.The varietie of living Creatures. Brittaine was called the Country of Brittaines, that is, the Country of painted and coloured men; like as Mauritania is called so of the Moores, Lusitania from Lusus, and Aquitania the Region of Waters. Brittaine is endowed by Nature with all guifts both of Aire and Soyle, in which neither the cold of winter is too violent, (as the Oratour hath it, speaking to Constantine) nor the heate of Summer, and it is so fruitfull in bearing corne, that it is sufficiently stored with Bread and Drink: Here the woods are without wilde beasts, and the earth without harmefull Serpents. On the contrary, innumerable flockes and heards of tame cattell, full of milke, and loaden with their fleece; yea, whatsoever is necessary to life is here: the dayes are very long, so that the nights are not without some light, and the Sunne which seemeth in other Countries to goe downe and set, doth seeme here only to passe by.The Ile of Albion. Among all the Iles of Brittaine, two do exceed the rest in greatnesse: Albion, (under which are contained England, and Scotland,) and Ireland. The greatest of these is Albion, now alone called Brittaine, which was a name formerly common to them all: and this name is rather deduced out of Books, than used in common speech, only the Scots doe yet call themselves Albinich, and their Country Albin. Concerning the name of Albion, the Grecians first gave it to this Ile for distinction sake; seeing all the neighbour Ilands were called the Iles of Brittaine: so that it did first arise from the vaine and fabulous lightnesse of the Grecians in faigning names. For seeing they called Italy, from Hesperus the sonne of Atlas, Hesperia; France, from the sonne of Poliphemus, Gallatia, etc. It is not unlikely that they fabulously named this Iland Albion, from Albion the sonne of Neptune, which Perottus and Lilius Giraldus

map of the isles of BritainTHE ISLES OF BRITTAINE.

doe confirme. Others would derive it fromVerstegan affirmeth it vvas so called ab albis rupibus: the white rocks tovvards France. The figure. (...), which, as Festus witnesseth, in Greeke signifies white; whence also the Alpes are so called. The figure of it is Triangular, or three cornerd, and it runneth forth into three severall Angles. The first Promontorie, towards the West, the Englishmen doe call the Cape of Cornewall. The second in Kent, which looketh towards the East, the English call it North-forland. The third is Orcas, or Tarvisium, which lyeth farre North, the Scots call it Dungisbehead: Livius, and Fabius Rusticus, have likened it to a Cheesell. On the West side, whereon Ireland lyeth, theWhich the English and French call the channell of S. George. Vergivian Sea brea^eth in, on the North it is beaten with the wide and great Northerne Ocean; on the East, where it lyeth against Germany, with the German^ Sea; on the South, where it butteth upon France, it is beaten with the Brittish Sea. Diodorus in his sixt booke, writeth that the compasse of it is two and forty thousand furlongs. Martian saith, that Brittaine is eight hundred miles long, and three hundred broad, and in compasse 6000. miles. The learned and accurate Writer Camden, doth thus account it from the Promontorie Tarvisium to Belerium, following the winding of the shoare, is eight hundred and twelve miles: from thence to Kent, 320. miles. Lastly, from Kent to Tarvisium seaven hundred and foure miles: the whole summe is 1836. miles. This Iland formerly was divided into two parts, as Ptolomie witnesseth in his second Booke: where he parts the whole Iland into Great Brittaine and Little Brittaine. The Great he calls theThis division vvas made by Severus the Emperor, saith Camden. p. 98. Hither part towards the South; the Lesser the Father toward the North. But the Romans neglecting the farther part, because, as Appian saith, it could not be commodious to them, the hither part being reduced into a Province, they at first divided into theThe Romans, saith Camden, called those Provinces of any Country they conquered which were next the^, Primas and s^periore, and the more remote, secundas and inferiores. p 99. Lower and Higher, as it is gathered out of Dion. For the hither part of England with Wales, he calleth the Higher, the farther and Northerne he calleth the Lower. Afterward they divided it into three parts, as appeares by Sextus Rufus, into Maxima Casariensis, Brittania Prima, and Brittania Secunda. Afterward, when the forme of the Common-wealth was daily changed, they divided Brittaine inWhat Countries these five parts contained, and why they were so denominated. See in Camden pag. 98. and 99. five parts, the First, Second, Maxima Caesariensis, Valentia, and Flavia Casariensis: And these were divisions of Brittaine when it was under the Romans. Some have written that the whole Iland was heretofore divided into three parts, Leogria, Cambria, and Albania, but Camden beleeveth that this was a later division, which seemeth to arise from those three People, the Englishmen, Welch, and Scots, who last of all divided this Iland among themselves. Afterward, the Iland was divided into two Kingdomes, namely England, and Scotland: but at last, under the happy raigne of Iames the sixt King of Scotland, these two Kingdomes wereThey were first united in the yeare of grace 1603. The Sea. united, and the whole Iland called Great Brittaine. Brittaine, as we said before, is every where environed with the great and wide Ocean, which S. Basil. saith is a great Sea, and very terrible for those that sayle on it. Now it floweth farre into the Land, and then it returneth backe againe and leaveth the Sands naked: it feeleth the efficacy of the encreasing Moone very powerfully, and doth flow in with so great a force, that it doth not only drive backe Rivers, but it sometimes sweepes off cattle from the Land, casts forth the fishes on the shoare, and at the ebbe leaveth them there. In a word, so

great a matter it was held to sayle upon this Sea, that Iulius Firmicus in his Booke concerning the errours of prophane Religions, cryeth out thus to Constantine the Emperour. In Winter (which was never heretofore done, nor shall bee done) you have passed over the swelling raging waters of the Brittish Ocean, the waves of a Sea almost unknowne to us have trembled under our Oares: and the Brittaines have beene afraid at the unlookt-for presence of the Emperour. What would you more? The Elements themselves were conquered by your valour. It doth not belong unto us to speake here of the commodities which this Sea yeeldeth, of the time when it cherishes the Earth, of the vapours with which it nourishes the Aire, and bedewes the fields, of the divers kindes of Fish, as Salmons, Playces, Crabfishes,The commodities. Codfishes, Herrings, etc. of which it bringeth forth infinite numbers. Yet theSee Camden pag. 640. and 595. Pearles are not to bee passed over in silence, which in a round shape doe swimme in great shoales as it were following one Leader like Bees; so that Iubas calleth it the Sea of Bees: and also Marcellus makes mention of it. Suetonius doth report that Caesar did first attempt Brittaine in hope of getting these Pearles: and so much concerning Albion or England, now let us passe over to the rest. Among all of them, Ireland doth farre excell, of which wee will speake nothing here, intending to speake of it in particular Tables. The Orcades doe follow,The Orcades. now called the Iles of Orkney, which are aboutHeylin saith they are 32. pag. 511. thirty in number, and doe lie a little way distant one from another, which a certaine ancient record doth so call, as if it were Argath; which is there expounded as much as supra Getas, above the Getes: Camden would rather have it above Cath, for it lyeth over against Cath a Country of Scotland, which in regard of the Promontorie, they now call Cathnesse: whose Inhabitants Ptolomy, though wrongfully, doth call Carini instead of Cathini. In the time of Solinus they were not inhabited,The fertility of the Soyle. being overgrowne with Reedes and Bullrushes, but now they are tilled and bring forth Barley enough, though they want both wheat and trees: there is no Serpent or poysonous Creature in them. They have great numbers of living Creatures in them; as Hares, Cunnies, Cranes, and many Swans. There is good fishing in them, of which the inhabitants make great profit. Iulius Agricola first sayling in a Shippe round about Brittaine, did finde out and conquer the Orcades at that time unknowne; and therefore it is unlikely that Claudius did first overcome them, as Hierom affirmeth in his Chronicle. Afterward, when the Romans were Commanders over Brittaine, they were the seats of the Picts; and after that they came under the power of the Norwegians and Danes: whence the Inhabitants doe speake the Gothicke tongue. Last of all, Christiernus King of Denmarke in consideration of a summe of money, in the yeare 1474. did passe over all his right unto the King of Scotland. The chiefe of these is Pomonia, famous in regard it is the seate of a Bishop, which was called by Solinus for the continuall length of the day Pomona diutina: now it is called by the Inhabitants Mainland, as if it were a Continent. It hath abundance of Tinne and Lead, and is adorned with a Bishops See in the Towne Kirkwale, and with two Castles. Among these Ptolomie also reckoneth Ocetis, which Camden supposes should now be called Hethy. And saith the same Camden, I am not yet resolved whether I should call Hey, which is among these

Plinies Dumna. If it bee not so, I had rather thinke Faire Ile, which hath onely one Towne called Dume, to bee that Dumna, than with Becanus to thinke that it is Wardhuys in Lappland. Iohn Major doth also call one of these Zeland, being fiftie miles in length. Moreover, the Inhabitants of these Iles doe make a very strong drinke by putting store of Barley in it, and are the greatest drinkers of all others; yet Boetius witnesseth that he never saw any of them drunke, or deprived of sense. The next to these are the Ilands called the Hebrides,The names of the Hebrides. in number foure and forty, which Beda calleth Maevaniae; Ethicus, Betoricae Insulae, Giraldus calls them the Incades and Leucades, the Scots the Westerne Iles: Ptolomie with Pliny and Solinus calleth themStephanus calleth them the Hebudes, others Ebonia Insula. Ebudae. Pliny writeth that there are thirty of them, but Ptolomie reckons onely five. The first is Ricina, which Pliny calles Rinea, and Antoninus Ridunas, but now it is called Racline, which is a little Iland just against Ireland. The next is Epedium, now called Ila, an Ile, (as Camden witnesseth) veryThis Iland is 24. miles long, and 16. miles broad. large, and having very fruitfull plaines: betweene this and Scotland lyeth Iona, which Beda calleth Hy and Hu, being plaine ground, in which there is an Episcopall See in the Towne Sodore, whence all the Ilands were called Sodorenses: it is famous, because here lie buried many Kings of Scotland. Then there is another which Ptolomie calleth Maleos, now Mula, which Pliny mentioneth when he saith that Mella of all the rest is more then 25 miles over. The Easterne Hebuda, now called Skie, is stretched along by the Scotch shoare, and the Westerne Hebuda lying more towards the West, is now called Lewes, of which Maccloyd is Governour, and in the ancient book of Mannia, it is called Lodhuys, being mountainous, stony, little manured, but yet the greatest; from which Eust is parted by a little Euripus or flowing Sea betweene them. The rest, except Hyrrha, are of no note, as being rockie, unpassable, and having no greene things growing in them. The Ilands of Man and Wight doe follow, of which see those things that are spoken in the seaventh Table of England.


THE KINGDOME OF IRELAND.
THE Island of Ireland followeth, which Orpheus, Aristotle,The new and ancient names, by whom, and why given. and Claudian doe callIsacius calleth this Kingdome Britannia O^cidentalis, or Westerne Brittaine; and Isidorus and others call it Scotta, because the Scots coming from Spaine dwelt here; the Irish Bards call it Ba^no, whence Festus Avienus calleth it Insula sacra: See Camden pag. 643. Ierna, Iuvenal and Mela Iuvernia, Diodorus Siculus Iris, Eustatius Vernia and Bernia, the Inhabitants Erin, the Brittains Yverdhon, and the English call it Ireland. Divers opinions (as in obscure matters) doe arise concerning the originall of these names. Some would have it called Hibernia from Hiberus, a Spanish Captaine, who first possessed it, and peopled it: some say from the River Iberus, because the Inhabitants thereof did first inhabite this Island: some ab hiberno tempore, from the winter season, because it enclines towards the West: the Author of the Eulogue, from Irnalphus, a Captaine. It was called without doubt Hibernia and Iuverna, from Ierna, which Orpheus and Aristotle mention; but that Ierna, together with Iris, Yverdhon, and Ireland, did proceede from the word Erin, used by the Inhabitants; therefore the Etymologie is to bee drawne from the word Erin. Herepag. 642. Camden affirmes, that hee knowes not what to conjecture, unlesse, saith hee, it bee derived from Hiere an Irish word, which with them signifies the West, whence Erin seemes to bee drawne, being as much to say as the Westerne Countrie. This Island is stretched forth from the South Northward in an ovall forme, not twenty dayes sayle, as Philemon in Ptolemie delivers, but onely 400.The Situation. miles; and is scarce 200. miles broad. On the East it hath Brittaine, from which it is parted by the Irish Sea, which is one dayes sayle: On the North, where the Deucaledon Ocean, which Ptolemie cals the Northern, breakes in, it hath Iseland: On the South it looketh towards Spaine.The temper of the Ayre. The Ayre of this Island is very wholsome, the Climate very gentle, warme and temperate; for the Inhabitants neither by the heate of Summer are enforced to seeke s^^adie places, nor yet by cold to sit by the fire: yet the seedes in regard of the moistnesse of Autumne doe seldome come to maturitie and ripenesse. Hence Mela writeth, that it hath no good Ayre for ripening of seedes: yet in the wholsomnesse and cleernesse of the Ayre it doth farre exceede Brittaine. Here are never any Earthquakes, and you shall scarce heare thunder once in a yeare. The Countrie is a fat soyle, and hath great plentie of fruits, yet it hath greater plenty of pasturage than fruits, and of grasse than graine. For here their wheate is very small, so that it can hardly bee winnowed or cleansed with a fanne. What the Spring produceth, the Summer cherisheth, but it can hardly bee gathered, in regard they have too much raine in Harvest time; for this Island hath windes and raine very often. But (as Mela saith) it is so full of pleasant sweete grasse, that when the Cattell have fed some part of the day, if they bee not restrained and kept from grazing, they will endanger the bursting of themselves. Which also Solinus witnesseth concerning this Island. Hence it proceedes, that there

are infinite numbers of Cattell, which are the Inhabitants chiefe riches, and many flocks of Sheepe, which they sheare twice a yeare. They have excellent Horses (called Hobbies) which are not pac'd like others, but doe amble very gently. No creeping thing nor Serpent liveth here, nor also in Crete: and Serpents being often brought hither out of Brittaine, as soone as they came neere the Land, and smell'd the Ayre, they died. Beda witnesseth, that he hath seene some, who have beene stung with Serpents, that have drunk the leaves of Bookes (brought out of Ireland) in a Potion, and straight-way the force of the poyson was allayde, and the swelling of the body went downe againe. Ireland hath greater store of Faulcons and Hawkes, than other Countries. And here Eagles are as common as Kites in some places. Besides, here is so great a number of Cranes, that you shall often see a hundred in a company together. In the North part also there are abundance of Swannes, but there are few Storkes through the whole Island, and those black. There are few Partriges and Pheasants, but no Pies, nor Nightingales. Here is such great store of Bees, that they doe not onely breede in hives, but also in hollow trees, and in the cavernes of the earth. Giraldus also writeth a strange thing concerning a kinde of Birde, commonly called a Barnacle, that out of certain pieces of wood, floating up and down in the Sea, there comes out first a kinde of Gumme, which afterward growes into a hard substance, within which little Creatures are generated, which first have life, and afterward have bils, feathers and wings, with which they doe flye in the Ayre, or swim in the water, and in this manner and no other this Creature is generated. This Giraldus doth testifie, that hee hath seene some of them halfe formed, which as soone as they came to perfection did flie as well as the rest. There are also many birds of a twofold shape, (as he witnesseth) which they call Aurifrisij, lesser than an Eagle, and bigger than a Hawke; whom Nature, to delight her selfe, hath framed with one foote armed with tallents sharpe and open, the other smoothe with a plaine webbe. There are other Birdes which they call Marineta, lesse than a Blackbird, being short like a Starling, yet differing from him by the whitenesse of the belly, and the blacknesse of the back. It is a wonderfull thing which was reported concerning these Birdes, for if when they are dead they be kept in a dry place, they will not putrifie or corrupt: and being placed among garments and other things, it will preserve them from moathes. That which is more worthy of admiration is that, if being dead, they be hanged up in some drie place, they will every yeare renew and change their feathers, as if they were alive Ireland contayneth all kindes of wilde beasts. It hath Harts that are so fat, that they can hardly runne; and by how much they are lesser in body, by so much the larger are their hornes. There are great store of Bores, many Hares, etc. but the bodies of all the wilde beasts and birds are lesser here than in other places. It hath many Badgers, and Weesils. It hath few or no Goates, fallow Deere, Hedghogs, Moles; but infinite store of Mice. It hath also Wolves and Foxes. But enough of these things, I returne to other matters. Heretofore Ireland was ruled by many Earles,The Government. now it is subject to England, and is governed by the Kings Substitute, who is called the Lord Deputie. It came to be under the dominion

map of IrelandIRELAND.

of the Kings of England about the yeareCamden saith it was in the yeare 1172. p. 649. 1175, at which time Roderick King of Connaught stiled himselfe King of all Ireland; and striving to subject the whole Kingdome to himselfe, waged continuall warre with the other Earles; by whose sedition it came to passe, that the other Earles of their owne accord, and without any effusion of blood, did put themselves under the obedience of Henry the second, King of England, from whom all the Kings of England were called Lords of Ireland, untill the time of Henry the eigth, who by the Nobles of Ireland was declared King of Ireland,The Cities. because the name of Lord grew hatefull to some seditious people. There are foure speciall Cities in this Island: FirstThis Town was built by Harald Hayfager, the first King of Norwey. Dublin, the Metropolis or Mother-Citie of Ireland, being the royall Archiepiscopall Seat, giving name to a County. The next in dignity is Waterford, the third Limbrick, the fourth Corke. There are many other very great Townes, of which wee will speake more largely in the particular Descriptions of Ireland. This Country hath many Lakes and standing waters,Lakes. among which there is a Lake in Vlster, twenty miles distant from the Lake Erne, of which wee will speake more largely hereafter. There is a little Lake beyond the Citie Armack, in which if you stick a Speare up some moneths, that part which stuck in the mudde will bee iron, that which is in the water stony, and that which is out of the water will remaine wood. There is also the Lake Erne, which is thirty miles long, and fifteene miles broad, being compassed about with thick woods, and so full of Fish, that the Fisher-men often breake their nets, by taking too many at one time.The Rivers. This Island is divided and watered with many faire Rivers, whose names are these:or the River Liffie. Avenliffe, running through Dublin; Boandus through Methe, Banna through Vltonia, Linut through Connack, and Moadus through Kenel-cunillia, Slicheia, and Samaira: Besides Modarnus and Furnus through Keneleonia, and many other. But of all the Rivers of Ireland, the Riveror Shennin, as some interpret it, the ancient River. Synnenus is the chiefe both for the breadth andIt runneth (saith Heylin) a course of 200 miles, to the Vergivian Sea, and is navigable 60 miles. length of its course, and for the plenty of Fish which is in it. But in generall, the Rivers and Lakes are full of fish bred in them. This Countrie is unequall and mountainous, soft and waterish: you shall finde Lakes and standing waters on the top of the Mountaines. The Mountaines abound with Cattell, and the woods with wilde beasts. Solinus writeth thus concerning the Sea, which floweth between Ireland and England: The Sea betweene Ireland and England is rough and unquiet all the yeare, and is scarce navigable but in some part of the Summer. But hee erres; for it is quiet enough, unlesse it bee stirred up with windes. And not onely in Summer, but also in Winter passengers doe sayle to and fro. All the Sea shores doe abound sufficiently with Fish. Ireland hath in all three and thirty Counties, and foure Archbishops. The Bishop of Armach, Primate of all Ireland: the Bishop of Dublin: the Bishops of Cassil and Toam: and these foure have nine and twenty Suffragans or Vicegerents. Ireland (from the manners of the Inhabitants) is divided into two parts. For those who refuse to obey the Lawes, and live more uncivilly, are called Irishrie, and commonly Wild Irish. But those who are willing to obey the Lawes, and appeare before the Judges, are called the English-Irish, and their Country the English Pale: they speake English naturally and uncorruptly, yet they understand

Irish, in regard of their daily commerce with the Irish-men. The Irish-men have some certaine Lords, under whose command the most of them are: but they live under the jurisdiction of the English, but counterfeitly, and as long as the English Souldiers doe waste their Territories: yet they appoint Sessions to be kept at certaine times and places, to restraine and punish robberies and theft, committed by night. There those that are accused, if they be convicted, have certaine Arbitratours to judge of the cause, whom they call Brehoni: these are all of one familie, and although they have no knowledge in the Law, yet for their wisdome and honestie of life they are accounted divine. Their warre is partly on horsback, and partly on foote. The Gentrie have horses well managed, so that without any advantage they will mount them in their armour, and taking a Javelin or dart of great weight by the middle, they will throw or brandish it against their enemie with much ease. Among the footmen, some are Souldiers in Cassocks very strong, whom they call Galeglacii, having Cuttle-axes as sharpe as razors, and they are the chiefe strength of the Irish warres. The next are Footmen wearing a light armour, with swords in their hands, and these are called Karnes, and they thinke a man is not dead, untill they have cut off his head. In the third place are footmen, whom they call Daltines, who going unarmed, attend upon the horsmen. The footmen as well as horsmen, as oft as they come to fight with their enemies, doe crie with a great voyceThe reason of this, See in Camden, p. 678. Pharro, Pharro: and they use a Bagpipe in stead of a Trumpet. The Irish doe fare sumptuously and magnificently: for though they have no delicate dishes,Their Diet. nor great service in their banquets, yet their Tables according to the season of the yeare are well furnished with Beefe and Porke, and other meate. In their Feasts they lye upon Beds: the first place at the Table belongs to the Mother of the Family, who weares a long Gowne or Mantell reaching to her ancles, often dyed, and also sleeved.



THE SECOND TABLE OF IRELAND. IN WHICH ARE VLTONIA, CONNACIA, MEDIA, AND PART OF LAGENIA. VLTONIA.
IRELAND being described in generall, I thinke it worth my labour, before I come to a particular description of the severall parts: first to make a division thereof, Ireland is divided into five Parts or Provinces. Into Lagenia, which being Eastward is next to England: Connacia, or Connachtia, which lyeth toward the West: Vltonia on the North side: and Momonia which is situate in the Southerne part. The fift part is called Media, which being placed in the midst, is enclosed with the rest. In these five Provinces there are many notable Territories. As Lagenia doth include Fingal, Offal, Leis, Ossir, and Ormund. Media containeth Slani, Four, and Delvin. In Connacia is contained Clar: in Vltonia is contained Vril, Antrimen, Lecal, and Treconch. In Momonia are included Trippitate, Kerie, Cosmay, Desmond, Tomond, and some others. There is another division of Ireland, which wee have touched in our generall Table, which is diligently to be considered if any one desire to know the state of this Countrie, wherefore hee must observe that Ireland is divided into two parts: the English part, and the Irish part. The latter the native Irish do inhabit, the former the Englishmen, and that part in common speech is called the English Province, because it is as it were empaled and environed with the Territories of the English. For after that the English having supprest the Irish Rebells, had restored Dermicius to his Countrie and Kingdome, they seated themselves and built themselves seats in the chiefest places of Ireland. Afterward seeing that as it were certaine Islands did part them fromt he subdued Irish, they called that part in which they placed a Colonie, the English Province. In this is contained the greater part of Lagenia, and Media, and that part of Vltonia which is called Vril: but the chiefest part of Lagenia, which is called Fingal, neere to Dublin on the North, hath the chiefe place, and Media is next to that. But Mercator useth the same division which wee made of it in the former Tables, describing it in foure Tables, beginning with Vltonia, Connacia, Media, and part of Lagenia. I will make a briefe description of all these parts, in the same order as our Author placeth them. Vltonia offers it selfe in the first place. This part of Ireland was first called by the Welch Vltun,The names of Vltonia. by the Irish Cui-Guilli, by the Latines Vltonia, and by the English Vlster: toward the North it is parted with the Narrow Sea:The bounds. toward the South it stretcheth it selfe to Connaught and Lagenia; the

map of IrelandTHE SECOND TABLE OF IRELAND.

East part is bounded with the Irish Sea, and the West part is beaten with the great Westerne Ocean. This Countrie beeing neere to Scotland, is reckoned one of the Scotch Islands, which are called the Hebrides, and lye scatterd in the Sea betweene both Kingdomes: which Islands the Irish-Scots, the successours of the Ancient Scythians, do inhabit. It is round in forme, and in length from the Haven Coldagh in the North, to Kilmore in the South, it is about an hundred miles; and it is in breadth from Black-Abbey in the East to Calebegh, a Westerne Promontorie, an hundred and thirtie miles and more. The whole circumference or compasse of it is about foure hundred and twentie miles.The Forme. This Country hath seldome any intemperate weather, for the suddaine and fresh gales of winde do refrigerate and coole the heat of Summer, and soft and gentle raines do mitigate the cold of Winter. Briefly, it is neither in the Cold nor Torrid Zone. The clouds are faire and cleare, and when they are most impure, yet the winde continually driving them about doth make the aire wholsome,The Aire. and at length quite dispelleth them. The equall temper of the Clime is the cause that the soyle doth plentifully bring forth divers kindes of trees, some bearing fruit, and others for building. The Countrie is full of grasse and fit for pasturing: very rich in horse, and sheepe,The Rivers. and Oxen. The Rivers are, as I may say, doubly commodious, being navigable to bring up Vessels, and Barques, and also being full of fish and very convenient for the inhabitants in other uses. Among these the first is Vinderius, which is now called the Bay of Knocfergus, from the Town seated on it, and from the safety of the Haven, which the English call Knocfergus, the Irish Caregfergus, that is Fergus his rock, which name it received fromA famous Scot, as Camden affirmeth. pag. 669. Fergusius who was drownd there: There is also Banna which (as Giraldus saith) is a very faire River as theBanna in Irish signifies faire. Camden. p. 669 The plentie of Salmons. name witnesseth, it runneth out of the Lake Eaugh, and dischargeth it selfe into the Ocean with a double Channell; it is fuller of Salmons than any River in Europe, because (as some thinke) the water is so cleare, in which Salmons do chiefly delight. And there is the River Logia, which Ptolemie mentioneth, and now is called Lough Foile, which falleth into the Sea with a great streame. There are many great Lakes in it, in which is the Lake Eaugh which spreadeth it selfe abroad from Armaugh:The Lakes. and on the East side are the woods Kilulto, Kilwarney, and Dyffrim, into which the Lake doth so insinuate and winde in it selfe, that it maketh two Peninsula's, Lecale toward the South, and Ard toward the North: Lecale runneth out farthest toward the East of any part of Ireland, and the farthest Promontorie therof Marriners do now call Saint Iohns Foreland, Ptolomie calls it Isanius, perhaps from the Brittish word Isa, which signifies Lowermost. In the Isthmus therof stands Dunam,Here was buried S. Patricke, who as they say, being sent by Celestinus the Bishop of Rome, An. 433. converted this Island to the Christian faith. which Ptolemie mentions, now called Down, being an ancient Towne, and the Seat of a Bishop. Ard lyeth over against it being divided fro^ it by a little slip of land. There are also Lakes, of which we have made mention in our generall Table. The Countrie is shadowed with great woods. To speake in a word, although it be barren in some places by reason of Lakes, Bogs, and thicke Woods, yet it is every where full of Cattell, and Grasse, and at all times it abundantly requiteth the labour of the husbandman. Nature is so little beholding here to Art or Industrie, that the flourishing bankes of Rivers embrodered with flowers,

the shadie Woods, greene Medowes, bending Hills, and Fields fit to beare corne if they were tilled, do seeme to be angrie with the Inhabitants,The Ancient Inhabitants. because by their carelesnesse and negligence they suffer them to be rude and wilde. The Voluntii, Darni, Robogdii, and Erdini in Ptolemies time held all this Countrie, who also dispersed themselves into other parts of Ireland. The speciall place in this Countrie is Armach, neere the River Kalis, which although it be not very faire, yet it is the seat of an Archbishop, and the Metropolis of the whole Island. The Irish-men do fabulously report that it was called so from Queene Armacha, butSee Camden. pag. 668. Camden thinkes it to be the same which Beda calleth Dearmach, which signifies in the Scotch and Irish language, the field of Redmen. There is one Archbishop in Vltonia, who hath his Seat at Armach, and hath these Suffraganes and substitutes under him, with the Bishop of Maeth and Deren, Ardach or Apde, Kilmore, Clogher, Doune, Coner, Klancknos, Raboo, or Ropo, and Dromoore. For the keeping of the Inhabitants of this Country and Province in order, it was fortified with six and fiftie Castles, there are also nine Market Townes in it.The names of Connagh. And it is divided into the Hithermost and Furthermost. The Hithermost hath three Counties, Louth, Downe, and Antrimme. The Farthermost hath seven, Monahon, Tiroen, Armack, Colrane, Donergall, Fermanagh, and Cavon. Connacia is the second part of Ireland, some call it Connachtia, the English call it Connagh,The bounds. and the Irish Connaghti: it is bounded on the East with part of Lagenia, on the North with part of Vltonia, on the West it is beaten with the Westerne Ocean, and on the South it is environed with part of Momonia or Munster, which is inclosed with the River Sineo or Shennin, and lyeth over against the Kingdome of Spaine. The Figure of it is long,The Forme. and at either end both Northward and Southward it is very narrow, but towards the middle it growes longer on either side. It is an hundred and sixe and twentie miles long, from the River Shennin in the South, to Engi Kelling in the North, the greatest breadth is about foure-score miles, from Tromer the Easterne bound, to Barrag-Bay the Westerne limit. The whole circuit and compasse of it is about foure hundred miles.The Aire. The Aire in this Region is not so pure and cleare as in the other Provinces of Ireland, by reason of some wet places bearing grasse, which are called in regard of their softnesse Bogges, being dangerous, and sending out many thicke vapours. The chiefe Citie of this Province, being the third Citie of note in Ireland, is Galway, in Irish Gallive. Built in the forme of a Towre,The Citie. having a Bishops See in it, and being famous for the frequent resort of merchants thither, and also profitable to the Inhabitants by the conveniencie of the Haven which is beneath it, and by the easie exportation of Merchandise: not far from hence on the Westerne sidely the Islands which are called Arran, of which many things are fabled, as if they were the Isles of the living, in which no man could either die or be subject to death. The Province of Connaught at this time is fortified with foureteen Castles, it hath nine Market Towns, and it is divided into sixe Counties or Shires in this manner: the Countie of Clare, of Galway, of Mago, of Slego, of Letrimme, and of Roscomen. Media is the third part of Ireland,The names whence derived. which in their Countrie speech they call Mijh, the English Methe, Giraldus Midia and Media, perhaps because it is in the very middle of the

Island. For the Castle Killaire in these parts, which Ptolemie seemes to call Laberus,The Situation. is in the middle of Ireland, as the name Killair doth denote. The Countrie reacheth from the Irish Sea, even to the River Shennin, which river parts it from Connacia. It hath a wholsome and delightfull aire. It is fruitfull in corne, pasturage, and flocks, abounding with Flesh-meate,The fertilitie of the Soile. Butter, Cheese, Milke, and the like: and in regard of the multitude of people, the strength of faire Castles and Townes, and the peace arising from thence, it is commonly called the Chamber of Ireland. Here is the Towne Pontana, which is commonly called Drogheda, a faire Town, and having a convenient Haven for Ships to ride in. But there are some who thinke that the middle part of this Towne, on the other side the River,The Tovvnes names. is in Vltonia. There are also these Townes in Media, Molingar, Four, Delvyn, Trimme, Kelles, Navan, Aboy, Dulck, and Scrin.



THE THIRD TABLE OF IRELAND. IN WHICH ARE MOMONJA, AND THE REMAINDER OF LAGENIA AND CONNACH.
CONNACIA is the second part of Ireland, some call it Connachtia, the English Connach, and the Irish Connachty.The names. It lyeth toward the West, and is bounded with the River Sen, the River Banna, and the Ocean. This, the Auteri and Nagnatae in the time of Ptolomie did inhabite. But there is so neare an affinitie betweene these two wordes, Nagnatae and Connaghty, that they seeme one to bee derived from the other: unlesse we suppose that the word Connaghty did arise from the Haven Nagnatae, which Ptolomy mentions, and from thence the Country got this name. For a Haven is called in their native speech Cuon, to which if you adde Nagnata, it will not bee much different in sound from Connaghty.The fertilitie of the Soyle. The Country as it is in some places fruitfull and pleasant, so in some wet places covered o're with grasse, and by reason of their softnesse, called Bogs, it is very dangerous, as other parts of the Island are, and full of darke and thicke woods. But the Coasts having many Bayes, and navigable in-lets, doth as it were invite and stirre up the inhabitants to imploy themselves in navigation, yet sloath is so sweet unto them, that they had rather begge from doore to doore, then seeke to keepe themselves from Poverty by honest labour.The ancient government. It is reported in the Irish Histories that Turlogus O-mor O-conor, was sole Governour of this Country, and that hee divided it betweene his two sonnes, Cahelus and Brienus. But when the English came into Ireland, Rodericke did governe it, and called himselfe King of Ireland, but he being afraid of the English warres, not trying the chance or fortune of the field, put himselfe under obedience to Henry the Second King of England. Who after revolting from his faith given, Miles Cogane was the first English-man who did attempt, but in vaine, to get Connachtia. Afterward, William the sonne of Adelme, whose posterity were called in Irish Bourki, Gilbert de Clare, Earle of Glocester, and William de Bermingham chiefe men in England, did subject this Country, and brought it to civilitie. But Bourke, or de Burgo, and his Posterity were a long time stiled and called Lords of Connach, governing this Province together with Vltonia in great peace and tranquillitie, and did receive great revenewes out of it, untill the onely daughter of Richard de Burgo being sole inheretrix of Connachtia and Vltonia, was married to Lionell Duke of Clarence, the sonne of King Edward the third. But he living for the most part in England, and his successors the Mortimers

did neglect their Patrimonie, the Bourks being their kinsemen, to whom they had committed the overseeing of those Lands, making use of the absence of the Lords, and the troublesome times in England, contemned the authority of the Lawes, entring into league with the Irish, and making marriages with them, and got all Connachtia to themselves, and by degrees degenerating, having left off the English habit, they followed the Irish manners. It is at this day divided into sixe Counties: Clare, Letrimme, Galwey, Resecomin, Maio, and Sligo. There are in it the Baron of Atterith, the Baron of Clare, and others. Here is also Galloway, a Towne much frequented by forrain Merchants. It is reported that an Outlandish Merchant who did traffique with the Townesmen, did once aske an Irishman, in what part of Galloway Ireland stood? valuing this Towne as the whole Country, and the whole Country as this Towne. There are reckoned to Galloway, Anner, Clare, Sligo, Arctlo, and Alon, Townes of note.
The Auteri, whom I mentioned before, did heretofore possesse the more Southerne part of this Connacia, where is now Twomondia, or Claria, the Country of Clan-Richard, and the Baronie of Atterith, which plainely intimateth whence came the name of the Auteri. Tmomond, called by Giraldus Theutmonia (which though it lie beyond the River Senus or Shinnin, may be added to Momonia) is stretched forth into the Sea with a great Promontorie, famous for the Seat of an Archbishop which they call Toam, and for the Earles thereof, namely the O-Brennis, who descending from the ancient Earles of Connack, were honoured by Henry the Seaventh, with the Title of Earles of Twomond. This Country of the most part of it the English call Clare-shire, from Thomas Clare the youngest sonne of Gilbert, the first Earle of Glocester, to whom King Edward the first gave this Country. Clan-Richard, that is, the Land of the sonnes of Richard, is next unto this; it tooke its name, according to the Irish custome, from one Richard an Englishman, called de Burgo, or Burgensis, who afterward in this Country became a man of great note and power; and out of this Family Henry the eighth created Richard de Burgo Earle of Clan-Richard. Atterith, commonly Athenri, doth glory in that warlike Baron, Iohn de Bermingham an Englishman, out of which Family the Earles of Louth are descended: but these Berminghams of Atterith, degenerating into the Irish Wildenesse and incivilitie, will scarce acknowledge that they were once English. In this Atterith Geographers doe place the mouth of the River Ausoba, which is now called the Bay of Galway: for Galway, in Irish called Gallive, is seated on it, being a faire Towne, which through the benefit of the River, is filled with many commodities brought thither, both by Sea and Land. Geographers doe also place the River anciently called Ravius, but now Trowis, in Connack; it is also knowne by the name of Bannus, for the inhabitants do call it Banny: This River comming out of the Lake Ernus is the bounds of Connack, and Vlster.
I returne to the Inhabitants. The rest of Connack toward the North was heretofore possessed by the Nagnata, even to the River Bann^^, which doth part Vltonia and Connack; where O-Conor, O-Rorck, and Mac-Diarmod, being wilde Irish, doe governe and rule. The shoare is

map of IrelandTHE THIRD TABLE OF IRELAND.

backed from Ausoban with the Isles of Arran, Inisceath, knowne heretofore by reason of Colmans Monasterie here seated, and Inis Bovind, which Beda translating out of Scotch, calleth Vitulae albae Insulam, or the Island of the White Calfe. Then the shoare runneth back to the mouth of the River Libinus, which Camden bringeth unto Dublin, but the place which Ptolomie assigneth, is now called the Bay of Slegah. Here Ptolomie placeth the Citie of Nagnata, but Camden saith, hee cannot tell what that Citie should be. There is one Archbishop here who keepes his residence at Toam; under whom are these Suffragan Bishops, the Bishop of Kilmako, Olfine, Bishop Helphen, Avaughdoune, Clonfert, and Moroo.

MEDIA.
MEDIA is the third part of Ireland, which in the Country speech is called Mijh,Whence the names are derived. the English call it Methe, Giraldus Midia, and Media, because perhaps it lyeth in the very middle of the Island. For the Castle of Killaire in those parts, which Ptolomie calls Laberus, is held to be in the middle of Ireland, and so much theSee Camden pag. 663. name it selfe doth expresse: for Lair in the Irish speech signifies the middle. Richard Stanihurst writeth thus concerning the Etymon or signification of the word Media. In the yeare of the World 2535. five brethren possessing the Islands, they resolved to divide it equally into foure Provinces, that so they might governe in them severally. But least their younger brother whose name was Slanius, might bee without some honour, they consented together to bestow on him a share taken out of all foure partes: Which was received by him chearefully, and hence some suppose that it was called Media. It stretcheth and extendeth it selfe from the Irish Sea,The Situation. even to the River Shennin, which River doth part it from Connack. It hath a wholesome pleasant Aire and deligthfull Prospect.The fertilitie and fruitfulnes. It aboundeth with corne, pasturage and cattle, having store of Flesh, Butter, Cheese, Milke, and the like, and in regard of the strength of the Townes and Castles, and the peace arising thence it is called the Chamber of Ireland. The Irishmen doe write that this Country heretofore had Kings, and that Slanius afterward became sole Monarch of all Ireland.The auncient government. But when the English had set foote in Ireland, Hugh Lacey did conquer the most part of it, and King Henry the Second King of England granted it unto him to hold in fee, and stiled him Lord of Media. He having his head on a suddaine cut off by an Irishman while he was building the Castle of Derworth, left behinde him Hugh Earle of Vltonia, and Walter Lord of Trim, the Father of Gilbert, who dyed before him. But by the daughters of Gilbert, Margaret, and Matilda, the one part fell by the Ienvills of the House of Lorraine, and the Mortimers, unto the King: for Peter of Ienvill being borne of that Matilda had issue Ioane, who was married to Roger Mortimer, Earle of March: the other came by the Verdons to many Families in England. In our forefathers time by an Act of Parliament it was divided into two parts, namely, into East and West Media. The River Boand or Boyne, which Ptolomie calleth Buvinda, runneth through the East side, and afterward when it hath washed Droghda, a faire and populous Town, called so from

the bridge, it divideth that part from Vltonia. The Westerne Media hath nothing worthy of memory or note beside Laberus (which Camden seemes to call Kaillair) and the Towne of Delvin which heretofore did honour Peter Meset, and now the renowned English Familie of the Nogents, with the title of Barons. For Gilbert Nogent (as Richard Stanihurst hath it, who writ eloquently of Irish matters) having a gentlemans estate, was rewarded by Hugh Lacy, for his service performed in the Irish warres, with the Colonies of Delvin and Four; from him are the Barons of Delvin descended. Those Irish Countries of O-Malaghlem, Mac-Coglan, O-Madden, and Mogoghian, whose names have a barbarous sound, we leave unto others. Among the Townes of Media, Pontana is reckoned which is commonly called Droghda, being a faire Towne and having an Haven fit for the receipt of Shippes. But there are some who place the middle part of this Towne in Vltonia, beyond the River. There are also in Media these Townes, Molingar, Four, Delvin, Trimme, Kelles, Navain, Aboy, Dulek, and Scrin. There are also in this Province neare Fonera three Lakes, not farre one from another, whereof every one containeth his severall sorts of fish, which never come one to another, although the way be passable by the River flowing betweene them: and beside if the fish be carried from one Lake to another, they either die, or returne to it againe. Here is the River Boand aforesaid, called so from the swiftnesse of it: forSee Camdens Brit. pag. 663. Boan both in Irish and Welch, doth signifie swift, and Nechamus hath sung of it.




THE FOVRTH TABLE OF IRELAND.
WHICH CONTAINETH THE EASTERNE PART, AND DOTH present these following Territories to view. Glandeboy, Tirone, Arde, Lecale, Enaugh, Arthule, Newry, Morne, Fuse, Vriel, and many others, also the Cities Armack and Downe.

LAGENIA.
IN our Authors division Lagenia followes Media, being the fourth part of Ireland,The names. which the Inhabitants call Leighnigh, the Brittaines Leyn, the English Leynster, the Latine Writers Lagenia, and the booke called the holy lives of the Saints Lagen. It lyes all toward the Sea on the East side of Ireland, even from Momonia to the River Neorus, which it goes beyond in many places: it is divided from Conack by the River Sen^t or Shennin, and from Media by the bounds thereof. In Ptolemies time it was the seate of the Brigantes, the Coriondi, the Menapij, the Cauci, and the Blani, and perhaps from these Blani, their names Lein, Leinigh and Leinster were derived. It is a fertile and fruitfull Country, it hath a gentle Aire, and the Inhabitants are of a curteous disposition. It is now divided into these Counties, Weishford, Caterlogh, Kilkenny, Dublin, Kildare, Kings-shire, Queenes-shire, Longford, with which Fernes and Wickle are now reckoned. These Counties wee will now view in order, with Camden, according to the people which the Geographer writeth did inhabit this part of Ireland. The Brigantes were seated betweene the mouth of the River Suirus, and the two Rivers Neorus and Barrow, which Ptolemie calls Birgus, which flow together under the Citie of Waterford. Because there was an ancient Citie of the Brigantes in Spaine, called Brigantia, therfore Florianus del Campo, striveth to fetch the originall of these Brigantes out of Spaine; though if there were any ground for such a conjecture, they might as probably bee derived from the Brigantes in Brittaine, which is a neighbour Nation and very populous. But if it bee true, as some copies have it, that they were anciently called Brigantes, then the very name doth perswade us that they were so called from the River Birgus, which they inhabited round about. The Coriondi did inhabite between the Rivers Neorus and Birgus, where is now the County of Carleo or Caterlogh, a great part of Kilkenny, and farther even to

map of IrelandTHE FOVRTH TABLE OF IRELAND.

Ossiria the Higher, beside Ormondia, which the Irish call Vrrown, the English Ormond, and vulgarly Wormewood. In both of these there is nothing memorable, but the Earles thereof. For Ossiria the Higher hath beene renowned by the Earle Barnabie Fitzpatrick, who was dignified by Edward the sixt with that honour. And Ormond hath had, accounting from Iames the first, thirteene Earles of the famous Familie of the Butlers, whom Edward the third advanced to that honour, and whose honourable Ancestors were heretofore the Butlers of Ireland, whence this name Butler was given them. That which some of the Irish, and those that would be thought men of good credit, doe affirme concerning certaine men in this Country that are every yeare turned into Wolves, I thinke it to be fabulous: Although it may be indeed the abundance of melancholy, wherewith they are possessed, (called by the Physitians Lycanthropia) doth stirre up such phantasies, that they imagine themselves to bee transformed into Wolves. Neither dare I imagine any other thing of these Lycaons transformed in Livonia. At the mouth of Surius the Menapij held a Promontorie toward the Southwest, which is now the Countie Weishford, in Irish Countie Reogh. The name it selfe doth seeme to intimate that these Menapij came from the Menapij a Maritime people among the Belgians. But whether that Carausius, who being made King defended Britaine against the Emperour Dioclesian, was descended from the one or the other, let others determine. For Aurelius Victor calleth him a Citizen of Menapia, and the Citie Menapia is placed by Geographers not in Holland, but inCamden thinks this Menapia to bee that which now is called Weishford, see him pag. 659. Ireland. Ptolemie calls this Promontorie Hieron, that is, holy, and I doubt not but it was called so by the Inhabitants for the same respect. For they called in their Country speech, the farthest Towne hereof, at which the English first landed in this Isle, Banna, which signifies Holy. From this Holy Promontorie the shoare runneth forth in a large tract toward the East and North, neare to which there are shallow sands very dangerous for shipping, which Saylers call The Ground. The Cauci, who were a Maritime people of Germany, did inhabite next to the Menapij. These had that Maritime Country, which the Irish Families of the O-Mores, and O-Brins doe inhabite, together with the County of Kildare. The County of Kildare is very pleasant, concerning the pastures whereof Giraldus useth these verses of Virgill.



Et quantum longis carpunt armenta ditbus,


Exigua tantum gelidus ros nocte reponit.



How much the flocks doe eate in the long day,
The cold dew in the short night doth repay.


But for the company of Gyants which Giraldus placeth in this Country, I leave it to those who admire fabulous antiquities, for I would not willingly doate too much on fables. Beyond the Cauci liv'd the Eblani, where is now the Countrie of Dublin and Meth, being one of the five parts of Ireland. The County of Dublin towards the Sea is of a fertile soyle, having pleasant Meddowes, but so bare of Wood, that for the most part they use Turfe and Coale digged in England. It is full of Townes and People; where the River Liffe hideth it selfe in the Sea, Houth is almost environed therewith, from whence the Family of the

Laurences are called Barons of Houth. On the North side of Dublin lyes Fingall, a faire Country well tilled, and is as it were the store-house or Barne of the Kingdome, in regard it yeeldeth yearely so great a quantitie of corne, that in a manner the earth doth strive with the labour of the husbandmen, which lying in other parts of the Island, neglected and untill'd, doth seeme to complaine of their ignorant sloath. These things being unfolded, let us now passe to the Cities and Townes. Here Kilkenny meetes us in the first place, being neare to the River Neorus,The names of the Townes. Kilkenny signifies the Cell, or Chappell of Canicus, who formerly in this Country was famous for his Religious solitary life. It is a neate fine Towne, abounding with all things, and the chiefe of the innermost Townes of this Island. The Towne is divided into the English and Irish part, the Irish part is as it were the Suburbs, wherein is the Temple of Canicus, who gave the name to it, and it is the Seat of a Bishop. The English Towne is newer, being built by Ralph the third Earle of Chester, it was fortified as some doe suppose, with walls on the West side by Robert Talbot a Noble man, and strengthned with a Castle by the Butlers. Below this, upon the same River of Neorus, a walled Towne is seated, called in English Thomas Towne, in Irish Bala mac-Andan, that is, the Towne of Antonius his sonne, both names were given unto it by the builder Thomas FitZ-Antonius an Englishman, whose heires are still acknowledged the Lords thereof. There stood in this Country that ancient City Rheba, mentioned by Ptolemy, which was also called Rheban, but instead of a Citie it is even (...) a Citie and no Citie, as he himselfe saith, being a few Cottages with a Forte. It honoureth the Saint-michaells with the title of Baronet. There is Lechlinia, in Irish Leiglyn, a royall Towne, fortified with a Castle by that Noble Deputie Bellingham. The great Citie of Rosse, hath likewise here flourished in times past, as having beene full of Inhabitants, and Merchandise, and fortified with a wall of great circuit, by Isabell the daugher of Richard Strongbow Earle, which walls doe now onely remaine. For discord arising among the Citizens concerning Religion, the Towne is ruinated and fallen to nothing: but enough of these things,The Mountaines and Rivers. I passe to the Mountaines and Rivers. Beneath Ormund the hills Bliew Blemi (which Giraldus calleth the Mountaines of Bladina) doe lift up their heads with their convex tops, out of whose bowels as it were, the Rivers Suirus, Neorus and Birgus, doe arise, and running in severall channels before they come to the Ocean they joyne all in one stream, whence the Ancients did call them Tres Sorores the three Sisters. Neorus hemmeth in many Castles and Townes; Birgus, now called Barrow, flowing out of the Mountaine Bladina, and running along by it selfe with many windings, at last passeth Rheba and other Townes. Afterward Neorus and Birgus do mingle their Waters, and having for some miles runne in one channell, they resigne their name and waters to their elder sister Suirus, which by a rocky mouth dischargeth her selfe into the Ocean, where on the left hand there runneth forth a little Promontorie with a straight necke, which beares a little Tower as a defence or marke for Shippes, built by the Rosses when they flourished that they might safely enter into the Haven. In this part Ptolemie placed the RiverOr Modana, which Camden thinkes to bee Slane. See him pag. 569. Modanus aforesaid, and Ovoca neare the Sea, on

the back whereof the Castle Arckle is seated, which River as Giraldus saith, both in the flowing and ebbing of the Sea water, doth still retaine its native sweetnesse, and doth preserve its waters unstained or unmingled with saltnesse a great way in the Sea.Called Lifnius, or Libnius Fluvius. Here is the River Liffie, which slideth by Dublin, it is not carried with any violence except after a great storme of raine, but floweth very gently. This River without doubt is mentioned by Ptolemie: but by the carelesnesse of Bookemen, it is banished out of its place. For the River Liffie, is placed in Ptolemies Tables in the same Latitude toward the other part of the Island, where there is no such River. But let us call it backe again toOr Dublin, which is called by the West Brittaines Dinas Dublin, and by the Irish Balacleigh. 1. the Towne upon Hurdles, for it is reported that the foundation therof was laid upon Hurdles. Eblana its proper place, and give these verses of Necham concerning it.


Visere Castle-cnock non dedignatur Aven-liff,
Istum Dublini suscipit unda Maris.


Aven-liff to see Castle-cnock doth not disdaine,
Which the Sea neare Dublin doth receive againe.


I will also adde that which Giraldus hath concerning Wiclo a Porte of Haven neare to Ovoca: which he calleth Winchiligello. There is a Haven at Winchiligello, on that side of Ireland which looketh toward Wales, whose waters doe flow in when the Sea doth ebbe, and when the Sea floweth, it ebbeth. There is also another very notable one, which when the Sea ebbeth, yet still continues salt and brackish in every part and creeke thereof. There is one Archbishop in Lagenia, which hath his seate at Dublin, and Clandelachy, hee is called, Glandeloyloug, and Primate of Ireland, having these following Suffragan Bishops under him, the Bishop of Elphine, or Bishop Helphen; of Kildare, of Fernes Ossorie, and of Leighlyn called by some Laghlyn.




THE FIFT TABLE. OF IRELAND. CONTAINING THE BARONIE OF Vdrone, part of the Queenes Countrie, and the Lord Fortonesy, in the middle of Vdrone lyeth the Citie Laglyn, otherwise Leighlin, adorned with a Bishops Seat. MOMONIA.
MOMONIA followes in our propounded method, in Irish called Mown, in English Munster: the fift and last part of Ireland, it lyeth on the South upon the Vergivian Sea, being divided in some places from Connacia by the River Shennin, and from Lagenia by the River Neorus; it was formerly divided into two parts, the Westerne, and the Southerne. The Westerne part the Gangani, Luceni, Velabri, and Vterini did anciently inhabit, the Vdiae or Vodiae the Southerne part. Now it is divided into seven Counties namely Kerry, Limrick, Corck, Tripperary the Countie of the Holy Crosse, the Countie of Waterford, and Desmond. Wee purpose to runne briefly over these Counties with Cambden, according to the severall people which the Cosmographer attributeth to them. The Gangani whom we formerly mentioned in the first place, do seeme by the affinitie of their name to be the same with the Concani of Spaine, whose originall was from the Scythians, and Silius witnesseth that they dranke horses-blood, which heretofore the Wild Irish did often use to doe; Kerri (as it is now called) at the mouth of the River Shennin, was Anciently their Seat. A countrie full of inaccessible and wooddy mountains betweene which there are many hollow vallies, having thicke woods in them. The Earles of Desmond were heretofore honoured with the dignitie of Counts Palatine hereof, but by the wickednesse of men, which would have libertie and yet knew not how to use it, it was long since converted into a sinke of impietie, and a refuge for seditious persons. A ridiculous opinion hath invaded and persuaded the mindes of the Wild Irish, that hee that doth not answer the great shouting or warlikeWhich is Pharick crie which the rest make, when they joyne battell, should be suddenly taken up from the earth, and as it were flying be carried into these desart vallies, from any part of Ireland, and there feed on grasse, drinke water, and yet know not what he is, having reason, but not speech, and at last should be taken by hunters, and brought home againe. The middle of this Countrie is cut into two parts by a River which hath now no name, but floweth by a small Towne called Trailes, now almost ruinated, where the Earles of Desmond had their mansion houses. This River, by the situation of it in Ptolemies tables, doth seeme to be Dur, and saith Camden, I

would avouch no lesse, if Duris, which at this day is reckoned among the Hauens of this Westerne Coast, be at the mouth of it, as I have understood by some. Not farre from hence is the Haven Smerwick (the word being contracted in stead of S. Mary-Wick,) of which, not many yeares agoe, when Girald Earle of Desmond, a man profound in trecherie towards his Prince and Countrie, did daily by severall inrodes waste the Countrie of Momonia, a mixt band or companie of Italians and Spaniards arrived, being sent unto his aide from Pope Gregory, and the Spaniards, who having engarrison'd themselves in a place, called Fort del Ore, seemed not to feare Heaven it selfe. But when that famous and warlike Deputie the Lord Arthur Gray came with his forces, hee did soone decide the matter. For forthwith they yeelded themselves, and most part of them were put to death, because it seemed most safe and fit so to doe, the affaires of the Kingdome requiring it, and the rebells being on every hand. The Earle of Desmond himselfe fled to the woods, and having hid himselfe in a Cottage was wounded by a Souldier or two who rushed in upon him, and afterward being knowne, he was beheaded for his trecherie and wasting of his Countrie. All Desmonia toward the South is subject to the Gangans, which the Irish call Dassown, the English, Desmond, heretofore three sorts of people dwelt in it, namely the Luceni, the Velabri, the Iberni, which are conceived in some Maps to be the Vterini. The Luceni seeme to have drawne both their name and originall from the Lucensii of Spaine, which held the opposite Coast. The Velabri were so called from Aber, which is as much to say as Aestuarii, because they were seated neare the armes of the Sea: hence also the Artabri and Cantabri were so called. Orosius places these at the Promontorie Notium, which Mariners at this day doe callSome call it Cabo del Mar. others Cara and Cabo de Cler. Biar-head: under this Promontorie the River Iernus is received into the Ocean, neare to which stands Dunck-eran a Bishops Seat, this Dunck-eran, which in the Scottish-Irish, is as much as to say, the Towne Eran, doth not onely expresly shew it selfe to be that Citie Ivernis which Ptolemie mentions, but the river to be that Iernus whereof hee speaketh, which hath its appellation together with the whole Island from Hier an Irish word signifying the West. For it is the farthest River of this Country toward the West, as Ireland is the farthest Island Westward of all Europe. The Iberni, who are also called Vterni, (that is according to Camdens interpretation, the High Irish) did inhabit by this River on one side of the Promontorie, where are the Havens Berehavim and Baltimore, well knowne for the plentie of Herring taken therein: neare to which dwelt Mac-Carti More, an Irish Nobleman who in the yeare 1566. did deliver and render his Lands and possessions into the hands of Elizabeth Queene of England, and received the^ againe from Her, to hold the^ by fealtie after the manner of England. And at the same time he was created Earle af Glencar, and baron of Valentia. A man in this Countrie of great name and power, and an enemy heretofore to the Giralds, who deprived his Ancesters, being heretofore, as he contended, the lawfull Kings of Desmond, of their ancient right. For these Giralds, or FitZ-Giralds, being descended from the house of Kildare: and having conquered the Irish, did here get themselves large possessions, and of these Giralds Maurice FitZ-Thomas was created by Edward the third

map of IrelandTHE FIFT TABLE OF IRELAND.

the first Earle of Desmond in the yeare of Grace 1355, and left so firme and so established an inheritance, that the aforesaid honour in a continued successio^ did descend to this wretched rebel, of which I have spoken before, who was the tenth Earle after him. Next to the Iberni dwelt the Vdia who are also called Vodiae, of which names there remaineth some tokens in the Country of Kilkenni; for the greatest part is called Idou and Idouth. These did inhabit the Counties of Corke, Triperarie, Linrick Kilkenni, and Waterford. In the Countie of Triperarie, there is nothing worthy of memorie, but that there is a Palatinate in it, and the little Towne called Holy Crosse, that hath great immunities and freedomes granted (as the Monkes have persuaded them) in honour of a piece of our Saviours Crosse which was kept there.The Rivers, Citties and Townes. The famous River Suirus, which the inhabitants call Showr, is carried out of this Countrie of Triperarie into Kilkenni. This River running out of the Mountain Blada through Ossiria the Lower of which the Butlers are stiled Earles, and afterward Thurles, of which they are stiled Vicounts, first passeth by the Citie Cassilia or Cassel, adorned by Pope Eugenius with an Archbishop, under whom are nine Suffragan Bishops. And from thence growing bigger by the receipt of two other Rivers into it, neere Waterford it dischargeth it selfe into the Ocean. Hitherto I have runne over this part of Ireland with Camden, now it remaines to unfold some things concerning the Cities and Townes in the same. Among them the first that offers it selfe isThis Citie the Irish and Brittaines call Porthlargy. Waterford, which is the second Citie in Ireland, and alwaies faithfull and obedient to the English governement. For after Richard Earle of Pembroke conquered and tooke it, it alwaies continued in peacable quietnesse and obedience to the English, endeavouring to bring Ireland into subjection; whence the Kings of England did grant them many and divers immunities and freedomes, which Henry the seventh did encrease and confirme, because the Cittizens did behave themselves valiantly and wisely against Perkin VVarbeck, who with the wings of impudence thought to aspire to the royall Throne. This Citie was built by Pyrats of Norway, which although it have a thick aire, a soile not very pleasant, and very narrow streets, yet such is the conveniencie of the Haven, that it is the second Ctity in Ireland for wealth and populousnes, and is filled with many wise and well behaved Citizens. It hath a safe and quiet Haven, and which is often full of outlandish and forraine ships. For there are many Merchants in Waterford, who in trading do so wisely use their stock, and so warily cast up their accou^ts, that in a short time they get great store of wealth; they are not for the most part indebted, but have ready money. There are very few usurers, which by fraudulent and intolerable interest live upon the goods and spoile of the Cittizens by taking them to pawne. The Citizens are curteous, bountifull, thriftie, hospitable to strangers, and serviceable both in private and publique affaires. This Citie was anciently called Menapia, as Dublin Eblana: or rather Amellana from Amellanus, who built it, as it is reported that Sitaracus built Waterford, and Ivorus Limrick; They being Cosen-Germans, and heretofore of great authoritie in Ireland. There is also in this Countrie Limrick, which is the third Citie, that excells the rest, for commodious situation, and for the fairenesse of the River, being watered with Shennin the chiefe of all the Irish Rivers;

though this Citie bee distant from the Sea sixtie miles, yet the ship-masters doe bring shippes of great burthen even to the walls of the Citie, neither neede they feare any rockes all the way they come up. It is wonderfull to see what store and plentie of fish you shall finde there. Iohn King of England being enamoured with the pleasantnesse of this Cittie, built there a faire Castle, and a Bridge. There is also Corcagia in the Countie of Corke, which the English call Cork, and the natives Korkcach, environed with a wall, not very wide in compasse. It is stretched out so as to make but one street, yet there is a prettie and very faire market place; it hath an excellent safe harbour, but hath heretofore beene so encompassed with seditious neighbours, that they keepe continuall watch and ward, as if they were alwaies besieged, and they scarce marrie their daughters into the countrie, by reason whereof, marrying among themselves, all the Citizens are somewhat allied one to another. The Citizens are strong in Souldiers, they addict themselves to merchandise, and governe their affaires both at home and abroad very frugally. Coenalis writeth, that the holy man Briacus came from hence, from whom the Diocesse of Sanbrioch in Brittaine, commonly called S. Brieu, tooke its name. But in this hee wandereth from the truth, because he placeth the Coriondi of Ireland in this Citie. For Ptolemie doth not mention it at all. Yet the River which floweth by it seemeth to be the same, which Ptolemie calls Daurona, and Giraldus calls Sauranus, and Saverenus by changing one letter. Learnedpag. 655. Camden saith, that the affinitie which is betweene these names did intimate so much unto him, and that with greater probalitie, then if hee should call the next River Daurona, which running through the Countie Corke and Triperarie falls into the Ocean by Lysmor, and is called by Historians Avenmor, that is, the Great River, of which Nechamus thus writeth:
Vrbem Lissimor pertransit flumen Avenmor,Ardmor cernit ubi concitus aequor adit.Avenmor runneth by Lissimors wallAnd at Ardmor into the Sea doth fall.



THE KINGDOME OF SCOTLAND.
The names.THE Northerne part of the Island of Brittaine is called Scotland, heretofore Albania. The Inhabitants who keepe their ancient speech, doe call it Albain, and the Irish Albany, as if it were an other Ireland, which the Bardes call Banno. For Historians doe call Ireland Greater Scotland; and the Kingdome of Scots in Brittaine the Lesser Scotland: Ptolemie doth call it Little Brittaine, Rufus the Second Brittaine; Tacitus calleth it Caledonia, from a certaine Forrest so called. But the Scots were so called from their Neighbours theor Scitti, a people of Germany that seised on a part of Spaine. Scyths: For as the Dutchmen call the Scyths and Scots by one name Scutten, that is, Archers: so also the Brittains did call both of them Y-scot, as appeareth by the Brittish Writers. And 'tis manifest, that they descending from the Scyths, came out of Spaine intoAnno 424. Ireland, and from thence into that part of Albain which they now possesse, and grew with the Picts into one Nation. Thus much of the Name, the Situation followes. The Southerne bounds towards England are the Rivers Tweede and Solwey, on the North is the Deucaledon Ocean,The Situation. on the West the Irish, on the East the German, other parts the Ocean and the German Sea doe compasse. It is 480 miles long, but no where above 112 miles broad.The temperature of the Ayre. The Country is more temperate than France, the heate and cold being more remisse, in like manner as it is in England, but yet it cannot be compared unto it in fruitfulnesse. The Earth, for the most part,The fertility of the Soyle. is full of Sulphure or moorish, which affordeth them coale and turfe for firing, especially in those places where there is want of wood. Yet here groweth as much corne as the Inhabitants can spend. The Earth also bringeth forth divers mettals, as Gold, Silver, Quick-silver, Iron, Lead, and Copper. It hath in Drisdale a Gold Myne, in which the Azure stone is found. It hath also pretious stones, especially the Gagate, which burneth in the water, and is quenched with oyle. Also excellent pastures, which doe feed and bring up all kinds of Heards: whence they abound with plenty of flesh, milke, butter, cheese, and wooll. When the Scots came to the Picts into Brittain, although they stil provok't the English by warres and robberies, yet the Scottish affaires grew not upon a suddain, but a long time they lay hid in that corner in which they first arriv'd; neither (as Beda noteth) for more than an hundred and seven and twenty yeares, durst they beare Armes against the Earles of Northumberland, untill at one and the samein the yeare of grace 740. time they had almost slaine all the Picts, and the Kingdome of Northumberland by domestick troubles, and by the incursions of the Dane, was almost ruined. For then all the North part of Brittaine came to be called Scotland, together with the Countrie beyond Cluide, and Edenburgh-Frith. The Scots are valiant in warre, and stout souldiers to endure hunger, watching, or cold. The chiefe Citie of Scotland isThis Citie the Scotch-Irish call Dun Eaden, i. the Towne Eaden. Edenburgh, commonly called Edenburrow,

map of ScotlandTHE KINGDOME OF SCOTLAND.

this royall Seate Ptolemie cals theWhich the word Edenburrow much resembles, for (saith Cama^n) Adain in the Brittish tongue signifieth a wing. See pag. 627. Winged Castell, and not onely the Metropolis of Lauden, but also of all Scotland; it hath its situation on the Mountaines, much like to Prague in Bohemia; the length stretched from East to West is a thousand paces, or a mile, the breadth is halfe as much. The whole Citie hangeth, as it were, on the side of a Mountaine, and is highest toward the West; toward the North it fortifies the Citie with its steepnesse, the other parts toward the East and South are environ'd with a wall. On the East side of the Citie is the Kings pallace, which they call King Arthurs Chaire: on the West there is a steepe Rock, and on the Rock a great Towre, which the Scots doe commonly call the maiden Towre, which is the same which Ptolemie cals the Winged Castell. There are also other Cities and famous Townes in this Kingdome, which we will describe particularly in their places. In the Valeys there are many Lakes, Marshes, Fountaines and Rivers full of Fish, the greatest part whereof arise out of the Mountaine Grampius,The Sea. of which wee will make mention in our next Description. The Scottish Sea is full of Oysters,The Ports. Herrings, Corall, and shell-fish of divers kindes. Scotland hath many Havens and Bayes, amongst which Letha is a most convenient Haven.Mountaines. The Country it selfe is very rugged and mountainous, and on the very Mountaines hath plaine levell ground, which doth afford pasturage for Cattell. Grampius is the greatest Mountaine, and doth runne through the middle of Scotland:Woods. it is commonly called Grasebaim, or Grantzbaine, that is to say, the crooked mountaine, for it bending it selfe from the shore of the German Sea to the mouth of the River Dee, and passing through the middle of this Countrey toward the Irish Sea, endeth at the Lake Lomund: it was heretofore the bounds of the Kingdome of the Picts and Scots. At Aberdon there are woody mountaines. It is thought, that here was the Forrest of Caledonia, which Lucius Florus cals saltus Caledonius, very spacious, and by reason of great trees impassable; and it is divided by the Mountaine Grampius. Moreover not onely ancient writings and manuscripts,Publick works. but also Temples, Friaries, Monasteries, Hospitals, and other places devoted to Religion doe testifie, that the Scots were not the lastThe Gospel was first preached here by Palladius anno 431. among the Europaeans, who embraced the Christian Religion, and did observe and reverence it above others. The royall Pallace of Edenburgh, of which I spake before, is very stately and magnificent, and in the midst of the Citie is their Capitoll or Parliament-house. The Dukes, Earles, Barons, and Nobles of the Kingdome have their Pallaces in the Citie, when they are summoned to Parliament. The Citie it selfe is not built of bricke, but of free squared stone, so that the severall houses may bee compared to great Pallaces. But enough of this, let us passe to other things. The people of Scotland are divided into three Rankes or Orders, the Nobility, the Clergie, and the Laiety.The manner of Government. The Ecclesiasticall Order hath two Archbishops, one of S. Andrewes, Primate of all Scotland, the other of Glasco. There are eight Bishopricks under the Archbishop of Saint Andrewes, of Dunkeld, of Aberdon, of Murray, of Dunblan, of Brecchin, of Rosse, of Cathanes, and of Orkney: Under the Bishop ofwhich is also called the Bishop of Galloway. Glasgo there are three, to wit, the Bishop of Candida casa, the Bishop ofor Argile. Argadia, and the Bishop of the Isles, namely Sura, Mura, Yla, etc. This is the manner and order of the Nobilitie,

the Kings and the Kings Sonnes lawfully begotten have the first place, of which if there bee many, the eldest Sonne is called Prince of Scotland, the rest are onely called Princes, but when the King is publickly crowned, hee promiseth to all the people, that he will keepe and observe the Lawes, Rites, and Customes of his Ancestours, and use them in the same manner as they did. The Dukes have the second place, the Earles the third, and those Nobles the fourth place, who are not known by that Title in forraine Countries, but the Scots doe call them My Lords. This name is so much esteem'd amongst them, that for honours sake they attribute it to their Bishops, Earles, and chiefest Magistrates. In the fifth place are the Knights and Barons, who are usually called Lords. They are in the sixth and last place, who having attained to no title of honour, but yet descended from a noble Familie, are therefore commonly called Gentlemen; as the Brothers, and Sonnes of Earles and Lords, the youngest Sonnes of Knights, who have no part in the Inheritance, because (by the Lawes of Scotland) that commeth unto the eldest Sonne, for the preservation of the Familie, but the common people call all those Gentlemen, who are either rich or well spoken of for their hospitality. The whole weight of warre doth depend on the Nobility of the lowest degree. The Plebeians or Citizens are partly chiefe men, who beare office in their Cities, partly Merchants, and partly Tradesmen, or Handy-craftes-men, all which because they are free from Tribute and other burdens, doe easily grow rich. And least any thing should be too heavily enacted against any Citie, the King permits that in publick assemblies or Parliaments three or foure Citizens, being called out of every Citie, should freely interpose their opinion concerning matters propounded. Heretofore the Clergie was governed by the authoritie of Decrees and Councels, but now (as the rest) they are ruled by the Lawes, which the Kings have devised, or confirmed by their royall assent. The Booke which containeth the municipall Lawes, written in Latine, is entituled Regia Majestas, the Kings Majestie, because the Booke begins with those words: In the other Bookes of the Lawes, the Acts of their Councels (which are called Parliaments) are written in Scotch. There are many and divers Magistrates in Scotland, as in other Nations. Among these, the chiefe and next to the King is the Protectour of the Kingdome (whom they call the Governour.) Hee hath the charge of governing the Kingdome, if the Common-wealth at any time be deprived of her King; or the King by reason of his tender age cannot manage the affaires of the Kingdome. There is also a continuall Senate at Edenburrough, so framed of the Clergie and Nobilitie, that the Clergie doth in number equall the Laiety. The Clergie have a President over them, who hath the first place in delivering his opinion, unlesse the Chancellour of the Kingdome bee present, for hee hath the chiefe place in all affaires of the Kingdome. Hee that sits on matters of life and death, they call The great Justice; hee that lookes to Sea-matters, the Admirall: he that lookes to the Campe, the Marshall: and he that punishes offences, committed in the Court, is called the Constable. There are also in severall Provinces, which they call Viecounties, those which are Governours of them, whom by an ancient name they

call Vicounts. Their authority in deciding those matters which belong to civill causes, doth depend on a certaine hereditary right, by which they claime also unto themselves those Vicountships. So that these Vicounts may be said not to be created by the King, but borne unto it by right from their Parents. The Cities also and Townes have their Governours, their Bailiffes, and other Magistrates of that kinde, who keepe the Citizens in obedience, and doe maintaine and defend the Priviledges of the Cities, whereby it comes to passe that the Common-wealth of Scotland, by the apt disposition and ranking of Degrees, by the holy Majestie of Lawes and the authority of Magistrates, doth flourish, and deserveth great praise. These are the names of the Dukedomes, Earledomes, and Vicountships of Scotland: the Dukedome of Rotsay and Albania, and the Dukedome of Lennox, the Countie of Carnes, Sutherlant, Rosse, Murray, Buchquhan, Garniach, Garmoran, Mar, Mernis, Angus, Gowry, Friffe, Marche, Athole, Stratherne, Menteith, Wagion, Douglasse, Carrike, Crawford, Annandale, Ourmonth, and Huntley. The Vicountships are, Berwick, alias North-Berwyk, Roxburgh, Selkirk, Twedale, Dunfrise, Niddisdale, Wigton, Are, Lanarke, Dunbretton, Sterueling, Louthean, Lauden, Clacmanan, Kiuros, Fiffe, Perth, Angus, Mernis, Aberdone, Bamph, Fores, and Inuernes. There are the Universities of Saint Andrew and Aberdone, the later was adorned with many priviledges by King Alexander, and his Sister Isabel, about the yeare 1240. The former was begun to be established under King Iames, in the yeare 1411. To which is added the University of Glasgo, founded by Bishop Turnbul, anno 1554, and Edenburgh. The disposition of the Scots is lively, stirring, fierie, hot, and very capable of wisdome.



THE SECOND TABLE OF SCOTLAND.
I Have ended that which I purposed to speake of Scotland in generall, our method requireth that we should run through the parts of it in speciall. Scotland is divided (by the Mountaine Grampius, cutting it in the midst) into the Southerne or Higher part, and into the Northerne or Lower part. It is divided from England by the River Tweede, by the high Mountaine Cheviota, and, where the Mountaine faileth, by a trench made not long agoe, and lastly by the Rivers Eske and Solway. Beyond these bounds the Countries even from the Scottish Sea to the Irish, doe lie in this manner. The first is Marcia, Merchia or March so called, because it is the limits, and lies on the Marches of Scotland; this reacheth to the left side of Tweede: on the East it is bounded with the ForthWhich is an arme of the Sea, where the water ebbes and flowes.The names of Cities Aestuarium, and on the South with England. In March is the Towne of Berwyke, Borwick, or Borcovicum; which the English hold. Here is also the Castle of Hume, the ancient possession of the Lords of Hume, who being descended from the Earles of March, became at last a great and renowned Familie. Neare to this Castle lyeth Kelso, famous by a certaine Monasterie, and the ancient habitation of the Hepburni, who a long time by Hereditary right, were Earles of Bothwell, and Admiralls of Scotland, which honours by the Sister of Iames Earle of Bothwell, married to Iohn the lawfull Sonne of King Iames the fift, did descend to Francis his Son. From thence we may see Coldingham, or Childingham, which Beda calls the Citie Coldana, and Vrbs Coludi, and Ptolemie perchance calls Colania. On the West side of March on either side of Tweede is Tifedale, being so called from the River Tyfic. It is divided from England by the Mountaine Cheviota. After this are three small Countries, Lidesdale, Eusedale, and Eskedale, so named from three Rivers of like name, Lide, Eue, and Eske. The last is Annandale, which is so called from the River of Annan, dividing it in the midst, which runnes along by Solway into the Irish Sea. Now that wee may returne againe to theCalled by Ptolemie Boderia by Tacitus Bodorria and by Boethius Fluvius Levinus. Lothiana. Forth or Scottish Fyrth it doth bound Lothiana or Lauden on the East side: the Cochurmian Woods, and the Lamirian Mountaines doe seperate it from Marcia. And then a little toward the West it toucheth upon Lauderia and Twedia: the one so called fro^ the Town Laudera, the other fro^ the River Tweede, cutting through the middle of that Country. On the South and West Lidesdale Nithesdale and Clidesdall doe touch upon Tweede, the name of Nithesdale was given unto it from the River Nyth, called by Ptolemie Nobios, which glideth through it into the Irish Sea.The Country is now called Lauden, and anciently ^^ctland.The fertilitie of the Soyle. The Rivers. Lothiaria was so called from Lothius King of the Scots. On the East side it is bounded with the Forth or Scottish Sea, and on the West it looketh toward the Vale of

Clide. This Country both for curtesie and plenty of all things necessary for mans life, doth farre excell the rest. It is watered with five Rivers, Tin^,The names of Cities. both the Eskes (who before they fall into the Sea doe joyne together in one channell) Letha, and Almone. These rising partly out of the Lamirian Mountaines, partly out of the Pictland Mountaines doe runne into the Forth. It hath these Townes, Dunbarr, Hadinia, commonly called Hadington, Dalneth, Edenburrough, Leth and Lemnuch. Somewhat more towards the West lyethOr Cluiddesdale.The Rivers. Clydesdale, on either side of the River Clide or Glotta, which in regard of the length is divided into two Provinces. In the former Province is a hill not very high, from whence three Rivers doe discharge themselves into three divers Seas.Called Vedra by Ptolemie. Tweede into the Scotch Sea, Annand into the Irish, and Clide into the Deucalidon Sea. The chiefest Cities in it are Lanarick and Glasco.The names of Cities. The latter the River Coila or Coyil runneth by on the West: beyond Coila is Gallovidia or Galloway. It is seperated from Nithesdale with the River Claudanus, almost enclining toward the South, whose bankes doe hemme in the other side of Scotland. The whole Country is more fruitfull in Cattle then in Corne.Galloway. It hath many Rivers which runne into the Irish Sea, as Vrus, Dee, Kennus, Cray and Lowys. It is no where raised into Mountaines, but yet it swells with little Hills. Among which the water setling doth make innumerable Lakes,The Situation. which by the first raine which falls before the Autumnall Aequinox doe make the Rivers rise, whence there commeth downe an incredible multitude of Eeles, which the Inhabitants having tooke up with wickar-weeles, doe salt up, and make a great commoditie of. In this Country is the Lake of Myrton, part of whose Waters doe congeale in Winter, the other is never frozen. The farthest part on this side is the Promontorie Novantum, under which in the mouth of the River Lowys is the Bay which Ptolemy callsAnd Camden Gerigonius, because there is a Towne situate called G^rgeny. Regrionius. On the other side there flowes into it the Bay of Glotta, commonly called the Lake Rian, which Ptolemy calls Vidogara. That Land which runneth betweene these two Bayes the Inhabitants call Rine, that is the Eye of Galloway: they call it also the Mule of Galloway, or the Mules nocke. The whole Country is called Galloway, or Gallovid, which in the language of the Ancient Scots signifies a French-man. Beneath Vidogara on the backside of Galloway, Caricta gently bendeth toward the estuarie of Glotta.Rivers. Two Rivers doe cut through it: one called Stinsianus, and the other Grevanus, on both of which many pleasant Townes are seated.Lakes. Between the Rivers, in those places where it swells into little hills, it is fruitfull in pasturage, and hath some Corne. The whole Country hath not onely a sufficiency of all things, for the maintenance of men both by Sea and Land, but also doth furnish the neighbour Countries with many commodities. The River Dun doth seperate it from Coila, arising out of a Lake of the same name, which hath an Island in it with a small Castle. There are in the Countrie of Caricta, very exceeding great Oxen, whose flesh is tender and sweet in taste, and whose fat being once melted never hardneth againe, but alwayes runneth abroad like oyle. Coila followeth, which Galloway doth bound on the South, on the East it toucheth Clidesdale, on the West it is divided from Cunningam by the River Vrwyn, the River Aire

map of ScotlandTHE SECOND TABLE OF SCOTLAND.

runnes through the middle hereof, on which is seated Ayr a faire Market Towne. For the generall, this Country hath greater plenty of valiant men, then of fruit or cattle, for it is altogether of a light sandie soyle: which doth sharpen the industrie of the Inhabitants, and their sparing life doth confirme the strength of their mindes and bodies. In this Country about ten miles from the Towne Ayr, there is a stone almost twelve foot high, and thirty Cubits thicke, which is called the deafe stone, for if you hollow or shoot off a Musket on the one side, hee that standeth on the other side next to the stone cannot heare it, he that stands farther off shall heare it better, and he that stands farthest off shall heare it best. After this Cunningam runneth to the North, and straightneth Glotta, untill it become a small River. It is manifest that the name of this Country came from the Danes, and in their language signifies a Kings house, which is a signe that the Danes sometimes possessed it. Next on the East side is situated Renfroan, so called from a Towne, in which the Inhabitants kept their publike meetings, it is commonly called Baronia. Two Rivers doe cut through the middle of it, which are both called Carth. After this Country is Clidesdale aforenamed, stretched forth to either banke of Glotta, and poureth forth many Noble Rivers: on the left hand Aven, and Duglasse, which doe runne into Glotta: on the right hand another Aven, which seperates Sterling on the South from Lothiana, and on the East from the Fyrth, untill at last growing lesser, it hath a Bridge over it neare Sterling. There is one River that cutteth through this Country, which is worthy of memory, called Carron, neare to which are some ancient Monuments. On the left side of Carron there are two little hills built by the industrie of men, which are commonly called Duni pacis. On the right side of Carron, there is a plaine field that at last riseth into a little hill, being in the middle betweene Duni pacis, and a little Chappell. On the side of this hill there appeareth yet the ruines or remainder of a small Citie. But the foundation of the Walls, and the description of the streetes, partly by tillage, and partly by digging forth squared stones for the building of rich mens houses, cannot be distinctly knowne. This place Beda doth call Guidi, and doth place it in a corner of the trench made by Severus the Emperour. Many famous Roman Writers have made mention of this Trench and Bulwarke. Here many tokens doe remaine, and many stones are digged up with inscriptions, which are either testimonies of ayde formerly received by the Tribunes and Centurions, or of their Sepulchers in those places. Beyond Sterling is Levinis or Lennox, divided from Renfroan by Glotta, from Glasco by the River Keluin: it is parted from Sterling or Striveling with the Mountaines, from Taichia, by the Forth: at length it endeth at the Mountaine Grampius, at the foot thereof the Lake Lomund through a hollow Vale extendeth it selfe 24. miles in length, and 8. in breadth, which containeth above 24. Islands. Besides a multitude of other fishes, it hath some particular unto it selfe, which are pleasant in taste, called Pollacks. There are three things reported of this Lake very memorable: First the Fish have no Finnes, but otherwise are of an excellent taste. Secondly, the water when there is no winde is sometime so rough, that it would affright the boldest Marriner,

from weighing Anker. Lastly, there is a certaine Island fit to feed flocks of cattle, which moveth up and downe, and is driven to and fro with every tempest. But I returne to the Lake, which at last breaking forth toward the South, doth send forth the River Levin, which giveth its owne name to the Country. This River neare to the Castle Brittanodun, or Dun brittan, and a Towne of the same name, entreth into Glotta. The farthest Hills of the Mountaine Grampius doe somewhat raise the farthest part of Levinia, being cut through with a little Bay of the Sea, which for the shortnesse of it they call Gerloch. Beyond this is a farre larger Bay, which they call Longus, from the River Long that falleth into it. This is the bound betweene Levinia and Covalia. Covalia it selfe,Called also Argile, and Argadia. Argathel or rather Ergathel and Cnapdale, are divided into many parts by many straight Bayes made by the estuarie of Glotta, or Dun-Brittan Fryth. There is one famous Lake amongst the rest; they call it Finis from the River Fin, which it receiveth, it is 60 miles long. There is in Knapdale the Lake Avus, in which there is a small Island with a fortified Castle. From hence the River Avus runneth forth, which alone in these Countries emptieth it selfe into the Deucalidon Sea. Beyond Knapdale towards the West Cantiera or Cantyre runneth out, that is, the head of the Country, over against Ireland, from which it is parted by a small narrow Sea, being longer than broad, and joyned so straightly, and in such a narrow manner to Cnapdale, that it is scarce a mile over, and even that is nothing else but sand. On Cantyre Lauria toucheth, lying neare to Argathel, and reaching neare to Abry: it is a plaine Country, and not unfruitfull. In that place where the Mountaine Grampius is somewhat lower, and more passable, the Country is called Braid Albin, that is to say, the highest part of Scotland, and where it is highest it is called Drum Albin, that is the backe of Scotland; and not without reason. For out of the backe Rivers doe runne into either Sea, some into the North, some into the South: out of the Lake Iernus, it sendeth forth the River Ierna into the East, which having runne three miles falls into Taus beneath Perth. From this River Strathierna or Stathierna, extended to either banke thereof, tooke its name. For the Scots are wont to call a Countrie which lyeth on a River, Stat.



THE THIRD TABLE OF SCOTLAND.
THe Mountains of Ocellum do border upon Tachia, which for the most part, together with the Country at the foot thereof, are thought to bee in the Country of Iernia: but the rest of the Countrie even to the Forth ambition hath divided into many parts, as Clacman, Colrosse, and Kinrosse. From these and the Mountaines of Ocellum, all the Countrie which is bounded by the Forth and Tay, groweth straight in the forme of a wedge Eastward, toward the Sea. And by one name is called Fife, having sufficiencie of all things necessarie to life: it is broadest where the Lake Levinus cutteth it, and thence gathereth it selfe into a narrow forme, even to the Towne Caralia. It sendeth forth one notable River, to wit Levinus, whose bankes are beautified with many Townes, of which the most renowned for the studie of good Arts,Rivers. is Fanum Andraeae, or Andrews Chappell, which the ancient Scots did call Fanum Reguli, and the Picts Rigmud. In the middle of the Countrie is Cuprum or Cuper, whither those of Fife do come to have their causes tryed: on that side where it toucheth Iernia, there stands Abreneth the ancient Pallace of the Picts. Here Ierna runneth into Taus. But Taus runneth foure and twentie miles, having broken out of the Lake Taus which is in Braid Albin, and is the greatest River in Scotland. This River bending toward the mountaine Grampius, doth touch Atholia a fertile Region placed in the wooddie Countrie of Grampius. Beneath Atholia Caledon is seated on the right-hand bank of the River Taus an old Towne which onely retaineth a name, common-called Duncaldene, that is, Hasell-trees. For the Hasell trees spreading themselves all over, and covering the fields thereabout with their shadie boughs, gave occasion of that name both to the Towne and people. These Caledones or people of Caledon, being once reckoned among the chief Brittaines, did make up one part of the Kingdome of the Picts. For Ammianus Marcellinus divideth them into the Caledones and Vecturiones, but of their names there is scarce any memorie left at this day. Twelve miles beneath Caledon lyes the Countrie of Perth on the same right-hand banke. On the left-hand banke beneath Atholia is Gour, looking toward the East, renowned for corne-fields: and beneath this againe is Angusia stretched out betweene Taus and Eske: this the ancient Scots did call Aeneia. Some suppose it to be called Horestia, or according to the English speech Forrest. In it is the Citie Cuprum which Boethius, to gratifie his Country, ambitiously callethThis is also called Allectum. Dei Donum, the gift of God: but I suppose the ancient name was Taodunum, from Dunus, that is, an Hill situate by Taus, at the foot whereof there is a Towne. Beyond Taus the next foureteene miles off, on the same banke is Abreneth, otherwise called Obrinca. After this Countrie is the Red Promontorie, very conspicuous. The River Eske called the Southerne, cutting through the midst thereof, the other Northerne Eske divideth it from Mernia. It is for the most part a

map of ScotlandTHE THIRD TABLE. OF SCOTLAND.

plaine field countrie, untill Grampius meeting with it beneath Fordur^^ and Dunotrum the Earle Marshalls castle, it somewhat remitteth in height, and soe bendeth downe into the Sea. Beyond it towards the North is the mouth of the River Deva commonly called Dea or Dee, and about a mile distant from it the River Don; by the one is Aberdon, famous for the Salmon-fishing, by the other anotherThe mouth of the River Don: this Town is called by Ptolemie Devana, for Denana, because it is situate on the River Den or Don. Aberdon, which hath* Bishops Seat, and Publike Schooles flourishing by the studies of all Liberall Arts. I finde in ancient monuments that the Hithermost was called Aberdea, but now these Townes are called the old and new Aberdon* From this strait Foreland betweene these two Rivers beginneth Marri^, which by little and little enlarging it selfe runneth 60. miles in length even to Badenacke or Badgenoth. This Countrie extends it selfe in one continued ridge, and doth send forth divers great Rivers into either Se^ Abria doth border on Badenacke, being somewhat enclined toward the Deucalidon Sea, and is as plentifull as any Countrie in Scotland with a^^ Sea and Land-commoditie. For it hath good corne and pasturage, and is pleasant as well in regard of the shadie woods as coole streames, and fountaines. It hath so great plentie of fish, that it is not inferiour to any part of the whole Kingdome. For beside the plentie of river fish, the Se^ storeth it; for breaking in upon the plaine ground, and there being kept in with high bankes it spreads it selfe abroad,Abria. in manner of a great Lake: whence it is called in their countrie speech Abria, that is a standing water. They give also the same name to the neighbour Countrie. Northward next to Marria is Buchania or Buguhan divided from it by the river Don. This of all the Countries of Scotland doth stretch it selfe farthest into the Germane Sea. It is happie in pasturage and the increase of sheepe, and is sufficiently furnished with all things necessarie for mans life.The fertility of the soile. The rivers thereof do abound with Salmons. Yet that kinde of fish is not found in the river Raira. There is on the bankes of this river a Cave, the nature whereof is not to be omitted, which is, that water distilling drop by drop out of the hollow arch thereof these drops are straightway turned into little Pyramides of stone, and if it should not be clensed by the industrie of men, it would quickly fill up the cave even to the top. Beyond Buchania towarps the North, are two small Countries, Boina and Ainia, which lye by the river Spaea or Spey that separateth them from Moravia. Spaea riseth on the back-side of Badenach aforesaid, and a good way distant from its fountaine is that Lake whence Iut^^ breaketh forth, and rowleth it selfe into the Westerne Sea* They report that at the mouth thereof there was a famous Towne, named from the river Emmorluteum: the truth is, whether you consider the nature of the Countrie round about it, or the conveniencie of Navigation and transportation, it is a place very fit to be a Towne of traffique. And the ancient Kings induced thereunto by the opportunitie of the seat, for many ages dwelt in the CastleNow called Dounstphage. Evon, which now many are falsly persuaded was Stephanodunum. For the ruines of that Castle are yet seene in Lorna. Moravia followes from beyond Spaea even to Nessus, heretofore it is thought it was called Varar. Betweene those two rivers the German Ocean, as it were driving backe the Land into the West, floweth in by a great Bay, and straightneth the largenesse of it. The whole Countrie

round about doth abound with Corne and Hay, and is one of the chiefe of the whole Kingdome both for pleasantnesse and encrease of fruits. It hath two memorable Townes, Elgina neare the River Lox, which yet retaineth its ancient name, and Nessus neare the River Nessus. This River floweth foure and twentie miles in length from the Lake Nessus. The water is almost alwaies warme, it is never so cold that it freezeth. And in the extremitie of winter, pieces of ice carried into it are quickly dissolved by the warmth of the water. Beyond the Lake Nessus toward the West, the Continent is stretched forth but eight miles in length; so that the Seas are readie to meete, and to make an Island of the remainder of Scotland. That part of Scotland which lyeth beyond Nessus, and this strait of Land North and West is wont to be divided into foure Provinces. First beyond the mouth of Nessus, where it drowneth it selfe in the German Ocean, is the Countrie Rossia,Rossia. running out with high Promontories into the Sea: which the name it selfe sheweth. For Ros signifies in the Scottish speech a Promontorie. It is longer then broad. For it is extended from the German Sea to the Deucalidon, where it becommeth mountanous and rugged, but the fields of it, are not inferiour to any part of Scotland in fertilitie and fruitfulnesse. It hath pleasant vallies watered with Rivers full of fish, and many Lakes that have fish in abundance, but the greatest of them all is Labrus. From the Deucalidon Sea, the Shoare by degrees bendeth in, and inclineth toward the East. From the other Shoare the German Sea, making a way for it selfe between the rocks, and flowing into a great Bay, maketh a safe and sure Haven against all tempest. Secondly, next to the farthest part of Rosse toward the North,Navernia. is Navernia, so called from the River Navernus: and this Countrie commonly (following their Countrie speech) they call Strathnaverne. Rosse bounds it on the South, on the West and North the Deucaledon Sea washeth it, on the East it toucheth Cathanesia.Sutherland. In the third place Sutherland is neare unto all these, and toucheth them on one side or another: for on the West it hath Strathnavernie, on the South and East Rosse, and on the North Cathanesia. The Inhabitants of this Countrie by reason of the condition of the soile are rather given to pasturage than tillage. There is nothing that I know singular in it,Mountaines. but that it hath Mountaines of white marble, (a rare miracle in cold Countries) which is not gotten for any use, because wantonnesse hath not yet invaded those parts. Lastly, Cathanesia or Cathanes is the farthest Countrie of Scotland toward the North, where Navernia meetes it, and these two Countries of Scotland do contract the bredth of it into a strait and narrow front. In this front of Land three Promontories do raise themselves. The highest was Navernia, which Ptolemie calleth Orcas, Tavedrum and Tarvisium: the two other being nothing so high are in Cathanesia, namely Vervedrum, now Hoya, and Betubium, called (though not rightly) by Hector Boethius Dame:Cathanesia. now it is commonly called Dunis Bey, others call it Duncans Bey. Out of this name by taking away some letters the word Dunis Bey seemeth to be derived. In this Countrie Ptolemie placeth the Cornavii, of whose name there do still remaine some tokens. As they commonly call the Castles of the Earles of Cathanesia, Gernico or Kernico: and those who seeme to Ptolemie and others to be the Cornavii, the Brittaines thinke to be the

Kernes. For sith not onely in this Countrie, but in a divers part of the Island they place the Cornavii, namely in Cornewall, they call those wh^ do still retaine the ancient Brittish speech, Kernes. Now it remaines th^^ wee should speake somewhat of the Islands. The later Writers ha^^ made three sorts of all the Islands, which do as it were crowne Scotland the Westerne, the Orcades, and the Zeland Islands. Those are called (...) Westerne Islands which are stretched from Ireland almost to the Orc^^ in the Deucalidon Sea on the Westerne side. These some call the He^^des, others theSo called fro^ Eb. rid. which signifies in the Brittish tongue sine frugibus, without fruit, as Camden thinketh. pag. 698. Aebudae, others the Mevaniae, others the Beteoricae. T^ Orcades, now called Orkney, are partly in the Deucalidon Sea, and partly the German, and are scattered toward the Notherne part of Scotland* Concerning their names Ancient and Moderne Writers do agree, b^ it doth not appeare who first possessed them. Some say they had th^ originall from the Germans: But out of what Countrie these Germ^ came it is not delivered. If wee may conjecture by their speech, th^ used formerly, as at this day, the ancient Gothicke tongue. Some supp^^ them to have beene the Picts, enduced thereunto chiefly, because (...) narrow Sea dividing them from Cathanesia, is called from the Picts ^^tum Picticum. And they thinke that the Picts themselves were of the Saxon race, which they conjecture by a verse of Claudians:
--Maduerunt Saxone fusoOrcades, incaluit Pictorum sanguine Thule:Scotorum tumulos flevit glacialis Ierne.The Orcades with blood of men grew wet,When as the Saxon did the worser get:Thule even with the blood of Picts grew hot,Ierne wail'd the death of many a Scot.
But seeing we have intreated of these things formerly in the Descript^on of the Brittish Isles, thus much shall suffice concerning Scotland.



ENGLANG.
THE Southerne and greatest part of the Isle of Albion, is called in Latine Anglia: from Angria, a Countrie of Westphalia, commonly called Engern,The name by whom it was given. as some would have it. Some suppose it was so called from angulus a corner, because it is a corner of the World. Others from Angloen a Towne of Pomerania. Goropius deriveth the word Angli, or Englishmen, from the word Angle, that is from a fishing-hooke, because, as he saith, they hooked all things to themselves, and were, as wee say in England, good Anglers: but this conjecture rather deserveth laughter than beleefe. Some suppose, it was so called from Anglia, a little Country of the Cimbrick Chersonesus, which was named Engelond, that is, the Land of English-men, by Egbert King of the West Saxons: or else as it were Engistland, that is, the Land of Engist, who was Captaine over the Saxons. But hee that shall note the Etymologie of the words, Engelbert, Engelhard, and the like German names, may easily see, that thereby is denoted the English-men. These are people of Germany that possessed Brittaine; and, as Camden sheweth, were one Nation, which now by a common name are called English Saxons. This part of the Isle of Albion is diversly called by the Inhabitants; for they divide it into two Countries. That part which looketh to the East, and the German Sea, the natives of England, being people of Saxonie, call in their LanguageBecause it is of an angular forme, for Eng in the Saxon tongue, signifieth a corner, or nooke. England. And the Westerne part, which is divided from the other by the Rivers Sabrine or Severne, and Dee, Wales. The Northerne bounds of it toward Scotland, are the Rivers Tweede and Solway: on the South lies France, and the Brittish Ocean; on the West Ireland, and the Irish Ocean; on the East the German Ocean. It is 302 English miles long, and 300 broad, that is, from the Cape of Cornwall to the Promontorie of Kent. The Ayre here at any time of the yeare is temperate and milde, for the skie is thick, in which cloudes, showres, and windes are easily generated, by reason wereof it hath lesse cold and heate. It hath a fertile and fruitfull Soyle, and so furnished with all kinde of fruits, that Orpheus saith, it was the seate of Ceres. With whom agreeth Mamertinus, who speaking a Panegyrick Oration to Constantine, said, that in this Countrie was such great plenty, as that it was sufficiently furnished with the gifts both of Ceres and Bacchus. It hath fields not onely abounding with ranke and flourishing Corne, but it produceth all kinde of commodities. Heere groweth the Maple and the Beech-tree in abundance: and as for Laurels or Bay trees it surpasseth Thessalie it selfe. Here is such plenty of Rosemary, that in some places they make hedges with it. Here is Gold, Silver, Copresse, though but little store of it, yet here is great store of Iron. Heere is digged abundance of the best black Lead, and white Lead or Tinne, and so transported to other Nations. Heere are many Hils, on which flocks of sheep doe graze, which are esteemed, not onely for their flesh, which is very sweete and pleasant, but also for the finenesse of their wooll; and these flocks of sheepe doe prosper and

increase through the wholsomnesse of the Ayre, and goodnesse of the Soyle, as also by reason of the scarcitie of trees on the Hils, and the freenesse of the whole Countrie from Wolv^^. This Countrie aboundeth with all kinde of Cattell and living Creatures, except Asses, Mules, Camels, Elephants, and a few other. There are no where better or fiercer Mastiffes, no where greater store of Crowes, or greater plenty of Kites, that prey upon young Chickens than here. The Romans did command the better part of Brittaine, almost five hundred yeares, namely from the time ofFiftie yeares before the birth of Christ. Caius Iulius Caesar to the time ofWhich was An. Dom. 446. according to Bede. Theodosius the younger: when the Legions and Garrisons of Rome, being called to defend France, they left the Isle of Brittaine, whereby it came to passe, that the Southerne parts thereof were invaded by the Picts and Scots, whose violence, when the Brittaines could no longer sustaine, they called the Saxones out of Germanie, men accustomed to warre, for their Ayde. These Saxons assisted them in the beginning, but afterward being allured with the temperature of the Ayre, or perswaded by the friendship and familiarity of the Picts, or stirred up by their owne treacherous mindes, they made a league with the Picts against the Brittaines, and having driven out their Hosts, they themselves possessed their places. England containeth many Cities,The Cities. and faire Townes, among which the chiefe are London, Yorke, Canterbury, Bristoll, Glocester, Shrewsbury, Winchester, Bathe, Cambridge, Oxford, Norwich, Sandwich, with many other which wee will delineate in our particular Descriptions.The Rivers. The chiefe Rivers are Thames, Humber, Trent, Ouse, and Severne, of which in their places. The Ocean which washeth this Isle,The Sea. doth abound with plenty of all kindes of Fish, among which is the Pike, which with the Inhabitants is in great esteem, so that some times they take him out of moorish Lakes, into fish-ponds, where after hee hath scoured himselfe, being fed with Eeles and little fishes, hee growes wonderfull fat. Moreover there are no where more delicate Oysters, or greater plenty of them than heere. The especiall Havens of England are these:Ports. first Davernas commonly called Dover, which is the farthest part of the Countie of Kent, it is fortified with a Castle seated on a Hill, and well furnished with all kinde of Armour: secondly Muntsbay of a great breadth in Cornewall, where there is a safe harbour for ships. There is also Volemouth, or Falemouth, Torbay, South-hampton, and many others. The King of England hath supreame power, and acknowledgeth no superiour but God:The manner of Government. his Subjects are either the Laiety or the Clergie: the Laiety are either Nobles or Commons. The Nobles are either of the greater ranke, as Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, Vicounts, Barons, and Bannerets, who have these Titles by inheritance, or else are conferr'd upon them by the King for their vertues. The lesser Nobles are Baronets, Knights, Esquires, and those which commonly are called Gentlemen: the Gentlemen are those who are honoured by their birth, or those whose vertue or fortune doe lift them up, and distinguish them from the meaner sort of men. The Citizens or Burgesses are those, who in their severall Cities doe beare publick Offices, and have their places in the Parliaments of England. The Yeomen are those, whom the Law calleth legall men, and doe receive out of the Lands which they hold, at the least forty shillings yearely. The Tradesmen
map of EnglandENGLAND.

are those, who worke for wages or hire. All England is divided into nine and thirtyShires were first made by King Alfred, for the better administration of Justice. Shires; and these Shires are divided into Hundreds and Tithings: In each of these Counties is one man placed, called the Kings Praefect or Lievtenant, whose office is to take care for the security of the Common-wealth in times of danger: and every yeare there is one chosen, whom they call the Sheriffe, that is, the Provost of the Shire, who may bee rightly called the Questor of the Countie or Province. For it is his office to collect publick money, to distraine for trespasses, and to bring the money into the Exchequer, to assist the Judges* and to execute their commands: to empannell the Jurie, who are to enquire concerning matters of fact, and bring in their verdict to the Judges (for the Judges in England are Judges of the Right, not of the Fact) to bring the condemned to execution, and to decide of the^selves small co^troversies. But in great matters those Judges do administer right, who^ they call Itinerarie Judges, and Judges of Assise, who twice every yeard visite most of these Shires, to determine and end matters of difference, and also to give judgement upon Prisoners. For asmuch as concer^ Ecclesiasticall Jurisdiction, England hath now two Provinces, and all two Archbishops: the Archb. of Canterbury Primate of all England, (...) the Archb. of Yorke: Under these are seven and twenty Bishops, two and twenty under Canterbury, and the other five under Yorke. The Tribun^ or Courts of Justice in England are of three sorts, for some are Spirit^ some Temporall, and one mixt, which they call the Parliament, consisting of the three Orders of England, and it representeth the body of the whole Kingdome. This Parliament the King cals and appoints according to his pleasure: Hee hath the chiefe authority in making, confirming, abrogating, and interpreting of Lawes, and in all things that belong to the good of the Common-wealth. The temporall Courts are two-fold, namely of Law, and of equity. The Courts of Law are the Kings Bench, the Starre-Chamber, the Common Pleas, the Exchequer, the Court of Wards and Liveries, the Court of the Admiraltie and Assises; wee omit others which are obscure. The Kings Bench is so called, because the King is wont to sit in it, and it handleth Pleas of the Crowne. The Starre-Chamber, or rather the Court of the Kings Counsell is that, in which criminall matters are handled, as perjuries, impostures, deceits, and the like. The Common Pleas is so called, because common pleas are tried there betweene the Subjects, by the Law of England, which they call the Common Law. The Exchequer deriveth its name from a foure square Table, covered with a Chequer-Cloth, at which the Barons sit; in it all causes are heard, which belong to the Exchequer. The Court of Wards hath his name from Wards, whose causes it handleth. The Admirals Court handleth Sea-matters Those which wee call the Assises, are held twice in a yeare in most Shires; in which two Judges of Assise appointed for it, with the Justices of peace doe enquire and determine of civill and criminall matters. The Courts of Equity are the Chancerie, the Court of Requests, and the Councell in the Marshes of Wales. The Chancerie draweth its name from the Chancellour, who sitteth there. This Court gives judgement according to equitie, and the extreame rigour of the Law is thereby

tempered. The Court of Requests heareth the causes of the poore, and of the Kings Servants. The chiefe spirituall Courts are the Corporatition of the Clergie, the Courts which belong to the Archbishop himselfe, and the Chancellours Courts, kept in every Diocesse. There are two famous Universities in this Kingdome Oxford and Cambridge. England doth produce happy and good wits, and hath many learned men, skilfull in all Faculties and Sciences. The people are of a large stature, faire complexion'd, and for the most part, gray-eyed, and as their Language soundeth like the Italians, so they differ not from them in the habite and disposition of their body. Their foode consisteth, for the most part, of Flesh. They make Drinke of Barley, being a very savorie and pleasant drinke. It is transported often into forraine countries. They use a habite not much different from the French. And thus much shall suffice concerning England in generall, wee will declare the rest in the particular Tables following.



THE SECOND TABLE OF ENGLAND. CONTAINING, The Counties of Northumberland, Cumberland, and the Bishoprick of Durham.
WEE have finished that which wee intended to speake concerning England in generall: Our Method doth require that wee should goe through the parts thereof in particular. The Romans diversly divided the hither part of Brittaine, being reduced into a Province. But the Saxons instead of the Pentarchie of the Romans, made an Heptarchie of it, in which are Kent, Sussex, Eastanglia, Westsex, Northumberland, Essex, and Mercia. At this day it is divided into Counties, which the English by a proper word call Shires. And first, in the yeare of Christ 1016, in the Reigne of Ethelred there were onely two and thirty. Afterward under William the Conquerour there were 36. And lastly, these being augmented by three more, came to be 39 Counties. To which are added 13 Shires i^ Wales; six whereof were in the time of Edward the first, the other Henry the eigth ordained by Parliamentarie Authoritie. These Counties or parts of England, with some Islands, our Mercator doth lively expresse in six Tables. Of all which Tables, wee will make a briefe Description or Delineation,Northumberland. in that order as our Author propoundeth them. In the first place Northumberland offereth it self, commonly called Northumberland,The Situation. lying, in a manner, in the forme of a triangle, but not equilaterall. The Southerne side thereof Derwent flowing into Tine, and Tine it selfe doe enclose where it looketh toward the Bishoprick of Durham. The East side is beaten with the German Sea. But the Westerne side is drawn out in length from the North to the South, first by a continued ridge of Mountaines, and afterward by the River Tweede; and being opposite to Scotland,The quality of the Soyle. it is the bound of that Countrie. The Soyle it selfe, for the most part, is barren and unfit for tillage. Toward the Sea and the Ti^^, if tillage be used, the Husband-man receiveth sufficient increase, but in other places it is more unfruitfull, and rugged. In many places great store of Sea-cole (as the English call them) are digg'd forth.The Cities. There is in Northumberland the Citie of New Castle, famous for the Haven, which the River Tine maketh, having so deepe a chanell, that it receiveth ships of great burthen, and defends them both from tempests and sands. The last Towne in England, and the strongest in all Brittaine is Berwick, which some doe derive from a certaine Captaine, called Berengarius, Leland from Aber, which in the Brittish Language signifies the mouth of a River, as if it were, Aberwick, a Towne at the mouth of a River. But whence soever it hath its name, it stands farre in the Sea, so that it is

map of EnglandTHE SECOND TABLE OF ENGLAND.

compassed round about therewith and the River Tweede.The Rivers. The Rivers here are the Southerne and Northerne Tines (which are so called, because they are bound in with straight and narrow bankes, for so much Tine doth signifie in the Brittish speech, as some doe affirme:) the Southerne riseth out of Cumberland, neere Alstenmore, where there is an ancient Myne of Br^sse; and having runne a good while toward the North, it turneth toward the East, and runneth straight forward with the Picts Wall. The Northerne Tine arising out of the bordering Mountaines, doth joyne it selfe with the River Reade, which being powred out at the Mountaine Redsquier, watereth Readsdale, that is, the Vale of Reade, which nourisheth the best Fowle. Both the Tines doe flow beneath Collerford, and growing bigger and bigger, doe hasten their journey to the Ocean in one channell. Tweede for a great way parteth England from Scotland, and is called the Easterne bound. This River breaking forth of the Mountaines of Scotland, runneth a great while in a winding course: but where it comes neere unto the Towne Carram, growing strong in waters, it beginneth to distinguish the Limits of the two Kingdomes, and at last having received the River Till, it disburthens it selfe into the German Sea. There are also other Rivers, as Coquet, Alaunus, or Alne, Blithe, Wanspethel, which I omit, and so passe to the second part: and that is,Cumberland. Cumbria, commonly called Cumberland: this lieth before Westmoreland on the West side;The Situation. It is the farthest Shire in this part of England, insomuch, that it toucheth Scotland it selfe on the North side, being beaten on the South and North with the Irish Ocean, but on the East side above Westmoreland it joyneth to Northumberland. It takes its name from the Inhabitants,The quality of the Soyle. who were the true and native Brittains, calling themselves in their Language Kumbri, and Kambri. Although the Countrey seemeth, in regard of the Northerne situation, to bee cold and verie mountainous, yet it delights the beholder with much variety. For behinde the Cliffes and cluster of Mountaines, betweene which the Lakes doe lye, there are grassie Hils full of Flocks, under which againe there lye plaine and fruitfull Valleys.The Cities. There is in this Countrie an ancient wel-seated Citie, called Carlile, being defended on the North with the deepe Channell of Ituna, or Eeden; on the East with Peterill, on the West with Cauda; and besides these fortifications of Nature, it is strengthened with strong Wals of square stone, with a Castle, and a Cittadell. There are other Townes, as Keswick, Wirkinton, Bulnesse, called anciently Blatum Bulgium, Penrith or Perith: that I may passe over Villages and Castles: This Shire hath 58 Parish-Churches. It hath also Lakes abounding with all kinde of flying Fowles:Lakes. and many Rivers, among which is the little River Irton,Rivers. in which while the gaping shellfish receive the dew, they become presently, as it were, great with childe, and bring forth pearles, which the Inhabitants when the water setleth doe seeke for. There are also the Derwent, Cokar, Olen or Elen, Eden and others, all abounding with Fish. Besides, this Ocean which beateth on the shore, doth bring forth great shoales of excellent fish, and doth seeme to reproach the Inhabitants with negligence, because they use fishing so lazily. Heere are many Mountaines close together, being full of mettall, among which there are the Mountaines called Derwentfels,

in which neere to Newland are found rich veines of Brasse not without Gold and Silver. Heere also is found that minerall earth,The Mountaines. or hard and shining stone, called by the English Black-lead, which the Painters use to draw their lines and proportions withall. That famous Wall, which was the limit or bound of the Roman Empire,The Wall of the Picts. being 122 miles in length, doth divide and cut through the higher part of this Country, it was built by Severus, who (as Orosius saith) tooke care that this part of the Island should be seperated by a trench from the other wilde and untamed people. Beda writeth, that it was eight foote broad and twelve foote high, standing in a right line from East to West, some ruines and pieces whereof standing for a good way together, but without Battlements, may be seene at this day, as Camden witnesseth.The Bishoprick of Durham The Bishoprick ofThe Citie of Durham was called by the Saxons Dunholme; Dun signifieth a hill, and Holme a peece of land compassed with a River like an Island in the Saxon tongue, and this name agreeth with the situation of the place. Durham, or Duresme bordereth upon Yorkeshire Northward, and lyeth in a triangular or three cornered forme, the top whereof is made by the meeting of the Northerne bound, and the Fountaines of Teisis. On the Southerne part, almost where the River retreateth back againe, the Cathedrall Church is seene, being beautified with an high Steeple and many Pinnacles: on the top of a great Hill the Castle is seated, in the middle of two Bridges, made of stone, by which the two streames of the River Vedra, the one on the East side, the other on the West side are joyned together. On the North side from the Castle lyes the Market place, and S. Nicholas Church. Here are also these Market Townes Standrove or Stanthorpe, Derlington, Hartlepole or Heorteu, Binchester or Binovium, and Chester upon the streete, which the Saxons called Concester, with many Villages and Castles. In this Shire and Northumberland there are an hundred and eighteene Parishes, besides many Chappels.The Cities or Townes. Heere are many Rivers, of which the chiefe is Tees, called in Latine Tesis and Teisa; Polidorus cals it Athesis, and Camden thinkes it was called by Ptolemie Tucsis, though this name be not found in him, by reason of the carelesnesse of the Transcribers of his Booke. This River breaking out of the Quarri-pit of Stanemore, and having gathered into it selfe many torrents, running by the Marble Rocks neere Egleston, and afterward washing many places, at last by a great inlet, it casts it selfe into the Ocean, whence the basis of the Triangle beginneth. There is also the Rivers Vedra or Weare, Gaunlesse, Derwent, etc.



THE THIRD TABLE OF ENGLAND. CONTAING THESE FOLLOWING Shires, Westmorland, Lancashire, Cheshire, Caernarvanshire, Denbigh-shire, Flint-shire, Merionedh-shire, Montgomerie-shire, and Shropshire, with the Islands of Mann, and Anglesey.
Westmoreland The situation.I Come unto the third Table, wherein Westmorland first offers it selfe, being bounded on the West, and North wi^^ Cumberland,The qualitie of the Soyle. and on the East with Yorke-shire and Durham It is so called, because for the most part it is unfit forthlage: for such places as cannot be till'd, the English e^^ Moores, so that Westmoreland signifies in English nothing but a Mori^^ and, for the most part, untillable Country towards the West. The So^therne part being narrowly inclosed betweene the River Lone and ^^nander Mere, is fruitfull enough in the Valleyes, (although it hath ^^ny ruffe and bare cliffes) and is called the Baronie ofSo called, because the River Kan runneth through it. Kendale or Kandale. Afterward, above the spring heads of Lone, the Count^y groweth larger, and the Mountaines runne out with many crooked wi^dings: In some places there are deepe Vales betweene them, which by reason of the steepnes of the Hills on both sides seeme like Caves. Th^ chiefe Towne here is Aballaba,The Townes. now called Apelby. The antiquity and situation whereof is onely worth regard: for it is so farre from elegant and neate building or structure, that if the antiquity thereof did not give it the prioritie to be the chiefe Towne of the Country, and the Assists held in the Castle, it would not differ much from a Village. There is also a Towne of great resort called Kendale, famous for Cloath-making and in this Shire there are sixe and twenty Parishes.The Rivers. The Rivers are Lone, Ituna or Eden, and Eimot. Lancastria is commonly called Lancashire,Lancashire. and the County Palatine of Lancaster, because it is a County adorned with the title of a Palatine.The Situation. It lyeth Westward, under the Mountaines which doe runne through the middle of England, and is so enclosed betweene Yorke-shire on the East, and the Irish Sea on the West, that on the Southerne side where it looketh toward Cheshire (from which it is divided by the River Mersey) it is broader, and so by degrees as it goeth Northward, there where it boundeth on Westmoreland it groweth straighter and narrower; and there it is broken off with a Bay of the Sea, yet so, as a great part of it is beyond the Bay, and joyneth to Cumberland. Where it hath a levell of field ground, it hath sufficient store of Barley and Wheate,The fertilitie of the Soyle. but at the foote of the Mountaines it beareth most Oates: The Soyle is tolerable, unlesse it be in some moorish and unwholesome
map of EnglandTHE THIRD TABLE OF ENGLAND.

places, which yet doe requite these inconveniences with greater commodities. For the upper grasse being pared off, they afford Turfes for fuell, in digging of which trees are often found, which have laid a long time buried in the earth: and digging a little lower, they furnish the^selves with Marle, or Marmure to dung their fields. In this Country the Oxen excell all other,The ancient government. both for the largenesse of their hornes, and fairenesse of their bodies. I passe now to the Cities, among which wee meete first with the ancient Towne of Manchester, which Antoninus calleth Mancunium, and Mannucia, this doth exceed the neighbour Towns for beautie, populousnes, the trade of Cloathing, and for the Market-place, Church, and Colledge. There is also Ormeskirke, a Towne of traffique, famous by being the burying place of the Stanleyes Earles of Derby. There is also Lancaster the chiefe Towne of the Country, which the Inhabitants doe more truly call Loncaster, and the Scots Loncastle, because it took that name from the River Lone, vulgarly called Lune. Camden supposeth this Citie to be that which the Romans did call Alona insteed of Arlone, which signifies in the Brittish language, at or upon Lone. In this Shire are but 36. Parishes,The Lakes. but those very populous. Here are many Lakes and Moores, among which is the Moore Merton, and the greatest Lake of all England called Winander Mere, which hath abundance of one sort of Fish peculiar unto it self and Huls,Rivers. which the Inhabitants call Charre. The Rivers are Mersey, Idwell, Duglesse, Ribell, Wyre, Lack, and Lone, which flowing out of the Mountaines of Westmoreland, toward the South with narrow bankes, and an unequall channell enricheth the Inhabitants in the Summer season with Salmon-fish.The Mountaines. Here are many Mountaines, and those very high, among which is that which is called Ingleborrow Hill, which (as Camden saith) we have admired rising by degrees with a great ridge toward the West, and the farthest part of it being hightned with another Hill, as it were set upon it. The next is Penigent, so called perhaps from the white and snowie head, which is raised to a great height. Lastly Pendle Hill, which is raised with a high toppe, in manner of a race marke, famous for the dammage which it doth to the neighbour grounds under it by sending downe great streames of water, and by the certaine foreshewing of raine, as often as the toppe of it is hidden with clouds. Cestria followes commonly called Cheshire,Cheshire. and the Countie Palatine of Chester, because the Earles of it have the rights and priviledges of a Palatine.The Situation. It is bounded on the South with Shropshire, on the East with Staffordshire, and Derbyshire, on the North with Lancashire, and on the West with Denbighshire, and Flint-shire; neare Chester it runneth farre out into the Sea with a Chersonesus, which being included betweene two Bayes, doth admit the Ocean to breake in on either side, and into these Bayes all the Rivers of this Country doe runne.The qualitie of the Soyle. The Country is barren of Corne, and especially Wheate, but abounding with cattle, and fish. Here is a faire Citie which Ptolemie calleth Deunana,The Cities. Antoninus calleth it Deva, from the River Dee, on which it standeth, the English call it Chester, and Westchester. This Citie standeth foure square, having walls two miles in compasse; toward the Northwest is seated a Castle built neare the River by the Earles of Cheshire, where the Courts for the Palatinate are held twice every yeare. The houses are very faire, and there are as it were

cloysters to goe in on both sides of the chiefe streetes. There are also the Townes of Finborrow, and Condate, now the Congleton:The Rivers. and this Shire hath about 68. Parishes. The Rivers which water this Citie, are Deuca, in English Dee; having great store of Salmons, and riseth out of two Fountaines in Wales: Whence it is denominated in the Brittish tongue, Dyffyr Dwy, i. the Water of Dwy, which word Dwy signifies two; Besides, there are the Rivers Wever, Mersey, and Dane.Caernarvanshire. The Site. The fertilitie of the Soyle. Caernarvanshire called, before Wales was divided into Shires, Snodon Forrest, in Latine Histories, Snaudonia and Arvoma, hath the Sea on the North and West side; Merioneth-shire boundeth the South side, and Denbighshire the East side, the River Conovius gliding betweene.The Town^^. Toward the Sea the Soyle is fertile enough, and full of little Townes: among which is the Towne of Bangor, the Seat of a Bishop, which hath 90. Parishes under it, and is situated neare the jawes of the narrow Sea. There is also the River Conovius, commonly called Conway, which bounds this Country on the East, and bringeth forth shell-fishes, which filling themselves with the dew of Heaven, doe bring forth Pearles. The Inland Parts of this Country are Mountainous, rugged, and cliffie.The Mountaines. Camden saith that you may worthily call these Mountaines the Brittish Alpes. Denbigh-shire is more inward from the Sea,Denbigh-shire. The Situation. The qualitie of the Soyle. and runneth out toward the East, even to the River Deva. On the North side, the Sea for a while doth encompasse it, and afterward Flint-shire: on the West Merioneth and Montgomery-shire, on the East Cheshire and Shropshire, are the bounds of it. The Westerne part is barren, the middle part, where it lyeth in a Vale, is the most fruitfull, a little beyond the Vale Eastward Nature is more sparing in her benefits, but neare Deva much more liberall. In this Country is the Vale of Cluide, very happie in pleasantnesse, fertilitie of Soyle, and wholesomnesse of Aire,The Townes. of which Ruthun or Ruthin, is the greatest Market Towne. After this is the Territorie, called in Welch Mailor Gimraig, in English Bromfield, very fruitfull and full of Lead. The chiefe Towne in this Country is Denbigia, commonly called Denbigh, and anciently by the Brittaines, Clad Frynyn. Beyond Denbigh-shire more Northward is Flint-shire:Flint-shire. The Situation. The qualiti^ of the Soyle. It is beaten with the Irish Sea, and the Bay of Deva, on the North; on the East it is bounded with Cheshire, and in other parts with Denbigh-shire. This shire is not Mountanous, but somewhat rising with swelling Hills, which are gently level'd into pleasant fields, especially those toward the Sea, which every first yeare in some places doe beare Barley, in other places Wheate, which being reaped, doth yeeld a twenty fold encrease: and afterward they beare Oates foure or five yeares together. There is a Towne here which the English call S. Asaph, and the Brittaines Llanelwy, (because it stands upon the River Elwy,) where there is a Bishops Seat, under which are many Parishes: and Ruthlan, a Towne beautified with an excellent Castle. Here is also the River Alen, neare which in a hill at a place called Kilken is a Fountaine, which in emulation of the Sea at set times doth ebbe and flow. Merioneth-shire, in Latine called Mervinia,Merionethshire. and in the Brittish language Sir Verioneth,The Situation. doth reach from the Towne Montgomery, even to the Irish Ocean, with which it is so beaten on the West, that some part thereof is supposed to have beene washt away with the

violence of the waves. Toward the South it is bounded with the River Dee, toward the North it joyneth to Caernarvan and Denbigh-shire. By reason of the frequencie of the Mountaines, it is the ruggedst and hardest Country of all the Shires in Wales.The Townes. Townes of any note here are very scarce, yet here is the Towne of Harlech well fortified with a Castle, being the chiefe in the whole Country. And here are two famous Bayes, Traith-Maur, and Traith-Bochum: that is, the greater and the lesser Bay. It hath very high Mountaines,The Mountaines. narrow and sharpe pointed like Towers, and so many of them joyned together by equalitie of distance, that (as Giraldus reporteth) sheepheards either conferring or brawling one with another on the toppes thereof, if they both intended to fight, yet could they hardly meet together, though they should endeavour so to doe b^ going from morning till evening. Great flocks of sheepe doe wander o^ these Mountaines, which feed not in danger of Wolves. Montgomeryshire is circumscribed on the South with Cardigan-shire and Rad^^shire,Mongomeryshire. The Site. The fruitfulnes of the Soyle. on the East with Shropshire, on the North with Denbigh-shire, an^ on the West with Merioneth-shire: and although it be raised with many Mountaines, yet it is happie in the fruitfulnesse of the Valleyes, Fields, and Pastures, and in times past famous for breeding of an excellent sort of Horses, which (as Giraldus saith) were as it were Pictures of Natures workemanship, and were commended both for their excellent shape, and incomparable speed. The chiefe Towne in this Country i^ Mongomery, situate upon an easie ascent of a Hill, and built by one Baldwine President of the Marshes of Wales,The Townes. in the time of William the Conquerour, whence the Brittaines call it Trefaldwin at this day: and secondly Lanuethlin, a market Towne. Salopia, commonly called Shropshire, as (...) is a Countie, no lesse pleasant and fruitfull then the rest, so it is much bigger. It is enclosed on the East with Stafford-shire, on the West wi^ Montgomery-shire, on the South with Yorke-shire, and on the North wit^ Cheshire. It is a Country fortified with many Castles and Townes, a^^ bordering upon the Welch, who a long time rebelled against the English, and therefore the Saxons called it the Marches. It is divided into two parts by the River Severne: The chiefe Townes thereof are Shrewsb^^^ (anciently called Sloppesbury, and by the Brittaines Pengwerne) Ludlo^ (called by the Brittish Dinan) Bridgmorse, or Bridgnorth, Vriconium, o^ Viriconium, called by Nennius Caer Vrvach, but commonly by the English Wreckceter or Wroxceter, Draiton, and Bewdley. The cheife Rivers that water this shire, are Sabrine or Severne, Temdus, called by the Welch Tefidianc, Colunwy or Clun, Corve, and Terne: and there are in it 170 Parish Churches for Gods sacred and divine service.The Isle of Man. The Isle of Man Caesar calleth Mona, Ptolemie Monaeda, as it were Moneitha i. the farther Mona to difference it from another Mona,The names. Plinie calls it Monabia, Orosius and Beda Menavia, Gilda calls it Eubonia, the Brittaines Menaw, the Inhabitants Maning, and the English the Isle of Man. It lyeth in the middle betweene the Northerne parts of Ireland and Brittaine, and is from the North toward the South about thirty Italian miles long,The Situation. but the bredth thereof where it is broadest is scarce 15. miles, and where it is narrowest it is but 8. This Island bringeth forth Flaxe and Hempe in great abundance, it hath very faire meddowes and plowed

map of WalesA PARTICVLAR DESCRIPTION OF VVALES.

fields, it is fruitfull in bringing forth Barley and Wheat, but especially Oates, whence the Inhabitants doe for the most part live upon Oate^ Bread. Here are great store of cattle, and great flocks of sheep, but both sheepe and cattle are of a lesser stature then those that are in England. The Inhabitants here wanting wood, use a pitchie kinde of Turfe for fireing; which, while they digge up, they doe sometimes finde trees hid in the earth, and these they convert to the same use. It is evident that the Brittaines did possesse this Island as they did Brittaine, but when the Northerne People like a furious storme fell upon the Southerne parts, it came into the hands of the Scots.The Townes. The chiefe Towne of this Island is thought to be Russin, situated on the Southerne side thereof, which from the Castle and Garrison kept therein, is commonly called Castletowne: but the most populous is Duglasse, because it hath an excellent Haven, and easie to come into, by reason of which the Frenchmen and other Forrainers come with Salt and other commodities to traffique with the Islanders for hides, raw wooll, barrell'd beefe, etc. On the West side of the Island stands Balacuri, where the Bishop liveth, who is subject to the Archbishop of Yorke; and the Pyle, being a forte placed on a small Island, in which there are many Garrison Souldiers. Over against the Southern^ Promontorie of the Isle, there lyeth a small Island called the Calfe of Man, which is full of those Sea-foule which they call Puffins, and of those Geese that are generated of putrified wood, which the English call Barnacles, and the Scots doe call Clakes and Soland Geese. Toward the middle Mannia swells into Mountaines,The Mountaines. the highest whereof is Sceafell, from whence on a cleare day both Scotland, England, and Ireland, may be discerned.The manner of government. The Judges, being called Deemsters, which the Inhabitants of this Isle have amongst them, doe decide all controversies without writings or other charges. For any complaint being made, the Magistrate taketh a stone, and having marked it, delivers it to the plaintiffe, by which he summons his adversary, and witnesses: And if the matter in controversie be doubtfull, and of great consequence; it is referred to twelve men whom they call the Keyes of the Island. Here also Coroners supply the office of Undersheriffes. The Ecclesiasticall Judge, when he cites a man to make appearance at a definite time, if hee obey not the summons within eight dayes,The manners of the people. hee is cast into prison; but neither Plaintiffe nor Defendant pay a penny either to him or his officers. The Inhabitants doe hate both lying and stealing, they are wondrous Religious, and all conformable to the English Church. They hate the Civill and Ecclesiasticall disorder of their neighbours, and whereas the Iland is divided into the Southerne and Northerne part: the former speaketh like the Scots, the latter like the Irish. Now remaines the Isle of Anglesey, of which we will entreat in the fourth Table of England.



THE FOVRTH TABLE OF ENGLAND. IN WHICH ARE THESE SHIRES, CORNEwall, Devon-shire, Sommerset-shire, Dorcet-shire, VVilt-shire Glocester-shire, Monmouth-shire, Glamorgan-shire, Caermarden-shire, Penbrock-shire, Brecnock-shire, and Hereford-shire.
CORNWALL,Cornewall. which is also called Cornubia and in the Brittish language Kernaw, is enclosed on the South with the Brittish Ocean, on the North with the Irish,The Situation. on the West with Penwith, called by Ptolemie Bolerium, and the French Ocean, and on the East it is parted from Devonshire with the River Tamar. It is a Countrie having a fruitfull soile,The qualitie of the Soile. and abounding with mettall-Mines. It hath also store of fruits, which yet will not grow without the industrie of the husbandman. This Countrie is full of Towns, and especially the Sea Coasts, as namely Heuston,The Townes. called by the natives Hellas, a towne famous for the priviledge of sealing of Tinne, as also Peryn a faire market Towne, together with Arwenak, Truro, which the Cornish call Truscu, Granpound, Fowy by the, Brittaines called Foath, Lestuthiell, called by Ptolemie Vzella, Leskerd, Bodman, S. Iies, S. Colombs, Padstow, anciently called Loderick and Laffenac, Stow, Stratton, Tamerton, or Tamerworth, Lanstuphadon, vulgarly called Leuston and anciently Dunevet, and Saltash anciently called Esse. And there are in this Countrie 161 Parishes. The Rivers are Vale, Fawey, Loo, Liver, Haile, Alan, or Camel, and Tamar.Havens. One of the famousest Havens in the Countrie is Volemouth or Falemouth, which Ptolemie calls the Bay of Cenio, being equall to Brundusium in Italie, as being capable of as many ships, and as safe an harbour. Devonia, commonly called Denshire, and by the natives Deunan,De vonshire. followeth. The bounds hereof are on the West the River Tamar, on the South the Ocean, on the East Dorcet-shire, and Somerset-shire,The Situation. and on the North the Bay of Severne. This Countrie as it is stretched out broader on both sides than Cornewall, so it is encompassed with more commodious Havens, and is no lesse rich in Mines of Tinne, besides it is diapred with more pleasant meadowes, and cloathed with more frequent woods: yet the soile in some places is very barren. The chiefe Citie here the English at this day do call Excester, The Latines Exonia, Ptolemie calls it Isca, Antoninus Isa of the Damnonians, and the Brittaines call it Caeruth and Pencaer, that is, the chiefe citie. There are also many other Townes as Plimmouth, anciently called Sutton,The Cities and Townes. which of late daies from a little fisher-towne is become a faire Towne, and for populousnesse it may compare with some Cities. Here was borne Sr Francis Drake

Knight, who for matters of Navigation was the most excellent of late times.The Rivers. Here are also the Townes of Lidston or Lidford, Plimpton, Modbery or Champernouns, Dartmoth, Exminster and many other. This Countie containeth 394. Parishes. The Rivers here are Lid, Teave,Somersetshire. Plim, Dert, Totnes, Teigne, Isca, Creden, Columb, Otterey, Ax, Towridge,The Situation. The temper of the Aire.The fertilitie of the Soyle. Taw, Ock, and North Ewe. Somerset-shire followes, the bounds whereof on the East are Wiltshire, on the South Dorcetshire, on the West Devonshire, on the North the Bay of Severne, and Glocester-shire. This is a verie rich soile, being in every place exceedingly fertile in fruits and Pasturage and in some places affording many Diamonds, which do exceed those of India for beautie though they are not so hard.The Cities and Townes. The chiefe Citie of this shire is Bristoll, (called anciently by the Brittaines Caer Brito, and by the Saxons Britstow) a pleasant place, which is beautified with many faire houses, a double River and wall, a faire Haven, much traffique, and the populousnesse of Citizens. It hath also the towne of Theodorudunum now called Welles, from the many wells or springs that there breake forth; and Bathonia, stiled anciently by the Brittaines Caer Badon, by Stephanus Badiza, but commonly called Bathe. And in this countrie are 385.The Rivers. Parishes. The Rivers are Ivell, Erome, Pedred, Thon, Avon, Somer, Brui and Welwe. In the next place Dorcetshire, which is bounded on the East with Hampshire, on the VVest with Devonshire, on the South with the Brittish Ocean, and on the North with VViltshire and Somersetshire.Dercetshire. It is of a fertile soile, and the North part full of many woods and forrests, from whence even to the Sea coast it descendeth with many grassie hills, on which feed innumerable flocks of sheepe. Durnovaria, which Ptolemie according to divers copies calls Durnium and Duneum, and now is called Dorchester, is the chiefe towne of this Shire, yet it is neither very great nor faire, her walls being ruined long since by the fury of the Danes. There are also other towns, as Birt-port, or Burt-port. Lime, Weymouth,The Townes. Poole, Warham, so called because it stands by the River Vari^, Shirburne, Sturminster, and Winburne, called by Antoninus Vindogladia from the Brittish word Windugledy because it stands betweene two Rivers. Here are in this Shire 248.The Rivers. Parishes. The Rivers are Lim, Trent, now called Piddle, Carr, Ivell, Wey, Sturn, Alen, Varia, so called by the Latines, but Fraw or Frome in the Saxon tongue. Wiltonia so called by the Latines from Wilton once its chiefe Towne,VViltshire. but commonly called VVilshire, is an inland Countrie,The Situation. having Oxfordshire, and South-hamptonshire to bound it on the East, on the West Somersetshire, on the North Glocestershire, and on the South Dorcetshire,The qualitie of the Soyle. and South-hamptonshire. The Countrie is every where full of pasturage and fruits.Townes. The Townes are first VVilton, anciently called Ellandunum, which was heretofore the head Towne of the Shire. Secondly, Sarisbury or new Sarum, now the chiefe citie, and famous for its Cathedrall Church, and for that a streame of water runneth through every street thereof. Here are also the Townes of Malmesburie, Chippenham, Trubridge, Calne, Marleburrow, etc. And this Shire containeth 304. Parishes. The rivers are Isis, Avon, VVilleybourne, Adderburne, Ellan and Kennet.Glocester. Glocestria commonly called Glocestershire, hath on the West VVales, on the North VVorcestershire, on the East Oxfordshire, on

map of EnglandTHE FOVRTH TABLE OF ENGLAND.

the South VViltshire, it is a pleasant and fertile Countrie, lying East and West;The Townes. and hath in it many other mines. The chiefe Citie of this Countie is Glocester, which Antoninus calleth Cleve, and Gleve, the Latines Glovernia, and some Claudiocestria: it is an ancient Citie built by the Romans, and is seated by the River Severne, having a strong wall in those places where the River doth not wash it.Rivers. There are also other Townes, as Teukesburie, anciently called Theoesburie, Deohirst, Campden or Camden, VVincelscombe, Cirencester or Circester, Tetburie, Barkley, etc. and 280. Parishes contained in this Countie. The Rivers which water it are Severne, Avon and Isis, commonly called Ouse, which afterward by the marriage of Thame unto it is called by a compounded name Thamisis or Thames.Monmouthshire. The Countie of Monmouth, called anciently VVentset and VVentsland,The Situation. and by the Brittaines Guent, is enclosed on the North with the River Munow, which doth part it from Herefordshire, on the East with the river Vaga or VVye, which divides it from Glocestershire, on the West with Remney which disjoynes it from Glamorganshire, and on the South it is bounded with the Severne Bay, into which those former Rivers together with the River Isc, which runneth through the middle of the Countrie, do rowle themselves. It hath not onely sufficient provision of things necessary for life for it,The qualitie of the Soyle. but also furnishes other Countries. The chiefe Towne thereof is Monmouth, called by the Inhabitants Mongwy: towards the North where the River doth not fence it, it was encompassed with a wall and a ditch; In the middle neare the Market-place is a Castle.The Townes. There are also the Townes of Chepstow, called Castlewent, Abergevenny, or contractly Abergenny, which Antoninus calls Gobanneum, New-port or Brunepegie, and the Citie which Antoninus called Ifa, where the second Legion named Augusta lay, now stiled by the Brittaines Gaerleon, and Caer Leonar Vsk. Here the Saxon Heptarchie, obeyed the Welch Mountainers, who notwitstanding, as we may discerne by the auncient Lawes,The Government. were under the government of the West Saxons. But at the comming in of the Normans, the Captaines of the Marches did grievously afflict them, especially Hamelin Balun, Hugh Lacy, Gualter and Gilbert de Clare called Earles of Strigulia, and Brian of Wallingford, to whom when the King had granted whatsoever they could get in that Countrie by conquering the Welchmen, some of them reduced the Higher part of the Countrie into their power: and others the Lower part which they called Netherwent. Glamorganshire lyeth wholy by the Sea side,Glamorganshire. it is longer than broad, and is beaten on the South side with the Bay of Severne. But on the East side it hath Monmouthshire, on the Norrh Brecnock-shire,The Situation. and on the West Caermardenshire. The Northerne part swelleth with mountaines which descending toward the South,The quality of the Soyle. remit somewhat of their height, and at the foot of them the Countrie lyeth plaine toward the South.The Cities and Townes. In this countrie is the litle Citie of Landaffe, that is the Chappell at Taff; under which there are 156. Parishes. Also Caerdiffe, or as the Britons call it Caerdid, Cowbridge, called by the Brittaines Poratuan from the stonebridge which is there, Neath, Sweinsey,The Rivers. and Loghor, which Antoninus calleth Leucarum. The Rivers that wash it are Ramney, Taff, Nide, and Loghor. The Earles of this Province

from the first vanquishing were the Earles of Glocester descending in a right line from the Fitz-hamons, the Clares, the Spencers, and after them the Beauchamps, and the two Nevils, and by a daughter of a Nevill, Richard the third King of England, who being killed, Henry the seventh enlarged the inheritance of this Countrie, and gave it to Gaspar his Unkle and Earle of Bedford, but hee dying without issue, the King tooke it againe into his owne hands.Caermardenshire. Caermardenshire is bounded on the East with Glamorganshire, and Brecknock-shire, on the West with Penbrockshire, on the North with the River Tay separating it from Cardiganshire, on the South with the Ocean. It is sufficiently fruitfull,The Townes abounding with flocks of cattle and in some places with pit-coales. The chiefe towne of the Shire is Caermarden, which Ptolemie calls Maridunum, Antoninus Muridunum, having pleasant Meadows and woods about it, it is very ancient, and as Giraldus saith, it was encompassed with a stone wall, part whereof yet standeth. There is also the auncient towne of Kidwilly, which now is almost ruinated, for the Inhabitants passing over the River Vendraeth Vehan did build a new Kidwilly, being drawne thither with the conveniencie of the Haven, which yet is of no note. The Rivers are Vendraeth Vehan, Towy or Tobius,Pembrokeshire. and Taff. Penbrokshire is on every side encompassed with the Sea,The Situation. except on the East, where part of Caermardenshire, and on the North where part of Flintshire lyeth against it.The temperature of the Aire. The countrie beeing neare Ireland hath a temperate, and wholesome aire, and is plentifull in all kinde of graine. The chiefe towne hereof is Penbro now called Penbroke,The Townes. and feated on a craggie long rocke. The other Townes of note in this Countrie are Tenby, Hulphord now called HarfordWest, and Menevia or Tuy Dewi, which the English at this day do call S. Davids. I finde but two Rivers in this Shire: but here is a Port called Milford-Haven,The Government. which is the fairest and safest in all Europe. Gilbert Strongbow was the first Earle of this Countie, on whom King Stephen did first conferre the title of Earle of Penbroke, and hee left it to his sonne Richard Strongbow, who subdued Ireland, from whom with his daughter Isabel, William Lord of Hempsted and Marshall of England, a man flourishing both in times of peace and warre, received it as her dowry. Concerning the other Earles read Camden. Brecnockshire is called so from the Prince Brechanius,Brecnock-shire. The Situation. as the Welchmen suppose. This is bounded on the East with Hereford, on the South with Monmouthshire and Glamorganshire, on the West with Caermardenshire, on the North with Radnorshire. The countrie is very full of Mountaines, yet it hath every where fruitfull vallies.The fruitfulnesse of the Soyle.The Townes.The Rivers. The chiefe towne in it is Brecnock, stiled in the Brittish tongue Aber-hodney, and placed in the midst thereof. There are also the townes of Blueth or Bealt, and Hay or Treketble. The River Vaga called by the Brittaines Gowy, and by the English Wye, watereth the Northerne part of the countrie: and Vsk runneth through the middle thereof. Herefordshire,Hereford-shire. called in the Brittish tongue Ereinuc, is as it were of a circular forme,The Situation. it is environed on the East with Glocester-shire, on the South with Monmouthshire, on the West with Radnor and Brecnock shire, and on the North with Shropshire. It is a pleasant countrie, full of fruit and cattle. Hereford or Hareford is the chiefe citie

of this countrie, having round about it faire medowes, and fruitfull fields; it is encompassed with Rivers almost round about, on the North and West with a namelesse river: on the South with Vaga, which hasteneth its course hither out of Wales. There are also the townes of Lemster (called anciently Leonis monasterium, and by the Brittaines Lhanlieni) Webley,The Rivers. Ledburie, and Rosse: and there are in it 157 Parishes. The chiefe Rivers here are Vaga, Lug, Munow, and Dor.



THE FIFTH TABLE OF ENGLAND. Containing these Shires, Yorkeshire, Lincolnshire, Darbyshire, Staffordshire, Nottinghamshire, Leicestershire, Rutlandshire, and Northfolke.
THE fifth Table of England comes to be unfolded, in the which, the first that wee meete withall is Yorkeshire,Yorkeshire. the greatest Shire in all England, and called by the Saxons Ebona-ycyne.The Situation On the East it is bounded with the German Ocean, on the West with Lancashire, and Westmoreland, on the North with the Bishoprick of Durham, and on the South with Cheshire, Darbyshire, Nottinghamshire, and Lincolneshire.The qualitie of the Soyle. It is held to be temperate and fruitfull. If in one place it bee sandie, stony, and barren, in an other place it hath fruitfull fields, if heere it be voide of woods, there it is shadowed with thick trees, Nature being so provident, that the Countrie is more pleasant by this variety.The Townes. Here is Eboracum called by Nennius Caer Ebrauc, and by the Brittaines Caers Effroc, but commonly stiled Yorke. It is the second Citie of all England, and the fairest in all this Country, which is a great strength and ornament to all the North parts. It is pleasant, large, strong, beautified both with private and publick Buildings, and full of wealthy Citizens. The River Ouse doth, as it were, part it and divide it into two Cities, which are joyned together by a great stone Bridge. There are also the Townes of Kingston upon Hull, Dancaster, called by the Scots Dancastle, and by Antoninus Danum, Halifax, anciently Horton, Pontfreit, Shirborne, Wetherby, Kingston, Patrington, called anciently Praetorium, and many others, for there are in this Shire 39 great Townes, and 459 Parishes, besides many private Chappels of ease, which great Parishes are faine to provide in regard of the multitude of the Inhabitants. The chiefest Rivers are Don or Dune,The Rivers. Calder, Are, Wherfe, Nid, and Ouse, which arising out of the Mountaines, doe runne through the fruitfullest parts of the Country. There are also other Rivers, as Cokar, Fosse, Derwent, Foulnesse, Hull, Teyse, Dow, Rhte, Recal, and Wisck. Lincolneshire is a great Country,Lincolnshire. being almost three score miles long, and in some places more than thirty miles broad. On the East it is beaten with the German Ocean, on the North it toucheth the Aestuarie of Abus or Humber, in the West it looketh toward Nottinghamshire, and on the South it is parted from Northamptonshire with the River Welland. It is a Country that produceth much fruit,The qualitie of the Soyle. and breadeth up abundance of cattell. The chiefe Citie of this Shire is Lincolne, which Ptolemie and Antoninus call Lindum.The Townes. The Citie it selfe is large and faire, being seated on the side of a Hill, where the River Witham

bendeth toward the East. There are also the Townes of Stanford, Grantham, Ancaster, anciently called Crococalana, Crowland, Spalding, Boston, rightly called Botolps towne, and others. And there are in this Shire about 630 Parishes.The Rivers. This Countrie is watered with many Rivers, as Witham, which is full of Pikes, Lud, Trent, Welland, Idle, Dan, etc. The next Countrie that followeth is Darbyshire,Darbyshire. which on the South is enclosed with Leicestershire, on the West with Staffordshire, on the North with Yorkeshire, on the East with Nottinghamshire. It is of a triangular forme, but not equilaterall,The Situation. or having equall sides. It is divided into two parts by the River Derwent. The Easterne and Southerne parts are till^ble, and fruitfull, the Westerne part is all rockie, and full of craggie barren Mountaines,The Townes. though they be rich in Mynes of Lead, and are commodious for to feede sheepe. The head Towne of the Shire is Darbie, famous for the best Ale in England which is brewed there. There are also the Townes of Saint Diacre, Workesworth, so called from the Lea^ workes there, and Bakewel. And this Shire doth containe an hundred and sixe Parishes.The Rivers. The Rivers that water it are Trent, Dove, and Derwent. The Westerne part of this Shire, which is mountainous, is called the Peake, and is very full of Lead: for in these Mountaines Lead-stones (as the Mettallists call them) are daily digged forth, which when the winde is Westward, they dissolve with a wood fire, and (having made trenches for the mettall to runne in) melt into pieces, which they ca^ Sowes. Moreover, not onely Lead, but also veines of Antimonie, which the Grecian women were wont to use in dying, are found in these Hils* Heere also Mill-stones are cut forth, as also whet-stones, and somtimes a white substance is found in the Mynes, like to Chrystall. But of this enough:Stafford-shire. I passe to Stafford-shire, which is encompassed on the East side with Warwick-shire and Darby-shire,The Site. on the South with Glocester-shire, o^ the West with Shropshire, and on the North with Cheshire. It beareth the shape of a Rhombus, running from South to North, and being broadest in the middle, and narrowest toward the two ends. The Northern part is mountainous and lesse pleasant,The quality of the Soyle. the middle part is more delightfull, as being watered with the River Trent, cloathed with green woods, and diversified with variety of fields and meddowes. The Southerne part is rich in Pit-coales, and veines of Iron. The head Towne hereof is Stafford or Stratford,The Townes. anciently called Betheney, and is much graced by the Castle called Stafford adjoyning to it, which the Barons of Stafford built for their owne dwelling. Heere are also the Townes of Lichfield or Licidfield, Burton, Vtcester, anciently called Etocetum, Stone, Drayton Basset, Tameworth, Wolverhampton, or Vulfrunshampton, Theotenhall or Totn^ll, and Weadesbrig or Wedsborow. And in this Shire are reckoned 130 Parishes.The Rivers. The chiefe Rivers which glide through this Countrie are Dove, Hanse, Churnet, Tayn, Blith, and Trent, which arising from two spring-heads, is the third chiefe River of Brittaine. There are also Sous, Ta^, and Penke. The Northerne part is somewhat mountainous, and full of hils,The Mountaines. which beginning heere, doe runne, like the Apennine Hils of Italie, with a continued ridge through the middle of England, even to Scotland, yet often changing their name. In the midst of this Shire is Needwood a spatious wood,The Woods. in which the Nobilitie and Gentrie of the Countrie doe
map of EnglandTHE FIFTH TABLE OF ENGLAND.

daily recreate themselves with hunting.Nottinghamshire. Nottinghamshire is bounded on the East with Lincolnshire, on the North with Yorkeshire, on the West with Darbyshire,The Situation. and on the South with Leicestershire. The Southerne and Easterne part of the Countie is fructified by the famous River of Trent,The quality of the Soyle. and other Rivulets that flow into it. The Forrest of Shirwood taketh up the whole Westerne side: this (because it is sandie) the Inhabitants call the Sand: the other (by reason the soyle consisteth of Clay) they call the Clay; and they divide their Countrie into these two parts. The chiefe Towne which gives a denomination to the Shire,The Townes. is Nottingham, being pleasantly seated; for on one side faire Meddowes lye along the River side, and on an other little Hils doe raise themselves, to adde a grace thereunto: It is a Towne abounding with all things necessary to life. For besides other conveniences, it hath Shirewood, which doth furni^^ it with store of fuell, and the River Trent doth yeeld it plenty of Fi^^^ The Streetes are large, having faire buildings, and two great Churches* with a spacious Market-place, and a strong Castle. Besides, heere are other great Townes,The Rivers. namely Suthwel, Newarke, Mansfield, Blith, Scr^^y and Workensop.Leicester-shire. And in this Shire there are 168 Parishes. The River are Trent, Lin, Snite, and Idle. Leicester-shire, anciently called Ledecest^-shire,The Situation. bordereth upon the South with Northampton-shire, on the East wi^^ Rutland-shire and Lincoln-shire, on the North with Nottingham shire* Darby-shire,The fruitfulnesse of the Soyle. and on the West with Warwick-shire. It is all field-ground and very fruitfull, but for the most part it wanteth wood. The chief^ Citie is Leicester,The Townes. called heretofore Legecestria, Leogara, and Legeocest^ more ancient than beautifull. There are also the Townes of Longburres, Lutterworth, Hinckly and Bosworth, neere which Richard the third was slaine; and in this Shire there are 200 Parish Churches. The River S^^ running toward Trent, waters the middle of it, and the little River Wit^ which at last mingleth his waters with Soar,Rutland-shire. doth gently winde ab^^ through the Easterne part. Rutland-shire, which was anciently call^^ Rudland and Roteland,The Situation. that is, red land, is, as it were, emcompassed w^^^ Leicestershire, except on the South side, where it lyeth by the River (...) land, and on the East where it joyneth to Lincolne-shire: It is the le^^ Shire in England; for it lyeth in a round circular forme, so that a m^^ may ride quite round about it in one day.The fruitfulnesse of the Soyle. This Countrie is no les^ pleasant and fruitfull than others, although it bee not so spacious. Th^ chiefe Towne in it is Vppingham,The Townes. so called, because it stands on the^ scent of an hill; it hath a faire free Schoole in it, which was built for the nurture and bringing up of children to learning, by R. Iohnson, Minister of Gods word, who also built an other at the towne of Okeham, so called, because it is situated in a vale, which once was very woody and f^^^ of Oakes. This Shire can reckon 47 Parish Churches. The little River Wash or Gwash, gliding through the middle of it from East to West doth divide it into two parts.Northfolke. Northfolke remaines yet to be described that is to say, the Northerne people. The bounds thereof on the South are Suffolke,The Situation. on the East and North the German Ocean, and on the We^^ the River Ouse.The quality of the Soyle. The Countrie is large, and for the most part field-ground unlesse it bee where there are some smaller hils; it is very rich, full of flocks of sheepe, and especially of Cunnies: it is watered with pleasa^^

Rivers, and is sufficiently stored with wood. The soyle differs according to the diversitie of places, for in some parts it is fat and rich, in other parts light and sandie, and in other clayie and chalkie.The Townes. Amongst the chiefe townes in this Shire, old Thetford is the first, which Antoninus calleth Sitomagus, that is, a towne situate by the river Sit. It hath now but few dwelling-houses, though heretofore it were faire and very populous: There is also in this Shire the famous Citie of Norwich, called by the Saxons North, that is, the North Castle, andThis Towne the Saxons called Garmouth, because it is situated ad Gartenis ostium, ^. the mouth of Gerne. Yarmouth or Garmouth, a faire Haven Towne, fortified by its situation, and mans industrie; for it is almost entrenched with water; on the West with the River, over which there is a draw Bridge; on other sides with the Ocean, except it be on the North side, toward the Land, and there it is encompassed with strong wals, which with the River doe lye in a long square-sided-figure. There are also these Townes, Ashelwel-thorp, Dis or Disce, Shelton, Skulton or Burdos, Attleburgh, Wauburne, Lynne, Swaff ham, North Elmeham, Dereham, Windham, Icborow, and others. For this Countrie hath 27 Market Townes, and 525 Villages, and about 660 Parish Churches. The rivers that doe water it are Ouse, Thet,The Rivers. anciently called Sit, Waueney, Gerne or Yere, and Wents anciently Wentfare. There is not in the world any towne which getteth so much by taking and catching of Herrings, as the towne of Yarmouth in this Shire.The commodities of the Sea. For it is incredible to thinke, what great Faires and Markets they have here at Michaeltide, and what a number of Herrings and other fish are carried from hence into other parts. Besides, from hence (as Varro adviseth) thou maist collect the goodnesse of the shire,The manners of the Inhabitants. the Inhabitants being well coloured, craftie witted, and sharpely insighted into the Lawes of England. But of these Counties wee have entreated largely enough, I passe now to the sixth Table.



THE SIXT TABLE OF ENGLAND. IN WHICH ARE THESE Shires, Warwick-shire, Northampton-shire, Huntingdon, Cambridge, Suffolke, Oxford-shire, Buckingam, Bedford, Hartford, Essex, Bark-shire, Middlesex, Hampshire, Surrey, Kent and Sussex.
Warwick-shire.IN the Sixt Table of England is first Warwick-shire, being bounded on the East with Leicester-shire, and Watling-street way, on the South with Oxford-shire and Glocester-shire,The Situation. on the West with Wiltshire, and on the North with Stafford-shire. This Country is divided into two parts* Feldon and Woodland,The qualitie of the Soyle. The Townes. heretofore called Arden, that is, into the Field and Wood-Country. The chiefe Towne hereof is Warwicke, called by the Brittaines Caer-Leon; besides the Townes of Leamington, called so from the River Leame by which it standeth, Vchindon, now called Long Ichingdon, Harbury, Mancester, called anciently Manduessedum; Coventry, called heretofore Conventria, Stratford upon Avon, and others; and there are in this County 158 Parish Churches. The Rivers are Avon, Leam, Arrow and Allen, commonly called Alne. The next that followes is Northampton-shire,Northampton-shire. which from the East, where it is broadest, lesseneth by degrees, and is extended Eastward. The County is bounded on the East with Bedford-shire and Huntingdon-shire,The Situation. The qualitie and fruitfulnes of the Soyle. on the South with Buckingham-shire, and Oxford-shire, on the West with Warwick-shire, and on the North with Leicester-shire, Rutland-shire, and Lincolne-shire, which are parted from it by the River Welland. It is a field-Country, of a very rich soyle,The Cities and Townes. both in upland grounds and meddowes. The shire Towne hereof is Northampton, the other Townes are Brakley, Torcester, anciently called Tripontium, Grafton, Daventry, Weden, Higham, Oundale, rightly Avondale, Peterborow, called anciently Petriburgus, Welledone, etc. And to this Shire there appertaines 326 Parishes:The Rivers. Huntingdon-shire. the Rivers are Ouse, Avon, and Welland. In the third place is Huntingdon-shire, being so situated, that on the South it looketh toward Bedford-shire, on the West toward Northampton-shire, on the North where it is parted with the River Avon,The Situation. The fertilitie of the Soyle. and on the East, toward Cambridge-shire. It is a Country fit for tillage, and feeding of cattle, and toward the East where it is low ground it is very fruitfull, having every where pleasant hills and shadie woods. The chiefe Towne of this Country is Huntingdon, called heretofore Huntesdune, to which it gives the name of Huntingdon-shire. Here are

map of EnglandTHE SIXT TABLE OF ENGLAND.

also the Townes of S. Ives, which the Saxons anciently called Slepe, Saint Needes, or Saint Neotifanum, and Cunnington; here are 78. Parishes. The two Rivers Ouse,The Rivers. and Avon doe water the Country. In the fourth place is Cambridge-shire,Cambridg-shire. The Situation. The qualitie of the Soile. which lying toward the East, doth butte upo^ North-folke and Suffolke, on the South on Essex and Harford-shire, on the West on Huntingdon-shire, and on the North on Lincolne-shire, and the River Ouse, which running through it from East to West, doth divide it into two parts.The Townes. The Lower and Southerne part is more tilled and planted then the rest, and therefore more pleasant; it lyeth in the manner of a bending plaine, being a Champion Country, and yeelding excellent Barley, except where it beareth Saffron: the farther and Northerne part flourishes more with greene Meddowes. The chiefe Towne in this Shire is Cambridge, anciently called Camboritum, and by the Saxon Grantcester,The Universitie. this is one of the Universities of England, yea the Sunne and Eye thereof, and a famous Nurserie of good learning and pietie, it is seated upon the River Cam. Besides, here are these Townes, Roiston, Rech, Burwell, Ely, and here are 163 Parishes in this Countie, and the Rivers are Cam and Stour.Suffolke. Suffolke followes in the next place, having on the West Cambridge-shire, and on the South the River Stour, which divides it from Essex,The Situation. on the East the Germane Ocean, and on the North the two little Rivulets,The fertilitie of the Soyle. Ouse the lesse, and Wavency, which arising as it were from one spring head, and running a diverse course, doe part it from North-folke. The Country is large, and of a fat soyle, except it be toward the East, for it is compounded of clay and marle, so that the fields doe flourish every where; here is fruitfull pasturage for fatting of cattle,The Townes. and great store of cheese made. The Townes in this County are Sudbury, that is the South-Towne. Ixning, Saint Edmunds-bury, called anciently Villa Faustini, Bretenham, Hadley, Ipswich, called anciently Gippwic,Rivers. Oxford-shire. Debenham, Oreford, and many others. The Rivers are Stour, Brete^, Gipping, Deben, Ore, Ouse, Wavency, and Gerne or Yere. Oxford-shire, which commeth next to be spoken of, on the West is joyned to Glocester-shire, and on the South it is parted from Barke-shire by the River Isa or Ouse, on the East it is bounded with Buckingham-shire, and on the North with Northampton-shire and Warwick-shire.The Situation. The fertilitie of the Soyle. It is a fertile and rich Country, the plaines thereof being adorned with faire fields and meddowes, and the hills crowned with many woods, filled with fruits, and all sorts of cattle which graze thereon. In this Shire the Citie of Oxford, anciently called Ousford from the River Ouse, lifteth up her head, being the other Universitie of England,The University. the other Sunne, Eye, and Soule thereof, and a most famous. Nurserie of Learning and Wisedome, from whence Religion, Humanitie, and Learning are plentifully diffused and dispersed into other parts of the Kingdome.The Townes. Here are also the Townes of Bablac, Burford, which the Saxons called Beorford, Minster Lovell, Whitney, Woodstocke, Banbury, Burcester, or Burencester, Tame, Dorchester, called by Bede Civitas Dorcinia, and by Lelandus Hydropolis, Watlington, and 280. Parishes in it: the rivers here are Isis, Cherwell, Windrush, and Evenlode.Buckingham-shire. Buckingham-shire so called, because it is full of Beech-trees, commeth to be viewed in the seaventh place, which being but narrow, doth runne length-wayes from Thamisis Northward. On the South it

looketh towards Berk-shire, being parted from it by Thamisis,The Situation on the West toward Oxford-shire, on the North toward Northampton-shire,The fertilitie of the Soyle. and on the East it looketh first toward Bedford-shire, afterward toward Hartford-shire; and last of all toward Middlesex. It hath a plentifull soyle, and the fruitfull meddowes thereof doe feed innumerable flockes of sheepe. The head Towne is Buckingham,The Townes. besides which it hath also the Townes of Marlow, Colbroke, Amersham, Crendon or Credendon, so called from the Chalke or Marle, by which the Inhabitants thereof manure their Land, High-Wickam, Stony-Stratford, Oulney, Newport-Pannell, etc. and in this Shire are reckoned 185 Parishes: the Rivers are Thame, Colne and Ouse. Bedford-shire followes,Bedford-shire. The Situation. The quality of the Soyle. being joyned on the East to Cambridg-shire, on the South to Hartford-shire, on the West to Buckingham-shire, and on the North to Northampton-shire, and Huntingdon-shire; it is divided into two parts by the River Ouse. That part which is Northward is more fruitfull and woody, the other part toward the South which is larger, is of a meaner soyle, but yet not barren: for it hath great store of very excellent Barley. In the middle of it there are thicke Woods, but Eastward it is more bare and naked of trees. The chiefe Towne is Lactodorum, now called Bedford, which communicates its name to the Shire. It hath also other Townes, as Odill, Bletnesho or Bletso, Eaton, Dunstable,The Townes built by Henry the first for suppressing of the robberies of the rebell Dun and his companions: it containeth 116 Parishes, and is watered with the River Ouse.Hertford-shire. Next to Bedford-shire on the South side lyeth Hartford-shire, the West side thereof is enclosed with Buckingham-shire, the Northerne side with Middlesex, and the East side with Essex,The Situation. and partly with Cambridge-shire. It is very rich in corne-fields, pastures, meddowes, and woods. The chiefe Towne in the Country is Herudford,The fertilitie of the Soyle. now called Hertford, which doth impart its name to the whole Shire. There are also the Townes of Watling-street, Fane, S. Albane, or Verulamium, Roiston, called anciently Crux Roisiae, Ashwell, Bishops-Stortford, and many others: and this Shire hath an 120. Parishes. The Rivers are Lea or Ley, Stort, Mimer and Benefice. Now come we to Essex,The Townes Essex. which the River Stour on the North divideth from South-folke, on the East the Ocean beateth it,The Situation on the South the River Thames now growne very wide, doth part it from Kent, on the West the River Lea divideth it from Middlesex, and the little River Stour or Stort, from Hertford-shire.The fertilitie of the Soyle. It is a large Country, fruitfull, abounding with Saffron, being full of woods, and very rich: here is Camalodunum, now called Maldon.The Townes. Also Colchester, which the Brittaines call Caer Colin, Leyton, Bemslot, Leegh. Rochford, Angre, Ralegh, anciently called Raganeia, Dunmow, Plaissy or Plessy, called anciently Estre, Chelmesford, now called Chensford, Ithancester, Earles Colne, Barlow, Walden, called likewise Saffron Walden, etc. the Parishes are 415. the Rivers are Ley, Thames, Chelmer, Froshwell, anciently called Pante and Colne. In the next place followes Berroc-shire,Berk-shire. now called Berk-shire, the Northerne part whereof Isis,The Situation. which is afterward called Tamisis, doth compasse with a winding pleasant streame, and doth divide it from Oxford-shire and Buckingham-shire: the Southerne part the River Kennet doth seperate from Hampshire, the Westerne part is held in by Wiltshire and Glocester-shire, and the Easterne part is

confined with Survey. This County on the West side where it is broadest, and in the middle thereof is very rich, and full of corne, especially in the Vale of White Horse, and on the Easterne side which is lesse fruitfull,The Townes. there are many long and spacious woods. The Townes are Fare^don, Abington, called anciently Abandune, and by the Saxons Sheoverham, Wantage, Wallingford, Hungerford, Widehay, anciently called Gallena, Ne^bery, Reading, Bistleham, or Bisham, Southealington, now called Maidenhead* and Windsore, called by the Saxons Windlesora. This Country hath 140 Parishes: the Rivers which water it are Isis, Thames, Ocke, Cunetio or Kenet,Middlesex. and Lambor. Middlesex is divided on the West side from Buckingham-shire with the River Colne, on the North side from Hertford-shire, with the knowne bounds,The Situation. on the East side from Essex with the River Le^, and on the South side from Surrey and Kent with the River Thames.The temperature of the Aire. The Townes. It is every where very pleasant by reason of the temperatenesse of the Ayre, and goodnesse of the Soyle, besides the faire Townes and buildings. The Townes here are Vxbridge, Draiton, Stanes, Radcliffe, and others: but above all London, called also Londinium, Longidinium, Augusta, and by Stephanus Lindonion, which is an Epitomy of all Brittaine. It is seated by the River of Thames, having a fertile Soyle and temperate Ayre it is distant from the Sea threescore miles, it hath a stone Bridge over the River, being three hundred and thirty paces long, adorned on both sides with magnificent and faire buildings. It hath also a strong Tower, which is the chiefe Armory of England, and in this the Mint is kept. Neare to London is Westminster, anciently called Thorney, famous for the Abby, the Courts of Justice, and the Kings Pallace. The Abbey is most renowned by reason of the Coronation, and buriall of the Kings of England,The Rivers. and in this Countie are 73 Parishes, besides those in the Citie. The Rivers that water it are Lea,Hampshire. The Situation. Colne, and Thames. Hampshire or Ha^-shire toucheth on the West Dorsetshire and Wiltshire, on the South the Ocean, on the East Sussex and Surrey, and on the North Berk-shire. It is fruitfull, having pleasant thicke woods and flourishing pastures: it hath two Cities, the one Southampton, so called, because it stands on the River Test,The Townes. anciently called Ant or Hant: the other Winchester, called heretofore Venta Belgarum. There are also these Townes, Regnwood or Ringwood, Christ-church, Whorwell, Andover, Rumsey, Portsmouth, Kings-clea^e, Odiam, Silcester, called anciently by the Brittaines Caer Segente, and others,Surrey. and it hath 253 Parishes: the Rivers are Avon, Stour, Test and Hamble. Surrey, called by Bede Suthriona, joyneth on the West partly to Berk-shire,The qualitie of the Soyle. and partly to Southampton-shire, on the South to Sussex, on the East to Kent, and on the North it is watered by the River Thames, and divided by it from Middlesex.The Townes. It is a Countrie not very large, yet very rich: The Townes are Godelminge, Aclea, or Ockley, Effingham, Kingstone, Merton, Cradiden, or Croydon, Beddington, Wimbandune, or Wimbledon, Wandlesworth,The Rivers. and the Borrough of Southworke, called by the Saxons Southwerke, and this Country hath 140 Parishes: The rivers are VVey, M^le, (so called, because for a certaine space it runneth under ground like a Mole) Wandale,Kent. and Thames aforesaid. Now followeth Cantium or Kent, a Country so called from the situation,The Situation. for it looketh toward France with a great corner, which the word Canton in the French signifies,

environed round about with the mouth of Thames and the Sea,The qualitie of the Soile. unlesse on the West side where it joyneth to Surrey, and on the South side to part of Sussex. It is unlevell, yet plainest toward the West, and shaded with woods, on the East it is raised with high hills. The chiefe Citie is Durovernum, which Ptolemie calls Darvernum, and in English is called Canterbury. There are also the Townes of Dover,The Townes. anciently called Durbis, and by the Saxons Dufra, Hith or Hide, Rumney, anciently called Rumenal, Sandwich or Sondwic, Gravesend, etc. The Rivers are Thames,Rivers. Darent, Medway, anciently called Medwege, Stoure, called by Bede Wantsome,Sussex. etc. Sussex toward the South bordereth upon the Brittish Ocean, and that part of the Country which is toward the Sea is full of high white hills,The Situation. which because they consist of a fat kinde of Chalke are very fruitfull: the middle of it hath goodly meddowes, pastures, fields, and many pleasant groves. The hither part hath many woods, and it hath many veines of Iron. The Townes here are Chichester, or rightly Cissanceaster,The Townes. so called from one Cissa a Saxon that built it: Arundal, so called, because it stands upon the River Arun, and other. It hath many Rivers, and 312 Parishes.



THE SEVENTH TABLE OF ENGLAND. CONTAINETH THESE FOVRE ILANDS which belong to England, Anglesey, Wight, Gersey, and Garnsey.
THe seventh and last Table of England containeth the^^ foure Islands which belong to England:The Isle of Anglesey. the former two whereof namely Anglesey and Wight, do lye neare the English shoare, the latter Garsey neare the French shoare. The first is Anglesey,The names. which the Brittaines call Mon, Tirm^^, and Ynis Dowyl, (that is) the darke Island, the Saxons call it Moneza, being divided by a slender Bay from the Brittish Continent. It is a brave Island,The Situation. and the ancient seat of the Druides, the length whereof 22 English miles, the breadth 17, and the whole compasse of it 60 miles. This Island, although Giraldus saith, it was in his time, drie, stonie, unpleasant, and deformed, yet now it is delectable, and being tilled yeeldeth so much wheat,The fruitfulnesse of the Soyle. that it is commonly called the Mother of Wales. It hath milstones, and in some places aluminous earth, out of which they have lately begun to make Alum. It is also rich in cattell. It was first subjected to the Romane Empire by Paulinus Suetonius, and Iulius Agricola as Camden out of Tacitus a learned Writer. Many yeares after being conquered by the English, it came to be called Anglesey, as it were, the English Island, Camden addeth, that when the Romane Empire in Brittaine began to decrease, the Scots crept out of Ireland into this Island. For besides the hills which are entrenched round, and called the Irish cottages:The Government. there is a place which the Irish call Yn Hericy Guidil, where being lead by their Captain Sirigi, they gave the Brittaines a great overthrow, as it is mentioned in the booke of Triads. Neither hath this Island beene invaded by the English, but likewise by the Norwegians. For in the yeare 1000. The navie of Aethelred sailing about it did wast it in hostile manner. Afterward two Norman Hughs, one Earle of Cheshire, the other of Shropshire did most grievously afflict it and built the Castle Aber-Lienioc to restraine the Inhabitants, but Magnus a Norwegian arriving at this Island kild Hugh Earle of Cheshire with an arrow, and having tooke bootie on the Island departed. Afterward also the English often attempted it, untill Edward the first reduced it into his power. Heretofore it had 363 Villages, and at this day it is full of Inhabitants, but the chiefe Towne is Bellus Mariscus,The Townes. commonly called Beaumarish, which Edward the first built in the East part of that Island in a moorish place; and in regard of the Situation, he gave it this name, and fortified it with a Castle. The second Towne to this is Newburge, in Welch Ressur, because it was

map of EnglandTHE SEVENTH TABLE OF ENGLAND.

much troubled with the sands which were continually cast upon it. Here is also Aberfraw heretofore the chiefe Citie of Wales. Also the holy Promontorie which the English call Holyhead: the Inhabitants call it Ca^ Guby from Kibius a holy man who was Scholler to Hilarius Pictave^sis. The Inhabitants are very rich and strong, and they use the Brittis^ language having no skill in English, albeit they, together with the rest of Wales,The Isle of Wight. have beene subject to the Kings of England these three hundred yeares. Now followeth Vecta or Vectis, the Isle of Wight, which the Brittains call Guith.The names. It is broken off fro^ the Continent of Brittaine by so small an Euripus running betweene, called heretofore Solent, that it seemeth to cleave unto it, and hence that Brittish name Guith, which signifies a separation, seemes to be derived: even as Sicilie being divided from Ital^^ tooke his name, (as learned Iulius Scaliger pleaseth to derive it,) a secand^, that is, from cutting. From this vicinitie of situation, and affinitie of the name, wee may conjecture that this Vecta was that Icta, which when the Sea Flow'd did seeme an Island, but when it Ebd againe, the shoare being almost drie, the ancient Brittaines were wont to carrie Tinne thither in Carts to be transported thence into France. I suppose it cannot be that Mictis of Pliny, which joyneth close to Vecta, because out of that there came white lead, and in this (saith Camden) there is no mettall veine so farre as I know.The Situation. This Island betweene East and West lyeth twentie miles in length in an ovall figure, the breadth thereof in the middle where it is broadest is twelve miles over, the one side lyeth toward the North, the other toward the South. It hath a fruitfull soyle, and very profitable to the husbandman,The fruitfulnesse of the Soyle. so that it exporteth and sendeth forth divers commodities, it is every where full of Cunnies, Hares, Partridges and Pheasants,The varietie of the living Creatures. it hath also a Forrest and two Parkes full of Deere for hunting. Through the middle of this Island there runneth a long ridge of hils, on which flockes of sheepe securely graze, whose fleeces are held to be the best wooll, except that of Lemster and Cotteswold, and therefore being chiefly bought up by Clothiers, the Inhabitants do make a great gaine and commoditie thereby. The Northerne part hath greene medowes,The Sea fields, and woods: the Southerne part is all corne-fields, enclosed every where with ditches and hedges. At either end the Sea on the North side doth so penetrate and winde into it, that it maketh almost two Islands, and the Inhabitants do call them Islands, namely that which looketh toward the West the Fresh-water Isle, that which lyeth toward the East Binbrydge Isle. Vespasian serving under the Emperour Claudius did first reduce this Island to the obedience of the Romans, asIn Vespasiano cap. 4. Suetonius writeth in the life of Vespasian. The first Saxon that made it his owne was Cerdicius which gave it to Stuffa, and Whitgarus, who carried away the Brittish Inhabitants to Caresbrok, and put them to death; afterward Wolpherus being of the Mercians, brought Vecta or Wight under his power,The ancient government. and gave it to Edelwalch King of the South Saxons. After that Caedwalla King of the West-Saxons, (the aforesaid Edwalch being slaine, and Arnaldus Governour of the Island being made away) adjoyned it to his territories.The nature of the Inhabitants. But see more concerning these things in Camden. The Inhabitants by nature are warlike, bold, and forward, and the Souldiers very stout. In Bedes time there were thought to be in this Island a thousand

and two hundred families, but now it hath sixe and thirtie Townes besides Villages and Castles. The chiefest Townes are New-port, the chiefe Market-towne of the Island, heretofore called Medena, and Novus Burgus de Meden, from whence the whole Countrie is divided into East-Meden, and West-Meden,The Townes. according as it lyeth East o^ West. Also Brading, Newton, and Yarmouth which have their Majors, and do send up their Burgesses to the Parliaments of England. This Yarmouth and another also called Sharpnore have Castles, which together with the Fort Worsteys doe defend the coast on the West side. Over against which scarce two miles off standeth the Fort Hurst on a little tongue of ground in Hampshire. Here is also the Towne Quarre where a litle Monasterie was built in the yeare 1132 for vailed Virgins or close Nunnes, and Gods Hill where I. Worseley founded a Schoole for the nurture of children. Here is situate Westcow and Eastcow, now ruinated, which Henry the eight built in the very jawes and entrance of New-port. And on the East is Sandham a Castle fortified with great Ordinance, as the rest are, beside the fortifications of nature, for it is encompassed about with ragged cliffes, underneath which are hidden rocks. As these two Islands lye neare to the English shoare, somewhat more toward the West, some Islands do appeare in the Sea neare to France, and yet belong to England, among which are Gerzey and Garnzey; and first Gerzey, called Caesarea by Antoninus, lyeth neare to Normandie, or the shoare of Lexobii, whom our Brittaines do call Lettaw, that is, dwellers on the shoare, or coasters:Gersey. this word Caesarea the Frenchmen have contracted into Gersey, even as Caesaris Burgus, a towne in Normandie is by them contractly called Cherburgh and Caesar Augusta a Towne in Spaine is by the Spaniards called Saraggosa.The names. Into this Island condemned men were heretofore banished,The Situation. for the Bishop of Lyons was banished hither. Papirius Massonius calleth it the Isle of Constantine shoare, because it lyeth over against the ancient citie of Constantia, which Ammianus thinketh was heretofore called Castra Constantia, and in former times Muritonium. This Island is about 20 miles in compasse, being defended by rockes and such sands as are dangerous to sea-men. The earth is sufficiently fertile, abounding with divers fruits and with flockes of cattell; it hath many sheepe, and most of them such as have foure hornes, is beautified with so many greene Orchards and Gardens, and those so fruitfull that the Inhabitants make a kinde of drinke of apples, which they call Sisera and the English Sider, therewith; but in regard they have little fuell, instead of wood they use Sea weeds (by them called Vraic) which seemes to be that sea grasse which Pliny mentions, and they grow so plentifully on these rocks,The fertilitie of the Soyle. that they seeme a farre of to be thicke woods. These being dryed in the Sun and after burnt for fuell, they make use of the ashes for manuring their fields, and making them fruitfull. This Island is likewise full of Villages, having twelve Parishes. It is fortified with a strong Castle seated on the hill Montorguel, and hee that governes it for the English is also governour of the whole Island. Twentie miles hence towards the West is another Island, which Antoninus named Sarnia,Gernsey. the English at this day call it Garnsey, lying from East to West in the forme of a harpe, it is not to be compared either for largenesse or populusnesse with the aforesaid

Gersey, for it hath onely tenne Parishes. Yet in this it is to be preferred before it, because it hath no venemous thing in it: beside it is more fortified by nature, as being encompassed on every side with broken cliffes among which the Smyris an hard and rough stone is found, which the English call an Emrall, with which Jewellers do cut their stones,The qualitie of the Soyle. and Glaziers do cut their glasse. This Island also, as the former, hath greene Gardens and Orchards planted with divers trees, whence for the most part, the Inhabitants use the drinke made of apples called Cider,The Haven. as the Gersey people doe, in regard of the conveniencie of an Haven, and the traffique of Merchants it is more famous than Gersey. For on the farthest part toward the East, on the Southerne side, it hath a Haven like an halfe Moone, neare which is seated the Towne of Saint Peter, being one long narrow streete,S. Peters Town. full of warlike provision, and frequented much with Merchants when warres begin in other places. The entrance into the Haven is fortified on either side with Castles, on the left hand is an ancie^t Castle, and on the right hand another which they call Cornet, seated on a high rock, and environed with the Sea. The Inhabitants of either Isle are originally either Normans or Brittaines, and do speake French. In both Islands they use that which they call Vraic instead of fuell, or pitcoales digged in England, and both of them have great store of fish. These Islands with other adjacent and lying neare unto them did heretofore belong to Normandie, but when Henry the first had overthrowne his brother Robert in the yeare of Christ 1108,The ancient Government. he adjoyned Normandie and these Islands to the Kingdome of England, since which time they have continued in faithfull obedience to England, although the French (banishing King Iohn) possessed Normandie and Henry the third sold his right in Normandie, and yeelded up the possession of Aquitaine in consideration of a certaine summe of money. 'Tis true that the French in the raigne of He^ry the fourth, did hold Garnsey, but by the industrie of Richard Harlest^^, Valectus de Carona (as they then called him) they were driven out, in reward whereof the King did conferre and bestow upon him the government of the Island and Castle. And let so much suffice to have beene spoken concerning these foure Islands, and also concerning England, both in generall and particular.




NORWEY, AND SVVETH-LAND. The first and second Kingdome of the North part of the World.
BRITTAINE being described as faithfully as wee could, that Northerne part of the world now followeth in our method, which the Ancients did call Scandia and Scandinavia, Pliny calleth it the Nurser of Nations, and the receptacle of people of a great stature. That part which is neerest to the farthest Northerne shore of Germanie, is distinguished at this time into the three Kingdomes of Norwey, Swethland, and Denmarke.Norway. Norway or Norwegia commeth in the first place to be viewed.Whence so called. The Etymologie whereof is easie to be knowne; for it is so called from Nord which signifieth the North, and Weg which signifies a way, as if wee should say, the Northway, or Northerne Countrey. It hath on the South Denmarke, on the West the Sea, on the East Sweth-land, and it is bounded on the North with Lapland, from which it is parted with high and rugged Mountaines, covered over with continuall snow. All the Countrie toward the West is unpassable by reason of rocks and sharpe cliffes, and it is also stony toward the South, especially in that part which lyeth against the Cimbrick Chersonesus, from whence it is 250 miles distant. But all the Countrie both toward the West and South hath a gentle Ayre, for the Sea is not frozen, neither doe the Snowes lye long.The qualitie of the Soyle. And though the Countrie it selfe bee not so fertile, that it is able to furnish the Inhabitants with foode: yet it aboundeth with cattell and wilde beasts,The variety of Creatures. as white Beares of an unusuall bignesse, Beavers and innumerable other. Norwey was somtime a very flourishing Kingdome, under the jurisdiction whereof were Denmarke and the Isles of the Sea, untill it came to be govern'd by hereditarie succession. Afterward in the Interregnum it was agreed upon by the consent of the Nobles, that the Kings should bee chosen by election. From Suibdager the second to Christierne the last, there were 45 Kings. Now it is under the command of Denmarke. There are at this time in it five royall Castles, and so many speciall Provinces, whereof the first and farthest toward the South is Bahusia,The Cities and Townes. or Bay. The Townes subject unto it are Marstand, feated on a rocky Peninsula, and famous for herring-fishing; and the Townes of lesser note, are Koengeef or Congel, neere Bahus and Oddewold, otherwise called Odwad. The second Castle is Aggerhusia, out of the Province whereof high Masts of ships, oaken and maple plankes and wood fit for building houses, is yearely carried into Spaine and other Countries. The Townes subject unto it are Astoia, the Seat of a Bishop, to which strangers doe

chiefly resort, because there is held the Court whither causes are brought for triall out of all parts of Norwey. Also Tonsberg or Konningsberg, Fridrichstad, Salizburgh, and Schin or Schon, where there are Mynes of Coppresse and Iron, also Hammaria the Greater and the Lesser, heretofore being Bishopricks, but now committed to the care of the Asloi^^ Bishop, and divided by the Bay of Mosian, gliding betweene them. The third is the Castle Bergerhusia, under which are the Cities of Bergen, or Berga, and Staffanger. But Berga is the most famous Citie of all Norwey for traffique, and as it were the Barne thereof: heere resideth the King Lievtenant, and a Bishop; and heere that delicate fish is sold, which being taken neere the shore of Norwey, is called the fish of Bergen, being transported from hence by Merchants into divers Countries. Heere lye the Factors of the Vandals and the Sea Townes, who continuing he^^ all the yeare, for traffique sake, doe take up one part of the Citie, which the Inhabitants call the Bridge. Heere is also an excellent and safe Heaven. The Citie Staffanger, although it have the same Governour wi^^ Bergen, yet it hath a Bishop peculiar to it selfe, and living therein. Th^ fourth Castle is Nidrosia, called so from the River Nideros and Rosa, whi^^ is the name of a Temple, commonly called Trundtheim, and heretofore Trondon; it is the Metropolis of all Norwey, and now reduced into the forme of a Towne. It was the chiefe seat heretofore of the Archbishop and of the whole Kingdome. It hath a large Jurisdiction, in which (...) fish and pretious skins are gotten, and afterward carried to Bergen to sold. And heere is at this day a Cathedrall Church, and such a (...) as there is scarce an other like it in the Christian world, both for (...) largenesse of the stones, and for the carved worke. The Border (...) ground-worke about the Altar in this Church was burnt with fire, (...) the yeare 1530, and the losse redounding thereby was valued at se^^ thousand Crownes. The fifth and last Towre toward the North (...) Norwey is Wardhuise, standing on the little Island Ward; it is now ve^ small, and almost decayed, having neither castle nor munition, yet (...) it a little Towne adjoyning unto it, which consists all of fisher-me^ houses. In this Towre or rather Cottage, the Kings Praefect liveth Summer, and governeth this cold Northerne part of Norwey, eve^ the borders of Russia. Moreover the Westerne shore of Norwey (beca^ it is of an unsearchable depth) in the Spring time is much troubled (...) Whales,The Sea. to prevent whose violence, the ship-men use a kinde of Oy^ made of Beavers stone, which is a present remedie, for assoone as (...) cast into the Sea, and mingled with the water, straight-way that gre^ Sea-monster maketh away and hideth himselfe in the deepe.The Commodities. Heere (...) good fishing in the neighbouring seas, and especially of Stock-fish, which being dried and hardened in the cold and hung up upon poles, they se^ into other Kingdomes of Europe.The Merchandise. The best taking of them is in th^ Moneth of Ianuary: for as then in regard of the cold, they are more ^sily dried, so the sea doth yeeld more plenty of them and fatter. Th^ commodities of this countrie in generall, are pretious Skins, Tallo^ Butter, Hides, the fat of Whales, Tarre, Oake timber, Masts, and Plan^ and Boards of all sort,The manners of the people. to the great commoditie of those who sell the^ The Inhabitants are honest, loving and hospitable to strangers, neither

map of Norway and SwedenNORWEY AND SVVETHLAND.

have they robbers, theeves or Pirates among them.
Swethland.The Kingdome of Swethland is an ancient Kingdome, as Pliny witnesseth.The Countries. It hath on the West Norwey, on the North Lapland and Botnia, on the East Finland, seperated from it by the Botnian Bay, or Finnish Sea, and Livonia or Liefland,Situation. disjoyned from it by the Baltick Sea, called by Tacitus Mare pigrum,Fertility of the Soyle. by the Suevians Mare Suevicum, and on the South Gothia. It is a countrie the most fruitfull of all the North parts: it hath a plentifull soyle, and seas, lakes, and rivers abounding with fish of divers kindes: it hath also Mettals, as Lead, Iron, Brasse, and Silver, which is digged up in very pure oare neere Slaburg: and likewise woods full of wilde beasts and honey. It is thought that it doth doubly exceede Norwey, both in largenesse, fruitfulnesse, and goodnesse of soyle, yet in some places it is rugged and moorish. This Countrie being for some ages valiantly and happily defended and enlarged by the native Kings thereof, afterward came to the Kings of Denmarke: and having beene subject to them more than an hundred yeares, at last did shake them off, under colour, that the Lawes which they were sworne unto at their Coronation, were not observ'd; and hence it stood a while in a very uncertaine condition. But now it is returned againe to the natives, out of which it chooseth it selfe a King. There are divers Provinces of this Kingdome, some belonging to the Gothes, as Ostgothia, whereof Lince^ is the Metropolis:The Government. Westgothia seperated with an ancient Lake from Ostgothia, whereof Scara is the Bishops seate: Also Southerne Gothia or Smalandia, Tuiscia, Verendia, in which Vexio or Wexo is the chiefe Town. Also Meringia, and the Isle of Ocland, fortified with the Castle Borgholm. Other Provinces there are that belong to Swethland, specially so called, as Oplandia, in which is Vpsal in the very centre of Swethland; heere are an Archbishops seat, publick Schooles, and many sepulchres of the Kings of Swethland, magnificently and fairely built. Also Stocholm, a faire Mart Towne, and one of the Kings places of residence, being fortified both by Nature and Art. It is seated in a marshie fenny place like Venice, and is named, as aforesaid, because it is built upon stakes. There is a passage to it out of the Easterne Sea, by a deepe channell through the jawes of Melerus; and it doth let the sea flow so farre into it, that ships of great burthen may easily come with full sayles into the Haven. But the towre Waxholme on the one side, and Digna on the other side doe so straighten the entrance, that no ships can come in or goe forth against the Governours will, who keepe watch there. On the Southerne banke of Melerus lyeth Sudermannia, whose townes are Tolgo, Strengenes the seate of a Bishop, and the Castle Gripsholme. In the third place is Niricia in which is the castle Orebo, and toward the West the countrie of Westmannia, and the cities Arosia, (neere to which there is such excellent silver, that Artificers can extract out of fifteene pounds of silverone pound of gold) and Arboga doe lye neere unto a Lake. From thence toward the West doe lye Westerne Dalia, the Easterne and Solies Dalia, so called from the Lake Solion; which three Provinces together with the greater part of the mountainous Provinces, are under the Bishop of Sarosse. Heere are minerall veines, which stretch themselves Eastward to the Baltick Sea, and to the Bay of Helsingia, and toward the West they

runne almost without interruption through Wermeland to the Westerne Ocean, so that in every part there is digged up some kinde of mettall, as Silver, Coppresse, Lead, Iron, Steele, or Sulphure. Toward the North neere unto Opland are these Countries, first Gestricia, then Helsing, after that Midelpadia, and beyond that the Northerne and Southerne Angermannia. Then is there North-Botnia, divided into West-Botnia and East-Botnia, both of them being large Provinces: and after these towards the North lyeSo called from the sliding and leaping gate of the Finn^ which are the Inhabitants thereof. Scricfinnia,So called from the blockishnesse of the Inhabitants, for Lappon signifieth Foolish. Lapland, and Biarmia. These or most of these ancient Provinces of the Kingdome of Swethland, the Botnick Bay stretched forth from the Balthick straight Northward to Toronia, and beyond the Artick Circle, doth divide from Finland a large Peninsula: at the Southward point whereof are the Islands of Alandia or Alant, and Abo a Bishops Seate, and on the North point Withurgeum. Finland is divided into the Northerne and Southerne Finland, to which the higher and lower Natagundia, Savolosia, Tavastia, all very large countries are adjoyned. From thence beyond the Finnick Bay isWhich with Biarmia aforesaid, belongeth to the Duke of Russia. Corelia, the Metropolis whereof is Hexholme or Kexholme: and toward the West Wotichonia, in which is the mouth of the River Lovat, that glideth by Novogardia, which the Inhabitants call Ny: above Copora is Ingria, in which standeth the Forts Iamagrod and Solonscia, wherein standeth Ivanogrod, over against Nerva or Narva; confining upon these toward the South are the provinces of Lieflandia or Civonia, extended even from Nerva to Revalia or Revel, and Prenovia or Parniew; as first Allantacia wherein Nerva is a Bishops See; then Wiria, whereof Wesemberg is a Bishops See: besides Wichia, wherein Habsay is a Bishops seate, and the Isle Dagen or Dachlen, most of which Countries beyond the Finnick Bay were added to the Kingdome of Swethland, in the yeare 1581; by the valour and good successe of King Iohn the third, after that Revalia had willingly yeelded it selfe to Ericus the fourteenth King of Swedes, Anno 1561.The Rivers. Swethland hath many fishing-waters,Mountaines. and many rivers gliding through it. The Countrey it selfe is rugged, being full of mountaines and woods.Woods. The subjects are partly Church-men, partly Lay-men; the Lay-men are either Nobles or Commons.The Senators. The chiefe title of Nobility is Knighthood, which is solemnly conferr'd by the King as a reward of vertue.The Manners. The provinces are governed by the natives. If the Inhabitants be compar'd with the Germans, they have lesse civilitie, but are more industrious and witty, so that every countrey-fellow with them hath skill almost in all trades, and all mechanick Arts.



THE STATE POLITICK OF THE KINGDOME OF DENMARKE.
DENMARKE is a large and populous Kingdome, commonly called Danemarch, as it were the Countrie of the Danes. But whence the originall of the Danes came, they themselves doe not know: Some doe fetch it from Danus, their first King, and some from the Dahi, a people of Asia, Dudo de S. Quintino, an ancient Writer (as Camden reporteth) doth affirme, that they came out of Scandia into the ancient seats of the Cimbri^ans. But they seeme to be so called from the waters, because AHA with them signifies a River, and they doe call themselves Daneman (that is) ^s it were, River-men, or Water-men. All Denmarke is a Peninsula, as the Description sheweth, and is divided into 184 Prefectships or Provinces, which they call Harret, and they are governed by so many Prefects skilfull in the Danish Lawes. It hath a King rather by election of the Nobles, than by succession of birth: the ancient manner of chusing him was, that when they gave their voyce, they stood in the open field upon stones, devoting by the firme stabilitie of the stones under them, the constancy of their election. The Kings are crowned at Hafnia in the Church of the blessed Virgine Mary before the Altar, and are led into the aforesaid Church by the Senatours of the Kingdome, the ensignes of regality being carried before them, as the Sword, Globe, and Crown. Neither are these things attributed to speciall Families, as it is in most Countries, but as every one excelleth in vertue and dignitie, so is hee chosen to that place. First the King is compelled to sweare that he will observe certaine written Articles, and that hee will strictly defend the Christian Religion, and the Lawes and Customes of the Kingdome. Afterward hee is anoynted by the Bishop of Roeschild, and first the Crowne is set upon his head by all the Senatours, who then take their oath to his Majestie, if they have not done it before the Coronation, and then the King maketh out of the Gentry some Knights by the light stroke of a sword, for some service done either in peace or warre. Thus the ancient Danes did establish an excellent Politicall State and Monarchie, neither hath any Nation ever brought them into subjection, or tooke away their Country Rites and Priviledges. But on the contrary the Northerne people, as the Danes, Swedens, Norwegians, have wasted almost Europe, and in some places have established Kingdomes. For the expedition of the Cimbrians against Italie is knowne unto all Historiographers,

as also the Gothes subjecting of Spaine, the Longobards establishing of a Kingdome in Italie, the Normans seating themselves in France, the erecting of the Kingdome of Naples and Sicilie, and the attempt of Godfride upon Freseland against Charles the Great.To these may bee added the late King of Swedens prosperous victories in Germany. Canutus the Great, his holding five Kingdomes a long time. For he was King of Denmarke, Swethland, Norwey, England, and Normandy, and sonne in law to Henry the third Emperour, of whom these verses are yet extant.



Desine mirari quos garrula laudibus effert
Graecia, quos jactat Roma superba duces. etc.

Cease thou to wonder at those Captaines bold,
Of which both Greece and Rome did boast of old.
For now the Danish Land hath brought forth one,
That is in vertue second unto none.
By my atchievements I much fame attain'd,
Five Kingdomes subject were to my command.
And me he chose his sonne in Law to be,
Who was third Emperour of Germanie.
My Iustice famous was, I shew'd the way,
How powerfull Kings should their owne Lawes obey.


By which it appeares, as also by the followig warres, which divers Kings of the Familie of the Oldenburgs happily waged, that it is a warlike Nation, and fortunate in vanquishing their enemies both by Land and Sea. The Noble men and Senatours of the Kingdome have a free power to elect the Kings, but for the most part they chuse the Kings eldest sonne, unlesse there be some sufficient cause for the contrary. However, they alwayes chuse one of the Royall bloud, and they doe not suffer the Kingdome to be divided, unlesse they be compelled thereunto by civill warres. They send the younger sonnes or brothers into other Countries, seeing they cannot participate in the government of the Kingdome: and hence it is that so many expeditions are undertaken by them. Moreover, seeing all the Nobles and Common-people cannot live conveniently in their owne Countrie, therefore they seeke out to get themselves a more fit seate. For the Northerne people have abundance of children, in regard of their abundance of bloud and heate; they are quarrellers and fighters, they drinke and eate much, (for the cold Ayre excites their appetite) and yet digest it well, whence it is that they live long; they are faire complexioned, of great stature, crafty and faithfull. And an argument, that they are long liv'd, is that their Kings have raigned very long, many of them thirty yeares, some forty, and some longer.

The Politicall government.
THere are five States or Orders in the Common-wealth of Denmarke: The first is of the Kings Familie, the second of the Nobles,The Situation. among which there are neither Earles nor Barons, yet all of them can shew how their Nobilitie descended to them by a long pedigree of Ancestours. They carry Bucklers, which they will not change nor alter,

because they anciently used them. There are some Families yet living, whose Ancestors were present at the Parley between Charles the Great, and Hemmingus King of Denmarke, upon the River Egidora or Eider, as the Familie of Vren and others. These hold their goods and lands in Capite, and they have free liberty to hawke and hunt in their owne lands, as the Counts have in Germany. Their goods are not feudatory, but hereditary. All the Castles, lands, and goods, as well moveable as immoveable, left them by their parents, are equally divided among the brethren: and the sisters by a speciall priviledge have a share also, yet so, that the brother hath two parts with the Castles and places of strength, and the sister but one. By this meanes the eldest sonnes have not much lands, yet some of them comming of a good Familie, and being endued with vertue, through the Kings favour, doe advance themselves to great possessions by marriage. Out of this order the Senatours of the Kingdome are chosen, who are seldome more then 28. These Senatours have a certain allowance from the King and Kingdome, for they have Castles so long as they bee Senatours, for which they pay no rent to the King, but are charged to keepe certaine horses both in peace and warre, and whensoever the King calls them, they are to be ready at the proper charge of the Kingdome. If they be sent on any Embassage out of the Kingdome, they have allowance out of the Exchequer, that they may performe their journey in a Princely manner, as becommeth a Kings Embassadours. The other Nobles also have sufficient maintenance from the King, whether they live at Court or not. For the King hath lands which in the Danish speech are called Verleghninge or Benefices, and out of these hee giveth maintenance, either for terme of life, or for yeares, to those who have done him or the Kingdome any service. And those who hold these Benefices of the King, are charged to keepe certaine horses, and to pay yearely a certaine summe of money into the Exchequer, yet so as they may gaine something in reward of their labour and service. There is also a good Law and Institution in the Kingdome of Denmarke, whereby the King is prohibited and restrained from buying any immoveable goods of the Nobles, least any dissention should arise betweene the King and them. For otherwise the King might by violence take into his hands those lands which the Nobles would not sell: yet the King may change any immoveable goods with the Nobles, though on the contrary the Nobles cannot buy any of them of the Kings Farmers, many of which have hereditarie, and (as it were) free lands.


Here followes the names of the speciall Families of the Nobility, in the Kingdome of DENMARKE.
THe Lords of Kaas, the L. Guldensteen, the Lords of Munc, of Rosencrantz, of Grubbe, of VValkendorp, of Brahe, of Schram, of Pasberg, of Hardenberg, of Vlstant, of Bing, of Below, of VVepfert, of Goce, of Schefeldt, of Ranzow, of Schelen, of Frese, of Iul, of Bilde, of Dresselberg, of Green, of Brockenhusen, of Holke, of Trolle, of Knutzen, of Biorn, Schested, of Iensen, of Steuge, of Mattiesse, of Lunge, of Banner, of Luc, of Rastorp, of Krusen, of Fassi, of Lindeman, of Suvon, of Stantbeke, of Quitrowe, of Lange, of

Gelschut, of Glambeke, of Krabbe, of Marizer, of Kragge, of Achsel, of Bec, of Ruthede, of Negel, of VVirfelt, of Split, of Ofren, of Appelgard, of Iuenam, of Poldessen, of Reuter, of Podebussen, who were all in times past Barons in the Dukedome of Pomerania, and some of whose Familie are still remaining there. Also the Lords of Vren, who lived in the time of Charles the great: Also the Lords of Blic, of Galle, of VVogersen, of Bassi, of Solle, of Daac, of Bax, of Baselich, of VVensterman, of Hoken, of Lindow, of Bille, of Reutem, of Hundertmarc, of Heiderstorper, of VVolde, of Papenhaimb, of Spar, of Falster, of Narbu, of VVorm, of Bilde, of Bocholt, of Budde, of Swaben, of Santbarch, of Gram, of Lutken, of Vhrup, of Spegel, of Bammelberg, of Rosenspart, of Duve, of Hube, of Schaungard, of Must, of Gris, of Falcke, of Brune, of Laxman, of Duram, of Baggen, of Norman, of Goss, of Matre, of Rosengard, of Tollen, of Ronnoun, of Krimpen. Out of this Nobilitie is chosen the Praefect or Master of the Court, which is such an office, as the Governour of the Kings House in France: Hee dwelleth, for the most part, at Haffnia, being, as it were, the King Substitute, and doth dispatch matters as hee is directed by the Kings. Next to him is the Marshall, which in the time of warre and peace doth provide those things which appertaine to expedition. In the third place is the Admirall, which doth build new ships, repaire the old, and every year order the sea-matters, for the securing of the coasts. He hath under him an other Admirall appointed, and in every ship a Captaine, who must bee borne a Gentleman. There is also the Chancellour of the Kingdome, to whom out of all the Provinces and Isles they appeale and make suite unto, and from whom appeale is also made to the King and the Senate of the Kingdome. All the Provinces are divided into Haeret, as they call them, or into Dioceses, under which are many Parishes, heere, if there be any controversies, matters are first tried. And from hence they appeale to the Judge of the Haeret. Afterward to the Chancellour, and last of all to the King and Senatours, where it hath a determinate and finall Judgement. They have a written Law, composed by Woldemare the first, together with the Bishops and Senators, which is very agreeable to the law of Nature, and not much differing from the Roman Lawes, and that causes and suites may sooner have an end, and judgement be given and put in execution, It is provided that Judges, if they doe any wrong or give false judgement, are condemned to lose halfe their goods; whereof the King hath the one part, and the injured partie the other. Woldemare the first (except I be deceiv'd) added the Bishops to the Senators, whom Christianus the third, for rebellion and certaine other causes did put out againe. The Kings Chancellour, who for the most part followeth the King in the Court, hath seven or eight Noble men adjoyned unto him as Assistants, besides Secretaries and Clerkes; and all businesses are dispatch'd by the King himselfe. But if it be some matter of consequence, as concerning peace or warre, entring into league with forraine Nations, or into consultation concerning the defending of their owne Territories, then the King calleth a Councell of Senators. Neither can the King impose any taxe upon the Kingdome or Countrie, without their consent, and the consent of the Nobles. There is also in this Kingdome a Master of the Exchequer, who collecteth

and gathereth all the Revenues of the whole Kingdome, both of Castles, Farmes, and Customes, as well by Sea as by Land. Hee taketh account of them, enquireth into them, and giveth acquittances for the receit of them. Hee hath two Assistants of the Nobilitie, and many Clerkes under him; and for his office hath a yearely stipend or pension.
The third State is of the Clergie, in which there are seven Bishops, as the Bishop of Lunden, the Bishop of Roeschild, the Bishop of Otthon, of Rip, of Wiburg, of Arhuse, and the Bishop of Sleswich, to whom the other Canonicall persons have relation. These have the Tenths of the Kingdome; which in divers Countries are divided in a divers manner for the Bishops have an halfe part of the Tenths, and the King an halfe part, the Canonists and Preachers have a part, and a part is contributed toward the building and repairing of Churches. And as concerning the Popes authoritie in this Kingdome, as also in France, the ordination of Prelates and Bishops have beene alwayes in the Kings power, as may appeare by the answer of Woldemare the first, King of Denmarke, which heere I have annexed. When the Pope required these and the like priviledges from the King, it is reported, that the King writ back unto him, Wee have our Kingdome from our Subjects, our life from our Parents, our Reliligion from the Romish Church, which if you will take from us, I send it you by these presents. And as the wise Decree of Charles the fifth is praised, prohibiting Ecclesiasticall persons from buying any immoveable thing without the consent of the King, so Christian the third as wisely did ordaine, that the Clergie should not sell any thing without the Kings expresse commandement. In other matters the Clergie-men through the whole kingdome are well provided for by Christian the third, of famous memorie, and many Schooles erected in many places, as also two in Iseland, where they have likewise a Printing-House. There is but one Universitie in the whole kingdome, called the Universitie ofThis Citie is called by the Germans Copenhagen, that is, the Merchants Haven. Haft^^ or Hafnia, founded by Christerne the first, by permission of Pope Sixt^, in the yeare of Christ 1470: which Frederick the second, although hee were seven yeares incumbred with the Swethish warres, did so enrich that the yearely revenues thereof are very much.
The fourth State is of the Citizens and Merchants, dwelling in Cities and Townes. These have proper and peculiar priviledges which they enjoy, besides certaine fields and woods that belong to them; and these doe traffique both by Sea and Land in all parts of Europe. Out of these, as also out of the Countrey-people, the Bishops, the Canonists, the Preachers, and Senators of Cities, the Clerkes of Bands, the Lievtenants of Towres, and the Masters of Ships are chosen, and some of them are Masters of the Customes or Tributes; lastly, of these all lesser Councels of Justice doe consist, one of the Nobility, for the most part, sitting as President.
The fifth State is of the Rustick, or Countrey-people, and there are two sorts of them, the first they call Freibunden, that is, Free-holders. These doe hold Lands of Inheritance, yet paying for the same some little free-rent every yeare. These doe also use merchandise and fishing. They are not opprest with doing services, neither doe they pay any taxes, unlesse the Senators of the kingdome doe grant it as a subsidie.

The other sort is of those, who doe not possesse goods of inheritance, but doe farme them of the King, the Nobles or Ecclesiasticall persons, and are constrained to doe many services for their Lords, in such manner, as they shall covenant with their Land-lord. These are the chiefe things which I thought good to declare concerning the State politick of Denmarke; whereby it appeareth, that the Danish Monarchie was, for the most part, well framed: for the free election of the Kings being in the hands of the Nobilitie, and yet notwithstanding out of the royall Progenie, as wee said before: it followeth, that the Danes have no civill warres or dissentions, unlesse those which are betweene such as bee of the Blood Royall, which are quickly composed by the mediation and helpe of the Nobles; but especially seeing the Kings younger Sonnes can have no part of the kingdome. Moreover, as they are all stiled but Nobles, and know not the titles and names of Barons, Earles, and Dukes, so there are none that have so much wealth and power, as that reposing trust therein, they dare oppose themselves against the Royall Familie; because the Fathers Inheritance is alwayes divided betweene the Sonnes and Daughters. Thus the Kings of Denmarke have a flourishing Common-wealth, which may easily bee defended from forraine enemies, whom their Subjects, living in unanimity and concord with them as their naturall Lords, are able to resist both by sea and land.



THE KINGDOME OF DENMARKE. BEING THE THIRD KINGDOME OF THE NORTH.
DENMARKE is joyned only in two places to the Co^tinent,The Situation. on the West the Ocean beateth on it, on the Ea^^ the Balticke Sea, on the North lyeth Norwey and Sw^^land, and on the South Holsatia, Megalopolis, and Pomera^^ It hath many severall Islands lying by it.The temperature of the Aire. The temper (...) the Climate, together with the wholsomnesse of the Aire (that I ma^ use Ioh. Coldingensis his words) doth make the Danes fresh complexio^ed. The fruitfulnesse of the Earth doth nourish them, the sweete h^^mony of Birds doth recreate them; their Woods and Groves, in which great numbers of Hogges do feed,The fruitfulnes of the Soyle. and fat themselves with Akornes (...) Beech-maste, do refresh them; and the divers sorts of Cattle and f^^^rishing Medowes do yeeld them much delight. The Sea doth affo^^ them such plentie of provision,The varietie of living creatures. that the Danes thereby not onely furnish themselves, but also many other parts of Europe. In a word, they wa^ nothing that is necessarie to life, so loving hath Nature shewed her self^ to this Countrie. Concerning the ancient Government thereof M^^ster writeth, that one Danus many ages before Christ, was the first King of Denmarke,The Ancient Government. from whom the other Kings of Denmarke did descend in a faire and orderly succession; therefore concerning the names of his successours, and the other Kings of Denmarke, read Munster, largely discoursing. All the Countrie of Denmarke having many armes of the Se^ reaching farre into the Land, doth consist of many parts, the chiefe whereof are these Iutia, Fionia, Zelandia and Scania, besides the Islands lying neare to severall parts thereof.
Iutia, which some would have called Gotia, being heretofore the Sea of the Cimbri, is called by Historians and Geographers the Cimbri^^ Chersonesus, and is divided into the Southerne and Northerne Iutia. The Description of this Northerne Iutia you may behold in the second Table of Denmarke. Southerne Iutia, heretofore called Nordalbingia, doth containe the famous Dukedome of Sleswick to which the Dukedome of Holsatia may now be added, whereof you shall finde a more ample declaration in the third Table of Denmarke.
Also there followeth a more particular Description of Fionia, in the fourth Table of Denmarke.
Zeland, otherwise called Staland, and by some Authors Selandunia, is the greatest of all the Isles of Denmarke, which Olivarius and Ortelius thinke to be that Codanonia which Mela mentioneth. Others call it Zeland as if it were Sealand, because it is on every side encompassed with the Sea. Some would have it so called as if one should say Seed-land, because

map of DenmarkTHE KINGDOME OF DENMARKE.

of its owne accord without any yearely manuring it is very fruitfull in bearing of corne. This Island isFor it is 64 English miles in length, and 52. in breedth. two daies journey long, and almost as much in bredth. It hath 15 Cities in it, and twelve royall Castles. But among the Cities the chiefe is Hafnia, which is the Metropolis or mother Citie of all Denmarke, and famous, not onely for the largenesse and wealth thereof, but for a convenient Haven, which the incredible depth thereof, and the lying of the Island Amaggor over against it doth make a safe Harbour to Sea-faring-men. This Citie, being an Universitie, affordeth a continuall supply of Doctors, learned Pastors, and Preachers for all the Churches of the Kingdome of Denmarke and Norwey. Above Hafnia is Helsingor called also Elseneur, and neare unto it the royall Castle of Croneburg of which we will speake hereafter: over-against this Castle on the other side of the Sea, there standeth another like unto it called Helsinborch or Hilsemburg with a Towne of the same name. Here Zeland and Scania do lye so neare together with their Promontories, as it were meeting one the other, that the Sea between them is scarce foure miles over, and is called De Sund, or the Sound. At this place all the ships that are bound toward the East, are compelled to come as to one common Center, and pay Custome to the King. And there being a Castle on either Shoare, the King when necessitie requires it, having placed his ships in the middle of it, can so shut up the mouth thereof, that he can restraine a great Navie either from entring in, or going forth; for sometime 200, and sometime 300 ships do arrive there together in one day out of divers parts of Europe. Here is also Roeschild heretofore the Seat of a Bishop, where are to be seene divers famous monuments of many D^nish Kings and Dukes, now almost wasted and decayed. Beneath Zel^^ are the Islands following Amigria, Huena, Weem, Moenesland in which ^s the Citie Stegoa and many others. Zeland hath one Bishop, whose Se^ the Prelate of Roeschild (as I said) did hold heretofore.Scania. Scania among a^ the Provinces of the Kingdome of Denmarke is famous for the large ^s and wealth thereof. This some have called Scandinavia for Scond^^^ that is, the pleasant part of Denmarke, some Scania, and others Sconing^^ commonly it is called Sconen. Pliny calleth it Scandia and Scand^^^via, which hee falsly supposeth to be a very large Island. But Orte^^ thinketh that this Scandia and Scandinavia which Pliny mentions was (...) Scania, but that Peninsula, which at this day doth containe three very large Kingdomes,The Situation. Norwey, Swethland, and Gothland beside other Countries. This Scania is every where encompassed with the Sea, except it be where an arme of Land stretcheth out Northward, and from thence be^ding backe Eastward is joyned to Swethland: yet the deepe vallies and high Rocks which lye betweene these two Countries, make it to be s^ difficult a journey out of Scania into Gothland and part of Swethland, that it is easier to adventure to goe by Sea, than to undergoe the trouble by land. This Countrie is inferior unto none in the temperature of the Climate,The fruitfulnesse of the Soyle. the fruitfulnesse of the Earth, the conveniencie of the Havens, i^ Sea commodities, in fishing, in Lakes or Rivers, in hunting of wil^ beasts, in the inexhaustible veines of Gold, and Silver, Brasse, and Lead, in the frequencie of Townes,The qualitie of the Soile. and in their Civile institutions. Whence as Munster witnesseth, it still retaineth the name of Scandia. It was heretofore

divided into two Dukedomes Halland and Bleking, now it containeth thre and twentie Prefectorships, and fifteene Cities. The Metropolis or chiefe Citie thereof is Londa or Londia, where the Archbishop of the Kingdome resideth. Here is also Malmogia, which is also called Ellebogen, being a famous Mart-towne, and the speciall Citie of the whole Countrie for Faires and continuall traffique, which the people of the Countrie do use there. In Halland is the Castle Warburg, built on the high tops of Mountaines. It was taken by the Swedens, and fortified with a Garrison of their owne in the yeare 1565, when Daniel Ranzovius by by the command of King Fredericke the second, did straitly besiege it, that at last it was enforced to yeeld it selfe up. This man famous for his vertues and valour was slaine in the yeare 1569. being shot through the head with a bullet sent from a brasse piece of Ordinance. Neare unto this Countrie are the Islands Landoe, Hannoe, and Bornholm, a famous Island divided into foure Prefectorships, and containing three Cities and one Castle. There is also Gotland, in which the ancient and once flourishing Mart-towne of Wisby is seated, but now the traffique being removed to other cities, it is decayed, both in Inhabitants, and wealth. Besides corne, with which this countrie aboundeth, it affordeth not only plentie of cheese, butter and divers sorts of skins, but faire firre trees, of which there are great woods for the making of masts for ships, and also lime and stone for building. The Rivers of Denmarke are Egidora, commonly called Eyder, which Ptolomy calls Chalusus. This River divides the Frizians from the Ditmarsians, and so discharges it self into the Brittish Ocean. The fish-full and navigable River Stora, (which arising in the inner part of Holsatia, watereth and washeth some Townes, together with the noble house of Brandenberg belonging to the Ranzovian familie, and afterward powreth it selfe ito the River Albis) and divers others. TheThis Sea is called by some Mare Suevicu^, by Pom^p^^us Mela, Sin^^ Colanus, and by Strabo, Sinus, Venedicus. Balticke Sea which wee have made to be the bound of Denmarke on the East, the Germans call it Oastzee, but the inhabitants doe now call it Belts from the Latine word Baltheus which signifieth a Belt or militarie girdle, because in manner of a girdle, it embraceth and encompasseth either Chersonesus. Tacitus seemes to call it Mare pigrum, that is, the slow Sea, from the effect, as Ortelius thinketh, because it is not moved as other Seas, for the Tides thereof are scarcely discerned, as they do affirme that have often sailed on it, and it floweth in a perpetuall course from East to West. Helsingera at the Bay of the Sund, hath the royall Castle Cronburg, being the defence and strength of the farthest Island from the shoare of Zeland. This Castle Fredericke the second King of Denmarke, did build with great cost, and raised it from the bottome of the Sea by laying many stones under water between woodden planks for a foundation; it is so strong and firme, that it despiseth the huge waves of the Sea with stormie weather rowles against it. There is in the Citie Lundis a very curious Clocke wherein much Art is expressed, called Saint Laurences clocke: and set up in the lower part of the Church, where it hath a Table of wood fastned to the wall distinguished with many circles of divers colours. In this clocke by certaine Indexes the present yeare, moneth, and weekes, also the particular day and houre of the day is represented to the eye, thereby are shewed the fixt and moveable

feasts, the motion of the two great Luminaries, the Sunne and Moone, their places in the Zodiacke every day, and their positions and aspects one toward another. And as these things appeare outwardly, by reason of certaine engines, and wheeles framed within to that purpose, So is there added a covering so made by Art, that as often as the Clocke strikes, two little Images like two Champions do meete together, and do give one another so many blowes as the Clocke striketh strokes. But that which is more wonderfull is this, in the middle of this Table, as it were in a Throne, is placed the Image of the Virgin Mary, holding her Infant in her armes: on both sides of her there are, as it were, two Gates, and before her feet a Theater of a semicircular forme, with the arch thereof turned toward the spectators, within there is a devise with the Images of the three wisemen, having every one their servant. The whole engine being turned as he pleaseth that keepeth it, straight way the Images come forth. And before the rest there comes as it were a threatning Herald, who brandishing his sword knocks at the left doare, that being open'd hee goeth forward while two Images seeme to blow two trumpets before him. He that is the first of the wisemen, walketh with a stately pace. But when hee commeth to the Virgin Maries Image hee reverently bends himselfe unto it, as if hee did adore her. And so also do the other two. The servants goe on without doing any obedience or making any shew of reverence, the last of them shutteth the right gate, that the sound of the Clocke when that is shut may be heard more plainly. But of this enough.



THE SECOND TABLE OF DENMARKE. WHICH CONTEINETH PART OF THE NORTHERNE IVTIA.
THE Westerne and speciall part of Denmarke is Iutia, commonly called Iutland,The names. which Ptolemy calleth the Cimbrian Chersonesus, and Pliny Cartrin. This runneth forth Northward in manner of a Peninsula, betweene the Brittish and Germane Seas, as Italy doth toward the South. The Southerne bound thereof is the River Eydera,The Situatio^. and it lyeth many miles in length from the River Albis or Elve, toward the North: The greatest breadth of it is not much. This Country is divided into the Northerne and Southerne part, as we have already spoken. The Northerne Iutia,Iutia. called the Northerne Cimbrica, which is described in this Table, extending it selfe toward Norwey, doth over against Saga, a Towne famous in regard of the quick-sands and shallow Sea neare it,The Situation. end in a straite and narrow forme like a wedge. This Country is broadest about the Market Towne of Aleburg, where Lymford winding it selfe into it, and passing almost through all Iutia Westward, parteth the Country Wensussel from the rest, except it be for a very little space, and so maketh it as it were an Island. This River being carried in a great channell, maketh many famous Islands by encompassing them about; and having many Bayes as it were, and severall branches, it doth divide and give limits to divers Provinces. Northerne Iutia is fertile in producing and bearing Fruits, Corne, Barley, and the like: It hath also in some places very fruitfull pastures. It aboundeth with so many heards of Oxen, and bringeth up so many Cowes, that it sendeth an incredible number of cattle into forreine Countries, and especially into Germany, whither there are yearely brought almost 150 thousand Oxen, besides Cheese, Butter, Tallow, and Hides. It doth bring forth an excellent breede of Horses, of which a great number are transported to other places. Iutia heretofore was subject to the Saxons, but not the other Northerne Countries. Out of this Country the Cimbri 150 yeares before Christs birth, came and fell upon Italie like an impetuous storme, to the great terrour thereof. For they having joyned to themselves the Teutons, the Tigurines, and Ambrones, conspired utterly to extinguish the Roman Empire. Syllanus could not resist the violence of their first approach, nor Manilius their second on-set, nor Caepio the third. All of them were put to flight and beaten out of their Tents, insomuch as Florus thinketh they had beene quite undone and overthrowne if Marius had not lived in that age. This Cimbrian warre continued eight yeares after the Consulship

of Syllanus, even to the fift Consulship of Marius, who at the River Athesis, called by the Germanes Etsch, and by the Italians L'adica, did quite cut off their Army consisting of Cimbrians, Teutons, and and Ambrones. But because in this place wee have by chance made mention of the Cimbrians, whose name is famous in Histories, we will speake somewhat more of them: and because Iunius a learned man doth discourse most learnedly of them, I will not thinke it much to set downe his owne or other words to the same effect.

It appeares in Moses Bookes, saith he, that Iaphes had a sonne called Gomer, or by changing of a letter Comer, which word signifies with the Hebrewes one perfecting a circle. But the genuine sense of the word, (hitherto unknowne to Writers unskilfull in the Cimmerian language, because none hath declared the obscuritie) will bee as manifest and cleare as the Meridian Sunne, i^ you gently breake the word in pieces. For what other thing does ^^om her, being disjoyned, signifie in that language, or if you pronounc^ it Gomer, than I goe about in a circle, or I finish a perfect course? Hence also is that orbicular order of Artes, which the Grecian Writers cal^ Encyclopedia, and Fabius the circle of learning, (because it is endlesse as a ring) called Gomera. Rightly therefore that auspicious name hapned unto the offspring of Iaphet, which spread themselves over the World, and as the name doth signifie, did finish that course th^^ was given and prescribed to them by lot, having travell'd over al^ Countries from the rising of the Sunne to the setting thereof. For (...) man is so rude and ignorant in the knowledge of Historie, that knoweth not that the Gothes and Vandales (who were the ofspring of the Cimmerians or Cimbri) did possesse both the Hesperiaes. Wherefore, since by the consent of all men the Cimmerians did descend from Gomer, who at first did possesse the inward part of Asia, and being expell'd by the Scythians, repairing Westward did passe into Scandia, and from thence unto the Cimbrian Chersonesus, I see no reason how a more convenient name can bee given to Gomer the Author of the Cimbrian Nation, and to the people retaining their fathers na^^ than from the desire of circuiting and wandring about. For I think no man hath read of any Nation that hath travelled a greater circuit of earth, as Iosephus, an accurate Writer of the Iewish antiquities, doth perspicuously and diligently explaine when he writeth that the post^rity of Gomer comming out of Armenia, did runne out into the Riv^^ Tanais, and from thence with their multitudes, did overspread al^ Countries of Europe, as farre as the utmost coasts of the Gades. Plutar^ in the life of Marius hath clearely explained the desire that was in the Nation to propagate and finish this their course when hee reported thus of them. The Cimbrians, as often as they change their seates, do^ attempt the neighbour Countries by warres, yet not with a daily or continuall violence, but every yeare when the season serveth they make some inroade, and seeing there are divers and severall names of people amongst them, they call their troupes by a common appellation Celtoscythians. Some do report that there was no great company of Cimbrians, who were anciently knowne to the Grecians, but that some banished men or seditious persons, cashiered by the Scythians,




map of Denmark
THE SECOND TABLE OF DENMARKE.



passed fromNow called Mar delle Sabacche. Maeotis into other parts of Asia under the conduct of Lygdamis: and that the greatest and most warlike part of the Nation did seate themselves on the outmost coasts of theOr Northerne Sea, called now Mare Cronium, or Mare Scythecum. Ocean, and did inhabite a darke Country, which in regard of the high and thicke woods, reaching even to the Forrest of Hircynus, was to the Sunne-beames inaccessible. Hitherto I have for the most part rendred his owne words: but I understand not whence Plutarch from the Germane Etymologie, or Festus Pompeius from the French, can prove that the Cimbrians were called theeves and robbers, unlesse wee take hired Souldiers for theeves and robbers, or unlesse it seeme that Plutarch did referre it to the manner of warring peculiar to that Nation, who did set upon their neighbours with secret ambushment and assaults like theeves, for he relates that Italy was strooken with feare by their fierce inrodes, when they understood that a Nation of no name or setled habitation, was like a sudden cloud of raine ready to fall upon their heads. Hitherto Iunius. This Iutia is divided into foure large Episcopall Seats,The Townes. into the Ripensius, which is kept at Ripen, the Arhusian which is at Arhusium, the Vandalica^ which is at Alburg, and the Wiburgian which is at Wiburg. The Ripensi^^ Diocese hath 30 Prefectures, seven Cities, and ten royall Castles. Queen Dorothy the widdow of Christian the third erected and built a Schoole at Kolding, at her owne proper charge and cost. The Arhusian Diocese hath one and thirty Prefectures, seven Cities, and five Castles, Ar^^sium or Arhusen is a famous Mart-Towne, in regard of its Haven made by the great Promontorie of Hellen, which extendeth it selfe through the Country of Mols, from the royall Castle Kalloe, even to the high Mountaine Ellemansbergh, and by its owne situation, and some Islands lying neare unto it, maketh the Sea very placable and calme for Marriners. Under this Diocese there are the Islands Samsoe, Hielm, Tuen, Hiar^^, sometimes called Gerno, Hilgenes, and many other. The Vandalican Diocese, called also the Diocese of Burglaw, hath thirteene Prefectures, and sixe Cities. The most speciall parts thereof are Wendsyssel, Handhaeret, Thyland, and Morsoe. Wendsyssil or Vensilia, that is the Land o^ Seat of the Vandalls hath sixe Prefectures, three Townes, and one Castle. Here is the Mountaine Alberg, in which are certaine Monuments of Gyants, the adjacent Isles are Grysholm, Hertsholm, Tydsholm and others. In Handhaeret is a Rocke of great height, called Skarringelint, and on the coast thereof those two quick-sands, which they call Sandores and Braccae. The Isles subject unto it are Oland and Oxeholm. Thyland hath foure Prefectures, one Towne called Thystad or Tystet, where Christian the third built a Schoole for the nurture of Youth, and one Castle called Orumna. Under it are the Islands Hansholm, Ostholm, Iegen, Cifland, Egholm, Bodum. Morsia hath three Prefectures, the Citie Nicoping, the Castle Lundslod or Lundgard, and an Island adjacent neare unto it, called Ageroa. The Diocese of Wiburg doth containe sixteene Prefectures, three Cities, and as many Castles. At Wiburg the generall Councell of the most Noble and wise Trium-viri, concerning enquiring into, and judging of civill matters, is continued almost all the yeare, unlesse sometimes when they are wearied with that troublesome office, they refresh themselves, and recollect their strength in their owne Country houses.

Hither are brought the causes of all the Cimbrian Chersonesus, as complaints of bounds, controversies concerning inheritance, and all capitall causes, as slaughters, adulteries, thefts, poysonings, etc. Neare to the Peninsula Wenslia, where ending in a Cone, it bendeth by degrees toward the East, is that corner of Iutia, so perilous and fearefull to Marriners: for a great ridge of rock^s runne so farre into the Sea, that those who would bee free from danger, come not neare to the shoare by 8. miles. Such also is all the Westerne shoare of Iutia, so that those who purpose to sayle into Norwey, or out of the Ocean Eastward, are enforced to take a large compasse to avoyde it: and to this purpose there are foure Mountaines on this shoare, which the Marriners observe as Sea-markes. The Inhabitants of this Country seeing they have no fit Haven for ships to ride in, draw them out of the deepe upon the shoare so farre, that the waves of the Sea by beating upon them cannot bruise them.The Sea. In this Sea there is plenty of fish, and especially of Herrings;The commodities.The manners of the people. and therefore the Inhabitants use fishing much. These things being declared, I will adde something not impertinent to conclude this place withall, which is, that the people in these Northerne Countries have beene, and yet are cold and drie, of a large stature, faire complectioned, well coloured, merrie, jocund, suspitious, crafty, and provident in businesse, healthfull, proud, loving to their friends; they eate and drinke much, they digest well, and therefore live long, they abound with bloud, they are blunt in behaviour, and in regard of much heate about their heart, they are quarrellous and contentious, they love dangers, hunting and travelling, they are obstinate in defending their owne opinions, and yet mindefull of Justice, they are very docible and apt to attaine Languages, they are lovers of the Muses, and doe strictly performe their covenants and bargaines, they have many children, which the weomen with great difficulty bring forth; their woemen are also beautifull, and both wise and sparing in the government of their Familie: but they die for the most part of Catharres, the Kings evill, the Pleuricy, the Fistula, the Dropsie, or Ptisicke. Achilles Gassarus affirmeth that Guns were here first invented by a Monke.



THE THIRD TABLE OF DENMARKE. Jn which are part of the Dukedome of SLESWICH and HOLSATIA.
The Dukedome of Sleswick.SO much concerning Northerne Iutia, the Southerne ^^^loweth, which the Ancients did call Nordalbingia, because it is seperated and parted toward the North from the (...) of Germanie, by the riverCalled by the Germans Elve, which signifieth in their tongue eleven, because it hath so many fountaines, whence so called. Albis. It containeth the (...) Dukedomes of Sleswick and Holsatia, of which wee will speake in order. The Dukedome of Sleswick taketh his name from the Metropolis and ancient Mart Towne of Sleswick. Heretofore this Countrie was called the Dukedome of Iutia, which Woldemare Nephew (...) Abel King of Denmark received to hold in fee of King Ericus, about (...) yeare 1280. But the Royall Line of the Kings and Dukes being exti^^^ and the Dukedome of Sleswick being thereby fallen to the Crown^ Margaret Queen of three Kingdomes gave it to Gerard Earle of Hols^ on this condition,The ancient Government. that hee should acknowledge to hold it of the (...) of Denmarke.The Townes. The Cities which are subject to this Dukedome, bec^^ they have the same priviledge with other parts of Denmarke, therefo^^ they have the same Lawes with them. The Subjects may appeale from the Sentence of the Magistrates of any place to the Princes and th^^ Senators, and not farther, as it is provided by their priviledges. But (...) generall government of both these Dukedomes belongeth to the King of Denmarke, and the Duke of Holsatia by turnes. When it is devolv^^ and doth fall to the King, it is governed by his Substitute in his name The chiefe Towne of this Dukedome is Slesvicum, commonly called Schleswick. It hath its name from a German word, in regard it is situa^^^ neere Slia, in the Bay of the Baltick Sea: for Wick signifies in the Sax^^ language both a Towne, and a crooked winding or Bay of the Sea, (...) Becanus hath observed in his Bookes of Gothish and Danish matters. Cr^^Zius and those who have writ the Saxon Histories, doe give it an other appellation besides Sleswick, which is still in use with the Danes and Fr^^landers: for they call this Towne in their language Heidebui or Heid^^^, because, they say, it was first built by a certaine Queene of Denmark, whose name was Heth. It hath a convenient situation for traffick, and a convenient Haven for commerce and trading. Not farre from this Towne is seated the Castle Gotorpi. Heere is a famous Custome or Toll, for it hath beene observed, that in plentifull yeares, fifty thousand Oxe^ being driven out of Denmarke into Germanie, have heere beene paid toll for. There is also in this Dukedome, Flensburg, a famous Towne, lying among the high Mountaines, neere the shore of the Easterne Sea. It

map of NorwayTHE THIRD TABLE OF NORWEY.

hath a Haven so convenient, deepe, and safe, that many of the Citizens may loade and unloade ships even at their owne doores. And heere are the Townes Husenum or Hussum, and Haderslebia. This Dukedome hath onely one Bishoprick, two Chapters, three Monasteries, and divers Castles belonging to the Prince and his Nobles.The Senators. The order of Senators, whereof I have heretofore made mention, doth consist of the number of 24 persons of the Gentry, to whom is joyned a generall Chancellour, and two Doctors of the Law.

The Dukedome of HOLSATIA.
Holsatia whence so called.SOme doe suppose, that Holsatia was so called from the many Woods and Forrests which are in it, for the Cimbrians and Low Germans doe call a wood holt: and some doe derive the Etymologie of the word from a hollow stone, because the Dukes of Holsatia were formerly called Dukes of the hollow Stone.The Situation It is bounded on the East with the River Bilena, on the West with Stora or Steur, on the South with Albis, and on the North with Eider.The qualitie of the Soyle. The Countrie it selfe is woody and full of Forrests, whence they have such store of fuell, that they are able to supplie Freesland with wood, when they themselves also doe keepe great fires. But although their woods are very spatious, so that they seeme to have no end, yet they seldome have any great Oakes in them, but are full of Beech-trees, with whose waste an innumerable sort of Hogges are fatted. The Land, for the most part, doth afford them every three yeares great store of fishing, and a very rich and plentifull harvest. For three yeares together it is tilled, sow'd, and mow'd, and three yeares afterward the Lakes are let in, to feede the fish and grasse, thereby a certaine fat and slimie matter is brought in,The varietie of living Creatures. which doth fertilize the fields. This place beares neither Vines nor Olives; but there is much hunting of wilde beasts. And this Countrie doth breede a great number of horses. Holsatia is divided into foure parts, Dithmarsh, Holsatia, Stormaria, and Wagria. These were heretofore Counties, and afterward chang'd into a Dukedome, by Frederick the third Emperour, at the suite and request of Christierne the first, who now is charged to maintaine 40 horsemen, and fourescore foot, for the use of the Roman Empire. Dithmarsh at the first enjoy'd freedome and libertie for some hundred yeares;The ancient government. and albeit it were granted by the Emperour Frederick to Christierne the first in fee, yet it was not at that time subjected. Afterward his Sonnes, King Iohn, and Duke Frederick did undertake to make an expedition against it, in the yeare of our Lord 1500, but the Dithmarsians having overthrowne their Armie, defended their owne libertie, untill they were conquer'd and overcome by the Nephews of Christierne the first, namely Duke Iohn, Adolphus, and Frederick the second King of Denmarke, in the yeare of our Lord 1559. In Holsatia are these Cities, first Segeberg, in Wagria, a Countrie of Holsatia, 16 miles from Lubeck. 2, Itzohoa, a faire Towne in regard of the nature and situation of the place, and the resort of ships unto it. 3, Stormaria is encompassed, and, as it were, embraced in the armes of a fishie and navigable River, which arising in the inner parts of Holsatia, doth wash the wals of certaine Townes, and the

noble Ranzovian House of Bredenberg, and afterward doth discharge it selfe into the River Albis. Heere is in this Countrie Chilonium, commonly called Kile, which is an ancient Towne, and hath a large Haven, in which (to the great commoditie of the Holsatians) divers sorts of merchandize are brought out of Germanie, Livonia, Denmarke, and Swethland. Also Krempe, and Reinholdsburg or Rensburg, the former taketh his name from the River gliding by it, the later from the first builder. Here are moreover Meldorp, Heiningsted or Henste, and Tellingsted in Dithmars,This Town was anciently but a little Castle, and called Hochburg. and Hamburg the Metropolis of Stormaria, a renowned Mart-Towne neere the River Albis, which after many devastations and calamities suffered in the warres, was at last reedified, and in the time of Henry the fourth Emperour, it began to be encompassed with wals, and to be beautified with three Gates and twelve watch-towres. In this Citie Albertus Crantzius, an eloquent and true Historian lived and was buried. This Countrie is full of Lakes, and especially Dithmars, whose Inhabitants (trusting to the benefite of their Lakes) did refuse to acknowledge obedience to the Kings of Denmarke, though of late they have beene compell'd thereunto. The chiefest River of note which watereth this Countrey is Egidora or the Eidera, there are also some others, the most whereof may rather be called Brookes or Rivulets than Rivers: but the Baltick Sea, in that part where it washeth the Dukedomes of Holsatia and Sleswick, hath safe and pleasant Bayes, which are safe harbours for Merchants, and weather-beaten ships. In some places also it affordeth great store of fish, and especially of Salmons. It is a plaine Countrey, seldome raised with any mountaines, yet one it hath betweene Lubeck and Hamburg, of a pleasant situation, and famous for the ornaments of peace and warre, with which Henry Rantzovius did adorne it. It hath an ancient Castle seated on it, famous for the antiquitie and first builder thereof, and at the foote of the hill a Towne adjoyning to it. Heere are many woods, with which the Countrey of Holsatia is beset and replenished,The Woods. but especially Dithmars, as the woods of Borcholt, Burgholt, Alverdorpenholt, Resenwalde, and many others.The Senators. The Holsatians had heretofore 48 men, who were Presidents and Governours of the whole Countrie; to these they made their appeale out of the severall Parishes, and they did judge all matters. But they being subdued, and the Countrie now divided into two parts, in each of them there are twelve speciall and principall men, together with a Prefect, who, for the most part, is a Doctor or Licentiate at Law. These have all yearely pensions from the Princes, and they have a Clerke joyned to them, as also an Overseer or President out of the Holsatian Nobilitie. The one of these Prefects, which is for the King, is called the Prefect of Steinburg, and the other being for the Duke, the Prefect of Gottorpe. Yet the Subjects have leave to appeale or make suite to the Princes and Senators of either Dukedome, as well of Sleswick as Holsatia, but not further. They had heretofore a written Law, which now by degrees is changed, and reformed according to the Common Law, compiled by Henry Rantzovius the Kings Substitute,The Lawes and Institutions. by Sigefrid Rantzovius, heretofore Lord of Nienhs, the Lord Adam Trazigerus, and the Lord Erasmus Kirslemius, according to which Law all causes are decided, and punishments pronounced against delinquents and offenders.
Holsatia hath foure Orders or degrees of people: The Nobles, the Clergie, the Citizens, and the Countrie-men, whereof there are two kindes, for some possesse goods of their owne being hereditarie and free; others hired goods or lands, for which they pay rent and doe certaine services. The Nobles have Castles and Lands, together with the royalty of hunting, fishing, and hawking, which, for the most part, are hereditarie unto them.The Noble Families. The whole Countrie hath not above 24 Families, whose names are mentioned in the Holsatian Chorographie, but divers Families there are that are descended from the same stock, as the Rantzovians doe at this time possesse an hundred and fiftie Castles, and divers other possessions. The Aleseldians and Powischians have almost as many. Holsatia hath one Bishoprick, namely Lubeck, for the Bishoprick of Hamburg is subject to the Bishoprick of Breme. The contentions which happen among the Nobles are judged by a Senate of Dukes, the Princes, for the most part, sitting Presidents in judgement as it is provided by their priviledges and Lawes. From the order of Senators any one putting in a sufficient caution may appeale to the Imperiall Chamber. The Citizens enjoy priviledges peculiar to themselves, and use the Roman Law, or else the Lubeck. The Subjects may appeale from the judgement of the Senate of their owne Citie, to the judgement of foure Cities, appointed to judge and determine of all speciall matters. From them againe they are permitted to appeale to the Princes and Senators of Holsatia, and also further even to the Imperiall Chamber, so that fit securitie be put in. Countri-mens cases or suites are pleaded by their Lawyers, even in the open fields, where are present the Noble-men thereabout, the Prefects, and two Assistants. There they come forth and doe make their appearance, who have any suit one against an other; the Defendant and Plaintiffe being both heard, the whole company or assemblie of Countrie-men are bidden to goe forth; and then their causes being diligently weigh'd on both sides, they returne againe, and the suiters being called in, they give sentence in their case according to Law and right.




THE FOVRTH TABLE OF DENMARKE. CONTAINING FIONIA WITH THE ISLANDS LYING ROUND ABOUT IT.
SO much according to our Method concerning the Dukedome of Sleswicke and Holsatia: Fionia followes with the Isles lying round about it. Fionia,Fionia whence so called. commonly called Fuynen is the chiefe of all other Isles lying in the Bay of Codonus from Zeland.The Situation. It taketh its name from the beautie thereof, both in regard of the forme and situation. It is separated from the Continent of Denmarke, by so small and narrow a Sea flowing between them, called Middlefar, that it seemeth almost to cleave unto the Continent. This Iland as it looketh on the West toward Iutia, so on the East toward Zeland. It is 48 miles in length, and 16 in breadth. The Land (that I may omit the Sea which is full of fish) is a fruitfull soyle,The fruitfulnes of the Soyle. and very profitable to the husbandman. For it aboundeth with such plentie of corne, that it sends store thereof yearly to other farre Countries, especially Wheate and Barley. And the ground, albeit it be very fruitfull and endowed with the gifts of Ceres, yet it is never dunged. Whence the Cities and Townes thereof are annoyed with filthy smells of the dung of cattle, which is cast out, being thereof no use, as Munster writeth. This Countrie aboundeth with so many Droves of Oxen,The varietie of living creatures. and breedeth such a number of Cowes and Horses, that it sends yearly into Germany great Heards and Droves of them. And in regard of the many woods which are in the Island, there is great store of game for hunting, as Harts, Hares, and Foxes.The Cities. In the middle of it is the Metropolis or mother Citie called Ottania, or Ottonium commonly called Ottensel being a Bishops Seat, built as it appeares by many testimonies by Otto the first, about the time when he compeld King Herald to receive the Christian faith. This Citie is a famous Mart for the whole Island, in which about Epiphanie or Twelfetide there is a great meeting of the Islanders and especially the Nobles, as there is at Kile in Holsatia. Fionia is divided into five and twentie Prefectures, sixteene Cities, and six royall Castles. The other cities are in a manner equally distant from Ottonia, which is as it were the Center, and are so built of the Sea shoare, that in regard of the conveniencie of the Havens, they traffique not onely in the Balticke Sea, but also exercise their negotiations throughout all Swethland, and Norwey, Russia, the Low-countries, and Germany: the chiefe amongst them are Niburch, Swynburch, Foborch, Assens, Bowens, Middlefart, or Milvart, and Kettemynde, or Cortemund. The chiefe royall castles are Newburg, Hagenschow, Hinsgagel, Eschburg, and the Court of Rugard. Here are many Villages,

and not a few Noble-mens houses. For this Island in regard of the pleasantnesse of the Climate, and fertilitie of the soyle is much esteemed by the Nobles. The sea doth yeeld great plentie of fish, and every Bay is so full thereof, that ships or boats being over set with them can hardly saile or row against them, which yet they do not take with any fishing engines, but with their hands. Those who dwell by the Sea side, besides tillage and husbandrie, doe use fishing, both which do furnish the^ with all things necessarie for house-keeping. There are some places in this Island famous for warlike atchievements done not many yeares past.The commodities of the Sea. For there is a certaine mountaine called Ochenberg, not farre from the Castle Hagenschow, in which Iohn Rantzovius Knight and Generall of the field, for King Christian the third, in a great battle did overthrow Christopher Count of Oldenburg, in the yeare of Christ 1530, on the eleventh day of June, in which conflict were slaine two Counts, the one being the Count of Hage, the other of Tecklenburg, whose bodies being afterward taken up out of the field were brought to Ottonia, and buried in Canutus his Church about the same time also on the Mountaine Fa^c^burg, which is 4 mile distant from the Towne Ascens, some thousands of the Rebels were slaine and put to flight. This Countrie is adorned with many woods in which are great store of wild beasts. In the citie of Ot^^nium there are two famous Temples or Churches, one consecrated to Canutus,The publike buildings. the other to Saint Francis. In this latter Iohn King of Denmarke, and his sonne Christierne, when they had spent 37 yeares in banishment and captivitie, were buried in the yeare 1559: about the other is a large and spacious court-yard, in which the King of Denmarke did renew his ancient league of friendship, with the Dukes of Holsatia and Sleswick^, An. 1580, they report also that the mother of King Christian the second did place up a certaine Altar here belonging to the Minorite Friars, a wonderfull curious piece of worke carved in wood, the like whereof is not to be found in Europe.The Islands. Out of this Island from the Towne Asc^^ it is eight miles into Iuitland or Iutia, and from Nyburge into Zeland is a passage of sixteene miles long through the Baltieke Sea, which is very dangerous, especially if the Sea be rough, for when the East Sea being increased by the receit of many rivers is thrust forward with a violent course, it often happens that contrarie windes do raise such mightie waves, and make the sea so unquiet, that Mariners are many times to great danger drawne in with these gulphlike windings of the waters and sometimes swallowed up by them. And so much concerning Fionia: now let us passe to the other Islands. Under Fionia are contained ninety Islands situated toward the South, and the most of them habitable: the chiefe whereof are these:Langeland. Langeland, Lawland. Falstre, Aria or Arr, Alsen, Tosing, and Aroe. Langeland is 28 miles in length. In it there is a Towne called Rudkeping, and Traneker a royall Castle, beside many villages, Parishes, and Noble-mens houses.Lawland. The fertilitie of the Soyle. Lawland is separated by the strait of Gronesand from Zeland, and by a small arme of the Sea from Falstre. It is so fruitfull in corne and filberd Nuts, that ship-loads are brought from thence into other Countries.The Townes. It hath five townes which are these, Nistadt, Nasco, Togrop, Roth, and Marib: besides royall Castles, Noble-mens houses, many Parishes and Villages.Falstre Falstre is 16 miles long, and hath these two Cities

map of DenmarkTHE FOVRTH TABLE OF DENMARKE.

Stubecopen, and Nicopen, which in regard of the pleasantlesse and beautie thereof is called the Naples of Denmarke. Out of this Island neare a royall Pallace, there is a frequent passage into Germany, namely to Warnemund, which is 28 miles long. It furnishes neighbour countries every yeare with much corn. Aria being distant 6 miles fro^ Elysia, is cloathed with woods, and therefore affordeth much recreation for hunters, it hath three Parishes, and some Noble-mens houses, with the Towne and Castle of Coping. It belongs together with Elysia to the Dukedome of Sleswicke, and is under the government of the Duke thereof. Elisia or Alfa, commonly called Alfen, is an Island of a reasonable bignesse, for it is 16 miles in length, and 8 in breadth, being not farre distant from the Dukedome of Sleswicke, and looking toward the Bay die Flensburger Wick, it is parted by it from the first seat of the English. The Rantzovian Musaum tells us that the Romans did call these Islanders Elisians. As also those who inhabit the next Island, Arians: which appellation or name they still retaine to this day. Ptolomie relateth, that the English were the ancient inhabitants of the Northerne Countries, by the Sea side: to which Tacitus addeth the Elisii, Arii, and the Monimy, whose names also are still used in the Islands Alsen, Arr, and Moen. There is a Towne in Alsen or Elisia called Sunderburg and a Castle of the same name, with other Townes, as Norborch, Osternholm, Die Holle, and Gammelgard. It hath thirteene populous Parishes, whence it can set forth many thousands of Souldiers. It is very wooddy, by reason whereof it affordeth Harts, and many kindes of wild beasts for hunting. It hath great store of Sea-fish and fresh-fish, and much wheat, and it is every where fit for feeding and pasturing of cattle. Tussing or Tosinga being the chiefe Isle among all the other Islands, lyeth neare unto a towne of Fionia called Swineburg, and is foure miles in length. In this Island besides Parishes, there is the Pallace of Kettrop, belonging to the Rosenkransians, and Rantzovians. Aroe is situated neare the Dukedome of Sleswicke where they passe to the Towne Alcens in Fionia by the Arsensian Bay, and hath foure Villages. There are also these Islands, Ramso, Endelo, Ebilo, Fenno, Boko, Brando, Toroe, Aggerius, Hellenis, Iordo, Birkholm, etc. Let so much suffice to have beene spoken concerning Fionia, and the Islands lying round about it. And now to conclude, I will here, rather then no where, adde unto the rest a Description of Huena or Ween seated in the Sound, in which is the Castle of Vraniburg, filled with many accurate and elaborate Astronomicall instruments, The middlle of this Island, where this Castle standeth, hath the Pole elevated about it 56 Degrees and 55, and is situate from the West 55 Degrees. It is in compasse 8160 paces, every pace being 5 foote, so that the whole circuit of it is equall unto two common German, 18 English miles. This Island being placed in the most famous strait of the whole Kingdome through which many ships saile out of the Easterne into the Westerne Sea: and on the contrarie with a gooly prospect hath in view many chiefe Townes of this Kingdome, which stands as it were round about it; in Zeland Hafnia, 12 miles distant from it South, Southwest also Helsinger, (where those ships that saile or passe by, do pay custome or tribute) and the Castle Cronaburg both distant from it on the Northwest 8 miles, Helsingburg which lies on the shoare of Scania, is as

farre distant from it toward the North, and on the same shoare is Landskrone being foure miles from it: toward the East lyeth Lunda or Londen, which although it be not a Sea-towne,The fruitfulnesse of the Soyle. yet is but 16 miles distant from hence. And although the Island be not very great, yet no part of it is barren or unfruitfull, but produceth great store of frui,t and aboundeth with cattell, it bringeth forth Does, Hares, Cunnies,The varietie of living Creatures. and Partridges in great plentie, and is very convenient for fishing. It hath a wood of Hasell trees, which are never worme-eaten, but hath no Dormise. Heretofore it was remarkable for foure Castles, whose names do yet remaine, Synderburg, which was seated on the Southerne shoare, Norburg on the opposite Northerne shoare. Karheside which stood toward the East side of the Island, and Hamer toward the West, the foundation of these foure Castles may be yet seene, but there are no ruines thereof remaining. This Island lyes very deepe in the Salt-sea, and yet it hath many fresh Rivers and Springs, among which there is one Spring that never freezeth with the violence of the Winters cold, a strange thing in these Countries.




BORVSSIA, OR PRVSSIA.
The name, and whence so called.BORVSSIA being the farthest coast of Germany, take^^ its name from the people called Borussians, as Erasmus S^la witnesseth. These, as Ptolemy affirmeth, placed the^selves by the RiphaeanRather by the Riphaean woods which are a part of Hy^cinia, for there are no Hills as Ortelius observeth. The Situation. Hills, where they runne out Northward, not far from the head of Tanais arising out of the^ and weary of their owne habitations, with a strong head and viole^^ force, they seated themselves in these places, and called the wh^^^ Country from their owne name Borussia, which now by wiping out (...) letter, and pronouncing another more softly, is called Prussia. Bor^^^ beginning from the River Vistula, which boundeth it on the West, (...) running to the Balticke Sea,The qualitie of the Soile, and fertility therof. which compasseth the Northerne side the^^ of, hath the Alani or Lituanians, on the East, and on the South the ^^maxobij, i. the Scythians inhabiting the European Sarmatia. It hath a ple^sant ayre, but somewhat cold: All the Country is more fruitfull that the neighbour Provinces. The ground is very fertile in bearing of co^^ and such as farre excells the corne of Poland and Lithuania. It hath a great store of Bees and Honey,The variety of living creatures as any of the other Northerne Countries. There is also in it much cattle, and great store of game for ^^^ting. The great and vast woods bring forth many kindes of wild be^^^ as Beares and Boares, with which they abound, yeelding a sort of Be^^^ very strong and swift, called Bubali. They bring forth Buffons being wilde kinde of Oxen, and wilde Horses, whose flesh the Inhabitants (...) eate. They bring forth Alces, which they commonly call Elandes: (...) white Weesels or Ferrets. The Borussians for the most part were Idol^ters untill the time of the Emperour Fredericke the second, in what raigne, and in the yeare 1215. someThese Marian or Dutch Knights had the first institution of their order under the walls of Achon. Anno 1190. Knights of the Dutch order, or the order of the Crosse did overcome them, and taught them the Christian Religion. After the Provinces and Cities of Borussia, An. 1419. being mooved thereunto by the covetousnesse and cruelty of those of the order of the Crosse, did revolt to Casimirus King of Polonia. And 30 years after the first defection revolting againe, they sold Mariburg with other Castles and Cities to the King for 476000A Floren is according to the English valuation, three shillings. Florens. But the Mari^^ refusing to yeeld obedience to the King, they a long while contended by a doubtfull and uncertaine warre, untill at last the whole Country came into the hands of Albert Marquesse of Brandenburg, the last Governour of that Order, who afterward at Cacrovia was made a Duke, and a secular Prince by Sigismund King of Polonia. They report that Prince Venedusus did divide Borussia into twelve Dukedomes, whereof these a^^ the names:The names of Cities. Sudavia, Sambia, Natangia, Nadravia, Slavonia, Bart^^^^, Galinda, Warmia, Hockerlandia, Culmigerin, Pomesania, and Michlo^^^*

map of PrussiaBORVSSIA, OR PRVSSIA.

Sudavia was so wasted by those of the order of the Crosse, that now of a Noble Dukedome at this day there are scarce seven Townes remaining, and those very meane. In Sambia are many Cities, as Lebenicht built in the yeare 1256: Kneyback built in the yeare 1380. Regimount, called by the Germans Keningsberg, and built in the year 1260 by Duke Albert. Fischusen built in the yeare 1269: and lastly Lechstet, built in the yeare 1289. In Natangia there are these Cities, Valdonia, Girania, Zinten, Crentzburg, Heiligenbeil, Fridland, Shippenbeil, and Brandenburg. In Nadravia there are a few Cottages onely remaining, but all the Townes of note wasted. In Slavonia are these Cities, Ragnet, Tilse, Renum, Liccow, Salaw, Labis, Tapia, Vintburg, Christaderder, Baytia, Cestia, Norbeitia, Vensdorfe, Angerbury, and Dringford. In Bartonia are these Townes, Nordenburg, labansburg, Iurgburg, Insterburg, Richtenerder, Barton, and Rhenum. In Galinda are these Towns, Ortleburg, Rastenburg, Neyburg, Passenhume, Dreschdo^, and Luzenburg. In Warmia are Ressen, Seburg, Bitstein, Wartenburg, Allensteyn, Melsak, Heilsberg, Werinedit, and Gustat. In Hockerlandia are Brunsburg, Tolkemit, Munhuse, Scorpow, and Elbing the greatest of them all, being built on the Sea shoare, and famous for the wealth of the Citizens, and frequencie of Merchants. In Culmigeria are Turunia, or Thorn, a famous Mart Towne, built neare the River Vistula, or Weisel, in the yeare 1235. Also Culmina or Culme, Wentslaw, Althasis, Graudentz, Gilgehburg, Schonsee, Strasburg, Bretchen, Neumarckt, Pappaw, Fridech, Leippe, Lesen, Golb, Reden, Berglaw, and Lantenburg. In Pomerania is Marienburg, a large City, built in the yeare 1402. Also Newtich, Stum, Christburg, Preusmarck, Salfeld, Merinec, Holand, Lichstad, Osterod, Rosenburg, Marienweder, Garnesie, Lebmul, Hohenstein, Schonenberg, Culenburg, Neunburg,The Rivers. and Salaw. In Michlovia all is wasted and destroyed, except Straburg, onely. Prussia is a Country, in regard of the navigable Rivers, Bayes, and Havens, fit for the importation or exportation of divers commodities and merchandises. The chiefe Rivers areCalled at this day Dravaniza and anciently Visula, Bisula, and Eridanus. The commodities of the Sea. Vistula, Nemeni, Cronon, Nogent, Elbing, Vusera, Passerg, Alla, Pregel, Ossa, Vreibnitz, Lua, and Lavia. In which, as in the Lakes there are great store of fish, Moreover, on the shoares of Borussia neare the Balticke Sea, a certaine kinde of Amber is gathered, which the Inhabitants call Barstein from burning, and Augstein, because it is very good for the Eyes. The Greeks call it Electrum, because the Sunne is called Elector, having recourse as it were to the fable of Phaethon. Servius upon the eighth Aeneid saith, that there are three kindes of Amber, one of which commeth out of trees, another which is found in the earth: a third which is made of three parts gold, and one part silver. Plinie writeth that the Germanes called it Glessum or Glesse, because it is not unlike unto it, seeing both of them are perspicuous and transparent; and from thence the Romans did call this Country Glessaria. There are many kindes of it, the white hath the best smell, which was cheape at the first, the next are the yellow and waxe-colour: the yellow is the best of all, having a translucent shining colour like flames of fire. There is some which is as soft as boyled or decocted Honey, and therefore is called Honey-Amber: there is much used of this Amber in many things; being heated with rubbing, it draweth unto it chaffe and drie leaves, as the Load-stone doth Iron. Borussia

hath also woods which were never cut,The Woods. whence great store of wood is carryed away for the building of shippes and houses: they have streight trees to make Mastes for Shippes, which are carried from thence into farre Countries, and lastly they have other riches of their owne, from which the Inhabitants receive great profit; as Bees and wilde Beasts of which wee spoke before. The Country is divided at this day into Russia Regis, and Russia Ducalis. The King of Poland doth immediatly possesse either banke of the River Vistula, even to the mouth therof. Also the Island which is enclosed with Vistula and Nogo, the Towns and Castles to the new Bay, as Elbing, Tolkenit, Frawenberg, and Brunsberg, even to the mouth of Passaria, and the whole Diocese of Warmia, being large toward the South, and adorned with Townes and fields, hanging like a Bladder, in the middle part of Borussia.The manner of government. But although Borussia be immediatly subject to the King, and is but one Kingdome with Poland, yet it hath a publike Councell, Lawes and Judgements, an Exchequer, and the management of warres peculiar to it selfe. There are two Bishops in it, one of Warmia, who hath his residence at Brunsburg, and the other at Culmes. There are three Palatines, as the Palatine of Culmes, of Marienburg, and of Pomeran. Three Castles, as the Castle of Culmes, Elbing, and Gedane, commonly called Dantzick, and so many Under-chamberlaines. There are three chiefe and prime Cities, Turunia, Elbing, Dantzick. These assemble themselves together to deliberate and give Judgement in matters of controversie twice every yeare, in the moneth of May at Margenburg, and at Michaelmas at Graudents. There are eighteene Captaines or Prefects of the Kings Castles and revenues.The Senatours. As in the Palatinate of Marienburg, the Captaine of Stuma, Gneva, Meva, Stargardia. In Pomeran the Captaine of Slochovia above Tuchol, neare the River Bro, the Captaine of Sueza, Tuchol, Dernias, and Puske. In the Palatinate of Culmes the Captaines of Brodnicke, Graudents, Radine or Reden, Colba, Rogosna, Rogenhausen, and three others. The Dukedome of Borussia belonged heretofore to the Germane Order, or the order of the Crosse, being converted into an hereditary Dukedome by Albert of Brandenburg Master of the Order, and being rent away from the Germane Empire, it came into the protection and obedience of the King of Poland, in the yeare 1525. The Prince thereof taking his place in all Counsells, meetings, and assemblies next to the King. If any contention arise betweene the King and the Duke, it is decided at Marienburg or Elbing by the Kings Counsell, who are sworne by a new oath to Judge rightly. But the Nobles or others having an action against the Duke doe commence it before the Dukes Vassalls,The Lawes and Institutions. being deputed and appointed by the Duke to give judgement, and from them an appeale is permitted to the Kings and the Dukes Counsell residing at Marienburg. Every one ought there to be called into judgement where his goods are, or where hee dwelleth, neither can he be compelled to stand to forraine tryalls, and so be kept from his right. The Judges are so placed in the Provinces, that out of three named by every Province, the Duke chuseth one, to judge according to the Law of Culmes, and the Institutions of the Province: But if the Duke doe any thing against their Priviledges, Lawes, or customes, and upon suite made doe not heare their grievances, it is in

the choice of the chiefe men in the Province, without being thought to be rebellious and seditious, to flie unto the protection of the Kings Majestie of Poland, and by the vertue of some covenants and agreements betweene the King and the Duke, may request him to defend their Priviledges.The Mountaines. There are in the Dukedome of Borussia two Bishops, one of Sambia, who hath his residence at Kings Mount, commonly called Ko^ningsperg: the other of Pomesania, whose seat is at Marienwender, and these have all Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction in their owne power. Concerning the Religion and Rites of the ancient Borussians, Meletius telleth wonderfull things in his tenth Epistle to Georgius Sabinus. They worshipped Divells (saith he) instead of Gods, and now also in many places doe secretly worship them. They Religiously worshipped severall uncleane creatures, namely, Serpents and Snakes, as if they had beene the servants and messengers of the Gods; for these they kept within their houses, and sacrific'd unto them as unto their houshold Gods. They held that the Gods did dwell in Woods and Groves, and that they were to please them by sacrificing unto them in those places: and to pray unto them to send them raine or faire weather. They held that all wilde Beasts, especially the Alces living in these Woods, were to be reverenced as the servants of the Gods, and therefore they were to abstain from injuring of them. They beleeved that the Sunne and Moone were the chiefest of all the Gods. They did worship Thunder and Lightnings according to the opinion of the Heathens, and were of opinion that they might by prayers raise or calme stormes and tempests. They used a Goate for their sacrifice, in regard of the generative and fruitfull nature of that creature. They said that the Gods did inhabite in excellent faire trees, as Oakes, and the like: wherefore they would not cut downe such trees, but did religiously worship them as the houses and seates of the Gods. In such account also was the Elder tree, and many others. They were heretofore barbarous and ignorant of Learning, so that they would have thought it an incredible thing, if any one should have told them that men could make knowne their mindes one to another by the sending of letters. But of these things enough, hee that desireth to know more, let him have recourse to Erasmus Stella his antiquities of Borussi^, in his second booke thereof.



LIVONIA OR LIEFLAND.
IN my method Livonia or Levonia, commonly called Liefland, doth follow,The Countrie whence so called. concerning the originall of whose name I dare affirme no certainty. But Althamerus writeth thus of it. It may be, saith hee, that the Livonians, the farthest people of Germanie toward theSo called, because the Veneds anciently lived there. Venedick shore, dwelling under the Parallel of the Island Scandinavia, which is called Gothland, were derived from the Lemovians, but I had rather derive them from the Efflui, for that they are commonly called Eyflenders. Ptolemie also mentioneth the Levonians in his second Booke, cap. 11. And a litle after speaking of the Aestii, hee saith, that Beatus Rhenanus did correct the corrupt reading of Tacitus, and did againe rightly set downe the Nation of the Aestii. In as much as Rhenanus saith, it did appeare, that it was in the first copie Aestui in stead of Aestii, the ancient Writers of Bookes putting U for I. And Althamerus saith, if it were in the ancient copie the Efflui, hee durst affirme, that the Eyflanders were so called from them, by a litle alteration of the word. These people also are called Sudini, and their Countrie Sudina, joyning to Prussia. Some doe place the Lectunni hereabouts, from whom it may be that their name was derived. Livonia is stretched toward the Balthick Sea, or the Venedick Bay, being 500 miles in length, and 160 in breadth. Borussia, Lithuania, and Russia doe encompasse most part of it, the rest the Livonian Bay doth hemme in.The Situation and fruitfulnesse of the Countrie. The Countrie is plaine and very fertile, it bringeth forth corne in such abundance, that in deare times and yeares of scarcity it supplieth the wants of other Countries. It aboundeth also with the best flaxe, and breedeth store of cattell. Besides, there are in the woods of this Countrie many Beares, Alces, Foxes, Leopards, Cats of the mountaines, and here are many Hares,The varietie of living Creatures. which according to the season of the yeare doe change their colour, in like manner as they doe in Helvetia upon the Alpes: in the Winter they are white, in Summer of an Ash colour. And heere is such plentifull hunting of wild beasts, that the Countrie-people, though they be cruelly used by the Nobles, are not prohibited from it. In briefe, Livonia wanteth none of those things which are necessarie for the preservation and sustentation of mans life, except wine, oyle, and some other things, granted by the divine bountie to other Countries, as being under a more warme and gentle Climate, which yet are brought hither in great abundance. Livonia (being Anno 1200 by the industrie and labour of the Merchants of Bremes, and especially by the Knights of the Dutch order, brought and converted to the Christian Faith) when it had a long time suffered the miseries of forreine and civill warres,The Government. and had beene made, as it were, a prey to the neighbour Kings and Princes, at length in the yeare 1559, being under Gothardus Ketlerus the last Governour

of the Dutch Oder, it was received into the protection and government of Sigismundus the King of Poland, as a member of his Kingdome, and of the great Dukedome of Lithuania. But Gothardus resignin^ his Order on the fifth day of March Anno 1562, in the Castle of Rig^ before Nicholas Radziwilus the King of Polands Commissarie, and Pal^tine of Vilna; as first the Crosse, afterward the Seale, then his Lette^^ Patents, and all Charters which the Order had received from the Emperours and Popes, besides the keyes of the Castle of Riga, and of th^ gates of the Citie, the office of Commendator, the priviledge and powe^ of coyning money, the custome of fish, and all other rights belonging to him: hee was presently proclaimed by the aforesaid Palatine in th^^ Kings Majesties name Duke of Curland and Semigallia, and straightwa^ the Nobilitie of Curland and Semigallia did take their oath of allegeanc^ before him, as to their lawfull and hereditary Lord. The next day t^^ Duke of Curland, sitting in estate, was proclaimed in the Court of Rig^ Governour of Livonia, and received the keyes of the castle and the g^^^ of the Citie; after which the Nobility and the Citizens had all their rights and priviledges restored and confirmed unto them. Livonis (...) divided into three parts,The Cities. distinguished both by situation and language namely into Estia, Lettea, and Curlandia. The Provinces of Estia of E^^land are Harria or Harland: the chiefe Citie whereof is Revalia or Rev^ being situated toward the North, neere unto the Balthick Sea, and nothing inferiour unto Riga; it was built by Voldemata, and hath a famou^ Haven. The Citizens use the Lubeck Law, and doe coyne foure-square money. Also the Province of Viria, Virland, or Wirland, in which a^ Weisenburg, Tolsberg, and Borcholm, the Seate of the Bishop of Rev^b^ In the third place is Allantika, where is the Towne Nerva or Nerve, by a River of the same name; over against which is the Castle called I^now Gorod, belonging to the Moscovites, for the river that runnes between these townes doth part Livonia from Moscovia: also Nyschlot or Ne^^chlos. In the fourth place is Odenpoa, in which is Derpt or Topatum, a Episcopall Citie, Wernebe^, Helmet, and Ringen. In the fifth place is ^^via or Ierven, in which are Weissenstein, Lais, Overpolen or Ober Paln, and Vellin or Fellin. In the sixth place is Wichia or Wicke, wherein is Abs^^ or Hapsel, Leal, Lode, and Pernaw. Neere to the Estians lye the Island Osilia or Osel, Dageden or Dachden, Mona, Wormse or Worist, Wrange^ Kien, and many others, in which they use partly the Estian language, and partly the Swedish. The Cities of Lettea or Letten are Riga, Kokenh^ses, Wenden, and Wolmar. Riga is the chiefe citie of Livonia, neere the River Duina, which doth discharge it selfe into the Venedick Bay. This citie is fortified with a strong Wall, with strong Towres, and pieces of Ordnance against any assault, and is strengthned or fenced with double ditches and sharpe stakes round about it. It hath a Castle well provided, in which heretofore the Governour of Livonia (being of the Teutoni^^ or Dutch Order) kept his residence; and this Castle, though Gothard^ Ketlerus, aforesaid, did governe in the King of Polands right, yet hee did usurpe no authoritie over the Citie: for the Citizens being strong, and defenders of their libertie, cannot endure to have any Governour or Captaine over them. They doe onely pay tribute and yeeld obedience

map of LivoniaLIVONIA. OR LIEFLAND.

to the King of Poland, in other things they have Lawes peculiar to themselves. Besides, heere is a Market of all Northerne commodities, as of Pitch, Hemp, Waxe, Timber, and such other things. The Townes and Castles of Curland are Goldingen, Candaw and Windaw, which the Polanders call Kies, and the Germans Wenden: this Towne was famous heretofore, for that the Master of the Teutonick Order did keepe his Court heere, and Parliaments were here wont to be held; now it is defended by a Garrison of Polanders. There are also the Cities Durbin, Srunden, Grubin, Pilten, Amboten, and Hasenpot. The Cities of Semigallia are Mitovia, commonly called Mitaw, where the Duke of Curland kept his Court; also Seleburg,The Lakes. Bassenburg, Doblin and Dalem. The River Duina doth divide Semigallia and Curland from Lettea, and the rest of Livonia. In Livonia there are many Lakes, the chiefest is Beibus which is 45 miles long, and doth abound with divers kindes of fish.Rivers. The Rivers are Duina, Winds, Beca, and some others. Duina or Duna (which Ptolemie cals Turuntus, and Peucerus Rubo) running out of Russia, a great way through Lithuania and Livonia, at length eight miles below Regia powreth it selfe into the Livonick Bay and the Balthick Sea. Winda in like manner dischargeth it selfe into the Balthick Sea, which neere unto the mouth thereof is very deepe, and dangerous. The River Beca, which the Inhabitants call Einbeck, is carried in one channell to the Ocean, and there rushing down headlong from the steepe Rocks, as Leunclavius saith, doth make those deafe which dwell neere unto it, as they report the Water-fals of Nilus doth those who inhabite neere unto them. The Countrie hath no mountaines,The Woods. but is full of thick woods: for heere are the great armes of Hercynia, and other such. At the mouth of Duina neere to the Sea is Dunamunta or Dunemund (an impregnable Castle, not farre from Riga) kept by a Polish Garrison,The publick workes. to which all ships doe pay a certaine tribute as they passe by. There is also in the mid-way Blokaus, a royall fortresse, which commandeth ships as they sayle by it. There is moreover the castle and citie Felinum or Fellin, in the Dukedome of Estland, which the German hired Souldiers, together with the last Governour of Livonia, William Furstenberg, by most detestable treachery did betray to the Duke of Moscovia. Ternestum (which others call Taurum) in this Country was heretofore a strong castle, but after it had beene taken by the Moscovites, the Lithuanians marching under the conduct of their Captaine Nicholas Radziwilus Palatine of Vilna, by undermining, and by planting powder under it, did quite demolish it in the yeare 1561. In Livonia many yet doe live in a heathenish manner, and wanting the true knowledge of God,Their Rites and Customes. some adore the Sunne, some a Stone, and there are those who doe worship Serpents, and Bushes. When they are to interre and burie a dead body, they banquet freely round about the dead carkasse, and doe drinke to the dead man, powring also upon him a great pot of drinke. Afterward they put him in a Sepulchre, and lay by him an hatchet, meate, drinke, and some money for his journey, and then they crie out, Get thee gone into an other world, to rule over the Germans, as they have heere ruled over thee and thine. They first received the Christian faith under the Emperour Frederick. They account it a fault to be laborious and painfull. The women borne in the countrie carrie a great state

with them, and doe despise those women which come from other parts. They will not bee called women, but Mistresses, and they never busie themselves with any womans worke, but doe vagarie and wander abroad in the Winter time in Chariots, and in the Summer by Boate. The drinke of the countrie is Mede, Beere, and Wine (which the richer sort onely use, being brought from forraine countries) especially Rhenish Wine.Their habite The women doe disgrace the beauty and comlinesse of their bodies, by the disguisednesse of their garments. The commodities which are transported out of Livonia into Germanie and other Countries, are Waxe, Honey, Ashes, Pitch and Tarre, Hemp, Skins of divers wilde beasts, and Hides.Their commodities. Also that kinde of corne which the Latines call Secale, and wee Rye, is yearely transported in great plenty from hence into Germanie and other bordering countries. Having explained and declared thus much concerning Livonia, I hope it will bee a matter acceptable to the Reader, if heere for conclusion I shall adde some thing concerning those Lycaons, or men transformed (...) wolves, who are reported to be very frequent and common in this place. There are Writers, who thinke themselves worthy to be beleeved (among which is Olaus Magnus) that doe affirme, that in this Countrie every yeare some men are turned into wolves. I will heere set downe his owne words, thereby to recreate the minde of the Reader with the relation of an unheard of noveltie: and thus hee writes in his 18 Booke cap. 45. Although in Prussia, Livonia, and Lithuania, all the Inhabitants all the yeare are much endammaged by ravening Wolves, because every where in the woods they teare in pieces, and devoure a great number of their cattell, if they stray never so little from the flock or heard; yet they esteeme not this losse so great, as that which they sustaine, by men changed and transformed into wolves. For in Christmas, in the night time, such a companie of men-wolves doe gather themselves together, and shew such fierie cruelty both towards men and other creatures, which are not wilde by nature, that the Inhabitants of this Countrie doe receive more detriment and losse from these than from true and naturall wolves. For as it is found out by experience, they doe besiege mens houses standing in the woods with much fiercenesse, and doe strive to breake open the doores, that so they may destroy and prey upon the men and other creatures that are within. But of these things wee have spoken enough, let us goe forward to Russia.



RUSSIA, OR MOSCOVIA.
The names.RUSSIA which is called also Roxolonia, is twofold, t^^ Blacke and the White: The former bordereth on Polo^^ the latter is a part of Moscovia. Moscovie was with^^^ doubt so called from the River Moschus or Mor^^^ which giveth its name also to the chiefe Citie Mo^^ through which it floweth.The Etymologie. The Territories thereof are extende^ farre and wide, and it is bounded on the North with the Icie Sea, on th^ East it hath the Tartarians, on the south the Turkes and Polonians, and (...) the West the Livonians and the Kingdome of Swethland. In all which spaces of ground many large countries are contained,Moscovie. and therefore th^ Duke of Moscovie doth thus enstile himselfe. The Great Lord, and by the grace of God Emperour and Governour of all Russia, also Great Duke of Vol^miria.The Situation. Moscovia, great Novogrodia, Pskovia, Smolonskia, Thweria, Iuga^^ Permia, Viathkia, Bulgaria, etc. Governour and Great Prince of Novog^^^ the Lesse, of Czernigovia, Rezania, Wolochdia, Resovia, Bielloia, Rostovia, ^rostania, Poloskia, Biellozeria, Vdoria, Obdoria, and Condimia, etc. The tem^^rature of the Aire in Muscovia is immoderately cold and sharpe,The temperature of the Aire. yet (...) so wholsome, that beyond the head of Tanais toward the North (...) East, there is never any plague knowne, although they have a disease (...) much unlike unto it, which doth so lye in the head and inward parts, (...) they die in few daies of it. The Countrie in generall neither bring^^^ forth Vine nor Olive, nor any fruit-bearing tree except it be Mell^^ and Cherries, in regard that the more tender fruits are blasted with (...) cold North windes.Fertility of the Soyle. The corne fields do beare Wheat, Millet, a gr^^^ which the Latines call Panicum, and all kinde of Pulse. But their (...) certaine harvest consists in waxe and honey. Here is the wood Herc^ being full of wild beasts. In that part which lyeth toward Prussia gre^^ and fierce Bugles or Buffes are found, which they call Bison. And also th^ beast called by the Latines Alces like an Hart save that hee hath a fles^ snout like an Elephant, long legges, and no bending of the hough, and this creature the Moscovites call Iozzi,The varietie of living creatures. and the Germans Hellene. Besides there are Beares of an incredible bignesse, and great and terrible Wolves of a blacke colour. No Countrie hath better hunting and hawking that this. For they take all kinde of wild beasts with Dogges and Nets, and with Hankes which the Countrie of Pecerra doth plentifully yeeld, they kill not onely Pheasants, and Ducks with them but also Swannes and Cranes. The Countries of Russia or Moscovia are very large. All the Cities,The Government. Townes, Castles, Villages, Woods, fields, Lakes, and Rivers are under the thereof command and government of one Prince, whom

map of RussiaRVSSIA, OR MVSCOVIA.

the Inhabitants do call the great Czar, that is King or Emperour, and (...) the revenues that arise from them, are brought into the Princes exche^quer. There are no Dukes or Counts, which can possesse any thing by (...) Tenure of Freehold, or can passe the same unto their heires. Hee d^^ bestow some villages and Townes upon some, but yet hee useth the ^^bour of the husbandman, and when he list taketh them away againe. S^ that hee hath absolute command over his Subjects, and againe his S^^jects honour and reverence him as a God, and do shew obedience to (...) in all things, without any refusall. The chiefe Metropolis or mother ^tie of the whole Kingdome is Moscovia commonly called Moschwa, ^ing conveniently situated, as it is thought, in the middle of the Coun^ It is a famous Citie as for the many Rivers which meete there,The Cities. so (...) the largenesse, and number of the houses, and for the strength of (...) Castle. For it lyeth neere the River Moschus with a long row of hou^ The houses are all of wood, and divided into Parlers, Kitchings, (...) Bed-chambers: all of them have private gardens both for profit, (...) for pleasure. The severall parts of the Citie have severall Churches (...) hath two Castles one called Kataigorod, the other Bolsigorod, both wh^^ are washed with the Rivers Mos^hus, and Neglinna. Moreover in (...) there are many Countries, as first, the Dukedome of Volodimirta, wh^^ title the Great Duke doth assume to himselfe, it is named fom the ch^^ citie Volodomire being seated on the bankes of the River Desma, w^^ runneth into Volga. This Province is of so fruitfull a soile, that the ^^crease of one bushell of wheat being sowne is oftentimes twentie (...) shells. Secondly, Novogrodia which though it be inferiour unto th^ forenamed Countrie in pasturage, yet not in the fruitfulnes of the s^ It hath a woodden citie, called by the same name with the whole D^dome Novogrod, being seated where the Rivers Volga and Occa do (...) one into another. This citie had alwaies the chiefe preheminence in^gard of the incredible number of houses, for the commoditie of a br^^ and fishie Lake, and in regard of an ancient Temple much reveren^^ by that Nation, which about five hundred yeares agoe was dedicated S. Sophia.Neare to this Towne was sought the battle betweene the Sarmatians and their slaves, of which read Iustin. Here is a memorable Castle built of stone upon a rocke at (...) great Charge of the Duke Basilius. This Citie is distant from the C^^^ Moscovia an hundred Polish miles, and from Riga, the next haven town is little lesse than five hundred. Thirdly Rhezan which is a Province ^tweene the River Occa and Tanais, having store of Corne, Honey, F^^^ and Fowle: it hath these Cities built of wood, Rhezan seated on (...) banke of Occa, Corsira, Golluga, and Tulla, neare to which are the Spri^ heads of the River Tanais. Fourthly the Dukedome of Worotinia, whi^^ hath a Citie and a Castle of the same name. Fifthly, Severia which is great Dukedome abounding with all things, it hath great desart field and many Towns among which the chiefe are these, Starodub, Sicwi^sey, and CZernigow. The bees in the woods do yeeld them great store (...) honey. The Nation in regard of their continuall warres with the Tar^rians is accustowed to armes, and ready of hands. Sixthly, the Dukedome of Smolensko, which being seated neare the River Borysthenes hath a Citie of the same name, watered on the one side with Borysthenes, an^ on the other side environed with deepe ditches, and rampiers arme^

map of MoscowMORE PARTICVLAR DESCRIPTION OF SOME PROVINCES OF MOSCOVIA.

with sharpe stakes. There are also these Dukedomes and Provinces, Mosaiskia, Bielskia, Rescovia, Tweria, Pleskovia, Vodzka, Correllia, Bicleizioro, Wolchda, Vstiuga, Iaroslavia, Rostow, Dwina, Susdali, Wiathka, Permia, Sibier, Iugra, Petzora, and Novogrodia the Greater, which they call Novogr^^ Wielki in which is a very great Citie of the same name, bigger than Rome it selfe. Petzora taketh its name from the River which the mountaines and rockes do hemure in on both sides. There are spacious countries which pay Tribute to the great Duke lying northward in a great space of Land; as Obdora, in which is the Idoll called Zolota Babs, that is, the Golden old woman, also Condora, Lucomoria, and Lappia. There are many great Lakes in Moscovia,The Lakes. as Ilmen or Ilmer, also Ladoga, and the White Lake which the Inhabitants call Bielejezioro. There are also many faire Rivers,The Rivers. as first Boristhenes or Pripetus, commonly called Nioper and Nester, or by the addition of a letter Dnieper andThis River is also called by others Brisna and Berisna. Dnester. Secondly, Taruntus which is that same with Ptolemie, which Herberstemius calleth B^bo, but the Inhabitants Duina and Oby. Thirdly, the River Rha, which Ptolemie mentions, and is now called Volga and Edel. There is in this countrie the RiverThis River was anciently by the Scythians called Sylus and Amazonius. Tanais, which the Italians call Tana, the Inhabitants De^. Beside, the river Occa and the lesser Duina, called likewise Omega, etc. Here are the Montes Hyperborei or Riphaean mountaines, mentioned by Pliny in his 4 Booke Chap. 12. and by Mela in his 3 Booke, which are impassable,Mountaines. Woods. because they are cover'd over with continuall snow and ice. The wood Hercynia which Isidorus calleth the Riphaean wood, taketh up a great part of Moscovia, it is inhabited, having some few scattering ho^ses in it, and now by long labour is made so thinne that it cannot, as most suppose, shew such thick woods, and impenetrable forrests as heretofore. Moscovia hath innumerable costly Temples or Churches, and very many Monasteries. The Duke lookes to matters of government, and administration of Justice by the helpe and assistance of twelve Counsellers who are daily present in the Court.The Senators. Among them, the Prefectureships of all the Castles and Cities are distributed: and they receive the letters and Petitions which are directed to the Prince, and do answer them in his name. For the Prince himselfe receiveth no letters, neither doth hee set his hand to any that are written to his Subjects, or any forraine Prince. The Bishops are chosen out of the Friars as men of a s^^ctimonious and holy life: There are many Monasteries of these Fr^its in the Kingdome of Moscovia, and yet all of the same habit and Order, of which they say that S. Basil was the first founder. There are in the whole Kingdome of Moscovia eleven Bishops which they call Wladdicks, that is, in their language Stewards or Dispensers.The Rites and Customes. They call their Priests Poppes or Archipoppes. The Metropolitan Bishop liveth in Moscovia, who was heretofore confirmed by the Patriarch of Constantinople, but now being chosen by the great Duke onely, he is consecrated by two or three Bishops, and is displaced at the Kings pleasure. Under this Metropolitan are two Archbishops, the one at Novogardia the Greater neare the River Low^^, the other at Rostovia. There are no Universities or Colledges in all the Empire of Moscovia. The Moscovites are of the Greek religion, which they received in the yeare of our Lord 987. They suppose that the Holy Spirit, being the third person in the Trinitie, doth proceed from the Father

alone. They tooke the Sacrament of the Eucharist with leavened bread, and permit the people to use the Cuppe. They beleeve not that Priests Dirges, or the pietie or godlinesse of kindred or friends can be avaleable to the dead, and they beleeve that there is no Purgatorie. They read the Scripture in their owne language, and do not deny the people the use thereof. They have Saint Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome, and Gregorie translated into the Illyrian tongue, and out of these, as also out of Chrysostome, Basil and Nazianzenus, the Priests do publikely read Homilies instead of Sermons; for they hold it not convenient (as Iovius saith) to admit of those hooded Orators, who are wont to Preach too curiously and subtlely to the people concerning divine matters, because they thinke that the rude mindes of the ignorant may sooner attaine to holinesse and sanctitie of life by plaine Doctrine, than by deepe interpretations and disputations of things secret. They make matrimoniall contracts, and do permit Bigamie, but they scarcely suppose it to be lawfull marriage. They do not call it adulterie, unlesse one take and keepe another mans wife. They are a craftie and deceitfull Nation,Their Diet. and delighting more in servitude than libertie. For all do professe themselves to be the Dukes servants. The Moscovite line rather prodigally than bountifully, for their tables are furnished with all kinde of luxurious meats that can be desired, and yet not costly. For they sell a Cocke and a Duck oftentimes for one little single piece of silver. Their more delicate provision is gotten by hunting and hawking as with us. They have no wine made in the Countrie,Their Traffique. and therefore they drinke that which is brought thither, and that onely at Feasts and Bankets. They have also a kinde of Beere, which they coole in Summer by casting in pieces of ice. And some delight in the juice prest out of sowre cherries, which hath as cleare and pure a colour, and as pleasant a tast as any wine. The Moscovites do send into all parts of Europe excellent Hempe and Flaxe for rope-making, many Oxe-hides, and great store of Waxe.



THE DVKEDOME OF LITHVANIA, Samogitia, Blacke-Russia, and Volhinia.
SOME would have Lithuania so called from the Latine word Lituus, (that is) a Hunters horne, because the Country doth use much hunting.The Country whence so called. Which opinion Mathias a Michou rejecteth, and delivers another concerning the Etymologie thereof: for he saith that certaine Italians, forsaking Italy in regard of the Roman dissentions, entred into Lithuania, calling the Country Italie, and the Nation Italians; and that the sheepheards began first to call it Litalia, and the Nation Litalians, by preff^ing one letter. But the Ruthenians or Russians, and the Polonians their neighbours changing the word more, at this day doe call the Country Lithuania,The Situation. and the people Lithuanians. It is a very large Country, and next to Moschovia: It hath on the East that part of Russia, which is subject to the great Duke of Moscovy: on the West it hath Podlassia, Masovia, Poland, and somewhat towards the North it bounds on Borussia; but full North it looketh toward Livonia and Samogitia: and on the South toward Podolia and Vothinia.The quality of the Climate. The fertilitie of the Soyle. The aire here is cold, and the winter sharpe. Here is much waxe and honey which the wilde Bees doe make in the Woods, and also much Pitch. This Country also affordeth abundance of corne, but the harvest seldome comes to maturity and ripenesse. It hath no wine but that which is brought hither from forraine Countries, nor salt, but such as they buy and fetch out of Brittaine. It bringeth forth living creatures of all kindes, but small of growth. In the Woods of this Country there are Beastes called by the Latines Vri, and others called Alces,The variety of living creatures besides Buffes, wilde Horses, wilde Asses, Hartes, Does, Goates, Boares, Beares, and a great number of such other. Here is great plenty of Birds, and especially of Linnets. Besides in this Country and Moscovia there is a ravenous devouring beast called Rossomak^, of the bignesse of a Dogge, in face like a Cat, in the body and tayle resembling a Foxe, and being of a black colour. The Nation of the Lithuanians in former yeares was so unknowne and despised by the Russians,The Ancient Government. that the Princes of Kiovia did require nothing from them but Corke-trees, and certaine garments as a signe of their subjection in regard of their poverty, and the barrennesse of their soyle, untill Vithenes Captaine of the Lithuanians growing strong, did not onely deny tribute, but having brought the Princes of Russia into subjection, compelled them to pay tribute. His successors did invade the neighbour Nations, and by hostile and suddaine incursions did spoyle them, untill the Teutonick order of the Crosse began to warre against them, and to oppresse them, which

map of LithuaniaTHE DVKEDOME OF LITHVANIA.

they did even to the dayes of Olgerdus and Keystutus Captains of the Lithuanians. But at last Iagello, who afterward was called Vladislaus, was made great Duke of Lithuania. This man being oftentimes oppressed by those of the order of the Crosse, and by Christian Armies, did at last encline to the Polanders, and havingWhich was in the year 1386. embraced the Christian Religion, and married Hedingis the Queene of Polonia, hee was made King of Polinia, committing the government of the Country of Lithuania to his Cozen German Skirgellon, as to the supreame Duke of Lithuania. The great Dukedome of Lithuania is now divided into ten speciall Palatinates or Provinces,The Cities. the first whereof is the Palatinate of the Metropolis or chiefe Citie Vilna, which the Inhabitants call Vilenski, but the Germans commonly Die Wilde: it was built at the confluence or meeting of Vilia and Vilna by Duke Gediminus, in the yeare 1305: and is the Se^ of a Bishop, subject to the Archbishop of Leopolis, and also of the Metropolitan of Russia, who hath seven Bishops under him, that bee of the Greeke Religion, as the Bishop of Polocia, Volodomiria, Luca in Volhi^^, Luckzo, Pinsca, neare to the River Pripetus, Kiovia, Praemislia, and Lepol^, Vilna or Wilna is a populous large and famous Citie, being encompassed with a wall and gates which are never shut. The Churches thereof f^r the most part are built of stone, and some of wood: there is in it a c^^ous Monasterie of the Bernardines, being a famous structure of squa^d stone: as also the Hall of the Ruthenians, in which they sell their co^modities which are brought out of Moscovia. The second Palatinates the Trocensian, the Townes whereof are Grodna by the River Cro^ where Stephen King of Poland dyed. And Lawna at the confluence (...) Cronus, and Villia or Willia, also Kowno, Lida, and Vpita. The third P^latinate is the Minscenfian, wherein is the Citie Minsko, and the Castle Keidanow, also Radoscowice, Borissow, Lawisko or Liwsko, Swistocz, ^^broisko, and Odruck. The fourth Palatinate is the Novogrodian, in whi^^ is Novogrodeck, a large Citie, and built of wood: also Slonim, Wolkowi^ and many other Townes. The fift Palatinate is the Briestian, so call^^ from the Citie Briesti, being large, and built of wood, and here is the C^tie of Pinsko. The sixt is the Palatinate of Volhinia, in which is Lucz^ the Seate of a Bishop: also Voladamire, and Kerzemenesia. The seven^^ Palatinate is Kiovia, in which there was heretofore a large and ancie^^ Citie of the same name, seated by the River Boristhenes, as the ruin^ which lie sixe miles in length doe easily demonstrate. There are als^ the Townes Circasia or Kerkew, Kaniova and Moser. The eighth is the Palatinate of Miceslow, neare to the Rivers Sosa and Borysthenes in the borders of Moscovie, wherein are the Townes of Miceslaw, Dubrow^ Copyz, and Sklow; beside Mohilow, Bychow, Reczycza, and Strissin with their Castles. The ninth Palatinate is the Witebscian, in which is the Citie Witebsk situated by the River Duna, and Orsa, neare Borysthe^ The tenth Palatinate is the Polocensian, which is so called from Polotesk^ a Citie lying neare to the confluence of the River Polota and Duna, betweene Witsbek and Livonia: There are also the Townes, Disna, Dri^^, and Druha, with their Castles. These things being explained, let (...) speake something of the Rivers of Lithuania. On the East side Lith^ania is bounded with the Rivers Oscol,The Rivers. Ingra, and the lesser Tanais, (...)

which with many others doe runne into great Tanais. There is also in Lithuania the River Borysthenes, which arising out of a plaine marish ground, and running through Russia, doth vent it selfe at last into the Euxine Sea: and the Rivers Wilia and Niemen, the latter whereof runneth a great way with a very crooked winding streame, and at last disburthens it selfe into the Prutenick or Finnish Sea: also Duina and other Rivers, beside Lakes, and standing waters, of which the Country is full, and all these do afford great plenty of fish, which are very delectable and pleasant in taste. Moreover the Country is covered with very great and spacious woods. Sigismund that happie and auspicious King of Poland,The Woods. did unite the Palatines and Castellans of the Provinces of Lithuania into one body of a Common-wealth with the Polanders, and did designe a certaine place and order in the Senate of the Kingdome,The Senators. to all the Noblemen, Bishops, and Palatines of this Country, so that out of the Kingdome of Poland, and the Provinces united unto it, there are in the Senate fifteene Bishops, one and thirty Palatines, thirty of the greater Castellans or governours of Castles, and fiftie of the lesse, beside those who are called the Officialls of the Kingdome; as the Marshalls, the Chancellours, the Vicechancellors, and the Treasurers, of which wee will speake more largely in the description of Poland.Their manners Marriages amongst the Lithuanians are easily dissolved by mutuall consent, and they marry againe and againe. The wives have openly men-concubines by their husbands permission, whom they call connubij adjutores, i. helpers in marriage; but on the contrary, for men to follow whores is counted a reproach. When any one is condemned to die, he is commanded to punish himselfe, and to hang himselfe with his owne hands, which if he refuse to doe, hee is threatned and beaten with stripes untill he kill himselfe. Their flockes doe afford them great store of milke for their food. The common bread which they use is very blacke,Their food. being made of Rye or Barley together with the branne: but the rich mens bread is very white, being baked and made of pure Wheat. They seldome use any wine, for the common people drinke water, and such as are of abilitie drinke Ale, which they brew of divers sorts of corne, as Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oates, and Millet, but such as is unsavory. They have abundance of thicke and thinne Mede boyled in divers manners, and with it they make themselves merrie, and oftentimes drunke. Lithuania seemeth almost to be inaccessible, as being almost all overflowne with waters: but in Winter there is more convenient trafficking with the Inhabitants, and the wayes are made passable for Merchants, the Lakes and standing waters being frozen over with yce, and spread over with snow. Their chiefe wealth is the skins of beasts, as of Weesills, Foxes, and those which are more precious, as Martens, and Scythian Weesills.Their commodities. Of these they make a great profit, as also of their Waxe, Honey, Ashes, and Pitch. The best Wainscot is cut here and brought into Germany through the Balthick and Germane Sea, and out of this Country all woodden Architecture both publique and private through all Germany, and the Low countries is made, as also for the most part such woodden housholdstuffe as belongeth to houses: but enough of Luthuania, we will now adde something concerning the rest. There followes in our

Title Samogitia (which in their language signifies the Lower land) the Russians call it Samotzekasemla,Samogitia. The names. it is a Northerne Country, and very large, being next to Lithuania, and environed with Woods and Rivers. On the North it hath Livonia, on the West it is washed with the Balthick or Germane Sea, which is properly called the Balthick Bay, and towards the Northwest Borussia joyneth unto it.The fertilitie of the Soyle. It aboundeth with the best, whitest, and purest Honey, which is found in every hollow tree. It hath no Towne nor Castle;Their manners the Nobles live in Lodges, the Country people in Cottages.Their food. The people of this Country are of a great and large stature, rude in behaviour, living sparingly, drinking water, and seldome any drinke or Mede; they knew not untill of late the use of Gold, Braffe, Iron, or Wine. It was lawfull with them for one man to have many wives, and their father being dead to marrie their step-mother, or the brother being dead to marrie his wife. The Nation is much enclined to Fortune telling and Southsaying. The God which they chiefly adored in Samogitia was the fire, which they thought to be holy and everlasting, and therefore on the top of some high mountaine the Priest did continually cherish and keepe it in by putting wood unto it. In the third place is Russia,Russia. by which name in this place wee understand the Southerne or Blacke-Russia, whose chiefe Country is Leopolis or Lemb^^g built by Leo a Moscovite: it is famous by reason of the Mart kept there, and the Bishops Seat.The Citie Leopolis. Beside the Country of Leopolis there are three other in this Russia, to wit, the Country of Halycz, Belz, and Praemislia. In the fourth place is Volhinia,Volhinia. which is situate betweene Lithuania, Podolis, and Russia,The Situation. The fertilitie of the Soyle. it aboundeth with fruits in regard of the fertility of the soile. The Inhabitants are strong and warlike, and doe use the Ruthenian language. This Country did pertaine once to the great Duke of Lithuania, but now it is joyned to the Kingdome of Polonia. It hath three divisions, the Lucensian, Wolodomiriensian, and Cremenecensian, and there are three Provinciall Cities,The Cities. Lucko, Wolodomiria, and Kerzemenec, which have many Townes and places of Defence under them.Lakes. Here are many Lakes and standing waters full of fish,Woods. and woods full of wilde beasts. There is also in this Table Podolia,Podolia. situated by the River Tyras. It is a most fertile Country,The fertilitie of the Soyle. being sowed once, and reaped thrice: the meddowes are so proud and ranke, that the Oxens hornes as they graze can scarce bee seene above the grasse.The Cities. The chiefe Cities are Camienies, Bar, Medzibo^, Brezania, and Braslaw. But let these things which have beene spoken hitherto, suffice concerning this table, we passe now to Transylvania.



TRANSYLVANIA, OR SIEBENBVRGEN.
TRANSYLVANIA is the mediterranean part of ancientSo called from the Daci, the first Inhabitants, who afterward passing into the Cimbrick Chersonesus were called Dani. Dacia, which the Romans called Dacia Ripensis,The names. and it taketh its name from the woods and mountaines wherewith it is encompassed, as the Hercynian woods, and the Carpathian hils. It is called commonlyBecause it hath on the Frontiers therof 7 Castles for its defence. The Situation. Septem castra, by a ^he borrowed from the German word Siebenburgen, and the Hungarians (...) it Herdel. On the West it is bounded with Pannonia, on the North ^^th Polonia, on the South with Walachia, and on the East with Molda^^a. Transylvania is very fruitfull, and hath great plenty of corne through (...) whole Countrie, which (besides daily experience) that coyne of ^rajans doth witnesse, in which Ceres stood, holding in her right hand ^he horne of the goate Amalthaea, which signifieth plenty; and in her ^eft hand a Table, with this inscription or motto Abundantia Daciae. i. ^he abundance of Dacia.The fruitfulnesse of the Soyle. It bringeth forth excellent wine about Alba ^^lla, D^va, Egmedine, Birthilbine, and Fenuscine, It hath also great store ^f fruite, among which (to omit the rest) it hath most excellent Damaske Prunes, Quinces, sweet Cherries, which may be compar'd with those that grow in Italie, and Mellons. Heere are also excellent choyse hearbs, which grow in every place, as Rhubarbe, the greater Centory, Gentiana with a yellow and purple flowre, Sea-wormewood, the herbe called Libanotis, saffron, and many others. There are many famous Mynes of Mettall in this Country, as Mynes of Gold at Sculattin, which the Hangarians call Zalakna, and at Rimili DominurdZ, which signifies the River or Rivulet of Lords. In these places great wedges or pieces of gold are cut forth, which as soone as they are digged out they can presently make use of without any accurate refining. The Roman pieces of golden coyne which are oft digged up in these places, doe witnesse this plentie, for they have on the one side the image of a man with a broade hat, and with this inscription on it C. Cato, and on the other side, Dacia in the forme of a Goddesse, holding a Booke in her right hand with this inscription AVR: PVR. Moreover, there are silver Mynes at Offera and Radna. Copper is digged out of the same Mountaines, out of which the gold and silver commeth. Steele is digged and found at Cyk, Iron at Thorosco, and Vaidahuntada: and lastly Sulphure and Antimonie are found in the Copper Mynes. There is such great store of salt. ^pits in Transylvania, that it sendeth abundance of salt to other Countries. And there is such a great company of Oxen in it,The varietie o^ living Creatures. that the largest and fairest ones are often sold for a Floren. What shall I speake of the ^^cellent metall'd horses which it breedeth, which amble and pace naturally? What should I mention the divers kindes of Birdes? as Eagles, Faulcones, Pheasants, Partridges, Peacocks, Woodcocks, Snipes. And what should I reckon the water-fowle? as Swans, Bustards and Bitternes,

etc. I passe from these to the wilde beasts: for this Countri^^ hath great Forrests, and spacious woods, in which are Beares, Buffes (...) wilde Oxen, Elkes, Harts of a large stature, Leopards, Martins, Do^^ and white Hares. Divers Nations heretofore inhabited this Countries of whom there is yet a remnant in Hungaria, as the Iazyges, called by Pliny Metanastae, beside the Getes, Bastarnians, Sarmatians, Grecians, Romans, Scythians, Saxons, and Hungarians. The Romans did conquer (...) when the Emperour Trajan overcame Decebalus King of Dacia, and ^^duced it into the forme of a Province,The ancient Government. calling the Citie Zarmizegeth after his owne name Vlpia Trajana; but Galienus lost it two hund^^^ yeares after, and from that time the Inhabitants having laid aside (...) Roman humanitie, speech, and eloquence, began to resume their for^^ wildenesse and barbarisme, calling themselves Walachians. After (...) Romans, the Scythians under the conduct of their Captaine Artitlas s^^ted themselves in this place, and built seven free Townes. The Sax^^ succeeded the Scythians in the time of Charles the great, who forsaki^^ their Countrie, seated themselves likewise in these parts, and built themselves seven free Cities, following the example of the Scythians. Th^ Hungarians came last, who partly allured with the vicinity and neerne^^ of the place, mingled themselves with the Dacians: and afterward be^^ provoked by injuries, they conquered the whole countrey, in the rei^^ of Stephen King of Pannonia, whom they stiled the holy. By them so^^ Townes were also built. The mountainous part of Transylvania (...) lately subdued by Matthias Huniades, whose surname was Corvinus, and afterward by Stephen King of Hungary. This Matthias tooke alive (...) Dracula, a Vaivode or Prince of the mountainous Transylvania, a (...) of unheard of cruelty, and after ten yeares imprisonment, restored hi^ to his former place. Transylvania is now divided into three Natio^^ differing both in manners and lawes, and inhabiting severall parts of the Countrie: namely into the Saxons, the Ciculi, and Hungarians: T^^ Saxon Transylvanians, as all other German Nations, have a pecul^^^ dialect or language unto themselves: they inhabite the strongest (...) and castles, and doe excell the other Nations. They have seven Sea^ namely Zarwaria, Zabesia, Millenbach, Reusmarke, Segesburg or Sches^^^ Ollezna, Schenkerstall, and Reps: all which have some villages (...) them. The Ciculi neere to Moldavia, being descended from the Scy^^ans, doe live after their owne lawes and customes, and doe distrib^^ their offices by lot. They are divided into seven Regions, which they call Seates, the names whereof are, Sepsi, Orbai, Kysdi, Czyk, Gyrgio, M^^cus Zeek, and Aranyas Zeek. The Hungarians and Transylvanian Nobl^ being mingled with the Saxons, and the Ciculi doe, for the most part, ^gree with them both in speech, habite, and armour. All Transylvania (...) able to set forth ninety thousand armed men and more. There are seven chief Cities in Transylvania,The Cities. having a reasonable distance one fr^^ an other, among which Cibinium is the Metropolis or Mother-citie, and is now called Hermanstat: It is seated on a plaine, not shut up with mountaines, but spread into a great breadth. It is not much lesse tha^ Vienna in Austria, but it is farre stronger both by Art and Nature: f^^ in regard of the many Fish-ponds and Lakes round about it, no Arm^

map of TransylvaniaTRANSYLVANIA OR SIEBENBVRGEN.

can come unto it. 2,This Towne is also called Stephanopolis. Brasso or Corona, which the Germans call Cronstat, and is somtimes called Stephanopolis, being seated amongst pleasant mountaines, and fortified with Wals, Ditches, and Rampiers. Heere is a famous Universitie and Librarie. 3, Bistricia or Noesenstat, which is seated on the plaine of a large valley, and hath on either side hils full of Vines. 4, Segoswar or Schespurg, which is partly situated on a hill, and partly at the foote thereof. 5,This Town is called by Ptolemie Pirum. Megies or Midwisch, which is situated in the midst of Transylvania, being fruitfull in wine, and stored with all commodities that are either gainefull or necessary for food. 6,This Towne is also called Millenbach. Zabesium or Zaaz, which lyeth in a plaine and deepe valley, encompassed with waters full of fish. They say that this was the first seate of the Saxons 7,This Towne is likewise named Claudiopolis. Coloswar or Clausenburg, which is likewise sweetly seated in a plaine, and is beautified not onely with faire wals without, but with stately buildings within. Heere is also Alba Iulia or Weisenberg, an ancient city, and a Bishops Seate, it is situated on a steep hill, which hath a large plaine spreading it selfe round about it. It hath on the East the River Mor^, and on the other side the River called in the Hungarian language O^pay, which descendeth from the Alpes. Heeretofore it was called Tumis, and in Trajans time it was the Pallace of King Decebalus. As touching the payments of taxes and tributes, there are in Transylvania eight principall circles or divisions of ground called Chapters, all which together they call the Universitie, as first the Bistricensian Chapter, which hath in it Bistricia with 23 royall Townes. 2, The Regnensian Chapter, which hath more than 30 Townes. 3, The Barcensian Chapter, which hath the citie Corona, with thirteene royall Townes. 4, The Kisdens^^ Chapter, which hath Segesburg, and eight and fortie townes. 5, The Chapter called the chapter of two Seates, which doth containe the city of Megies with sixe and thirtie townes. There are two Chapters of the Cibinians, one of which containeth Cibinium, and three and twenty townes, and the other which they call Surrogative, containe about (...) Villages. Last of all, the Zabesensian Chapter, which hath Zabesium with seventeene Villages.The Lakes. This Countrie hath many Lakes and standing waters, which are full of excellent fish. There are in it three navigable Rivers,The Rivers.Which the Hungarians call Olt, and the Germans, Alth. Aluta, Morus, (called also Marus and Marisus) and Sam^^^ the two former arising out of the Scythian Mountaines, the last of the^ falleth into Tibiscus, the other runneth straight forward into Danubius, Samus (which the Germans and Hungarians call Thimes) ariseth out of the Alpes called Colota, and likewise slideth into Tibiscus. There are also other Rivers, as Kockel the Greater and the Lesse, Sabesus, Chrysus, Chrysoloros, and Strygius, etc. the three last whereof have little graines o^ sand of gold in them, and doe somtimes bring downe pieces of gold of halfe a pound weight. Divers kindes of excellent fish are found in them, and the aforesaid Rivers, as namely the greater and lesser Sturgeon, three kindes of Carpes, the Salmon, the River and Lake-Lamprey, the fish called Silurus, the Mullet, an other rare kind of Lamprey, the white and black Trout, the scaly Gudgeons, and those that have no scales, unknowne to other places: besides Pikes, Perches, Tenches, and the common Lamprey, all which are found there and of a great size. There are Mountaines neere unto Walachia, Cisalpina and Moldavia, which

doe produce Agarick and Turpentine Trees.The Woods. There are many woods in Transylvania, and amongst the rest Hercynia, in which besides the wilde beasts above-mentioned, there are wilde Oxen and Horses, whose manes doe reach even to the ground.The publick workes. There are also in this Countrie many Castles well fortified: among which the chiefe is called the Red Castle, being a strong defence, and seated on the Alpes, neere to a running streame, where there is a straight passage betweene the Mountaines into the Countrie, and it is, as it were, the fortresse thereof, so that no one can enter into it on that side, if the Governour of the castle barre up the way. There is also an other fortified castle beneath the Towne Millenbach neere unto the Towne Bros, where also neere unto the River, there is a way leading into Transylvania betweene the vales and snowie Alpes. Now it followeth that wee should adde somthing concerning their manners which are divers and various, because (as we said before) it was formerly possessed by divers Nations, and is still at this day. The people of Walachia are rude,Their manners and ignorant of good Arts and Disciplines, they are of the Greeke Religion, but their manners and customes savour of Paganisme, in regard that they much esteeme of Oracles, sweare by Iupiter and Venus whom they call Holy, and in many other things come neere unto the customes of the Gentiles. They have no Townes, or brick-houses, but doe live in the woods and forrests, having no defence against the violence of the weather but a few reedes, or cottages of reedes. The other part of Transylvania in most places is of a more fruitfull soyle, and the people are more civiliz'd, and of a better behaviour. The Scythians speech in Transylvania differs little from the Hungarian speech at this day, though heretofore they differr'd much both in speech and writing, for they (like the Hebrewes) did begin to write from the right hand to the left. The Ciculi are a fierie and warlike kinde of people, among whom there are no Nobles or Rusticks, but all of them are of one ranke. The Hungarians have great power and authoritie above all the rest. And let so much suffice to have beene spoken briefly concerning Transylvania.



TAVRICA CHERSONESVS.
THis CHERSONESVS was so called by Ptolemie from the Tauri a certaine people of Scythia in Europe. Strabo calle^^ the Scythian Chersonesus. Pliny in his 2 Booke and 96 chapter calleth it,The names. after the Latines, the Peninsula of the ^a^^ans. Appianus calleth it the Pontick Chersonesus, and P^^lus Diaconus calleth itStephanus saith it hath beene called by others Taunais, Alopecia, and Ma^tis. Chersenesa. At this day it is called Precopska, and Gesara by Antonius Pinetus. It is a large Peninsula, stretched out toward the East, betweene the Euxine Sea, and the Maeotick Lake, even to the Cimmerian Bosporus which divides Europe from Asia. It hath a gentle winter, and most temperate Aire. For at the end of December wi^^^^ beginneth, and is at the sharpest or coldest in the middle of February, as having then most snow,The Situation. The temper of the Aire. which yet lyeth not above three d^^^^ vvhen the cold and frost is most constant. The Winter never last^^ longer than the beginning of March. All the whole Countrie is very fruitfull,The fertilitie of the Soyle. and very fit for feeding flocks of cattell. Yet albeit the Inh^^^tants have a fertile soile: many of them do not till their fields nor So^ them.The varietie of living Creatures. They have abundance of Horses, Camels, Oxen, Kine, and Shee^ on which they live. There are also great store of daintie fowle, which oftentimes the Christians, and Turkes, and sometimes the Polanders, th^^ come thither as strangers, are wont to take. There is much hunting of Harts, Goates, Boares and Hares, both in the Tartarian and Turkish Dominions neare the Sea. This Chersonesus hath hard and rugged mo^^taines, that running through the middle of it do divide it into the No^therne and Southerne part; as the Apennine Mountaine doth divide Ita^^ Mahomet in the yeare 1475 did possesse the Southerne part, and made^ tributarie to himselfe. But in the Northerne part the Tartars wandering in the broad fields betweene Borysthenes and Tanais,The ancient Government. and continually changing their places of feeding their cattell, possessed the Towne called Crim as a royall Seat, and from thence they were called Crim Tartars. Afterward having cut through the Isthmus of the Taurick Chersomsus, when, neare unto the Ditch which they call Praecop, they built a Citie a royall Seat of the same name, they were from thence called Praecope^ses. The King of these Tartars, when being joyned in league and societie with the Turkes, hee had at their request banisht his owne brother, who made warre against him, and had besieged Capha, at last both himselfe and his two yong sonnes were cut in pieces by his Counsellers, whom hee had with large gifts corrupted for the aforesaid purpose, and so gave an unhappie example of the Ottoman friendship. For hee being slaine, the Tartarians, who were hitherto free, untamed, and companions and brethren to Ottoman were now made servants, and after the manner of the other Turkish Provinces were compelled to receive and acknowledge not a King but a Beglerbeg, that is a Vice-Roy to governe

map of Chersonesus TauricaTAVRICA CHERSONESVS.

them. But the Turkish Empire may be easily known by the Descriptions of Wallachia, Greece and the Turkish Empire, and therefore for brevities sake wee referre the Reader thither. Besides Cazan and Astrachan which are Kingdomes belonging to the Tartarians, who do till fields, dwell in houses,The Cities and Townes. and at this day are subject to the Moscovite, and besides the aforesaid Praecopenses, there are other Field-Tartars, who live in the fields in great companies, obseruing no limits, and of these we will speake in their proper place, to wit, in the Tables of Asia. In the Southerne part of this Chersonesus is the Metropolis, Capha, heretofore called Theodosia, a famous Mart-towne, being the ancient Colonie of the Genois. It is situate neare the Sea. And hath a faire Haven. It seemes that in the time of the Gene^ it was very populous. But when the Turkes almost two hundred yeares since, in the time of Mahomet the Great tooke it from them, the Italians were reduced to such a strait, that there are few tokens remaining of their being there: for the Citie hath for the most part lost her former beautie. The Italian Churches are throwne downe, the houses decayed, and the walls and Towers on which the Genois colours and ensignes were placed, with Latine Inscriptions, are fallen to ruine. It is now inhabited by Turkes, Armenians, Iewes, Italians, and a few Grecian Christians; It is famous for traffique as being the chiefe Haven of the Chersonesus, and hath an infinite companie of Vine-yards, Orchards, and Gardens, Besides this towne there is Perecopia called by the ancient Greekes E^^toria, Pompeiopolis, Sacer Lucus, Dromon Achillis, Graecida, Heracli^^^ Heraclia. Also Costovia a famous Mart-towne, and Ingermenum, having a stone Castle, beneath which is a Church, and many Caves, that w^^^ great labour and paines are cut and hewed out of a rocke, for this tow^e is seated on a great high Mountaine, and taketh its name from those T^^kish Caves. It was heretofore a faire Towne and full of wealth and riches. Here is Chersonesus Corsunum or Cherso, which is the ancientest (...) of Taurica. This the Turkes called Saci Germenum, as it were, the Yell^^ Castle, for this Countrie hath a kinde of yellow soyle. The admirable and wondrous mines of this place do testifie that it was heretofore* proud, rich, delicate, and famous Colonie of the Grecians, and the ma^^ ancient citie of the whole Peninsula, being much frequented, magnificent, and having a faire Haven. Here is the Castle and Towne of Ia^^li or Balachium,Ptolemie calls this Citie Taphros and Pliny Taphra. Mancopia or Mangutum (as the Turkes call it) and the Towne of Cercum with a Castle. Here is the citie and castle of Crem^^, which the Tartars call Crim, having an ancient wall very strong and high, and in regard of its largenesse it is farre unlike the other cities of the Taurick Chersonesus. And in the utmost part of this Countrie is the citie Tanas neare the mouth of the River Tanais, the Russians call it Azac. It is a famous Mart-towne, unto which Merchants do come out of divers parts of the world, for that every one hath here free accesse, and free power to buy or sell. There are many great Rivers i^ this Countrie, running downe out of the Mountaines. The chiefest whereof is Borysthenes, commonly called Nieper a deepe and swift River which runneth from the North into the river Carcinites or Hypaciris, now called Desna,The Rivers. and so into the Euxine Sea neare the Towne Oczacow. Also Don or Tanais, Ariel, Samar that runneth into Don, with many others.

TheThis Strait is called by Martianus, Os Maotidis; by Marcellinus, Patares Angustiae; by the Italians, Boccadi S. Iovanni, by Castaldus, Stretto de Caffa; and by the Tartars Vospero. Cimmerian Bosphorus, to which this Chersonesus (as we said before) is extended. It is a narrow Sea two miles broad, which divideth Europe from Asia, and by which the Maeoticke Lake doth flow into the Euxine Sea. It is called from the Cimmerians who dwell upon the coldest part thereof, or fro^ the towne Cimmerium as Volaeterranus would have it. TheThis Lake is called commonly Mar delle Sabacche by the Italians Mar della Tana, and by the Arabians Marel Azach. The Sea. Maeotick Lake is neare the mouth of Phasis (commonly called Fasso, and by the Scythians Phazzeth) receiving Tanais into it. The Scythians call it Temerenda, that is, the mother of the Sea, as Dionysius witnesseth, because much water floweth from thence through the Cimmerian Bosphorus into it, as also much from other places, which doth so replenish and fill the Lake, that the bankes thereof can hardly containe it. This Lake in regard it receiveth many rivers, aboundeth with fish. There is also theThis sea is called by some, mare Boreale, by Claudianus, Po^tus Amaz^nus; by Fla^cus, Pontus S^ythicu by Festus Avienus, Pontus Tauricus: by Herodotus, and Orosius, Mare Cimmerium: by Stralo, Mare C^l^hirum: by Ap^lonius, lib. 4 Mare Cauchasium: by Tacitus, Mare Pont^cum: by A^^st^des, M^^e Phasian^^^ by Ovid, M^re Sarmaricum: by the G^^^^s, Tanais: by the Italians, Mar Majo^e: by the Greekes, Maurothalassa: by Lucian, Pontus Niger: and by the Turkes, Caradenis. Euxine Sea, the upper part of whose water is sweete, and the nether part salt. This being heretofore called the Axine, and according to Sophocles the Apoxine Sea, because no Ships could arrive here, or in regard of the barbarous Scythian borderers who killed strangers, they afterward called the Euxine, by the figure which they call Euphemismus. But they called it Pontus as if it were another Ocean, for they supposed that those who sailed on it did performe some great and memorable act. And therefore saith Strabo, they called it (...), Pontus, as they called Homer the Poet. There are many rugged and steepe mountaines in this Chersonesus, especially those which runne through the middle thereof. The greatest and highest of them hath a great Lake on the toppe of it. But so much hitherto concerning these things. Now let us proceed to other matters. Justice is administred among the Tartarians by the Law of Mahomet in the Cities and Townes of the Chan, and the other Sultanes. They have their Priests, their Judges in their Townes, and their Begi or Praefects, who do heare and decide private injuries. But the Chan himselfe with his Counsellers doth judge of capitall matters, as murder, and theft. In declaring whereof they need no Lawyer, neither do they use the subtiltie thereof, nor excuses, or prolonging matters by delay. For the meanest of the Tartarians or strangers do frely declare their owne wrongs and grievances before the Judges, and the Chan himselfe, by whom they are quickly heard and dispatched. They instruct their sonnes when they are children in the Arabicke language, they do not keepe their daughters at home, but deliver them to some of their kindred to be brought up. When their sonnes come to ripenesse of yeares they serve the Chan or the Sultans, and when their daughters are marriageable, they marrie them to some of the chiefe Tartars or Turkes. The best of the Tartars in the Princes Court go civilly and decently in their apparell, not for ostentation or pride, but according as necessitie and decencie requireth. When the Chan goeth abroad in publike,The mountaines. The manner of government. The Senators. the poorest men may have accesse unto him, who when he sees them doth examine them what their wants and necessities are, and whence they did arise. The Tartarians are very obedient to the Laws: and they adore and reverence their Princes like Gods. Their Judges according to Mahomets Law are accounted spirituall men, and of undoubted equitie, integritie, and faithfulnesse.Their manners. They are not given to Controversies, Law-suits, private discord, envie, hatred, or to any wanton excesse either in diet or apparell. In the Princes Court, none

weare Swords, Bowes, or other weapons, except it be Travellers, or strangers that are going on some journey, to whom they are very kinde and hospitable. The chiefe men eate bread and flesh, drinking also bu^^ Wine and Metheglin,Their food. but the Country people want bread, using instead thereof ground Millet tempered with milke and water, which they commonly call Cassa. They use cheese instead of meate, and their drink^ is mares milke. They kill also for their food Camels, Horses and Ox^^ when they are ready to dye or are growne unserviceable, and they often feed on the flesh of sheepe. Few of them do use Mechanicke Arts (...) the Cities and Townes, few do use Merchandizing, and those Artificers or Merchants that are found there,Their trading and traffique. are either slaves to the Christians, (...) else they are Turkes, Armenians, Iewes, Cercesians, Petigorians who are Christians, Philistines, or Cynganians, all men of the lowest ranke. But l^^ this which hath been spoken suffice concerning the Taurick Chersones^, and the Northerne Countries. Let us passe to the Description of Spa^^^ which we have placed next, and take a view thereof.



THE DESCRIPTION OF SPAINE.
SPAINE is a chiefe Country of Europe, and the first part of the Continent, it was so called, as Iustine noteth from King Hispanus.The names and whence so called. Some would have it so called from Hispalis a famous Citie, which is now called Sevill. But Abraham Ortelius, a man very painfull in the study of Geographie, when hee had read (in the Author that treateth of Rivers and Mountaines, following the opinion of Sosthenes in his third Booke,) that Iberia now called Georgia, a Country of Asia, was heretofore called Pania from Panus, whom Dionysius (having conquered the Country) made Governour over the Iberians, and that from thence Moderne Writers did call it Spaine: moreover when he had observed that almost all Writers did derive the first Inhabitants of Spaine from Iberia, he was induced to beleeve that the Country was so called rather from that Spaine, than from Hispanus or Hespalis. This opinion is the more probable for that Saint Paul doth call this Country Spania, in his Epistle to the Romans,The Situation. chap. 15. verse 28. as doth also Saint Ierome, and many others.So called fro^ the Cantabri, a people of Spain who inhabited upon the coasts thereof. But that which the Latine Writers call Hispania, and Ptolemie, Stephanus, and others, doe call Ispania, leaving out the aspiration, Strabo, Pliny, and others doe testifie that in ancient times it was called Iberia and Hesperia. It was called Iberia from Iberia a Country of Asia,The Atlanticke Ocean, though it bee sometimes taken for the whole Ocean, yet it is taken properly for that Sea which washeth Europe and Africa upon the West. It is called by Ptolemie Mare occiduum and exterius, by Florus Mare externum: and the Arabians call it Magrib. from whence many doe derive the first inhabitants of Spaine, though some doe fetch the word Iberia from King Iberus, others from the River Iberus, and Avienus from Ibera a Towne in Baetica or Andaluzia. Some report that it was called Hesperia from Hesperus the brother of Atlas, or as Horace thinketh from Hesperia the daughter of Hesperus, or rather from Hesperus the Evening-starre, under which it was supposed to be situated, because it is the farthest Country Westward of the whole Continent of Europe. And seeing Italie might have the same name, Horace calleth this Hesperia ultima. Appian reporteth that it was heretofore called Celtiberia, which yet is rather to be thought a part of Spaine heretofore called Celtica, as Varro witnesseth. Gulielmus Postellus, and Arias Montanus, in his commentaries upon Obadiah, doe note that the Hebrewes did call it Sepharad: and so much concerning the name; the Quantitie and Qualitie followeth. The Quantitie doth consist in the bounds and circuit thereof,So called fro^ two Islands in the Mediterranian Sea, named Majorca and Minorca, but anciently both of them Baleares. and in the forme and figure which ariseth from thence. Concerning the bounds of Spaine, the Ocean doth wash two sides thereof, the North side the Cantabrian Ocean, and the West the Atlanticke. The Iberian or Balearicke Sea doth beat on the South side, where is the Bay of Hercules, and on the East it hath the Pyrenaean Mountains running along with one continued ridge from the Ocean, (where stands Flaviobriga, at this day called

Funtarabia) even to the Mediterranean Sea. Hence it is that they make two famous Promontories, the one calledCalled by Ptolemy, O^ase; by Mela, Eason; by Martianus, Iars^; by Strabo, Idanus. Olarso, which shooteth o^^ into the Ocean, the other which taking its name heretofore from th^ Temple of Venus, but now called Cape de Creus, doth jet out into the Mediterranean Sea. The utmost length of Spaine is 200 Spanish miles: the breadth where it is broadest is 140 miles, and where it is narrowest it is 60. Iohannes Vasaeus in his Chronicle of Spaine doth report, that Spaine is so narrow at the Pyrenaean Hills, that when he travell'd over them, on the Mountaine of Saint Adrian, he saw the Sea on either side: namely, the Ocean which was next unto him, and a farre of as farre as hee co^^^ see, he discerned the white waves of the Mediterranean Sea. They s^^pose that the whole compasse thereof is 2480 miles. Ptolemy, Str^^^ and others doe compare Spaine to an Oxe-hide stretched out on t^^ ground, the necke whereof is extended toward France, which cleav^^ unto it. The necke I say, which reacheth in breadth as farre as the ^^^^^^renaean Mountaines, from the Mediterranean Sea, to the Brittish Ocea^ the fore part of it is stretched from New Carthage even to the Canta^^^ans, and the hinder part from Hercules Bay, to Gallicia and the Britt^^^ Sea: that which represents the tayle of the hide, is theThis Promontorie some have called Sacrum Iugam, and others Caput Europa, i. the head of Europe. Holy Promontorie called at this day Saint Vincents Promontorie, which stretche^^ it selfe out into the Atlanticke Ocean, farre beyond any other part (...) Spaine. Spaine is under the middle of the fourth, all the fift, and part of the sixt Climats, where there is an excellent temper for the producing of all things. For it is neither scortched with the violent heat of the S^^ as Africke, nor troubled with daily windes as France; but lying between^ them both,The temper of the Aire. it hath a temperate Winter and Summer. Hence it is (as ^^^^stine witnesseth) that Spaine hath a very wholesome aire, the equall ^^^per thereof being never infected with Moorish fogges. Beside the co^^^ blasts of winde which come from the Sea, and doe as it were search (...) parts of the Country, doe drive away all earthly vapours, and so make it very healthfull. Yet all parts of Spaine are not of one qualitie, for towa^^ the North, as it is something cold and obnoxious to the Sea, so it w^^^^eth fresh water, and therefore affordeth no convenient habitation: especially, seeing the most parts of it are full of Rocks, Forrests, and wood^ places. Towards the South where it extendeth it selfe in a contin^^^ ridge of Mountaines,The fertilitie of the Soyle. it hath a happy and good soyle, being watered with many great Rivers, and refreshed with seasonable raine, so that it bringeth forth fruits of all kindes. It is not onely a bountifull mother, b^^ also a nourisher and breeder of living Creatures. It is very fruitfull not onely in producing those things which doe grow out of the earth, but also those things which are generated and hidden in the bowells thereof: who can reckon up the excellent living creatures, which are br^^^ on the Land and in the Sea? There is great plenty of fruits through (...) Spaine, and most of the fields are so fertile, that they returne unto the husbandmen thirtie bushels for one that is sowed, and oftentimes forty. It produceth many hearbs as well unsowed as sowed, which have soveraigne vertues in them, especially in mountanous places; where di^^^ring from the other parts, it bringeth forth Hempe, and hath more st^^^^ of fruit, and fairer. There are two sorts of apples in this Country, which

map of SpainTHE DESCRIPTION OF SPAINE.

are chiefe note, the wrinckled apple, and the King-apple. Also there are foure speciall sorts of Peares, sweet both in tast and smell, the Apian and honey-peares; the peare called Muscatum, being the least of all kind of peares, the wine-peare, and the peare called by some Pintum, and by the Spaniards Sine Regula. What should I mention the Olives that are here? amongst which those are the best which come from Hispalis, and are farre bigger than any Wallnuts. What should I speake of other fruits? The Lemmons and Orenges that grow here are commended by all men: the Quince-peare which they commonly call Membrilles and Pomegranats that are good for medicine, are here in great abundance. What should I speake of the Wines of this Country, having an excellent taste and smell, and being made in all parts, yet in some places better than in other? Spaine was heretofore (as now also) rich in mines of Gold, Brasse, Iron, Leade, and other mettals: and it doth not onely boyle and make salt, but in some parts thereof it is digged out of the Earth. For as it is made in many places in Spaine of pit or Well-water, as at Seguntia and elsewhere, insomuch that the King setteth a great custome thereon, so there are Mountaines (if we may beleeve Marineus Siculus) which have native salt in them. Besides, Spaine is rich and plentifull in all kinde of Cattle, so that the Woods, Mountaines, Meddowes, Fields, and Forrests doe resound with their bleating and lowing. It breedeth the best horses: Baetica breedeth more than other parts: As^^ria breedeth the strongest, and Spanish Gennets are called Asturcones. In some parts of Spaine there are bred those that are of such swiftnesse and and agilitie, that antiquity did fabulously beleeve that they were begotten by the winde. It hath no Lyons, Camells, or Elephants, except those that be brought from other places,The variety of living creatures but there are great store of Does, Harts, Boares, Beares, Hares, and Cunnies, which do afford them much game and sport in hunting of them.


Haec sane docet versiculus Catulli,
Cuniculosae Celtiberiae fili.


These things Catullus verse
Doth unto thee declare
O sonne of Celtiberia where
So many Cunnies are.


There are in Spaine (besides other birdes which invite them to fowling) Eagles, Hernes, Hawkes, and the bird called Atta, first brought out of Sicilie, also Cranes, Geese, Partridges, ring-Doves, wilde and tame Ducks, etc. But of these things enough: I come now to the Government, which is the next point to bee spoken of, according to the order of our method. I doe not purpose heere to weary the Reader by reckoning up out of Iustine, Diodorus, Iosephus, Eusebius, Hierome, Berosus, and his Translatour Annius Viterbiensis, the ancient Kings of Spaine, and their atchievements both at home and abroad.The Government. Tubal never was in Spaine, not in Europe, but liv'd in Asia. Neither are Iberus, Iubalda, Brygus, Tagus, Batus, and others to be accounted as Kings therof, unlesse we will grant that Kings in ancient time, were borne of Rivers and other inanimate things. Againe, the Catalogue of the Kings succeeding them, is no better

than fabulous, as also those things be which the Lydians, the Thracians, Rhodians, Phrygians, Cyprians, Phoenicians, Aegyptians, Milesians, Carians, Lesbians, and Chaldaeans are reported to have performed successively in this countrey. But those things are more certaine, which Writers have recorded were heretofore atchieved by the Carthaginians, Romans, Gothes, Vandals, Alani, Swethlanders, Huns, and their Kings, for that the Writers of them were either present at those actions, or else came to the knowledge of them by the faithfull relation of others. Of these things therefore I will speake briefly, and thus it was. When the Carthaginians did rule all Spaine, and had all things under their owne command, the Senate and people of Rome did send first of all the two Scipioes against them with an army of Souldiers, in the beginning of the second Punick warre: who were slaine in the seventh yeare of that war, Q. Fulvius Flaccus and Ap. Claudius Pulcher being Consuls. The next year P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus being sent next to his Father and Uncle, did performe many things very prosperously, and first of all made a Province of it, Q. Caecilius Metellus, and L. Veturius Philo being Consuls. First, Asdrubal and Mago Carthaginian Captaines, being overthrown and put to flight in the battell, neere to the Citie Baetula (which is supposed to have been in that place where now Baeca and Vbeda are seated) and the Spanish Armies beaten out of Spaine, hee established a league of friendship with Syphax King of the Massilians, who is now called Biledulgerid; a litle after hee compelled the rebellious people of Spaine to yeeld themselves unto him, and having made a league with Massanissa King of the Masaesulians, and the Gaditanes, hee committed the government of the Province to L. Lentulus and L. Manlius Acidinus, and returned to Rome. After Scipio, L. Cornelius Lentulus the Proconsul did governe Spaine, and after many prosperous acts and atchievements, entred the Citie in triumph. Three yeares after, C. Cornelius, Cethegus, and Minucius Rufus being Consuls, the two Spaines were first bounded, and two new Pretors sent into them, C. Sempronius Tuditanus into the hither Spaine, and M. Helvetius Blasio into the farther. Two yeares being scarcely past, so great a warre began in Spaine, that it was necessarie, that a Consul should be sent out with an Army: Marcus Portius Cato Consul being allotted to goe into the hither part, did so appease and quiet rebellion, that the Proconsul in regard thereof triumphed. This is that Cato, who, as Livie writeth and others, by a wonderfull stratagem, did throw downe the wals of many Spanish Cities in one day. After Cato's victorie, Spaine was diversly possessed, and many times lost and regained againe, so that there were above 30 triumphs for victories obtained heere. They did not begin to pay any taxe, before the time of Augustus Caesar, who having by long continuance of warres tamed all Spaine, and overthrowne the Cantabrians and Asturians that had longest of all made resistance, divided the whole Countrie into three Provinces, Baetica, so called from the River Baetis, Lusitania, and Tarraconensis, so called from its citie Tarracon; and every one of these have their Diocesses or Circles of jurisdiction. In Baetica there are foure Diocesses Gaditana, Cordubensis, Astigitana, and Hispalensis. Lusitania hath three Diocesses, Emeritensit, Pacensis, and Scalibitana. Lastly, Tarraconensis hath seven, Carthaginensis,

Tarraconensis, Caesar Augustana, Cluniensis, Astura, Lucensis, and Bracarensis (See Pliny lib. 3. Strab. lib. 3. and others.) Thus things by degrees being changed, the chiefest Provinces were under the Romans command, even untill the Consulship of Honorius the third, and Theedosius the third. At which time the Vandals, Suevi, and Alani being called into France by Stilico, when once (having passed the Rhene) they had set foote in France, being in a barbarous manner spoyled by the Gothes, and the Kings Adolphus and Vallia, whom the Emperour Hon^rius had sent to ayde and set France at libertie, they passed at last over the Pyrenaean Hils. Afterward the Gothes inhabiting France, for many yeares possessed Spaine, having taken it from the Romans; for being assailed by the Frankes, they againe made warre upon the Vandals. The Frankes drove the Gothes out of France, and the Gothes drove the Vanda^^ and Alani out of Spaine. At which time the Vandals and Alani being called by Boniface into Africk, which hee governed for the Emperour, left Spaine to the possession of the Gothes. When the Gothes, having driven out the Roman Garrisons, had made Spaine their owne, and had a long time Kings of their owne who ruled in it, at length they were overthrowne in a great battell by theWhose chiefe Captaine was one Tarif, who overthrew Roderick and his Armie, consisting of 130000 foot, and 35000 horse. Arabian Saracens, and KingWho having sent Iulian on an embassage to the Moores in Africa, in the meane time defloured his Daughter Cana; to revenge which injurie, her Father procuted the Moores to come into Spaine. Roderick being kill'd, they lost almost all Spaine. Those that survived after the battell, when they had fortified themselves in the Mountaines of the Astures, Cantabrians, and Galicians, by litle and litle they begin to recover the Countries, Cities, and Castles which they had lost. At last the Saracens partie growing weake in Baetica Hispania, and the Gothes having recovered all Spaine, they againe were overcome by Ferdi^^^ Catholick King of Aragon, and thrust out of Spaine, so that the whole Countrie returned and came againe into the hands of the ancient Lords thereof. But whereas in the times of the Moores, five Kings, namely of Castile, of Aragon, of Portugall, of Granada, and Navarre did possesse Sp^^^^, at this day Philip the fourth, sonne unto Philip the third, who was Nephew unto the Emperour Charles the fifth is sole King thereof. It was heretofore diversly divided. The Romans first divided it into the Hith^^ and Farther Spaine. They called that the Hither part which was neer^^^ unto the chiefe Citie and the principall Countries of the Empire, being situated betweene the River Iberus and the Pyrenaean Mountaines: they called that the Farther part which lay more remote, being stretched out beyond Iberus even to the Ocean. In following times wee read^ that Spaine was divided into sixe parts, Tarraconensis, Carthaginensis, L^sitania, Galicia, Baetica, and Tingitana beyond the narrow Sea in Afric^. In the time of the Moores there were many Kingdomes in Spaine, which were afterward divided into five, as the Kingdome of Castile, of Aragon, of Portugall, of Granada, and Navarre. But now by a new distribution the whole Empire is divided into three Kingdomes, namely of Aragon, Castile, and Portugall. Under the Kingdome of Aragon is contained, besides Aragon, Catalonia, Valentia, Majorica. Under the Kingdome of Castile are comprehended Biscay, Leon, Asturia, Galicia, Estremadura, A^dalusia, Granada, Murcia, and both the Castiles, with the Canarie-Ila^^* Under the Kingdome of Portugall is comprehended, besides Portugal, Algarbia. The Cities which are in the whole Kingdome are almost innumerable.

The chiefe of them are Hispalis, Madrid, Tarraco, Lisbon,The names of the Cities. Granada, Pampilona, Valentia, Barcino, commonly called Barzelona. The seventh German Legion now called Leon, S. Lucar, Corduba, Nebrissa, Compostella, Toledo, Salamanca, Complutum, Pintia, Caesar-Augusta, now Saragossa, Asturica Augusta, and many others. Heere are admirable Lakes: neere the towne Beiara is a commodious and wonderfull Lake, which breedeth Turtles, being a black kinde of Fish, but excellent in taste; and, as Marineus Siculus witnesseth, prognosticating and foretelling of raine and stormes to come, by the great noyse which they make, so that the sound thereof is heard like the roaring of a Bull, eighteene miles thence.The Lakes. There is a certaine Lake on the very top of the Mountain Stella, as Vasaeus writeth, in which fragments and pieces of Ships are found, when notwithstanding it is more than 12 leagues distant from the Sea: and the same Author noteth, that the Inhabitants doe affirme, that it boyleth, and is tempestuous, as often as the Sea is rough or unquiet. The most diligent Writer Suetonius saith, in his Description of the life of Galba, that thunder fell downe into the Lake of Cantabria, and that afterward twelve axes were found therein: There is also the pleasant Lake which Pliny mentioneth lib. 3. Natur. histor. cap. 3. not farre from Valentia, at this day it is called Albufera. The Rivers follow. Spaine is watered every where with many Rivers, there are some who reckon an hundred and fiftie, and over them 700 Bridges, the chiefe whereof is the Bridge of Segovia and Alcantara. There is in this Kingdome the River which Ptolemie cals Iberus, and now is called Ebro, it breaketh forth in Cantabria out of the Mountaine Idubeda, with two fountaines or spring-heads, that on the right hand in the Aucens^an wood called Monte d'Oca, the other on the left hand neere a Towne which the Inhabitants call Fuentibre: and so increasing with the receit of great Rivers, being first entertained in the fields of Galaguris, it runneth unto and visiteth Iuli^briga and Tudella, two Townes of Navarre, and then it watereth Iulia, Bolsa, and Caesar-Augusta. Departing thence, it glideth Southward, and by and by Northeastward, by the people of Laletania, now called Galetani, and the rich Citie Tortosa. At last being enlarged with many Rivers flowing into it, and having runne almost foure hundred miles forward in length, it entreth so violently with two mouthes into the Mediterranean Sea, that having thrust it selfe 50 paces thereinto, yet the water is sweete and fresh.This River is called also Doria, Durias, Dorius, and commonly Duero. Durius is the greatest River in Spaine, because so many Rivers do runne into it that it would be too tedious to reckon them up, it floweth out of the Mountaine Idubeda, where it is called Sierra de Cocolo, it divideth the Vectones from the Asturians, and the Portugalls from the ancient Gallicians: And having viewed the Towre Sullana, called Tordesillas, Salabris, Miranda, and other Towns fortie English miles beneath Lamego, neere to a Towne of Portugall which is called Porto, with a violent course, it doth mingle it selfe with the Westerne Ocean. The River which Ptolemie and others call Tagus, ariseth in the high cliffes of the Mountaine Orospeda, some fiftie furlongs from a little towne which is called Tragacet, not farre from the Citie Coneia, now called Guensa. And gliding by theWhich is a people which inhabite the Countrie of Toledo. Carpetani, it visiteth Toledo, the royall citie, and having a bridge there over it, it

watereth the noted faire Cities of Talavera, Augustobroga, Alcantara, and others, and so cutting almost through the middle of Portugall, it dischargeth it selfe into the West Ocean beyond Lisbone, by a mouth or outlet (as some observe) which is seven miles and an halfe broad. The Inhabitants at this day call this River Taio. The Portugalls Tejo. The River Tagus having sands mingled with gold, as Solinus in his Polyhistor, and Isiodorus Lib. 13. Etymolog. cap. 21. do witnesse, hath beene preferred before all the other Rivers of Spaine. Emanuel Henricus, a man worthy of beleefe, doth affirme in Ortelius, that it hath at this day golden sands, as also many other Rivers of Portugall. And Pomponius doth testifie, that it hath great store of Fish, Oysters, and Pearles in it. The river Anas well knowne to the Latine and Greeke Writers taketh its originall out of the great Lakes, in Laminitania, as Pliny writeth Lib. 3. Naturalis Histor. cap. 1. now called Campo de Montiel, and gliding by theA people of Tarraconensis Hispania. Oretani, neare to a Town, which the Spaniards call Cagnamanus, and so to Metallina where Vitellius pitcht his Tent, as the ancient inscriptions of the place do shew, it hideth it selfe at last in the bowels of the Earth, though Georgius of Austria Provost of Harlebeck doth witnesse in Ortelius, that this is rather a common opinion, than true, and by and by after it hath runne some 15 miles, as if it rejoyced to have many new births, as Pliny saith, breaking forth neare Villaria, and having runne and glided by Merida (where it hath a long stone-bridge over it) and other Cities toward the South, it rowleth it selfe into the Sea neare the Castle of Marin. The Spaniards call it at this day Rio Guadiana, by borrowing a word from the Arabian, for with them Guad signifies a river. The river which Ptolemie calls Be^^s doth arise neare Castaon out of the mountaine Orospeda, as Strabo and Stephanus do write, and out of that part thereof which is called Sierra d' Alcarat. This river running Westward from its fountaine, and gliding by Cuduba and other townes, at last declineth Southward toward S^^^ and with a large mouth (being one league over but full of flatts and sands) discargeth and emptieth it selfe into the Atlanticke Sea not farre from Caliz. Here is a faire river which the ancients called Auro, and Obvetis, Strabo and Pausanias call it Tartessus. Livy noteth that the Inhabitants did call it Circes, which name it retained for a long time, as M^rius Niger witnesseth, notwithstanding the Africans had gotten Spaine, and yet at length it was by them called Guadalquivir, or as others w^i^e Guadalchebir, as it were to say, the great river. Here is also the river Mi^^ in Hispania Tarraconensis, the head whereof beginneth eighteene miles above the Sextian Altars, which are now called Lugo, neare to a towne commonly called Castell Verde. This river passing by the towne called Porto-marin, and sliding by the bridge Belsarius, and the Citie Orense, at last joyneth it selfe with the river Avia at Valentia; and having runne eighteene miles further it doth cast it selfe into the Ocean. There are other rivers as Lethe, Turius, Limaea, Sicores, Chalibs, Austra and others of lesser note, which I leave to be unfolded or described by others, lest I should be too tedious.The commodities of the Sea. The Sea calleth on us nex to be entreated of, together with the Bayes and Havens, which belong unto it Spaine is enclosed on every side with the Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea, except that part which is joyned to the Pyrenaean mountaines and to Aquitanis.

In regard whereof it is very fit to traffique and merchandise with all parts of the old and new world. The Sea round about it doth afford abundance of all kindes of fish, as Whales, Congers, Tunies, Soales, Lampreys, and the like: beside Oysters and other Shell-fish. There are three famous Bayes of Spaine, which lye all towards the Mediterranean Sea, the Sucronensian, Illicitane, and the Virgitane. The greatest of them all is the Sucronensian, receiving the Sea, as Mela saith, with a large mouth or inlet, which within groweth narrower and narrower. The Illicitane is the middlemost in bignesse, now called Puerto d' Alicante. The least is the Virgitane Bay, and is so called, as Mela writeth, from the towne Virgi, now stiled Vera or Bera: Ptolemie corruptly calls this towne Vrce or Virge, Antoninus as erroniously calleth it Vrci, and Pliny vvith no lesse error Vrgi. The Gaditane Bay vvas so called in Mela (lib. 3.) from Gades: now it is called Baia de Cadiz. The chiefe Havens in Spaine are first that vvhich the ancients called Magnus, betweene the Nerian and Scythian Provinces, which now is called Corunna. Secondly, Amibalus Portus, now called Alber, in the Kingdome of Algarbia. Thirdly, that which Pliny calls Amanum, now Fuentarabie, as Villonovanus, or Barnino as Moralis thinketh. Fourthly, Portus Tarraconensis of which the Italian Poet Silius writeth thus, Lib. 15.

The stranger in the Haven then doth land
Of Tarraconia, while the shippes do stand
In the safe harbour, labour is laid by,
And feare of the deepe Sea, while here they lye.

And lastly, the Haven of Venus, so called by Mela,Mountaines. which lyeth at the foote of the Pyrenaean hills. Now followe the mountaines; the chiefe whereof are the Pyrenaean mountaines dividing Spaine from France. Ptolemie and others call them Pyrenea, and Stephanus calleth them Pyrena, Tibullus Pyrene, Livy and others call them Saltus Pyrenaeus, the Spaniards generally call the^ Los Pirencos, for they have divers names in divers parts thereof. Some would have them so called from fire, or because they are often struck with thunder, or because all the woods thereof (as Diodorus writeth in his sixt Booke) were heretofore set on fire by sheep-heards, and so burnt downe. Silius the Italian Poet doth give them this denomination from a maide called Pyrena, the daughter of Bebryx, whom Hercules lay withall upon this mountaine, and being afterward torne to pieces by wild beasts, she was buried here. The Pyrenaan mountaines (as they do) stretching and extending themselves from the East unto the West even to the Celtick Promontorie, divide Spain into that part which lyeth on the hither side of the mountaines, and that which is on the further side thrusteth forth a mountaine neare the fountaine of Iberus towards the South through the breadth of Spaine. Strabo and Ptolemie do name it Idubeda. But it is commonly called Saltus Aucencis, and Monte d' Oca, from the ancient Citie Auca, some ruines whereof may be discerned at Villa Franca beyond Burgos. Also there is the mountaine which ariseth out of Idubeda, called by Strabo Orospeda, and by Ptolemie Otrospeda. Yet hath it not one certaine name for all the whole mountaine: for whereas Alvarius Gomecius calleth it Sierra Vermigia, Florianus Sierra Mollina, and Clusius Sierra Morena: these names are but names to part of

it. Calpe is reckoned with Orospeda. For so this mountaine is called by Ptolemie and others. It is neare to the Bay of Hercules, which is commonly called the Bay of Gibraltar. Part of Orospeda is high and rockie, and reaching from the Citie of Hispalis to Granada, it doth lift up it selfe neare Archidona. It hath its name, and deserveth still to be famous, by reason of a memorable example of love, which was shewed thereon, for the Spaniards call it, La Penna de les Enamorades, or the Lovers Mountaine. Paulinus calleth it Bimaris because it looketh on two Seas, the Inward and the Outward Strabo saith that the mountaine Calpe is not very large in compasse, but that it is so high, that to those who are farre off (...) may seeme an Island, some do fabulously suspose it to be one of Hercul^^ Pillars, and Abela over against it in Africke to be the other, both being the bounds of Hercules labours: they say that it was heretofore o^^ mountaine, and that Hercules digged it through, and so altered the shape of it. Out of Alcarassum do arise the mountaines called by Pliny Mo^^ Mariani, by Ptolemie in the singular number Marianus, and by A^^ninus mons Mariorum. They are now called Sicera Morena. The noble river Baetis doth water the bottomes of their mountains on the left side Neare to Barcinon or Barcilona there is a mountaine which the Inhabitants call Mon-Iui: some do translate it Iupiters mountaine, and some (...) better render it the Iewes mountaine, for that they were heretofore b^ried in this place, where many of their Graves and Sepulchers do yet remaine. On the top thereof there is a Towne, from whence a watchman, by setting up a linnen flagge in the day time, and a fire i^ the night doth give notice to the Citie Barcinon of the approaching of any ships. Spaine is every where full of woods, and trees bearing sing^lar and excellent kindes of fruit, which it would be too long to recite is particular. There is a wood neare unto the Towne called Monte Maj^^e, in which Nature alone hath planted Oakes, Chestnut-trees, Nuts, Eberds, Cherries, Prunes, Peares, Figges, wild Vines, and all kinde of fruit-trees, very high and fairely spred. Not farre from the Towne Be^^ or Bigerra, is a most pleasant wood, where Lucius Marinaeus Siculus w^teth,The publick and private workes. that hee hath measured Chesnut-trees, which have beene fo^^e foot about. It hath many woods also to fell and cut, which do afford the Spaniard wood enough for the building of ships. What shall I speake of the publike or private workes in this kingdome? here are many magnificent Temples, many Abbeys, Friaries, Monasteries, Hospitals for strangers, and for the sicke. Here are many famous Kings Pallaces, many magnificent and faire houses belonging to Noble-men and Knights, and innumerable other publike and private edifices. The King of Spaine is borne not chosen or elected to the Crowne, yet is hee inaugurated, and sworne to defend this people and their priviledges when hee taketh the oath of alleagiance of them. The Kings children are called Infantaes. Among whom the eldest sonne, who in his fathers life is declared King by the consent and oath of the Nobles the Cittizens, and people, is called Prince of Spaine. Although the King have supreme power over all persons and over all causes, yet hee seldome decreeth any thing, but with the consent,The manner of Governement. and by the counsell of twelve men, who being the chiefe of the whole Kingdome do make a royall Senate. By them matters of

moment are discussed and determined, but matters of more secresie are consulted of by a Privie Counsell, which consisteth of the King,The Senators and their numbers. the Dictator of Leon, the President, and the third part of the Kings Counsell. Those things which concerne the Indies and their government, are handled in the Senate, which they call the Indian Senate, by one President, and twelve Counsellers. Matters of warre are handled in the mi^itarie and warlike Senate, which the 12 Royall Senators, the Dictators of Leon and Castile, with others doe make up. Besides theseThere are beside these Cou^sells the Counsell of the Low Countries, the Counsell of the order of S. Iohn, and the Counsell of the Inquisition. there are also in Spaine three Prefectureships of Right and Justice, which they call Places of hearing, or Chanceries, one being in Castile, the other in Granad^, and the third in Gallicia: Every one hath a President and 12 Senators, and if that Suiters receive no satisfaction or redresse of their greevances from them, their causes are brought before the Royall Senate. Lastly there is the Treasurer of Castile, having foure Questors under him, whose office is to receive the Kings Treasure, and to take and give accompt thereof. There is a great company of Dukes, Marquesses, and Earles in Spaine. Besides the Prince of Assuria and others, I finde that there are about 23 Dukes, as the Friensian Duke, the Duke of Medina-Rivi-Sicci, of Alua, of Alcala, of Albuquerqua, of Scalona, of Osuna, of Averi, of Bejar, of Gandia, of Sessa, of Infantasg, of Medina Caeli, of Medina Sidonia, of Maqueda, of Najar, of Feria, of Segorbia, of Sonna, of Villa-Formosa, of Verragua, Pastrana, and Franca-Villa. And these have for their yearely revenues some fortie, some an hundred thousand Duckets.A Ducket is according to our English valuation 6s. 8d. The Dukes of Infantasg, and Medina-Sidonia have a farre greater revenue: for the latter hath 130000, and the former 120000 Duckets per annum. These are the Marquesses, the Marquesse of Villa Nova, of Astorga, of Aquilar, of Denia, of Mondejar, of Navares, of Savia, of Velleza, of Coma^es, of Aiomonte, of Altamir, of Veladra, of Vearina, of Carpio, of Camarassa, of Cortes, of Monte-Majore, of Guardia, of Monte-Clare, of Las Navas, of Poza, of Steppa, of Tanara, of Villa-Franca, of Drada, of Cavietis, of Falcis, of Fomesta, of Molina, of Ciralva, of Valesis, of Vallis, of Zaara, of Ardalis, of Tarifa, of Alcanisa, andFor there are in all 45 Marquesates. others,A Towne in New-Castile, where this order was instituted by Ferdinand of Leon, and confirmed by Pope Lucius Anno 1183. the greater part having annuall revenues from ten thousand to 40000 Duckets. There are also about ^n hundred Earles, whose yearely revenues are from ten thousand to 25 thousand Duckets, the chiefe of them are the Earles of Benaventum, of Albua, Miranda, and Oropoza. It would be too tedious to the Reader to ^eckon up, the Vicounts, which are ten in number, the Barons, the long ^oll and Catalogue of Vice Roys, Governours, Prefects of Provinces, ^nd of the Sea: and lastly the long Catalogue of Gentlemen, and divers ^rders of Knights; as in Castle, Knights of the order of SaintFounded by King R^ynar of Leon, Anno. 984. Iames, of (...) Alcantara, ofA Towne which R^ymund Abbot of Pisoria, defended against the Saracens, and therefore instituted this order. Calatrava, and of the order of Saint Iohn: in Aragon and Catalonia, Knights of the order of Montesa: in Portugall Knights of ^he order ofThis order was instituted by Denis King of Portugall, and confirmed by Pope Iohn the 22th Anno. 1321. Iesus Christ, (whereof the King is the Master) being very ^reat, and having all the Provinces which are found out in Africke, A^^ia, or America, annexed unto it. But it will not be amisse if we observe ^y the way that of all the Families in Spaine, the ancientest is the Pacie^ian Familie, for Hirtius in his Commentaries maketh mention of L. Iu^ius Paciecus, in that place where he entreateth of Corduba: as also Cicero ^n the 6th Booke of his familiar Epistles to wit, in his Epistle to Lepta.

These following Families are also very noble and Illustrious, to wit, th^ Meridonian, Toletane, Cerdean, Cardonean, Larensian, Velascean, Gusma^an, Pimentellane, Stunican, Henritican, Oriosian, Cordubentian, Limensi^^ and the Mondragonian Families, to which wee desire others to add^ others, and crave pardon if we mistake their places in ranking of then We have spoken of the Politick State and government: the Ecclesias^^ call followes. The Church of Hispalis was in ancient time the Prim^^ and chiefe of Spaine, and afterward the Church of Toledo, untill th^ great overthrow and devastation of the Kingdome. For Toledo co^ming into the Barbarians hands, the Bishopricke of Bacara had that dignitie: but when being recovered by the Christians, the Toletan Bishopricke sought its former dignitie, and the Baracensian to retaine wh^^ had gotten, there arose a contention, as we may reade Lib. 1. Decre^^ so that the matter is yet undetermin'd. Moreover Vasaeus to Chroni^^ cap. 20o. sheweth who were Presidents in Spaine from the time of (...) Romans and Gothes. But after Spaine was recovered againe out of (...) hands of the Barbarians, the Bishoprickes with their ancient Cities we^ restored, and some newly instituted. We reade that Spaine hath at^^ day seaven Archbishops, and 41 Suffragane Bishops subordinate (...) them. The first is the Archbishop of Toledo, Chancellour of Ca^^^ who next unto the King and his Progenie is the greatest man in dignitie and wealth. The Bishops that doe obey him, are the Bishop of B^rg^ whose Seate was heretofore at Aura, (whence it was called Au^t^^ Episcopatus, and corruptly in some Councells and other publicke Ac^^ Auxitanus) but was after translated from thence to Burgos, the Metropolis of Old Castile, by Alphonsus the sixt, who restored Toledo to the Christians by the authoritie of Pope Vrban the second, in the year 1097. Also the Bishop of Cuena, the Bishop of Osma, called commo^ Episcopus Oxmensis, and corruptly in Councells Oxoniensis: the Bishop at Corduba, (whose Bishopricke is most ancient and famous by meanes of Osius once Bishop thereof) the Bishop of Iaenensia, Palentia, and Segna The second is the Archbishopricke of Hispalis, under which there were heretofore eleven Bishopricks, though there are now but three; namely of Malaga, Gades, and the Canarie Isles. The third is the Archbishop^^^^ of Compostella. The Seate of this Bishop was heretofore Iria Fla^^s, (...) Sea-Towne of Gallicia, and commonly called Padron: but being afterward translated to Compostella, it began to bee called the Bishopricke of Compostella, or of Saint Iames; under which are the Bishops of Cori^, ^centia, Asturia, Gamora, Salmantica, Orense or Auria, Tude or Ty^^, (...) Towne of Gallicia, seated by the River Minius, and commonly called Tuy. The Bishop of Badaios, (which is now called Episcopus Pace^^ and the Bishop of Mindonia, whose Seate was heretofore Ribad^^ commmonly called Mandonnedo. The fourth Archbishop is the Archbishop of Granada; under whom is the Bishop of Almeria, and the b^shop of Guadix, heretofore called Episcopus Accitanus, for that wh^^ heretofore was called Acce, is now called Guadix. The fift is the Archbishop of Valentia, under which are the Bishops of Carthage, Orign^^ Segobrica, (whin is now called Segorbia) and Majorca. The sixt is the Archbishop of Tarraconia, under whom are the Bishops of Herda, (co^monly

called Lerida) Tortosa, Herlua, Barcinon, Genida, Vrgella, and Vich. Lastly, the seventh is the Archbishop of Caesar-Augusta, who hath under him the Bishops of Pampilona, Calagurris, Osca, and Balbastro: the Bishops of Leo and Oviedo are subject to none. Portugall hath three Archbishops, namely of Bracara, Olisipona or Lisbon and Funchala; under whom are the Bishops of Ebora, Visca, Guarda, Conimbrica, Porta, Lamego, Silva, Cepta, and Leria. Concerning the other Bishops, you may consult with Vasaeus, L. Marinaeus Siculus, Damianus a Goes, and others, who doe curiously observe and note what are the revenues which belong to every Bishopricke, as also to Abbies and Monasteries. Those who belong to the Inquisition are of the Ecclesiasticall State: they were first instituted and ordained to examine the Moores, Saracens, and Iewes; but afterward in processe of time they began to extend their power and authoritie over all that were not of the Roman Church and Religion. In the next place we will note the Academies or Universities in Spaine, which are about two and twenty; the chiefe whereof are Salamanca, Compludo, Conimbrica, or Conimbra, Pincia, Saganta, Osca, and Lerida. The Spaniards have happie wits, yet doe they learne or studie little, because they thinke themselves learned when they are not: they love the craft and subtlenes of Sophisters. In the Universities they speake Spanish more than Latine, mingling their speech with many words belonging to the Moores. They seldome leave any offspring or monument of their wit to their owne posteritie, much lesse to strangers, in regard their language is defective. Yet there have beene, and are some learned men, who by their excellent learned workes and writings, have graced their Country, and made it famous unto other Nations.
If we seeke for Divines, there will come forth Vigilantius Priest of Barcinon, Aquilius Severus, Prudentius Bishop of Armentia, Osius of Corduba, Avitus a Priest, Marcianus Bishop of Barcelona, Paulus, Orosius, Pacianus, and his sonne Dexter, Audentius, Isidorus, the interpreter of the Apocalyps, Iustinianius, the President of the Church of Valentia, Leander Bishop of Hispalis, Martinius the President of Mandova, Fulgentius the Bishop of Carthage Eladius the Archbishop of Toledo, Isidorus Bishop of Hispalis, Iohn Bishop of Gerunda; Eutropius, Valentinus, and Franciscus Ximenes Cardinall and Archbishop of Toledo, and father of the Universitie of Compludo, who caused the Holy Bible to be printed in divers languages, which is co^monly called the Complutensian Bible. If we seeke for those which have beene skilfull in the Canon Law, wee shall finde Bernardus of Compostella, Raymundus de Pennya Forti, and Hugo Barcinonensis. If for other Lawyers, we shall finde Pope Calixtus the third, Gomezius, Didacus Covarruvias, and Antonius Augustinus Archbishop of Tarraconia, a man very learned and skilfull in the Roman antiquities. If wee enquire for Physicians, wee shall meete with Avicen, Averroes, Rasis, Almanca, and Messahallah. If for Historians, we shall finde Trogus Pompeius, Iustine, and others. If for Philosophers, we shall meete with L. Anneius Seneca and his sonnes Seneca, Nonatus and Mela, Lucius Iunius, Moderatus Columella, C. Iulius Hyginus, Sotion, and Iohannes Vives Valentinus. If wee search for Mathematicians, behold Pomponius Mela, Abrahamus Cacutius, Alphonsus King of Castile, Henricus the Infanta of Portugall, Henricus Marquesse of Villena, Arnoldus Villanovanus, and his Scholler Raimundus Lullius. If we enquire for Orators, we shall finde beside Seneca, Portius Latro, and M. Fabius Quintilianus.

Lastly if we would reckon up some Poets borne here, we may make account of Sextilius Hena: L. Annaeus Seneca, and Lucan who were Cosins. M. Valerius Martialis, Rufus Festus Avienus, Aurelius Prudentius, Pope Damasus, Caelius Sedulius, and many others: I omit for brevities sake the later moderne Poets. The Spaniards are by nature hot and drie, swarthe-coloured, to helpe which the women use a kinde of painting: they are well limb'd and strong set. They are the most superstitious of all people, so that other people doe learne from them both ceremonies, complements, and large titles. They have a great dexteritie in concealing their thoughts both by silence and dissimulation. They have a kinde of an affected gravitie, which maketh them incurre the hatred of all other Nations, which, as Marianus sheweth, is an individuall concomitant or companion to great Kingdomes. The women are not very fruitfull in bearing children: they abstaine much from wine, and are seldome seene abroade, as imitating therein the Roman Matrons. They use strangers discurteo^sly, and in forraine Countries they will reverence, prayse, and extoll one another. They are great observers of Justice, so that Justice is administred to all, even from the highest to the lowest: and so great is the painfull industrie of Magistrates, that there are few or no robberies committed. Beside, they keepe their hands free from bloud, and other wicked acts, and who soever offendeth the Lawes, or doth trespasse against any one, though never so meane, is punished for it. They are still attempting some greate matter, for having supprest their enemies at home, and overthrowne the Saracens, they seeke for to discover and get for their King the most pote^^ parts of the world. When two or three meete together, of what place or condition soever, they alwayes discourse of the Common-wealth and serious affaires, they seeke wayes how to weaken their enemies force, they devise stratagems, and invent a thousand engines, which they open and make knowne to the Captaines. In the field they can endure both hunger thirst and labour. In battle and matters of warre they are more politick than stout: they are of a light body, and being lightly armed, they not onely easily pursue their enemies, but when they are put to it, they can easily save themselves by flight, (alwayes meditating on some militarie or warlike designe). In their feastes and banquets at home they are frugall, sober, and content with a little, but abroade they have more delicate fare. They use handsome convenient garments, well made and fashioned. Spai^^ doth affoord to the neighbour Countries, and also to remote Nations, Silke-wooll, Cloath of all kindes, Salt, Sugar, Honey, Orenges, Pome-Granats, Lemmons, pickled Olives, Capers, Grapes, Figges, Pruines, Almonds, Chesnuts, Anny-seed, Cumming-seed, Coriander-seed, Rice, Saffron, Oyle, Waxe, Alume, Vermilion, Purple, Saltfish, Bay-berries, preserv'd Fruits of all sorts, Alablaster, Corall, Gold, Silver, Iron, Steele, Tinne, Copper, Leade, Dying Oade, Quick-silver, Gotten, pretious stones, Aromatickes and sweet Spices, which are brought from the Indies and other places. And in exchange for these, the Europaeans, the Africans, the Asiatians, and the Americans, doe give the Spaniards such commodities, as their owne Country doth not affoord.


PORTVGALL AND ALGARBIA.
HItherto wee have described Spaine in generall, now our Method requireth that wee should decipher it in particular and by parts. Wee said in our generall Description,The names and whence so called. that it was diversly divided. But wee will make a faithfull Description of the parts of Spaine, in such order as it is delineated by Hondius. Hee describeth it in sixe Tables in this order. In the first Portugall is described: in the second Biscay, Guipuscoa, and Legio: in the third the New and Old Castiles: in the fourth Andalusia, in which is the Countrey of Hispalis and Gades: in the fifth is Valentia: and in the sixth is Aragon, and Catalonia. Portugall which offers it selfe in the first place, was anciently called Lusitania, and M. Varro and Plinie doe affirme, that it received this name from Lusus the Sonne of Liber, and Lysa who was drunke with him: for it was called Lusitania, as it were, the Countrey of Lusus. Marcianus thinketh, it was called Lusitania from a River which is now called Tagus. Some suppose it was called Portugall a Portu Gallorum, which is as much to say, as the French-mens Haven. But Andraeas Resendius,The Situation. whose opinion other learned men doe follow, doth observe, that the name of Portugall is derived a Portu Cale. This Countrie, if wee consider the breadth thereof from the South Northward, is greater than Old Lusitania, but if wee consider the length from the West Eastward, it is lesser. Portugall at this day runneth forth Northward, beyond the meeting of the two Rivers Minius and Avia even to the Towne Ribadania, seated on that banke of Avia which looketh toward Gallicia, and a straight line being drawne from thence Eastward, it reacheth even to Miranda, seated upon the River Durius, and from thence toward the South to the Mouth of the River Ana, on that side where it bordereth on Castile, Estremadura, and Andaluzia; on the Northwest it looketh toward the Atlantick Ocean, so that the whole compasse thereof is thought to bee 879 miles.The temper of the Ayre. This countrie hath an excellent sweete and temperate Ayre, and a cleere and fruitfull Climate. It aboundeth with Wine, Oyle, Oranges, Pome-citernes,The fertilitie of the Soyle. Almonds, Honey and Waxe. The fruite of this Countrie doth excell that which growes in others neere unto it. And though the Inhabitants have not out of their fields sufficient store of corne, to sustaine them with foode, yet there is much transported thither out of France and Germanie. This Countrie doth breede many living creatures, especially great store of Horses, and those so swift of foote, that they imagin'd them to bee begotten by the winde.The ancient Government. The Kingdome of Portugall began about the yeare 1100, for at that time it became a part of Spaine. Chronicles doe mention, that the first of the Line of the Kings of Portugall was Henry Duke of Lotharingia, Earle of Limburg, (a man of a great courage

and ready of hand) who removing into Spaine, married Tyresia the Daughter of Alphonsus the sixth King of Castile and Legio, and tooke for a Dowrie that part of Gallicia and Lusitania which is now called Portugall, and which not long before, by his owne valour, hee recovered and got from the Saracens and Moores. Hee dying about the yeare 1112, there succeeded him his Sonne Alphonsus, who calling himselfe Duke of Portugall, was enstiled King thereof by his whole Armie, in the yeare 1139, having obtained a victory against Ismarius, and foure other Kings of the Saracens and Moores, leaving to posteritie five Sc^cheons for their Armes, in remembrance of that atchievement. The^ succeeded him almost in a right line, Sanctius, Alphonsus the 2, Sanct^^ the 3, Alphonsus the 3, Dionysius who first began to usurpe the title of the King of theA people of Lusitania called also Turdetant. Algarbians, also Alphonsus the fourth, Peter, Ferdina^^ Iohn, Edward, Alphonsus the fifth surnamed Africanus, Iohn the 2, E^^nuel, Iohn the 3, Sebastian slaine in Africk, Henry the Cardinall, and A^tonius who because hee was a Bastard was expell'd, Philip the second King of Spaine, Nephew to Emanuel by Isabel his eldest Daughter, and Father to Philip the 3, whose Sonne Philip the 4 doth now reigne. The Metropolis of Portugall is Olisippo, as it is called in the ancient faithfull copies of M. Varro, Pliny, Antoninus, and Mela. For in vulgar writings it is written sometimes Olysippo, and sometimesSo called, because, as some say, Vlysses in his ten yeares travels comming hither built it. Vlysippo, and divert other wayes: now it is called Lisbone, or, as the Inhabitants doe pronounce it, Lisboa. It is a great Towne of traffique, abounding with riches, and it is a famous store-house of forraine commodities, which are brought thither out of Asia, Africk, and America. It hath a pleasant and commodious situation almost at the mouth of the River Tagus: it is now very large, being built on five Hils, and as many Vales or descents, but heretofore it was lesse, being seated onely on one hill as some doe report. On that side which is toward the Sea it hath two and twe^^^ Gates, and on that side which is toward the Continent it hath sixteene. It hath threescore and seventeene watch-Towres upon the wals. The Parish-churches are twenty five, besides many Chappels and Churches belonging to the Monkes, the Anachorets, and the Nunnes. The Cities beyond Tagus doe acknowledge Lisbone to be the Mother-citie, as E^^ra (called by Ptolemie Ebura, and now commonly Evora) Begia, commonly called Bega or Beia, and heretofore Pax Iulia, by Antoninus and Ptolemie Setubal, heretofore named (as Clusius supposeth) Salacia: Also Alcasar de sal in the Countrie of Algarbia, and Almada, which Ptolemie cals Caetobrix, and Antoninus Caetobriga. Beyond Tagus not farre from Lisbone Northward the Towne of Cascala is seated: and as you come a litle neerer to the Citie you meete with a litle Towne called Bethl^^m. There are also Leria, Tomar, and Guarda, all Townes of note. Not farre from Tomar lyeth Ceice, which Antoninus calleth Celium: Also Alanga^ra by the River Tagus, which Damianus a Goes being his owne native Towne thinketh to be so called, quasi Alankerke, (that is) the Temple of the Alanes: It was heretofore called Ierabrica, but now Coimbra, and it was heretofore the head Citie of the Kingdome of Portugall. There is also the Towne Viseum, commonly called Viseo, Plinie calleth it Vacca, but now it is called Ponte Fouga. The third Councell of Toledo doth

map of Portugal and AlgarbiaPORTVGALL AND ALGARBIA.

mention Lameca commonly called Lamego. Lastly Braga which lyeth betweene the Rivers Durius and Minius, it is now so called, though Ptolemie calleth it Bracar Augusta, Antoninus Braccara Augusta, and Plinie Augusta Bracarum. It is reported, that it was built by the Gaules, surnamed Braccati, in the yeare before Christs birth 290, and the Romans having conquered it, gave it the surname of Augusta. It was heretofore so famous, that here were the seven great Assemblies or Parliaments, which were kept and held in the hithermost Spaine, so that foure and twentie Cities, as Plinie reporteth, did bring their suits and causes hither to have them tried.The Rivers. The Rivers of this Countrie are Anas and Guadiana, Tagus or Taio, Mondego or Monda, Durius or Duero, and Minius or Mino: two of these being famous, to wit, Tagus and Durius.) Portugall on the West and South looketh toward the Atlantick Ocean, which,The commodities of the Sea. besides fish which it yeeldeth in great abundance, doth afford many other commodities. This Countrey is indebted unto, and receiveth all her plenty from the Sea, which she acknowledgeth, in so much, that it may more worthily be called the golden Sea, than golden flowing Nilus, because by the helpe hereof they have commodities imported and brought in from all parts of the earth, so that it standeth in need of nothing; and againe those commodities wherewith it aboundeth, it exporteth by shipping to traffique with forraine Countries. There is also (besides the Havens which wee mentioned before) the Haven of Setubal,The Havens. Dubal, or Tubal, which lieth Southward from Olisippo or Lisbone. Heere are few Mountaines, and those not very great, as namely those which the Inhabitants call Sierra de Monchiquo:The Mountaines. de Chaldecatao, de Sordedas, called heretofore the Mountaines of the Moone, etc. And these, for the most part, are full of woods and thickets. There are also very great and thick woods, in which the Princes of Spaine are wont to hunt.The publick and sacred workes. In the litle Towne of Bethleem, there is a Temple dedicated to the holy Virgin Mary, and built very costly: also the Monument of Emanuel King of Portugall, which hee appointed to bee built in his owne life-time, yet was it afterward enriched and beautified by Iohn the third the Sonne of Emanuel. There are moreover in that part of Portugal which lyeth betweene Tagus and Durius (as Vasaeus writeth) besides the Metropolitan Church of Bracara, the Cathedrall Church in Portug^^, and five other Collegiate Churches, more than an hundred and thirty Monasteries, the most of which have most large revenues, and about 1460 Parish-Churches. In that part which belongeth to the Church of Bracara there are reckoned eight hundred Parish-Curches, whereby you may easily collect and know the fertility of this Countrie. I doe not mention the Hospitals for strangers,The Universities. for the diseased, and for Orphanes, the Towres, the faire houses, the pleasant gardens, and Universities which are in this Kingdome, as namely Ebora andThe Masters of this Vniversitie made the Commentarie upon most part of Aristotle, called Schola Conimbricensis. Coimbra or Conimbrica; the first was lately instituted by Henry Cardinall of Portugall, and President of the same Citie; the other also was lately instituted by Iohn the second King of Portugall. The Portugals are the strongest of all the Spaniards, the quickest, the most nimble, and light of body, so that they can easily pursue or retire from the enemie. Their disposition is to be proud and selfe-conceited of themselves,Their manners and their owne affaires;

and they say themselves, that they live by opinion and conceit, that is, they sustaine themselves more with that which they thinke themselves to be, than with that which they truly are.Their traffick. They are skilfull in sea-matters, and are famous for their Navigations to unkowne parts of the world, where they grow rich by trading and merchandizing.
Under Portugall at this time is the Kingdome of Algarbia.Algarbia whence so called. It taketh its name from the Arabick tongue, and doth signifie a happie and plentifull Field or Medow, in which are all things necessarie for traffique. A straight line drawne from the River Anas betweene the Rivers which are commonly called Vataon, and Carei-vas to the litle Towne Odeseiza,The Situation. that is, from the East Westward, doth separate from Portugall this Kingdome of Algarbia, which is the least and unnoted'st Kingdome of all Spaine. There are carried hither out of divers parts of Spaine, downe the River Anas all sorts of Wines, Sacks, Bastards, Roman Wine, and others of the like sorts, which being shipped, are transported into France, the Low-Countries, and other parts.The Townes. It hath in it the Townes of Balsa, (so called by Ptolemie, Plinie, Antoninus, and Pomponius Mela, but now Tavila, as Coquus supposeth) and Ossonoba, so called by Plinie and Antoninus; it is called also by Pliny Lusturia, by Ptolemy Ossonaba, by Pinetus Gibraleon, by Clusius Exuba, by Varrerius Estombar, as also by Moralis, and it is thought to bee the same which is now called Silvis or Selves. There was also in the same place neere the Holy Promontory the Citie which Pomponius calleth Lacobriga, the ruines whereof are yet to be seene neere the Sea-Towne Lagos, at a Village which is called in the Portugall language Lagoa, as Vasaeus writeth. Algarbia at the first was given in dowry by Alphonsus the 10 King of Legio or Leon, (as ancient Annals doe report) unto Alphonsus the third King of Portugall,The ancient Government. when hee married his daughter Beatrice, which hee begate on a whore. Dionysius was derived from this marriage, who first of all began to usurpe the title of King of Algarbia. But thus much shall suffice concerning Portugall and Algarbia, I passe to the other parts of Spaine.



GALLICIA, LEON, AND ASTVRIA DE OVIEDO.
GALLICIA (which is also written Galecia or Gallaecia, and taketh its name from an ancient people called Callai^^ hath on the North and West the Ocean, on the South Portugall with the River Durius flowing betweene the^ and on the East Asturia.The Situation. This Countrie in regard it hath many rugged mountaines, and wanteth water, is but thinly inhabited. It aboundeth so with Horses, that they are supposed to be begotten by the winde. Pliny noteth, that here are rich mines of Gold. Niger writeth that the rivers hereof do bring downe earth mingled with gold, silver, and tinne, and that the soyle it selfe is full of gold, brasse and lead, so th^^ golden clods are oftentimes ploughed up. The mountaines afford great store of wood for building of ships.The fertilitie of the Soyle. Gallicia doth exceedingly abound with fish: especially with Salmons, Congers, a kinde of fish which they call Pescades, and many other daintie fishes, which being salted are carried into divers parts of Spaine. In the moneth of November and December, a great number of those fish are taken, which they commonly call Vesugos, being two or three pound weight; they are carried f^^^ and sweete into Castile and are sold there, for the cold doth easily preserve them: they have an excellent taste, yet those are best tasted which are taken in the Ocean, and not in the Mediterranean Sea. For the cold^^ of the Ocean doth fatten the fish, and therefore those which are tak^^ most Northward are the best. The most part of the Inhabitants doe live in mountaines, on which they build convenient houses. Concerning th^ name and originall of the Callaicians, let the Reader have recourse (...) Iohannes Bishop of Gerunda, Lib. 2 Paralipomenorum Hispaniae, Rodericus T^letanus (Lib. 10. de rebus Hispanicis cap. 4.) and others. The Metropolis of Gallicia is Compostella, where is worshipped S. Iames the Apostle, who together with the Universitie making the Citie famous giveth unto it the name of S. Iago,The Cities. it was heretofore called Briantia, as Franciscus Tarap^^ Ambrosius Moralis, and Villanovanus do thinke; Orosius calleth it Brig^^tia, who saith, that there is in it a very high watch-towre: Ptolemie calle it it Flavium Brigantum, Beuterus, Coquus, and Ioannes Mariana do call it Betancos, Florianus and Gomecius call it Coruna, and Iohannes Bishop of Gerunda (Lib. 1.) calleth it Compostella, saying it was so called quasi Co^^^ Stella, for so the evening starre was called which maketh these countries wholsome. There is extant at Salamantica in the Library of the Colledg^ of our Saviour the Historie of Compostella, the growth and increase of the Church of Compostella described in two volumes, written by the command of Didacus the first Archbishop thereof: concerning which you may also read Lucius Marineus Siculus, in his fift Booke, and i^

map of Gallicia LegioGALLICIA, LEGIO,

Chapter concerning religious houses in Spaine, and the wonderfull miracles done therein. The Lesser Townes are Orensium, a Citie neare the River Minius, and called by Ptolemie Thermae Calidae, as Gomecius thinketh in the life of Franciscus Zimenius, where hee addeth, that the Swedish people of Germany, who heretofore did subdue these parts, in their native language did call it Warense; though Ortelius saith it should rather be written Warmsee, which signifies the Warme Lake. Also a Town called in Latine Lucus, and by the Inhabitants Lugo, Pomponius calleth it Turris Augusti, Pliny, Aresti, and Arae Sextianae, and Ptolemie Promont^num Arae Sestii, neare to the Cantabricke Ocean in Artabria. Also, P^^vetus, Ponte Vedra, and Ribalaeum, commonly called Ribadeo. Other towns Marinaeus Siculus mentions in the beginning of his third Booke. Gallicis got the title of a Kingdome a thousand and sixtie yeares after Christ: For that yeare Ferdinand (the sonne of Sanctius Major King of Navarre) being King of Castile, when hee had married Sanctia the daughter of Alphonsus the fift, and so united the Kingdome of Castile and Legio: having three sonnes, hee made by his will Sanctius King of Castile; Alphonsus King of Legion and Asturia; and Garcia King of Gallicia (which hee enjoying in the right of his wife, was till then but an Earledome) and Portugall. Sanctius being not content with this division which his father made, thrust his brother Alphonsus out of his Kingdome, and slew G^^^ his other brother. Now when Sanctius had ruled about sixe yeares, and was at last beheaded by Vellidus through trecherie, Alphonsus who lived as a banisht man with the King of the Moores at Toledo, did not onely recover the Kingdome of Legio, which his father gave him by Will, but also got the Kingdome of Castile, Gallicia, and Portugall. Alphonsus had three children lawfully begot on three wives, by Isabell Queen of France hee had Sanctia, who was married to the Earle Rodoricke, who brought new Colonies into the Citie which is commonly called Ciudad-R^^^go; by Zaida a Moore, daughter to the King of Sevill, he had Sanctius, who was slaine in a battell against the Saracens; and lastly, by Constantia he had Vrraca, who out living Sanctius and Sanctia (who dyed without issue) after shee had beene wife to Raimundus Berengarius Earle of Tolosa, married Alphonsus King of Aragon, and had an heire by him who was afterward. Alphonsus the seventh, the most powerfull King of all his predecessours, and one that deserved to be called Emperour of Spaine. From th^ time Gallicia, Castile, and Legio have had alwaies but one King. Neare to Legio,Leon. and bounding thereon on the North is Asturia, on the West Gallicis, and on the South and East old Castile.The Situation. It taketh its name from the seventh German Legion, which was seated and placed here under the command of the Emperour Nerva, as some suppose. The Metropolis hereof is that famous Citie which taketh its name from the Countrie, and is called by Ptolemie Legio septima Germanica; Antoninus calleth it Legio Gemina; but it is now commonly called Leon, which name I cannot see why Franciscus Tarapha should rather derive from Leonigildus King of the Gothes, than from the Legion it selfe. Moralis doth deliver also that it was heretofore called Sublantia, and writeth that some evidences of that name are extant in a place but a little distant from Legio, called Sollanco. L. Marina^s Siculus writeth thus concerning the Church of Legio, in his third Booke

of Spaine. Although the Church which the Citie of Hispalis hath built in our age, doth exceed all the rest for greatnesse, although the Church of Toledo surpasse the rest for treasure, ornaments, and glasse windowes, and the Church of Compostella for strong building, for the miracles of Saint Iames, and other things: yet the Church of Legio (in my judgement) is to be preferred before them all for admirable structure and building, which hath a Chappell joyning to it, in which lye buried seven and thirtie Kings, and one Emperour of Spaine. It is worthy of memorie that this Citie was the first from which about the yeare 716. the recoverie of Spaine, (which formerly the Moores and Saracens almost wholly possessed) was begun. For (as also Rodericus Toletanus in his sixt Booke of Spanish matters for many Chapters together, and Roderick Sanctius in the first part of his Spanish Historie cap. 11. do relate) Pelagius the sonne of Fafila Duke of Cantabria, and descended of the royall blood of the Gothes, being made King by the remainder of the Christians who fled into the mountaines, made a great slaughter on the Moores; and being scarcely entred into his Kingdome tooke Legio from the enemies. This man afterwards making it the Seate of his Principalitie, built a new Castle there as a Fort and defence against the violence of their incursions.Asturia. And laying aside the armes of the Kings of the Gothes, gave the Lion Rampant Gules, in a field, Argent; which the Kings of Legio do use at this day. Fafila the sonne of Pelagius succeeded him in the Kingdome, and (he dying issuelesse) there succeeded him Alphonsus Catholicus, the sonne of Peter Duke of Cantabria, being descended from the stocke of Ricaredus Catholick King of the Gothes, who married Ormisenda the onely sister and heire of Fafila. The government of Legion remained in the hands of Alphonsus his familie, even to Veremundus the 24 King of Legio, who dying in the yeare 1020. without a Successour, his sister Sanctia married Ferdinando of Navarre, King of Castile, and brought the Kingdome of Legio to be joyned and united to his kingdome. Asturia hath on the North the Ocean, on the East Biscay, on the South old Castile, and on the West Gallicia. It produceth and bringeth forth gold, and divers sorts of colours, otherwise it is but little tilled, and thinly inhabited, except it be in those places which are next to the Sea. Here was the Seat of the ancient Astures, who were so called (as Isidore writeth lib. 9. Etymolog. cap. 2.) from the River Asturia, (whereof Florus maketh mention in the fourth Book of his Roman Histories, and others) From whom Ptolemie calls the Countrie it selfe (...), and the Latines Asturia, as also Astyria, as is evident by what I have read in ancient marbles. At Rome in the pavement of the Chappell which is in the Temple of Saint Gregorie in the mountaine Calius, there is a broken marble-table engraved with these words,
AcontiiL. Ranio. Optato. V. C. CosCuratori. Reip. MediolanensiumCurat. Reip. Nolanorum. Procos. ProvinciaNarbonensium. Legato. Aug. Et IuridicoAstyriae. Et. Galaecia. Curatori. ViaeSalariae, etc.
Moreover I see it called Asturica in a marble-Table, which is at Rome

beyond Tiber in a private Roman-citizens house. (I will set downe the words in the Description of Italie, where I shall speake of the Alpes joyning to the Sea) And it is called at this day Asturias. Pliny (lib. 3. cap. 3.) doth divide the Astures into the Augustini and Transmontani. The one being on the hither side of the mountaines toward the South, and the other beyond the mountaines Northward neare the Ocean. Concerning the Astures, Silius the Italian Poet writeth thus (lib. 1.)


--Astur avarus
Visceribus lacerae Telluris mergitur imis,
Et redit infelix effosso concolor Auro.


The covetous Asturian will goe
Into the bowels of the earth below,
Whence he returnes in colour like gold Oare
Which hee unhappily digg'd up before.


The Metropolis of the Province isThis Citie is called by Moletius, Asturum Lucus, and by Tarapha, Brigentium. Oviedo, of which Rodericus Toletan^ writeth much (lib. 4. de rebus Hisp. cap. 14.) where among other things he giveth the reason, wherefore it was called the Bishops Citie. Here is also Astorga, called anciently Asturica Augusta, and some other small Townes.



BISCAY, GVIPVSCOA, NAVARRE, and Asturia de Santillana.
BISCAY (as Iohannes Bishop of Gerunda affirmeth) taketh its name from the Bastuli the ancient Inhabitants of Baetica,The Countrie whence so called. for they comming from Lybia into that part of Spaine which is called Baetica, and being beaten and expulsed thence by the Moores, they fled into the Mountaines of Galaecia, and so building themselves houses, the whole Countrie was called from that time Bastulia, which is now called Biscay. Some doe call Biscay Viscaia, which word hath some affinity with the name of the Vascones.The Situation. Biscay is a Countrie of Spaine lying neere the Ocean, and very full of hils, out of which arise 150 Rivers. It hath a more temperate Climate than other parts of Spaine. For being environ'd with great Mountaines, it is not troubled with too much cold, nor burnt with too much heate.The temper of the Aire. The Countrie is full of trees fit for the building of Ships: which not onely Spaine doth acknowledge, but other Countries, whither whole ship-loades are often transported.The fruitfulnes of the Soyle. Heere are abundance of Chesse-Nuts, Hasel-Nuts, Oranges, Raizins, and all kind of Mettals, (especially Iron and Black-lead) besides other commodities. Where they want wine, they have a kinde of drinke made of prest Apples, which hath an excellent taste. Heere are also store of beasts,The varietie of living creatures. fish, fowle, and all things which are convenient and necessarie for the sustaining of mans life. TheWhence the Country was called Cantabria. Cantabrians did heretofore inhabite that Countrie which wee now call Biscay, but it was larger than Biscay is now, and contained Guipuscoa and Navarre. These Cantabrians were a famous people, and much celebrated by many Writers. They thought that was no life which was without warres: and when all the people of Spaine were subjected, and reduced to the obedience of Rome,The ancient Government. they alone with the Asturians, and some others who joyned with them, could not be overcome, untill at last C. Caesar Octavianus Augustus did subdue this stout Nation, being broken and wearied by a warre of almost five yeares continuance, (hee himselfe going against them, and the rest that were not obedient to the Romans) by the industrie and valour of Vispanius Agrippa, and of the other Generals which hee brought with him.The Townes. There is in Biscay, besides other Townes, one speciall Towne of note called Bilbao, which is, as some doe suppose, by changing of the letters (which is frequent with the Spaniards) as much to say as Beluao, that is, Bellum vadum, Didacus Lopeus de Hazo, Prince of the Cantabrians built it, in the yeare of Christ 1300, or thereabouts. This Towne is especially commended

for three things, the convenient Situation, the plenty of Co^ and the wonderfull great traffique and merchandizing which is he^ for whatsoever comes or is brought from England, France, or the L^ Countries, is transported and carried through this Towne into oth^ parts of Spaine, and whatsoever Spaine doth communicate by way (...) traffique unto other Countries, it is exported and carried through Heere are Citizens, who at their owne proper charge doe yearly b^ three or foure ships. On the side of the Citie there is a litle towne the Sea-coast, commonly called Portugallete, from whence a cert^ River, or rather a great arme of the Sea doth flow into it, even unto (...) houses of the Inhabitants. By reason of which, divers kindes of w^ are daily for a small matter imported and exported. There are also f^ Havens in Biscay. There is no kinde of fish but you may have it he^ and that good and new. The Sea-shell-fish here have pearles in th^ but of a meane sort. The people of the Countrie are curteous, me^^ and eloquent. It is a custome and fashion that the Virgins in Biscay long as they are unmarried, doe never let their haire grow, neither (...) they cover themselves with any veile; but presently when they (...) married, they cover their heads with a Quoife, made like a Helmet, linnen cloth of a golden colour, which they wrap up in such a man that it standeth forth a pretty way like an horne upon their forehea^ The Spaniards heere have great store of trading with the French,The traffick. (...) Germans, the English, and other people. It especially affordeth wo^ so that all Market-places are full of buyers and sellers.
GVIPVSCOA was heretofore the Countrie of the Cantabri^^ some doe call it Lipuscoa and Lipuisca,The Countrie. The names. yet corruptly, as Stephanus G^bayus an inhabitant thereof noteth. But whence it hath this appellat^ I cannot easily determine,The Situation. unlesse perhaps it taketh it from the anci^ Citie Opuscua. It is enclosed and bounded on the East with the Ri^ Vidosone, (which is also called Vidorso, Alduida, Huria, and B^^y^ being in the middle betweene France and Spaine) and the Pyrenaan H^^ on the South with the Kingdome of Navarre; on the West with Bis^ (of which I spake before) and on the North with the Cantabrick S^ This Countrey is very temperate,The temper of the Ayre. neither feeling too much cold, (...) too much heate of the Sunne. It hath a moist and variable Climate. (...) is very rugged and mountainous, and therefore it is not every wh^ tilled, but yet those places which are tilled are very fruitfull. It ha^ but few Vineyards,The fertilitie of the Soyle. except it be on that side which is next to the Sc^ But it hath every where great store of Iron and Steele, so that no Cou^trey hath better or greater abundance; for so much of it is digged he^ as is sufficient for many Countries. Moreover, not onely Vulcans sho^ but Mars his Armory seeme to be placed heere by Nature: for there here so great plenty and store not onely of Iron and Steele, but also (...) wrought Armour, that in some writings belonging to the Countrie it i^ deservedly called the Wall or defence of the Kingdomes of Castile and Legio. Navigierus writeth, that in this Countrey so much Iron and Steel^ is digged, that every yeare they make 80000 Duckats gaine thereof Therefore not without cause doth Pliny write, lib. 34. cap. 45. th^ there is a whole mountaine there of Iron: There is, saith hee, a very high

map of Biscaia and GuipuscoaBISCAIA AND GVIPVSCOA.

mountaine of Cantabria on the Sea side (a thing incredible to be spoken) whi^^ is all of Iron. Ptolemie, Pomponius, and Plinie doe place here the Oroge^^^nes, the Autrigones, and the Varduli. The Metropolis isThis is also called Testosages by Ptolemy, and by Martialis Palladia. Tolosa, seated at the confluence and meeting of Araxis and Orta: There are also oth^^ Townes, as Placentia, where there is an incredible company of Iron-smiths; Motrico, or as others thinke it should be written, Monte is Trico, from the Rocke which hangeth over the Towne; Fuentara^^^ which Ptolemie cals Phlasiobriga; the Fane or Temple of Saint Sebasti^^ heretofore called Hisuru, afterward Don Bastia, and now corruptly ^^nastien, signifying the same with Saint Sebastian; for Don signifieth th^ among the Cantabrians, which Sanctus doth with the Latines, and Sa^^^ with the Castellanes; and many places in Cantabria have, for the mo^^ part, divers names, in regard of the difference of speech: the Cant^^ans call them by one name, the other Spaniards by an other, and the French-men by an other name, and yet they commonly signifie one thing. This Towne is situated at the mouth of the River which is called by Pomponius Mela Menascus, by Ptolemie Menosca, but now is called in Gurumea,The River Chalybs. or Vramea. The River Chalybs doth rise up hereabout, the water whereof is very good to temper Iron withall, so that the Spani^^ doe approve of no other Armour, but that which hath beene tempered therewith. Iustine lib. 44. saith, that the bordering people were called Chalybes from this River.The Havens. The Fane of Saint Sebastian hath a very large Haven (not made by humane Art, but by Natures providence) whe^^ ships doe ride securely and safely, being defended from the violence (...) winde or Seas. The entrance into it is betweene two Castles, the o^e whereof standing towards the East is built on a high Mountaine,The Mountaines. high^^ than that which is on the West side, which is onely placed on a rock The Inhabitants are like in manners to the Inhabitants of Bis^ay, and speake the same language. They are by nature ingenious, politick, (...) accomplished, neate, easie to be allured, but hard to be compelled, desirous of honour, stoute defenders of their owne priviledges, nim^^ couragious, ready and quick in handling their Armes, and apt forw^^ The women also are very strong and of a warlike spirit, well bod^^^ well favoured, although they accustome and use themselves to lab^^ which is a cause why they are lesse proud. Those that dwell by the Se^ side doe get much by fishing, and especially by taking those kinde (...) fish called Baccali.
The Kingdome of Navarre, which was also anciently called in Kingdome of Sobabre, in all parts is as fertile, and abounding with (...) things necessary for mans life, as any other Kingdome of Spaine. A^though commonly it bee thought to be very small, yet it hath sixe and fiftie walled Cities. The Inhabitants of this Countrie were heretofo^^ very stout and warlike, and such as oftentimes shooke off the yoake (...) the Roman subjection, yet at the last they were wholly subdued, (...) brought into obedience to the Romans. When Caius Iulius the Dicta^^^ being kill'd at Rome, Octavianus Augustus succeeded him. For Augus^^ sent foure Legions against them, who entring the Province did waste i^ with fire and sword. When therefore they saw that they were unable to resist the Roman forces, the most of them fled to the mountaines

which were very steepe and inaccessible, and are now called Navaia; lying length-wayes betweene Mescua, and Eulates. Heere when they had dwelt a long time, they were called from those Mountains Navinii, and afterwards the Moores possessing Spaine did corruptly call them Navarri. But being opprest by the Tyrannie of the Moores, and compelled to forsake their owne habitations, they betooke themselves to theSome suppose, that Navarre had its name from a Towne among the Mountains called Navarrin. Pyrenaean Mountaines, where they chose themselves a King, and for many successions of Kings lived according to their owne Lawes, even till the yeare a thousand five hundred and thirteene, when Pope Iulius the second did by the sentence of Excommunication deprive Iohannes Albretus King of Navarre of his Kingdome as a Schismatick adhering to Lewis the 12 King of France, and gave a faire pretext and occasion to Ferdinand the Catholick K. to invade Navarre, which hee long gaped for; he therefore sending Duke Alban, did drive King Iohn out of his Kingdome, and left it to his Successours. The chiefe Citie of Navarre is now commonly called Pampelona, some call it Pompeiopolis, as if it were built by Pompeius Magnus. It is situated under the sixteenth Degree and eleven Minutes of Longitude, and the 44 Degree, and 43 Minutes of Latitude. There are besides these chiefe Cities, Sanctus Iohannes, Pedis Portus, Mons Regalis, Amaya, Estella, Olyta, Taffala, and Tudela.



THE OLD AND NEW CASTILE.
The Country, whence so called.CASTILIA or Castella, which taketh its name from the C^stle, that King Pelagius (having recovered Legion from (...) Moores) did build, was heretofore called Bardulia. T^^ describers of Spaine doe make it twofold, the Old and (...) New. Asturia and Biscay doe compasse the Old Castile (...) the North:The Situation of Old Castile. on the West, Portugall; on the South, New Castile; ((...) Mountaines which runne through the length of Spaine, lying between them) and on the East Aragon and Navarre. The Country is ve^^ fertile, full of wine, and all kinde of Fruits, Saffron, and all kinde of ^^ving Creatures: and this was the beginning of the Kingdome. Pel^^^ having taken againe Legio from the Moores, built a Castle as a defe^^^ against the violence of the Barbarians,The fertility of the Soyle. the Governours wherof were ^^^led Earles of Castile, and did acknowledge the King of Legio a long time as their Prince, even to Ordonius the second, the fourteenth King of Asturia and Legio; who having called the Earles and Nobles of Castile (...) to him under the colour of parley, beheaded them. This wicked (...) the Castilians stomacking,The ancient Government. and having cast off their obedience to (...) Kings of Legio, they choose two Judges out of themselves, Nunius ^^ra, and Lainus Calvus, (one to give Judgement, and the other to ove^^ matters of warre) whose children and posteritie were afterward called Earles of Castile, even to Sanctius Major King of Navarre, who (whi^^ by his warlike valour hee had taken Corduba and Toledo from the S^cens, and had thrust out all the Moores out of Navarre, Aragon, Castile Legio, Portugall, and other parts of Spaine) restored all Spaine to the C^^^stians; and having married Eluira the daughter of Sanctius, Earle of C^stile, and sister to the last Earle of Garsia, writ himselfe in the right of (...) dowry, not Earle, but King of Castile, and left the Kingdome to his S^ Ferdinand, who was enriched with the Kingdome of Legio by his w^^ Sanctia. Sanctius the sonne did succeed Ferdinand, and after him his brother Alphonsus; whose daughter Vrraca (for the heire male died) wh^^^ after the decease of Raimundus Berengarius Earle of Tolosa (her for^ husband) shee had married Alphonsus King of Aragon; the Kingdom of Aragon,The Cities. Castile, and Legio, came to be united. The Metropolis (...) Old Castile is the Citie ofThis Citie was built, or rather repaired by Nugno Belides a German, and contendeth with Toledo for the Primateship of Spaine. Burges, commonly called Burgos: Ptole^ thinketh it should bee called Bravum. It is an ancient Citie, famous (...) many things, and deserveth to be accounted one of the chiefe Cities (...) Spaine; for it hath an hundred and fiftie lesser Townes under it, ever^ where beautified with great, faire, and convenient houses, ado^^ with market places, streetes, bridges, Temples, Friaries, and Rivers and is very notable for the incredible diligence of the Inhabitants o^ whatsoever age, sexe, or condition. Round about the Metropolis divers Towns are pleasantly and commodiously seated, as Palentia situate

map of CastileTHE OLD AND NEW CASTILE.

on the banke of Carion, Pliny calls it Palantia, as also Mela, Ptolemy, and Appianus: Strabo calls it Pallantia, and Antoninus corruptly Peralantia. Also the Towne Valdoletum, heretofore a Royall Seate, and one of the seven Ancient Universities of Spaine. It is the fairest and most delightfull place, not onely in Spaine, but also in all Europe, as being seated on the most pleasant banke of Pesuerga: neither is there any Citie which can be preferr'd before it, for the fertilenesse of the soyle round about it. It hath a faire and large market-place, the circuit wereof is seven hundred paces; and whereas this Towne is very famous for many respects, yet it is especially honoured by the birth of Philip the second King of Spaine. It is commonly called Valladolid, which some doe interpret the Vale of Oletus: Ptolemie calls it Pintia, and Antoninus Pincia, as Cusius thinketh. Also Simanca, called by Antoninus Septimanca; and Camora which Ptolemy calls Sarabris, as Clusius thinketh, but Antoninus corruptly Sabaria. Yet Florianus del Campo, and Gomerius doe thinke that Sarabris was that Town, which is commonly called Tora, and in Latine Taurus, neare to the River Durius.This is a famous Universitie, and instituted by Ferdinand the second of Castile. Anno 1140. Salmantica is not the last in account which Pylaenus calls Salmatis, but is commonly called Salamanca. Not farre from hence, neare the River which is commonly called Gad^, is the Citie of Count Rodoricke, called anciently Ciudad Rodrigo, which (as Vasaeus and Clusius thinke) Ptolemy would have to bee Myrobrigs. From hence Southward is Coria, heretofore called Caurita, as Clusius writeth: Andraeas Schottus doth affirme that by the Moderne Lau^^ Writers it was called Cauria. About nine leagues on the East from Ca^ria is Placentia, a faire Citie; whose Cittrons and other Fruites, as also their white bread, are chiefly commended and desired: it is commonly called Plazentia. Placentia hath many pleasant Townes under her jurisdiction, among which is Xavahicium proud of her woods, and lying in a Valley like an Altar, (as Marinaeus noteth) in the innermost part of a Church. The Mountaines adjacent and lying neare to Placentia, are named from the Citie Verade Placentiae. AlsoHere Tostatus was Bishop. Avila, called by Ptolemie Olbula, as Clusius would have it. Not farre from the Fountaines of A^eva lyeth Segobia, which Pliny and Antoninus call Segovia, and Ptolemie Segubia: it is a Citie famous for Cloath-making, and wherein, as Vasa^^ writeth, this is memorable, that no man is seene idle, neither are there any beggars, unlesse it be those who are impotent through age or sicknesse: seeing none doe want meanes how to get a living or how to employ themselves. That Citie which is now called Aranda neare the River Durius, Ptolemie would have to be Rhanda of the Vaccaeans in Tarraconia: Antoninus calleth it Rhanda by the correction of Hyeronimus S^rita; for heretofore it was called Randachunia. That Towne which a^ uncertaine Writer calleth Exoma, Pliny calls Vxoma, who often addeth that this name is often used in other places; it is read Vxsama, with an S. in an ancient Marble: and now it is called Osma. But let so much suffice concerning the Cities and Townes: wee passe to New Castile. New Castile on the North cleaveth to the Old Castile,New Castile. on the other sides it is enclosed with Portugall, Extremadura, Andaluzia, Granada, and Valentia:The Situation. It aboundeth with corne and other graine, being situated on either side of the River Tagus. The Metropolis of this Country is Toletum,

as the Latines call it; Ptolemy calls it Toleton, now it is called Toledo: and Villanovanus in Ptolemy saith that it was once called Serezola:The fertilitie of the Soyle. it is the Center and Navell as it were of Spaine; it hath a very cliffie, rugged, and unlevell situation, and the ascents are so steepe, that it is very difficult travelling through it.The Cities. The River Tagus doth wash the greater part of it, and doth fence it against enemies: it is fortified with 150 watch-Towers. There are a great number of Noblemen in this Citie: The Citizens are very industrious. It is beautified with many faire Edifices and buildings, as also with a rich and stately Church. There have beene 18 nationall Councells held here, when as so many have not been held in any other place. Madritum, commonly called Madrid, doth reverence Toletum as her mother and Queene: it hath an wholesome aire and situation. It aboundeth with all things, and the Kings of Spaine have an house of residence in it. Not farre from hence is Villamanta, which (as Montanus and Villonovanus, and Tarapha would have it,) is that Town which Ptolemy calls Mantua in Tarraconia. That Town which by an Arabicke word the Spaniards do now call Alcala de Henares, Ptolemy beleeveth so certainly to be Complutum, that it is called so in Latine in all publique acts. It is seated on a plaine, neare the River which they call Henares, and aboundeth so with all things necessary for mans use, that it needes no supply from other places. Antoninus placeth Segontia betweene Complutum and Casar-augusta: it is at this day called Siguensa. Now I returne to Hispalis, and from thence passing by the Pallace, the bridge of Alcantarilla, and the Townes Cabeca and Nebrissa, I come now to the Towne Fanum Luciferi, for so the Latines doe name it, and Strabo in his fourth Booke, where he addeth that it was heretofore called Lux Dubia, now they call it Saint Lucar de Barrameda. Not farre from hence almost foure leagues toward the Northeast, there is a Towne which hath a famous ancient Bridge, now called Talavera, and as Beuterus and Moralis do suppose, named by Livy Aebura. Here are also the Townes Cuenca, which Pliny calls Cacenses: Lebazuza, which Antoninus calls Libisosa; and Caslola veja, which the same Antoninus calleth Castulo. The River Tagus doth water New Castile, together with other Rivers and Rivulets which run into it, and the Spring-head of the River Anas or Guadiana is in this Countrie. But enough of these things, I come now to the publique workes. Five leagues from Madrid toward the West, you may behold the magnificent and sumptuous Monasterie of Saint Laurence, who was of the order of Saint Ierome.The publick seates. It was the worke of Philip the second King of Spaine, and may compare with the Egyptian Pyramides, the Graecian and Roman Temples, Theaters, Amphitheaters, or other famous places for the structure: for there is scarce any thing equall or second to it.Quade reporteth that it hath eleven severall Quadrangles, and every one incloystered. The Frontispice of it looking toward the West, hath three stately gates; the middlemost and chief wherof leadeth you into a Church, a Friery, and a Colledge: that on your right hand bringeth you into the Offices belonging to the Monasterie, and that on the left hand bringeth you into the Schooles. The foure corners are adorned with foure curious Towers, which are exceeded by two other Towers placed one by another at the foot of the Church. Above the gates of the Church doe stand the Statues of the sixe Kings of Israel cut out in Marble, and being 17

foot high: on the North side there is a Pallace adjoyned to the Church, which is able to receive the King and all his traine. On the South side there are divers sumptuous Galleries, and on the East side a garden set with all kinde of hearbes and flowers, and enriched with many other ornaments. Also an Hospitall for the Sicke, a Roome for an Apothecarie, and other places. Lastly, every thing doth so amaze the beholder, that it is better for me to be silent with modestie, than to make a mea^e description of those things which remaine. There is also in this Countrie the famous Pallace of Toledo, (reedified by Charles the fifth) adorned with new buildings and Royall furniture: in which, besides many other singular things, there is a water-worke made by the wonderfull invention of an Italian, which by the helpe of a great wheele, draweth up water out of the River Tagus; and so imposing an artificiall violence upon nature, doth force it to ascend through Pipes into the highest pa^^ of the Castle, where it being received into one large Cisterne, is dispersed againe by Pipes, and serveth for the use of the Castle and the whole Citie: for it doth water gardens, and serveth for Noble mens houses, Stewes, Fullers of cloath, and other necessary uses of the Citie. Here are two Universities, Complutum a famous Academie for all Arts, which was instituted by Francis Ximenius Cardinall, and Archbishop of Toledo.The Universities. The other is the Academie or Universitie of Toledo, being a famous nurserie of Learning and Wisedome. All disciplines and Mechanicke Arts are greatly esteemed in the Citie Toledo;The Trades and Mechanicke Arts. and ten thousand men doe live thereby, dressing Wooll and Silke.



ANDALVZIA.
Jn which are the Countries of HISPALIS and GRANADA.
ANDALUZIA is a part of Hispania Baetica, it is supposed that it was heretofore called Vandalia from the Vandals,The name and whence derived. a people of Germany, who formerly came into these parts. Therefore some having searched more nearely into the name do thinke it was called Andaluzia, quasi Wendenhays, that is, the house of the Vandals, yet Marius Aretius doth thinke it was called Andaluzia quasi ante Lusitania, the letters being somewhat changed. On the East it hath Granada, on the North New Castile, on the West it is bounded with the Diocesses of Badaios and Silvis, and the River Anas; and on the South it looketh toward the Atlantick Sea. The chiefe part of it is the jurisdiction of Hispalis. This hath on the East Corduba, on the West Algarbia, on the North it cleaveth to that part of Portugall which is called Magistratus S. Iacobi. And the other part toward the South is enclosed with Gades, and the Mediterranean Sea. It is in a temperate and flourishing Climate, and is miraculously fertile in bringing forth Corne,The Situation. Wine, Oyle, and all kindes of fruits, with which it replenishes forraine Countries. Spaine in these parts that are encompassed with the Sea (as Pliny saith) may be compared with Italy: which commendations wee suppose may be chiefly understood of that part which looketh toward Hispalis, as being exposed to the Sea,The temper of the aire, and fertilitie of the Soyle. and the gentle Westerne gales of winde. And indeed this Countrie so aboundeth with all kind of things, and therein so farre excells all the Provinces of the World, that Pliny had worthily preferred it before Italie, but that he being an Italian would not disgrace his owne Countrie. Here is great store of all kindes of Cattell, and especially of Cunnies. Wee said before, that Andaluzia tooke that name from the Vandalls, because they being driven out by the Gothes seated themselves in this place: though afterward being thrust out from hence, they went into Africke. Thus it was: Rodericke the 25 King of the Gothes,The Ancient Government. in whom the line of the Kings of the Gothes was extinguisht, did send one Iulianus an Earle to Mauritania Tingitana as Governour thereof: and in his absence did violate his daughters chastitie, making a whore of her; which when her father heard, he called the Saracens out of Africke, thinking thereby to ease his just sorrow, by revenging it on the King who was the cause thereof. These Saracens comming in by the Straits of Hercules in the yeare of Christ 714. under the conduct of their Captaine Muzamissus, in two yeares space got possession of all Spaine, except Asturia which was fortified by the naturall situation of the place. In this little time there were slaine on both sides 700000 men. The Saracens having gotten the Empire, and having rooted out the Christian Religion as much as they could, they divided the Kingdomes

among themselves. The first Kingdome that they instituted was at C^duba, which they called Abenalibeticum. The other was at Hispalis, (...) the third at New Carthage. But at last being driven out of these part (...) Ferdinand the third, they went unto Granada in the yeare 1216. and a^terward by Ferdinand the sixt were quite thrust out of Spaine in the yea^ 1494. The Metropolis of this Countrie is that which Pliny calls Hisp^lis, Ptolemie Ispalis, Silius Hispal, Gratianus Spalis, and which now is called Sevill. Arius Montanus thinketh that Hispalis is a Carthaginian name, d^ved from Spila or Spala, which signifies a plain or greene country. So^ (among whom is F. Tarapha) do referre the name thereof to Hispalis (...) son of Lybian Hercules, but Isidorus, as in many other things, is ridicul^ in this matter, for when he had noted that this Citie was built by I^ Caesar, and so called from his name and the Citie of Rome Iulia Romul^ saith that it was so named Hispalis from Piles or Stakes upon which (...) supposed either all or part of the Citie to be built, as being situate (...) moorish place. It is a Citie neare Baetis pleasantly seated,It is 6 miles in compasse. great in co^passe, round in forme, beautifull, and adorned with Temples, and ma^ houses. So many things may be declared concerning it, that there is (...) ancient Proverbe of it, Quien no ha Visto Sevilla, no ha visto Maravilla, hath beene the mother and fosterer of many happie wits, among whi^ wasHere likewise studied Avicen, Pope Silvester the second, and Leander. Benedictus Arias Montanus, a great Divine, and very skilfull in ^vers languages, as his workes set forth by him do witnesse. Having s^ken something of the Metropolis, I will describe some of the other C^ties, not keeping any certaine order, yet so, as that which is neare^ the Metropolis shall be placed first. Five leagves from Hispalis is P^um, or Palantia, which is commonly called Palacios, from an anci^ Castle that standeth on one side of it. It is seated in the way which ^deth to S. Lucar, and the Gaditane Straits. Next unto this is Cabaca, a (...) Town seated in the entrance of the mountaines, which do extend the^selves Southward toward Malaga, and Cabecis, (three leagves off tow^ the North East) commonly called Lebrixa, by Ptolemie Nebrissa, and (...) Pliny Veneria. The builder thereof is supposed to be Liber Pater. It is pleasant and a prettie little Towne with an ancient Castle, encompas^ round about with pleasant fields, and is famous by reason of Aelius A^tonius once a citizen thereof and an ornament and honour to all Sp^i^ Moreover the Towne which is commonly called Carmona, by Sir^ Carmon, by Antoninus Carme, and by Ptolemie, Chermenia and Marches heretofore (as saith Onuphrius) called Martia; this Towne is seated (...) little hill which hath a plaine on every side for its prospect. There are (...) so these townes, Loja, on the right hand banke of Baetis: Axalita built old stone (as Clusius witnesseth) and called Flavium Axalitanum, as a^peareth by an ancient inscription: Moron, heretofore called by Clus^ Arucci; Ossuna called by Appianus, Orsona; by Strabo, Orson; by Pliny, V^ and Genua or Gemina Vrbanorum; by ancient Inscriptions, Vrsaon; and (...) Hirtius, Vrsao. The towne Eceja, by the river Singulis, Xenil or Chenil, c^led by Ptolemie, Astygis; and by Pliny, Augusta Firma, is a little Tow^ 13 leagues from Hispalis. Penastor (in the mid way betweene Hispalis (...) Corduba on the right hand banke of Baetis) which Ptolemie, thinketh to (...) Illipula magna, but Pliny, Ilpa Italica in the Iurisdiction of Hispalis; and (...)

map of AndaluciaANDALVZIA.

many miles hence on the banke of the same River, Corduba, commonly calledFrom hence comes our Cordovan leather. Cordova. Pliny saith, it was named Colonia Patricia, and Mor^^^ doth also prove the same by inscription on an ancient marble; Iohann^^ Gerundensis saith that it was called Corduba, quasi Cor Baetis, that is, the heart of Baetis. It hath bred famous Souldiers, and greatHere was borne Lucan the Poet, and the two Seneca's. Schollers. And it is happie in her fruitfull fields, pleasant gardens, and beside many other gifts, in her wholesome waters, Silius the Italian Poet lib. 3. calleth the soile of Corduba a golden soile when he saith,


Nec decus auriferae cessavit Corduba terrae.
Corduba's soile is of so rich a mould
It will not yeeld to that which beareth gold.


Five leagues from Corduba, Southward, is Mons Major commonly called Monte Major, Ptolemie thinketh it to be Vlia a Citie in Hispania Baetica, and so doth Antoninus. Some few leagues from Corduba is Montoro, Ant^^nus supposeth it to be Epora. Ptolemie erroneously calleth it Ebura instead of Epora, (when notwithstanding the former is not a Towne of Ba^^^ but of Lusitania) but worst of all Pliny who nameth it Ripepora Faeder^rum. Not farre from Lucar is the Towne which the Spaniards call Xe^ de la Frontera, as though it were the beginning and bound of Spaine (...) that side where it standeth. This towne Navagierus thinketh to be the same with that which Livie and others call Asta: Antoninus with (...) asperation calleth it Hasta, Moralis writeth that it doth still retaine the name of Asta, and thinketh it to be that place neare the river Gu^d^^, which is commonly called Masa de Asta. But Ortelius supposeth that (...) was drowned with the Island Tartessus in the mouth of Baetis. An hundred furlongs from the mouth of Baetis standeth the Towne Chi^^^^ which Strabo (lib. 3.) calleth Capionis Turris. At the mouth of the Ri^^^ Lethes, (which is now called Guadelet, or in the Arabian language B^^^^ there is a Towne which is called Portus S. Mariae, and commonly ^^^erto de S. Maria. Having passed over Lethes the next towne you shall (...) withall isWhose Duke was Captaine Generall of the Invincible A^mado, A. 1588. Medina Sidonia, and somewhat more Southward toward the Sea-shoare is Conilium a famous towne of Spaine, sixe leagues d^s^^^ from the Citie GadiZ, and subject to the Duke of S. Lucar, and Medi^^^donia. There is also Carteja, called commonlySo called because Tariff, the Leader of the Moores into Spaine, here landed. Tariffa; and not far (...) thence is the Towne Vegelium, commonly called Vegel It is indeed a (...) Towne, but yet famous for the situation and beautie of it, for it is (...) on a hill which is environed round about with a large plaine, so that (...) hath a faire prospect, as farre as the eye can reach, not onely upon the plaines and greene medowes, toward the East, as also the Mountaines (...) Africke, and the Southerne coast, but likewise upon the great and trouble some Ocean toward the North and West. Lastly, from hence toward the Northwest lyeth the towneHard by this Towne was fought the notable battle betweene Caesar and the sonnes of Pompey. Munda, for so Pliny nameth this tow^^ which now is called Monda, though some do thinke that to be old M^^da which now is called Ronda veja. There are in the Diocese of Hisp^^^, an innumerable company of Monasteries and Nunneries. It would be a tedious thing to reckon up the Hospitalls for strangers that are in this country, seing there are in Hispalis it selfe an hundred and twenty, which are richly endowed some of them having eight thousand Crownes, and some fifteene thousand Crownes yearely revenue. Hispalis is the most

beautifull of all the Cities of Spaine, in regard of the Religious houses and Churches which are therein: among many Churches, the chiefest is the Church dedicated to Saint Mary, than which the Christian world cannot shew a better, if you consider either the greatnesse and majestie of the worke, which carrieth with it an excellent beauty; or if you behold the heigth of the Towre, wrought with admirable workmanship, from whence there is a pleasant prospect over all the City, and the fields that lye round about it. What shall I describe the royall furniture of the Kings Castle in this Citie, than which the Kings of Spaine have none more fairely or curiously built? What should I mention the Pallaces here belonging to Dukes, Earles, and other Nobles? Or why should I speake of the Citizens houses, adorned with pleasant Fountaines and Gardens? I passe by the ancient Aquaeducts, by which water is convey'd into severall parts of the Citie, and those later which were brought with great cost and labour to the Pillars, commonly called Hercules Pillars, and dedicated to publick delight, besides many other ornaments of this Citie since, I feare lest I be tedious.



VALENTIA AND MVRCIA.
The Countrie whence so called.VALENTIA taketh its name from the Metropolis the^ of, being a faire Mart-Towne, and of great antiquit^ On the South it looketh toward Murcia: on the Westward both the Castiles:The Situation. on the North toward Ar^ and on the East the Sea beateth on it. It hath a more ^perate Ayre,The temper of the Ayre. and a more pleasant Climate than any other part of Sp^ yea the Kingdome of Valentia hath such a gentle Climate, (the wa^ Westerne windes breathing upon it) that at any time, even at Chri^ and in the Moneth of Ianuarie the Inhabitants may carrie Posies (...) flowres in their hands, as they doe in other places in April and May, It (...) an excellent Country, having plenty of all things, as Sugar, Wine, Oyle (...) Corne, and divers other fruites. It hath Mynes of Silver in a p^ which they call Buriel,The fertility of the Soyle. betweene Valentia and Dertosa. And there (...) stones found which have, as it were, golden veines and lines runn^ through them, in a place which is called Aioder. At the Promont^ Finistratum there are Iron Mynes, and neere to Segorbia there are so^ signes remaining of a Quarrie, out of which Marble was heretofore digged and carried to Rome. In some places Alablaster is digged up, b^ Alume, Tinne, Marking-stone, and Chalke is found every where. Th^ Moores by a long succession of Dukes held the Citie of Valentia for (...) long time, though it had beene often besieged by the Kings of Ara^ untill Iames the first, King of Aragon by a long siege obtained it, (...) enforced their Captaine Zaen Maure together with fiftie thousa^^ Moores to depart the Citie,The ancient Government. and to flie unto Denia, carrying with the^ their Gold, Silver, Armour, and Houshold-stuffe. Valentia being th^ forsaken, King Iames sent a Colonie to replenish it againe. The Colo^ consisted of Catalonians and Aragonians, their Captaine being Bereng^us Palatiol Bishop of Barcelona: Vidalus Cavelia Bishop of Ossa: Peter Fe^dinandes d' Acagra, and Simon de Vrrea Knights; they distributed t^ whole Citie among the new Inhabitants, which were 384 families, a^cording to their severall dignities, and adorn'd the Common-wea^ with new Lawes. This Countrie obtained the title of a Kingdome (...) the yeare of Christ 788, as Ortelius writeth out of Petrus Metinensis, (...) Petrus Antoninus Beuterus. The Historie hath it thus: Hisen King of C^duba being dead, there succeeded him in the yeare of Christ 788 (...) sonne Alca, whose uncle Aodala Lord of Valentia called to him (...) Brother (whose name was Culema, and had beene disinherited) out (...) Taviar; these two Brethren uniting their forces, came to Corduba, a^ endeavouring to expell their Nephew out of his Kingdome, were ove^ come in battell, so that Aodala fled for his safety, and returned to Val^tia:
map of Valentia and MurciaVALENTIA, AND MVRCIA.

But the chiefe of the Moores interposing themselves betweene the Uncles and the Nephew, they brought them to that agreement, that Aodala should write himselfe King of Valentia, and that Culema should receive every moneth out of the revenues of Valentia a thousand of Moradines (which was a kinde of money) for the maintenance of his table, and five thousand Moradines more for the provision of other necessaries. To which agreement when Aodala had consented, hee first stiled himselfe the King of Valentia. The ancient Inhabitants of Valentia were the Hedetani, which (as Ptolemie thinketh) were the same with the Sedent^ni. Secondly the Biscargitani, whose Metropolis was Biscargis, whereof there is some mention made in the Inscription of Caesars coyne, as Ha^, Goltzius witnesseth: and these seeme to have beene of the Heditanians, seeing Ptolemie names Biscargis to be amongst them. Thirdly the Leo^acenses, whose Metropolis Ptolemie cals Leonica, and placeth it also among the Heditanians. Fourthly the Contestani, from whom Pliny nameth the Countrie of Contestania in Tarraconia. Their memory is preserved by the Towne Contayna, or, as some pronounce it, Contentaina, at the head of that River, at the mouth whereof the Town Oliva is seated over against the Pityusian Ilands. Fiftly, the Lusones, whom Appianus placeth by the River Iberus in Iberia, neere to the Numantines, but Strabo at the Fountaines of Tagus. Sixthly, the Lobitani, whose Metropolis Ptolemie (...) Lobetum, and which Beuterus writeth was first called Turia, afterward Avarazin, and last of all as at this day Albarazin. Seventhly, The Tuboletae in Iberia, neere to the Saguntines, from whom Ptolemie calleth the Citie Turbula, now perhaps called Torres. Lastly the Celtiberi, so called by Plinie lib. 3. cap. 3. Pomponius Mela lib. 3. cap. 13. and other Latines, but by Ptolemie Celtiberes; for though some doe place them in Old Castile, yet the most in Valentia. Among the Cities of this Kingdome Valentia (commonly called Valencia) is the Metropolis, and a Bishops Seate: It was built by King Romus, as Vasaeus and others write, and from him called Rome: And the Romans having afterward amplified and enlarged it, did call it Valentia, a name signifying the same which (...) in Greeke doth. But this seemes a fable to Resendius, who reporteth, that it was built and so named by the Portugals and other Souldiers. It is seated in the innermost part of the Bay of Sucronia, on the right-hand Banke of the River Turia. It is famous for its manners, institutions, andHeere S. Dominick Father of the Dominican Friars studied. profession of all Arts both Liberall and Mechanick. It is happie in great wits, and desirous to preserve peace and concord within it selfe. It hath many Gentle-men in it, and is very rich in Merchandize. Wee will not passe by that which L. Marinaeus Siculus noteth concerning the Valentians: They have (saith hee) a custome every yeare on the Feast of Saint Matthew, that having made many supplications and prayers, they repaire to the place of execution, and there they take up the bodies of those who have suffered death, whether they be hanged up, or lye on the ground, gathering also together their scattered bones, if any be; and by and by having laid all things on a Beere, they carrie them to the common burying-place of the Citie, and there with sacrifices and prayers doe bury them. Petrus Medinensis relates, that there are in this Citie ten thousand springs of water. Heretofore on the left-hand banke

of Turia not farre from Valentia stood Saguntum, which Ptolemie affirmeth to be a Citie of the Heditani, Strabo and Plinie doe place it a mile off from the Sea; Strabo calleth it Saguntus, Stephanus Zacynthus, and Antoninus corruptly Secundum and Secunthum. The most doe thinke it now to be the same with Morvedere, being so called, as some suppose, from the ancient wals thereof. Appianus maketh it the Colonie of the Zacynthi; some doe suppose, that Saguntis the Sonne of Hercules was the builder of it, and some would have it named from the Iberian Sagi. Silius the Italian Poet describeth the situation of it in his first Booke: Livie in his 30 Book saith, that the wals of Saguntum were cemented with Lime and dirt mingled together, which was an ancient kinde of building. It seemeth by Plinie, that the Saguntini did heretofore reverence Diana; being brought thither by the Zacynthians their Progenitors, two hundred yeares before the destruction of Troy. Pomponius Mela saith, that the Saguntians are faithfull in the midst of troubles and adversitie. Concerning the overthrow and devastation of this noble Citie, which through their admirable constancie and great fidelitie towards the Romans happened in the yeare from the building of the Citie 535, (M. Lucius Salinator, and L. Aemilius Paulus being Consuls) you may reade and have recourse to Livie, lib. 21. Polybius, lib. 3. Orosius, lib. 4. cap. 14. Eutropius, lib. 3. Florus, lib. 2. cap. 6. Silius the Italian, lib. 1. Valerius Maximus, lib. 6. cap. 6. Augustine, lib. 3. de Civit. Dei, cap. 20. Aemilius Probus in Hannibal, Cicero in his Philippicks, and many others. There are also at this day these famous places in Valentia: First Segorbia, which Ptolemie and Strabo, as also Vasaeus, Clusius, Tarapha, Emanuel Henricus, and Augustus his coyne doe call Segobriga. Plinie also calleth the Inhabitants Segobricenses, placing them in the chiefe part of Celtiberia. But Moralis thinketh, that Segobriga should be called Injesta, or Cabeca el Griego: and Ioannes Mariana is of the same opinion. Hieronimus Surita professeth that hee knew not where this Segorbia was. Secondly, there is Denia, called by Cicero and Plinie (as Florianus, Morialis, and Clusius will have it) Dianium, and Dianium Stipendarium. Thirdly, Incibilis, so called by Livie, and by Frontinus Indibilis, where Scipio put Hanno Captaine of the Carthaginians to flight: It is thought by Florianus to bee Chelva. Fourthly, that Towne which Plinie cals Illici, Ptolemie Ilicias, Pomponius Illice, and in the Inscription of coyne Ilce Colonia; Ptolemie also cals it Illicitani (whence commeth the appellation of the Illicitane Bay) and now some call it Alicanta, and others Elche, which commeth somewhat neerer to truth. Fifthly Belgida, a Citie of Celtiberia which still keepeth its old name. Sixthly Leria, which Ptolemie cals Hedeta, (whence the Heditani have their name) Clusius and Moralis Oliete, and later Writers Liria. Seventhly the Towne which Florianus cals Orcelis, and Gomecius and Clusius Horivela and Oriola, but Nebrissensis Zamora. Eightly, the Towne which Livie and Ptolemie call Bigerra, Beuterus and Vasaeus Bejar, and Clusius Villena. Ninthly the Towne which Strabo cals Setabis, Ancient Stones Saetabis, (as Clusius witnesseth) and is now called according to Florianus his opinion Xativa. This Countrie hath many Rivers,The Rivers. and especially Turia, which Pomponius calleth Duria, and Ptolemie Dorium. The Inhabitants doe keepe the Arabick word, calling it Guetalabiar,

which signifies pure Water. This River bringeth great commodities to those places by which it floweth. There is also the River Xucar (called of old Sucron and Surus) which riseth out of the Mountaines of Orespeda.The Mountaines. Valentia hath two Mountaines, which are called Mariola and Pe^nagolosa, which being full of divers sorts of rare hearbs and plants, doe cause a great number of Physicians and Herbalists to resort unto them out of divers parts of Spaine, in regard of the rarities which are found there. The Citie of Valentia being venerable for antiquity, hath many ancient Marbles which remaine to posteritie, engraven with Roman inscriptions, some of which may be seene in Beuterus, Ambrosius Morals, Hottomannus and others.The publick workes. In the Citie of Saguntum, now called Morve^ there was a Theater, a Scene, and many other Reliques of antiquitie, as the Sepulchres of the Sergii, of L. Galba, and Sergius Galba, and othe^ Romans, with the stones whereof a Monasterie was built for the Fri^s of the Order of the Trinitie. Valentia hath a famous Universitie in the Citie so called, and also an other Universitie at Gandia, which was (...) long since erected and founded by the Duke of Gandia, that the Fathers of the Society of Iesus (of which Society hee became one himselfe) might studie there. The Citie of Valentia, in regard of its government of the Common-wealth, doth excell all the Cities in Spaine. The Countrey wherein this Citie is seated is inhabited, for the most part, by a Nation which are descended from the Moores, and therefore they doe yet retaine their Ancestours speech and manner of life. That is not to bee omitted which M. Tully doth speake in his last Oration against Ve^^, in the praise of Valentia: Valentinorum (saith hee) hominum honestis^morum testimonio, that is, by the testimonie of the Valentians who are most honest men.The Trades. Much silke is made in this Kingdome. Valentia (as Olivarius Valentinus writeth) hath great store of traffique and trading: for divers sorts of wares are exported from thence, as silke-thread of all colours, and raw silke as it comes from the Silke-worme, the best clock also is carried from thence into the Isles called Baleares,The traffick. and into Sicil^ and Sardinia: Besides, there is exported from thence Rice, Wheate, Sugar, Raizins, Figges, and preserv'd fruites into many Countries in Europe.



ARAGON AND CATALONIA.
ARAGON tooke its name either from the Autrigonians, a people of Spaine, as Laurentius Valla witnesseth;The Countrie whence so called. or from Tarracone an ancient Citie, as it pleaseth Antonius Nebrissensis and Vasaeus. Some suppose it was so called from the River Aragon, which rising there, doth flow into Iberus. Some doe derive it from the the Altar of Hercules, called in Latine Ara, and his sports called Agonalia: which if it be true, it is a wonder that Ancient Writers are so silent concerning Aragon.The Situation. Navarre cleaveth to this Kingdome on the Northwest, Calatrava toward the Southeast: On the Southwest it looketh towards Castile, and on the North it hath the Pyrenaean Mountaines.The qualitie of the Soyle. The Country is for the most part rugged and drie towards the Pyraenean hills, so that you shall not meete with a house for many dayes journeys: yet here are some fruitfull Valleyes abounding with the best corne, and other fruits, and it is refreshed with sweet Rivers. All Writers do report that Ranimirus was the first King of this Kingdome.The Cities. He was made King of Aragon, in the yeare 1016. But concerning the Kingdome and the Kings of Aragon, as also Valentia and Catalonia how and from whom they had their beginnings, and of their union,The ancient Government. you may reade Rodericus Sanctius in the first part of his Spanish Historie. cap. 13. Also Lucius Marinaeus Siculus de Regibus Hispaniae, lib. 8. and others. The Metropolis and head Citie of the Kingdome, Pliny and others doe call Caesar-Augusta, Ptolemy Caesarea-Augusta. It is now called Sarragosa, and is a famous Universitie. They report that the builder thereof was Iuba, King of Mauritania, who called it Saldyba, that is, the house of Iuba: but afterward, the former name being left off, it was called Caesar-Augusta. It is seated on the banke of Iberus, in a plaine place, and hath a long stone bridge which serveth the Inhabitants to passe over the River, (as Strabo speakes in his third booke). The Citie lyeth in the forme and shape of a shoo-soale: It hath foure gates looking to the foure quarters of the world. It is encompassed with strong walls, and well fortified with many Towres. In this Citie the Kings of Aragon were wont to be crowned by the Archbishop and Primate of the whole Kingdome. The other Cities are these; first that which Ptolemy and Plutarch doe call in Latine Osca, and is now called Huesca; but Velleius Paterculus fabulously calleth it Eteosca, where he writeth that Sertorius was slaine. Secondly the Citie Tyriassona neere the Mountaine Cacus, which some doe suppose was built by the Tyrians and Ausonians. Thirdly Iacca, lying in a valley, heretofore the Seate

of the Iaccetani. Fourthly Calatajut, standing in a Plaine, and built (...) of the ruines of Bilbilis, which together with many other Monument^ Antiquitie, are to be seene a mile and an halfe from the Towne, o^ Hill which is commonly called Bambola or Baubola. This Mountaine enriched almost on every side with the River Salon or Xalon, where ^lerius Martialis lib. 10. Epigram. 103. doth place Bilbilis, being bor^ Citizen of it; Paulinus calleth it Bilbilis hanging on the rock: Ptole^ corruptly calleth it Bilbis, and Martiall calleth it Augusta Bilbilis, as (...) doe the Inscriptions of ancient coyne. Fifthly Barbastrum (famous (...) Iron Crosse-bowes) which Ptolemie cals Burtina, and Antoninus B^rt^ as some thinke. Sixthly Monsonium, seated in the midle or nave^^ the Kingdome, not farre from the Banke of the River Cinga, (...) which there is a hill, from whence the Towne taketh its name. (...) Towne that is famous by reason of the meeting and convention of Kingdomes of Aragon and Valentia, and the Principality of Cata^ where it standeth. It is commonly called Moncon, and hath not one^ fruitfull Soyle, but a sweete and open Ayre. Seventhly Fraga, bet^ Ilerda and Caesar-Augusta: Ptolemie cals it Gallica Flavia, and Anto^ Gallicum, as Varronius thinketh, though some doe place Gallicum (...) where now stands Zuera. Eigthly Gurrea, heretofore called (...) Gallorum, which Antoninus placeth betweene Caesar-Augusta and the ^renaean Hils. Ninthly, Ajerbium, where it is thought that E^ sometime stood, which Antoninus and others doe mention. 10ly V^^ which Aimonius calleth Orgellum, and Ptolemie Orgia. It is a Towne farre from the Fountaines of Sicoris or Segre. There were also o^ Townes which are now so ruinated, that there remaines nothing (...) them; among which was the Towne Calagurris Nassica, being an^ besides that in Navarre. The Citizens thereof are called Calagu^ by Caesar in his first Booke of Commentaries: and Suetonius noteth (...) Augustus had a Guarde of them, (in the life of Augustus cap. 49.) (...) nameth them Nassici. The Rivers heere are Iberus or Ebro, and Gall^ Gallicum with others.
The Countrie whence so called.Catalonia commonly called Catalunna followeth. Volaterranus th^eth that it was so called by the Gothes and Alanes,, and that it shoul^ written Gothalania. Beatus Rhenanus (lib. 1. Rerum German.) supp^ that it was called Cattalania from the Catti and Alans, who joyning ^^gether broke into this part of Spaine. Some thinke it was called so (...) the Castellans, the ancient people of Spaine, who seated themselve^ these places; and there are others who thinke it was called Cath^ from Othogerius Cathalon,The Situation. of whom Marinaeus Siculus lib. 9. De reb^^ spanicis:The quality of the Soyle. and L. Valla de Ferdinando Aragon: Rege lib. 1. have wri^ much. It is bounded with the Pyrenaean Mountaines, the Mediterre^ Sea, and the Rivers Iberus and Cinga. The Countrie it selfe is, for (...) most part, barren, and hath nothing but some wilde fruit in it. The ^tropolis at this day is Barcelona, a faire Citie, which being situated; the shore of the Mediterranean Sea,The Cities. doth declare her antiquity, by (...) proofe and witnesse of many ancient buildings. The most of the Spa^^ards doe report, that the builder thereof was Amilcar surnamed Barc^ the Sonne of Hannibal Captaine of the Carthaginians: who being ow^

map of Aragon and CataloniaARAGON. AND CATALONIA.

come at Sea, was hanged by the enemie) and the Father of Hannibal the great Emperour: it is called by Ptolemie Barcinon, by Paulinus Baro^^^, by Iornandus Barcilona, and anciently Faventia (as Plinie witnesseth.) Marinaeus Siculus lib. 13. de Rebus Hispanicis doth praise this Citie largely, and describeth the situation of it lib. 15. It was heretofore much lesse than it is now, being a furlong off from the Sea. It had foure Gates, which looked to the foure corners of the world, equally distant one from an other, and are yet to bee seene in the heart of the Citie, having Oxe heads carved upon them, in token of peace and quiet ^illage, as some would have it. In processe of time it was encompassed with d^^ble strong Wals and Towres, and it grew to be so great, that it is worthily now thought to be the chiefe Citie of Catalonia. Concerning the Earles of Barcelona, and their originall, wee must have recourse to R^^ricus Toletanus, lib. 6. de Rebus Hisp. cap. 3. and L. Marinaeus lib. 9. N^^ to this Citie followes the Citie Tarraco, which Ptolemie and Strabo (...) Tarracon, it is now called Tarragona: It was a Citie so famous heretofore, that the better part of Spaine was denominated from it. And C^^la in his 2d Booke calleth it the richest of all the Sea-Townes. Secondly Vigua, commonly called Vicque or Vich, and by Ptolemie Ausa. Thirdly the Citie Girona, which Plinie and Antoninus call Geronda, and Ptol^^^ Geroundes. Fourthly Tortosa, which Ptolemie cals Dertoosa, an ancient Stone Dertosa, Antoninus Derdosa, and Strabo Dertossa. Plinie me^^^neth a people called Dertosani. Fifthly Lerida, which Ptolemie, Stepl^^ and others call Ilerda, the situation whereof is thus described by L^^^ lib. 4. Belli Pharsalici:
Colle tumetmodico, lenique excrevit in altumPingue solum tumulo, etc.A litle hill, not steepe, of fertile landsSwels up, on which the old Ilerda stands;Before the Towne flowes Sicoris soft streameAmong Spaines Rivers of no small esteeme,On which a Bridge of stone high-arched stoodT' endure the violence of a Winters flood.
Other matters are also entreated of concerning this Citie, as the vi^^ries obtained there by M. Petreius, and L. Afranlus, Pompey his Generals: concerning which Caesar hath fully written in his first Booke of the Civill Warre. Sixthly the Towne which Silius, lib. 3. Polybius lib. 3. and Ptolemie doe call Emporia; Stephanus Emporion, but is commonly called Empurias or Ampurias. Seventhly Blanda, so called by Pomp^ni^^d Ptolemie, but commonly called Blanes, as Beuterus, Florianus, and N^^gierus will have it. Eigthly. Manresa, which Florianus thinketh Li^^ doth call Athanagia. Ninthly Rosae, commonly called Roses, Livie^^s it Rhoda, Stephanus Rhode, Strabo Rhodope, and Ptolemie Rhodipolis, (...) Colibra, which Ptolemie and Plinie call Iliberis, Strabo Ilberris, and P^mpnius Eliberri. It is a Village which was heretofore part of a great Citie; some would have Iliberis not to be Colibra, but an other Towne, Pal^^ would have it to be Salsulae, Olivarius Euna, and Mercator Illa. There where Catalonia is now, heretofore stood Iulia Lybica, of which some ruines onely remaine, not farre from the Towne Linca; also neere the Pyrenaean hils, a Towne which Antoninus calleth Cinniana, and the Tow^

called by Ptolemie Deciana. Iohannes Gerundensis lib. 1. Paralipom. dis^uteth and proveth, that the Countrie of Ruscilion among the Pyrenaean Mountaines, belongeth to Catalonia, wherein was a Towne which Plinie ^als Ruscino, Strabo Royskinoon, Ptolemie Roysinoon, and Avienus Ruscinus. Some parts of it doe remaine not farre from a Towne called Perpignan, ^eere to a Towre of the same name: for they call it the Towre of Roscilion. Catalonia hath a famous and ancient Universitie called Ilerda, which (it is thought) Horace did point out Lib. 1. Epist. ult. in these words.


Aut fugies Vticam, aut unctus mitteris Ilerdam:


From Utica thou either now shalt flee,
Or else sent to Ilerda thou shalt bee.


Heere Pope Calixtus the third taught publickly the knowledge of the Law, as Platina witnesseth.
These things may suffice which have beene spoken hitherto concerning Spaine. But yet I thinke it fit to adde, by way of conclusion, the excellent testimonie of a French-man concerning this Kingdome, wherein whatsoever wee have hitherto said in praise and commendation thereof, is briefly and pithily repeated by way of recapitulation. This French-man whom I mentioned, was called in Latine Pacatus, who writ a most learned Panegyrick to Theodosius the Emperour being a Spaniard, in which hee speaketh to this purpose. Now it will appeare, that hee is declared Prince, who ought to bee chosen of all men, and out of all men. For first, Spaine is thy Mother, a Land more happie than all other Countries, (the great Fabricator and Maker of all things hath beene more favourable, in enriching and adorning this Countrie, than the Countries of others Nations) for it is neither obnoxious to the Summers heate, nor subject to the Northerne cold, but is seated in the temperate Climate, and by the witty diligence of Nature, it is, as it were, an other world, as being enclosed on one side with the Pyrenaean Mountaines, heere with the Ocean, and there with the shores of the Tyrrhenian Sea. Besides, adde to this the many famous Cities which are therein, the whole Countries being either tilled, or full of fruites and flocks, the gold-bearing Rivers that water it, and the sparkling pretious stones that enrich it; I know that Poets in their Fables which they have invented to please the eare, have attributed miraculous things to some Nations, which whether they are true or not, yet are very strange: neither doe I now seeke out the truth: Let Gargara (as it is written) yeeld a great increase of corne: let Menavia be praysed for her flocks, Campania for the Mountaine Gaurano, Lydia for the River Pactolus, Spaine hath every thing that is praise-worthy. It bringeth forth hardie Souldies, expert Captaines, eloquent Oratours, and famous Poets. This Country is the Mother of Judges and Princes: this Countrie yeelded the Emperours Trajan and Adrian, and the Empire is beholding to this Countrie for thee. Let Crete, which boasteth of Iupiters being nursed in it when hee was a childe, give place to this Countrie: let Delos, honoured by the birth of two Gods, and noble Thebes of Hercules who was brought up there, yeeld unto it. We

know not whether you beleeve what you have heard, but Spaine had lent us this God-like Emperour who is now present, and whom we see* Hee that desires to know more concerning Spaine, let him consult a^ have recourse to Iohannes Vasaeus, Marinaeus Siculus, Marius Aretius, D^mianus a Goes, Franciscus Tarapha, the Bishop of Gerunda, Annius Vi^^biensis, Florianus a Campo in Spanish, Ambrosius Moralis and others. Amongst the Ancients also wee may consult and have recourse to Caso Strabo, and others, whom Damianus a Goes sheweth in his Booke entitled Hispania.


CATALONIA MORE PARTICVLARLY DESCRIBED.
CATALONIA was heretofore called Marcha Hispanica; Comitatus Barcinonae, and Hispaniarum Marchionatus.The names. This Countrie of Spaine lyeth farthest Eastward of all the rest. It hath on the West the Valentinians and Aragonians neere unto it; from the former it is separated by the River Alcanar or Cenia, from the later in some places by the River Arnesius, in other parts by the Rivers Iberus, Sicoris, and Nogvera. On the South it stretcheth it selfe lengthward toward the Mediterranean Sea:The Situation. On the East, neere to the Lake Salsulae or Salsas, and a Castle of the same name built there by the Emperour Charles the fifth, over against the impregnable Castle of Leocata, which is upon the Frontiers or entrance into France, it toucheth Aquitania: Lastly on the North it is bounded with the Pyrenaean Hils. It is more than eight hundred Italian miles in compasse. It is in length from the Lake Salsulae to Valentia two hundred and fiftie miles, and in breadth from the Vale of Caralis or Calaris to the shore of Barcinon ninety foure miles. In Summer it hath every where a good wholsome Ayre, and is temperate in Winter, especially toward the Seashore, which lyeth Southward.The temper of the Aire. For that part which is Northward is cold, and hath many snowes. The whole Countrie, unlesse it bee in some par^ (...) is very mountainous, and yet it hath many greene Medowes, flourishing Pastures and very fruitfull Valleyes. The Countrie in generall hath such store of Corne and Pulse,The fertilitie of the Soyle. but especially Apples, Wine, and Oyle, that it is inferiour unto none. Neither doth it want Mynes of Gold, Silver, and other mettals, which the River Sicoris declareth by those fragments or sands of gold and silver which it casteth up when it overfloweth; as also some other Rivers of Catalonia. The best Iron is digged forth heere in great plenty, besides Brasse, Steele, and Lead. Of late there was found neere Signimont a fruitfull veine of shining pretious Stones, which are of a blew or Violet-colour, called Amethysts. There is also found neere unto the Towne of Tivica the Onix, which resembleth a mans nayle in whitenesse, having some veines which runne through it, which are in colour like the Sardonix or Iasper: Blood stones also which have a great vertue to stay blood are found on the East side of Rubricatum or Lobregat. The Dertosians have many Quarries of Iasper, which shineth and is of many colours, as purple greene, pale, Rose-colour, white, and duskish. At Tarraconia and Benda divers kindes of Marble are digged up out of the bowels of the Earth: and in some places shining and translucent Alablaster is digged forth, of which they make windowes to let in the light, and to keepe out the winde; these are the stones with which Plinie confesseth that the higher Spaine doth abound. Many places in Catalonia doe yeeld Alume, and

Coblers Inke or Blacking: also Hempe for Rope-making, which (as Plinie witnesseth) is as white and fine as any flaxe, by reason of the nature of the water wherein it is steeped. And seeing I am fallen into this matter, I cannot but in praise of the plenty of all things which Catalonis hath, make mention how that this Countrie doth build Ships of great burthen, even from the Keele to the highest Sayles, but especially Galleys;The varietie of living Creatures. and having furnished them with all warlike provision, they lanch them forth into the Sea neere to Barcinona: Besides, innumerable wilde Beasts doe wander through the Forrests of this Countrie, and great store of Cattell every where.The ancient Inhabitants. The Ancients did place divers sorts of people in this part of Spaine, as first the Castellani, whom Ptolemie cals (...), and Villanovanus and Verrerius doe call them Ducatus Cardone. 2 Those whom Avienus cals Indigeti: Ptolom. (...), and Stephanus (...). 3 Those whom Livie and Ptolemie call Ilergetes, and Polybius lib. 3. (...) Fourthly those whom Martial cals Laletani, Ptolemie (...), Strabo (...), and (...). Fifthly those which Aimonius cals Cempsi, and Dionysius and Eusthathius (...). Sixthly, those whom Plinie calleth Coretani, Iuliani, and Augustini, Ptolemie (...), Strabo (...), Silius Ceretani, Avienus Ceretes, and Stephanus (...), of whom there appeares and are yet remaining some tokens in Cerveira, Puigcerda, and Condado de C^dania. Seventhly those whom Xilander calleth Vetteres an ancient people in Tarraconia, dwelling betweene the River Iberus and the Pyreneus Hils, neere to the Sea, and called by Strabo (...), though Causa^^^ would have them called Secerrae, whom Antoninus maketh mention of Eigthly the Ligyes, whom Thucidides lib. 6. and Halicarnassus lib. 1. doe call (...), who dwelt neere to the River Sicanis, and are those perhaps whom Avienus cals Ligures. Ninthly those whom Livie and Pliny call Ansetani, and Ptolemie (...). 10, Those whom Plinie cals Lar^^s^^, neere to the River Larnus, at the rootes of the Pyrenaean Mountaines And lastly, those whom Ptolemy cals (...), neere to the Citie Dunsa, Livie Ilercaonenses, and Caesar Ilurgavonenses.
Catalonia is famous both for strong and wise men, for wonderfull achievements, and for many victories gotten by divers Nations. For in Catalonia the Carthaginians heretofore contended against the Inhabitants,Their ancient valour and vertue. the Romans against the Carthaginians, the Gothes against the ^^mans, the Saracens against the Gothes, and the French against the Sarace^^ besides the contentions which afterward happened betweene the surviving remainder of the Gothes, and the Earles of Barcinon: Who can relate the warres which the Sons of the Earles of Barcinon, being Kings of Aragon, did wage with other Nations? and the great victories which were gotten to the admiration of all men? The Baleares (commonly called Majorica and Minorica) Ebusa, Murcia, Valentia, Sardinia, Sicilie, Naples, Athens, and Neopatria can onely declare them. Concerning the Metropolis or chiefe Citie of Catalonia, and the other Cities and Towns, looke into the former description. On the very top of the high Mountaine Canus in the Countie of Roscellion, there is a certaine great I^le which hath abundance of those great fishes in it which we call Turt^^^ into which if any one cast a stone, the water is presently troubled, and sendeth forth vapours, which being condensed and converted into

map of CataloniaCATALONIA More particularly described.

cloudes doe cause a tempest immediately to follow with thunder, lightning, and haile. The Countrie of Balneole or Aquae Voconis hath a Fountaine of a golden colour, so that you may see any thing that is cast into it. And there is a wholesome Fountaine in Catalonia, the water whereof being drunke often and in great abundance, doth not onely not oppresse the stomack, but also miraculously cures men of many diseases: they fabulously report, that S. Maginus after some prayers to God to give it that vertue, did digge and open it with his staffe, being in a drie mountanous and stonie place. Over against the Towne Aulotum there are about 12 Fountaines arising or springing from brasse mynes, which both day and night all Winter and Summer doe, as it were, breathe o^ a thinne vapour, warme in Winter, but so cold in Summer, that no man can endure it for any while; and the water, if the Inhabitants doe set any bottles into it (as they often doe) maketh them as cold as Ice, so that the water which is in these bottles affordeth a delicate drinke to coo^^ the heate of the stomack. There are also many Fountaines alwayes h^^, which shewes, that there is some fire there which lyes hidden in the bowels of the Earth. There are more than foure such hot Fountaines (...) Catalonia, and all of them very excellent to helpe divers kindes of diseases, wherefore many that have griefes and infirmities doe resort u^^ them from all parts.The Rivers. Catalonia doth abound with Rivers, for it hath almost fiftie which runne through it, and all of them very full of Fi^^: some are small, but yet very pleasant streames, some are of a midle (...), and lastly there are some very faire ones, as namely Tettus, (which is also called Ruscison) Techum (which is also called Tetrum) Fluvianus (otherwise called Clovianus and Plumialbus) Tardera (otherwise called T^num) Besotium (which is also called Bisocto and Betulo) Rubricatus, Cin^^, Sicoris, and Iberus. All of them doe flow and runne into the Sea except Cinga and Cicorus, the former whereof runneth into Sicoris, the later into Iberus, which being much enriched with the watry tribute of these and other Rivers becommeth one of the greatest Rivers in all Spaine. The best Corall groweth in the Catalonian Sea on the East thereof. There are Mountaines and very high hils every where in Catalonia,The Mountaines. and those so cloathed with the constant liverie of greene bushes, shrubs, and many kindes of trees, that the most of them are full of woods and thicke^. There are many Beech-trees on them, many Pine-trees, abundance of Oakes, many Holme-trees, innumerable Maple, abundance of Hasel, Nut, and Chesse-nut-trees, and infinite store of Corke-trees, whose barke is very thick, and being bark't and taken off, groweth againe. Chrystall is found in the Mountains of Nuria, on the Cardonensian rocks. And that which any one will wonder at, as being worthy of admiration, there is found at the Towne of Cardona a Mountaine having very wholesome salt growing in it, and shining against the Sunne with a great deale of variety and delight to the eye, out of which (as Pliny reports of the Mountaine Oromenus in India) salt is daily cut and digged, and yet groweth againe; yea the Mountaine still groweth so much the higher, by how much the more salt is cut out of the pits that are in it. There is also an other thing very wonderfull, and that is, whereas places where salt is found are barren, and produce or beare nothing, yet this Mountaine

hath many Pine-trees and Vines upon it. In the Bishoprick of Gerunda on the South side thereof, there is a Hill of white small sand, which (as in Lybia) the winde carries heere and there, and makes great driftes of it, which are very perillous and dangerous for those that travell that way. Heere I cannot but mention the Mountaine called Mount Serrato, being distant toward the East seven leagues from Barcinona, it is very rockie and cliffie, in manner of a rugged Saw, and so high, that from thence the Pyrenaean Mountaines, and the farthest Mountaines of the Island Majorica may bee seene. This Mountaine is full of great shining Stones like Iaspers. There are some Fountaines which spring and flow out of it: it produceth many hearbs which have speciall and soveraigne vertues: and it is watered toward the North with the River Lubricatus, and at length like Soractus in Italie, and Tabor in Galile, it here raiseth up it selfe, wherefore it is very delightfull to behold.The publick and private workes. Now let us come to the publick and private Workes. There are every where many Churches in this Countrey, and many famous Monasteries, especially that memorable Church of S. Michael a Fago, (built betweene a Cave and an ancient Friarie of the Benedictines) over the top whereof there runneth a litle Rivulet, which the Inhabitants call TaneZ, and from thence it presently rusheth downe, so that the sound arising from the fall of the water doth much delight those which stand by it. There are besides so many faire built-houses disjoyned from the Citie and Towns, and so scatter'd through all the plaines, fields, valleyes, hils, mountains, woods, and groves that are in the Countrie that all Catalonia may seeme to be one Citie. It hath every where strong Castles and Towres, which are fortified not onely by Nature and the situation of the place, but by Art. Catalonia is a Principalitie,The manner of government. and containeth in it the Archbishoprick of Tarraconia, eight Bishopricks, to wit, the Bishoprick of Barcinona, Gerunda, Vrgell, Vicke, Ilerda, Dertosa, Herlua, and Celsona; two Dukedomes, the one of Mont Albo, and the other of Cardona: five Marquesates, namely of Ilerda, Dertosa, Pellearia, Camaras, and Itoha: eighteene Counties, the Countie of Bareinon (which doth farre exceede all other honours belonging to Catalonia) the Countie of Gerunda, of Vrgella, of Ceretania, of Bisuldinum, of Rossellion, of Emporia, of Ausonia, of Minorisa, of Prata, of Palmosium, of Petraelata, of S. Columba a Queralto, of S. Columba a Scintilliis, of Savallanium, of Vallisfogona, of Guimeranum, and and Mont acuto. It would bee too tedious to the Reader to reckon heere the number of the Vicounties and Baronies.The Schooles. It hath sixe Universities famous for all Arts and Sciences. It subsisteth, for the most part, by wool-dressing, and handy-craft-trades,The Trades. by which the Inhabitants doe live, pay their debts, sustaine their Families, get that estate which they have, and keepe that which they have gotten. But let so much suffice concerning Catalonia, let us passe to other Countries.






THE DESCRIPTION OF FRANCE. To the studious and curteous READER.
SEeing wee are not borne for our selves alone, but as much as every one can doe for the common good, so much the benifice^^ Framer and Maker of mankinde doth require of him, I thought it meete to accommodate and fit this Geographicall Worke, put whereof wee heere present, as much as I could to the utility and benefit of the Common-wealth. The use and utility of Geographie in reading Histories and retaining them, is greater than that I neede to make any adm^^^tion or description of; but there is an other greater dignitie belonging unto it, if it be directed to its proper end, and rightly used, and that is, it doth much (...) to the knowledge of Politick Government, when the situation of a place is in onely described, but also the nature and condition thereof, which is sometimes the office of a Geographer to doe. And as that Painter doth not satisfie himselfe in his profession, which delineates a man according to the proportion of (...) limbes, but doth not with colours and physiognomicall shadowes expresse his nature and affections; so hee shall but figure out an unpleasing and, as it were, a dead Geographicall body or carcasse, who having set downe places according is their symmetrie and proportion, shall not shew their Politicall respect which they beare one to an other. Wherefore I esteem'd it as a thing chiefly to be respected, that in every severall Countrie the nature and order of Government append^^ thereunto, should be prefixed before the Tables themselves, whereby I might somewhat benefit those who are studious of politicall and publick affaires. (...) our writing be in many places imperfect, defective, or erronious, the Read^^ needes not wonder, for the formes of things throughout all Nations are no^^^^tant, neither have I found all that are, purposely described by any Author; (...) even as I could gather them out of Histories, I have collected them, which thou maist partly understand the order and manner of every government, and so maist supply and correct that which is wanting in thy owne Countrie, which if every one would doe, how profitable would Geographie be to Students? That are three heads especially to be considered in the administration of Kingdomes, Principalities, and Provinces, namely the Ecclesiasticall State, the Political State, and the Administration of Iustice: first therefore according to the (...) of the Countrie described in the Table, I will reckon up how many members (...) parts there are of the Politicall State thereof, according to the order of dignitie as they are observed there. Secondly in distinguishing Noble-mens places (sit^ the whole government is in the hands of the Nobilitie) I will in the first place reckon those who are Feudals to the Prince, and afterward those that are free, descending still in order from the highest degree of Nobilitie, as Dukes, Earles, Barons, and Lords. Thirdly, I will shew into what Prefectures the Countrie is divided: and I suppose that by these three things the Politicall State will be sufficiently

declared. In the administration of Iustice, the juridicall Diocesses shall be noted, and the higher Senates to which appeale may be made. Lastly, in the Ecclesiasticall State, the Archbishops, if there be any, shall bee placed first, and then the suffragan Bishops which are under them, as also those which are suffragans to others. To reckon up all these things requires much studie, but seeing for want of matter it may be briefly delivered, I will performe what I may, that so I may stirre up lovers of their countrie to emulate a greater perfection in their writings. The severall places shall be noted with numbers, that they may be straight-way found out in the following Table; the first number shall containe the degrees and minutes of Longitude, which shall be sought out in the Northerne or Southerne side of the Table, the later shall have the numbers of Latitude, which are to be sought on the Westerne or Easterne side. From these bounds, heere by the direction of the Meridian, and there of the Parallel of Latitude, you shall come at last to their intersection, and so finde out the place propounded. The situation of those places which are in the description of the generall Tables ought to be sought from thence. But if so be that some names are not found in the table following, it was the fault of the Chorographer who delineated it, for the right designing and placing of principalities and dominions is not to be omitted. The rule and government of Countries is in the power of the Nobilitie, and therefore it is both profitable and delightfull to know and distinguish their severall degrees, and the proper conditions of them. The highest degree is that of Emperour or King, whom in order doe follow the degrees of Duke, Earle, Baron, the militarie Tribune, whom the Low-country-men call Banderheer, quasi Bendae, that is, Lord of the Troupes, which he leadeth under his Banner. After him is the Knight, or hee that hath attained to be of the Horsemans Order, whom the French-men doe call Chevalier, and the Low-country-men Ridder. In the last place is vn Escuyer, who beareth Armes, but hath attained to no publick dignitie. There are three degrees of Earles, the first whereof the French-men call Viconte, who excelleth the rest in dignity and priviledges, Ludovic. Guic. would have him now called a Burgrave. And though this Order of Earles in time hath remitted something of its honour, yet in the beginning it was of more excellent dignitie, as the description thereof shall by and by declare. In the second degree is the Earle Provinciall, who is called in Dutch, Landgrave. In the third degree is the Marquesse, or Marckgrave. These are the speciall degrees and orders of Nobilitie, among which the government of every Countrie is divided. There are also some differences in these degrees which might occasion a subdivision, but such as are distinguisht rather by priviledges than by forme of government. Yet moreover I will deliver the lawfull differences and conditions of every order which I have mentioned, as I have found them in a certaine French Booke, entituled La division du monde: deducing their creation from the lowest degree of Nobility, whence their proprieties and order of government doe most clearely appeare. A Knight, saith this author, or a Chevalier shall be thus created of one that was a Squire before, and bore armes in his Escutcheon. If hee, having long followed the warres, exercised armes, beene present at many conflicts, hath sufficient meanes to maintaine the state of his degree, and commeth of a great, noble, and rich Familie; then in any skirmish hee shall make knowne his request to the Generall of the Army, or to some valiant generous Knight, and when the battell is ended, hee shall come unto the said Generall or Knight, and entreate him

in the name of God and S. George, to give him the Order of Knighth^^^. Whereupon hee shall draw out his Sword and strike him thrice with it, saying: I make thee a Knight (or Chevalier) in the name of God and S. George, faithfully to defend the Faith, Iustice, the Church, Widowes, and Orphanes. But (...) the supplicant, although he be valiant, yet be poore, hee shall not bee admitted unlesse so much yearely revenues be assigned and given unto him, as is necess^^^ to preserve and maintaine the honour and dignitie of his Order. And this (...) the first degree of Nobility arising from the lowest. A militarie Tribune called een Bander-heer shall be made of a Knight, if having long followed the warres hee hath lands and revenues enough to keepe and maintaine fiftie Gentle-men in pay, that is, one Band of horse-men which shall follow his colours in the (...). For no man can set up a Colours or standerd of his owne, unlesse hee can bring into the field at his owne charge a Troupe or Band at the least of fiftie Gentle-men, who receive pay from him. A Baron may bee created of a Knight, or (...) of a Noble Squire, which hath foure Castles in his dominion, and all (...) within himselfe, for then the King may conferre a Baronrie upon him: yet (...) cannot give him this honour, unlesse he hath behaved himselfe valiantly in the warres. Therefore after the first conflict or battell he is made a Knight, (...) the second a militarie Tribune, and after the third a Baron. The degree of (...) Earle is the next, and first an Earle of the Marches, whom wee call a Marq^^^, that is, Marcgrave. And hee may be created one, who hath two or three B^^^nies included in one Dukedome, and that by the Duke in whose precincts they lye. Hee may be made a Provinciall Earle, that is, a Landgrave, who (...) foure Baronies in one Dukedome, by the Duke or the King, by the instances permission of the Duke, Hee may bee made a Vicount, who hath five Count^^ or more within one Dukedome, or which are joyned together by vicinitie of s^tuation. And (by the Kings permission) he may be created by the Duke and great solemnitie. But if the King himselfe be present the Pnincipality is more honourable. The Duke who is to be made of an Earle, must first possesse in the Kingdome wherein hee is to bee crowned, foure principall Counties, and (...) have in every one of them foure other Counties or Baronies, which must (...) bound to doe fealtie and service to them. But he must be crowned by the King or Emperour whose subject hee is, his Hatt being adorned with pearles and p^etious Stones, in the most flourishing Citie of his territories, and that in a gi^ assembly of Princes, Dukes, Earles, and Barons, a solemne festivall being (...) held, as it is the custome at the Coronation of Kings. Hee that is to bee King, must have foure Dukedomes lying neere together subject unto him, and in (...) Dukedome foure Cities, which hee alone governeth, in every one of these f^^ Cities one Archbishop, and under euery one of these againe ten Provincial Bishops. Hee being endowed and adorned with these dominions and dignitie shall come unto the Emperours Majestie as to his superiour, or shall invite l^^^ly an honourable Embassage to come unto him, and so desire to be crowned by hi^. But this seemes to be a later manner of electing the Kings and other Princes, for as long as those wandring Nations of the Gothes, Vandals, Longobardes, and many others did bring in their Kings with them, they did not measure the royall dignitie by large possession of lands, but by the multitude and strength^^ the people which they brought in. Neither was there any other choise of Dukes, who first began to bee instituted by Longinus Governour of Ravenna in the yeare 569, and afterward by the Longobards, than for their valour and wi^^

atchievements. Adde to this that which Paulus Aemilius witnesseth, namely, that Dukes and Earles were in the beginning made Prefects by the King over Nations and Cities on this condition, onely that as often as there was occasion they should bee dismissed or changed. Now how could the afore said Lawes of creating Princes (which are measured by, and doe claime the hereditarie possession of Lands) be in force at that time, seeing Dukedomes and Counties were conferr'd by Kings and Emperours as a temporary bountie? Therefore though the precise time of the Institution of them cannot be shewed (for that French Booke doth mention nothing of it) yet it is very likely, that under Otto the second Emperour, or about the yeare one thousand, or a litle after, that manner of constituting and confirming dignities was ordained by the Monarches. For even untill Otto the second, every Prince according to his power and ambition, did aspire to greater dignitie and royall Majestie. So out of one Kingdome of Lotharingia or Lorreine, which being extended from the Rhene even to the River Scaldis, was bounded with the Friesland Sea, and belonged to Lotharius the Sonne of Lodovicus Pius, more Kingdomes did afterward arise, namely the transjurane Burgundie, which being extended from the Mountaine Jura even to the Alpes, did containe all Helvetia, the Rauraci, the Allobroges, and the transjurane Burgundians: and the Kingdome of Provence which did containe some part of Burgundie and Sabaudia, and was afterward called the Kingdome of Arelatum, of which at this day the Elector of Trevers is called the Archchancellour. It did also containe the Kingdome of Lotharingia, now also called Lotharingia, and other Kingdomes betweene the Rhene and Scaldis, even to the Friesland Sea; and heretofore it was called the Kingdome ofIt was called Austrasia, either from one Austrasius a President, who^ Iustinian the Emperour set over this countrey, or from the word Auster, because it is more Eastward than any other part of France. Austrasia. Againe, this Kingdome of Lotharingia, Charles the bald, and his Brother Lodovick did part betweene them, both of them preserving the title of a King in all places. I omit the other Kingdomes which sprung up in that age by the desire and affectation of Soveraignty. But the Emperour Otto the second did divide Lotharingia, having tooke away the name of a Kingdome, into nine Dukedomes and Earledomes, as it were, into members pull'd and separated from the body, as Cuspinian hath it, and having made a division thereof Anno 981, he first made Charles the Brother of Lotharius King of France, Duke of that Countrie which is now called Lotharingia, as Richardus Wissenburgius doth speake more at large. It seemeth that after that time the arbitrarie erection and raising of Kingdomes and Principalities did faile, the Monarches now contriving how to establish a setled Empire, which consisteth in the just proportion and harmonie of its parts, as in man the parts of the body to the head. Therefore that some order might be perpetually kept in Principality and in government; I suppose that at length about the same time which I mentioned before, these afore-said Lawes were devised. And so, Reader, thou hast the distinct Degrees of all the Nobilitie, and the differences of their dignities. Now if thou observe how Provinces in every Kingdome are divided in respect of them, how the government and administration of the whole, and in what proportion it is distributed among these degrees, what is every ones peculiar office, what is the habitude or relation which they have one to an other, and especially to their head, you shall behold either an excellent harmony tending to the preservation of peace and tranquillity, strength and power, riches and state, vertue and wisedome to the Majestie of a Kingdome, and the enlarging of territories; or a confused disorder tending to instabilitie, declination,

destruction or inundation, according as there are divers kindes of government. If those matters which thou shalt see or judgest did succeed ill, thou m^^^ consider whence that ill successe proceeded; but if thou finde any prosperous and successefull event, search the cause thereof, so thou shalt behold which is the best policie in governing of Common-weales, and shalt studie Geographie with more profit.

An Admonition concerning the use of the Tables following.
WHen it was my purpose to reduce all Geographie to the consideration of the Heavens, that the just symmetrie of places, as they lye in the Sphericall figure of the Ea^^, might as neere as could be observed in plano or on a plaine superficies, (...) due proportion of degrees of Longitude was to be set down, according to the degrees of Latitude. Seeing therefore the Table could co^^^^^ but a few degrees of Latitude, I have reduced the proportion th^^ (...) almost to the midle Parallel of the Table, so that what the propo^^^ is of that Parallel to the Meridian, the same should be the proportion of the degrees of Longitude in the same Parallel to the degrees of La^^tude, and so all the Meridians are Parallels one to an other. But (...); there were more degrees of Latitude, because there is a great distere^^ of proportion in the Parallels both in the top and the bottome unto the Meridian, lest the symmetrie of places should not be true, I have chosen two Parallels almost equally distant from the midle and the extreames, to the proportion whereof, I have drawne the Meridians to designe and note out the degrees of Longitude, which are not then Parallels, b^ according to the greater or lesser distance of the assumed Parallels, th^^ doe encline more or lesse one to an other and to the midle Meridian (...) the Table.
Moreover thou shalt finde the degrees of Latitude and Longitude designed and set forth on the sides of the Tables, and for the most (...) the degrees of Latitude on either side of the Table, and of Longitude on the top and bottome, seeing according to the usuall manner of Geographers wee place the North on the higher part. But if the Countrie to be described be more extended toward the South and North, th^^ toward the East and West, then commonly wee place the West upward. Howsoever it be made the East and West sides shall alwayes represent unto thee the degrees of Latitude, the other two sides the degrees of Longitude. And all the degrees are divided into 60 parts which they call minutes, sometimes into single parts, when the magnitude will permit, sometimes into two, five, or ten. This foundation being laid, wee have followed the best descriptions in delineating of Countries, in which I had much helpe from a famous Measurer of Countries, and a most diligent Geographer to the King of Spaine called Christi^^ Grothenius, who had viewed many Countries, and described them more largely and exactly than any other, and also from a most diligent Geographer

to the King of Spaine Abraham Ortelius, who was candor and curtesie it selfe, and who, in evidence thereof, liberally communicated unto mee what Tables soever hee had gotten, though he had the same purpose that I intended. Those who besides did helpe mee any thing at all, I will mention in due place, so that Students may give them their deserved praise, and I may not bee found ungratefull. And whatsoever hath beene offerr'd mee by others, and I found out by my owne diligent search, I have compar'd together, that as neere as may bee I might set forth accurate descriptions: yet in one thing which I chiefly desired I am defective, namely in an exact numbring and reckoning up of Principalities and Noble-mens places, which are much sought for in Tables that are set forth: therefore (READER) thou must pardon that defect, and vouchsafe to helpe mee in describing the Politicall Order of the Nobilitie, and in shewing their places, names, and qualities, which will be an honour and grace unto thy name. Litle round circles doe shew the true situation of every place, from whence their distance is to be taken, and these have some markes whereby places are distinguisht one from an other. The Villages are marked onely by round circles: where wee meete with a Castle, wee marke it in this manner ^, and where with Friaries with a Crosse thus @: Townes have two Towres at least, and Villages of note where Noble-men reside one. These things wee observed as notes. And wee have taken easie markes for distinction, that so any may supply those things which are omitted.
If any one would finde out the Longitude and Latitude of any place,How by the Mappe to finde out the Longitude and Latitude. hee shall do it where the Meridians are Parallels, by taking with a paire of Compasses the distance thereof from the one side of the Table, and by applying the Compasse so opened to the other side. If you have taken the distance from the East side, the Compasse from the same side in the North side will shew the degree and minute of Longitude. But if you have the distance from the North side, it will shew you the Latitude in the East side. When the Meridians are not Parallels, the Latitude of a place shall bee found out in the same manner, as in universall Tables, where the Parallels are circular, for the distance of the place taken from the next Parallel will shew the same in the East side. But the Longitude is to be sought out with a thread or ruler laid upon the place, and turned about, untill on the North and South side the same minute of the same degree be on either side designed, and whatsoever that is, is the Longitude of the place assumed.
The miles in divers Countries do differ much, therefore if you please to compare them one to an other, bring them with your Compasses to the degrees of the Meridian, and then finde out how many miles are comprehended in one degree, and you shall see how many miles of one countrie, and how many miles of an other countrie doe make up one degree; so you shall finde the common German miles (fifteene whereof are in one degree) foure times larger than the Italian miles, and double as much to the Swethish and Westphalian miles.
Sometimes you shall find a line joyned to a litle Circle, thus ^ ^ ^ which sheweth the name pertaining to the place, being therefore added that you may know what name belongs to every place.




An Index of the Tables in FRANCE.
1 Gallia universalis, or France in generall.
2 Brittanie, Normandie, etc.
3 Lemovicium.
4 Santonia.
5 Aquitania.
6 Provincia.
7 France, Picardie, and Campagnia.
8 Francia.
9 Picardia.
10 Campania.
11 The Countrie of the Bellovacians.
12 Bolonia.
13 Aniou.
14 The Dukedome of Berry.
15 The Dukedome of Burbon.
16 Bourdelois.
17 The Countrie of Perch.
18 Touraine.
19 Poictou.
20 Cardurcium.
21 Bresse.
22 Lionnois Forest.
23 Northerne Langue dock.
24 Dauphine.
25 Lotharingia the Northerne.
26 --and Southerne part.
27 The Dukedome of Burgundie.
28 The Countie of Burgundie.
29 Sabaudia.
30 The generall Table of Helvetia.
31 Zurich.
32 Wiflispurgergou.
33 The Lake of G^
34 Argou.
35 Rhaetia.
36 A Table of all the Low-Countries.
37 Flanders.
38 The Easterne part of Flanders.
39 Brabant.
40 Holland.
41 Zeland.
42 Gelderland.
43 Zutphania.
44 Vltrajectum.
45 Mechlinia.
46 Groeninga.
47 Transisulania.
48 Artesia.
49 Hanonia.
50 Namurcum.
51 Lutzenburg.
52 Limburg.





FRANCE.
I Have described Spaine and the speciall Provinces thereof,The names and whence so called. now passing over the Pyrenaean Mountaines, France offers it selfe, which I will delineate as faithfully as I can. That part of Europe which is now called France (as many doe report) was heretofore called Galatia, from Gala,(...). which in English signifies Milke, because it produceth men of a white milkie colour, for that the Mountaines (for this also they adde) doe keepe off the violent heate of the Sunne. Diodorus writeth, that it had that name from Galata the Daughter of Hercules. Others doe deliverSome say it was called from the Hebrew word Galath, which signifieth Rain as if the first Inhabitants had beene so ancient a people, that they were drowned with the generall Deluge. other opinions. Ptolemie in his second Booke, and other Grecians doe call it Celt^galantium. Some thinke it was named Gallia fromSome affirme that it was so named, because it was inhabited anciently by the Gaules, which came from Gallatia, a Countrie in Asia the Lesse. Gallatia, which word others derive otherwayes. But these things are not of so great moment, as that they should detaine the Reader with a large discourse. 'Tis certaine that the name of Gallia was used by the Latine Writers, as wee shall understand more fully by that which followes. Postellus andSee Montanus upon Obadiah, vers. 20. Arias Montanus doe write, that the Hebrewes did call it TZarphat. It is now called France from the Francks, a people of Germanie neere the Rhene, who possest themselves of this Countrie by force of Armes: it is commonly called Le Royaalme de France. The Grecians did call the French-men in generall Celtae and Galatae: and they were also (as Iosephus witnesseth) heretofore called Gomeritae. And so much briefly concerning the name. The Situation and quantitie followes. I will unfold it according to the bounds, the longitude, the latitude, and the compasse thereof. Concerning the bounds of the Kingdome of France, on the North, on which side it looketh toward the Low-Countries, it is bounded by a line drawne from Callice unto Argentoratum or Strasburg, which on the left hand leaveth Artesia, Hannonia, Lutzenburg,The Situation. and other Countries; and on the right hand Picardie and Lotharingia: but that part which lyeth against England, the great Brittish Ocean doth beate on; as likewise on the West, making a great Bay into Aquitania. On the South, where it cleaveth to Spaine, it hath the Pyrenaean Mountaines, and that part of the Mediterranean Sea, which is called the French Sea. Lastly, on the East it is separated by the Alpes from Italie, by Iura from the Helvetians, and by the Rhene from the Germans. Gallia or France (for I will use these words indifferently) is more than 300. G. French miles long from the West straight forward unto the East: or from the South-South-West unto the South-South-East above 330. In breadth it is almost 285 miles; the compasse of it is above a thousand and twentie; and this is the quantity of it, the quality followeth. It lyeth under part of the fifth Climate, all the sixth and seventh, and part of the eigth, betweene the degrees of latitude fortie one and fiftie three, and of longitude 20 and 38. And although in generall it lye very much open ^o the Northerne windes, yet it may be reckon'd with the best Countries of Europe for the wholesomnesse and temper of the Ayre. Claudianus calleth it a happie Soyle, Caesar lib. 3. Bel. Civ. calleth it a wholesome

Soyle, and Strabo the fruitfull Mother ofIt is supposed to containe 15 millions of living soules, Heylin. p. 76. The fruitfulnesse of France. Men (lib. 2. de Bel. Gal. The Countrie, for the most part, is plaine, and yet having in some places pleasant hils, and betweene them delightfull valleyes, both of ther^ wonderfull fruitfull. The fields are well tilled, and doe bring fo^ great store ofEspecially Picardie, and Languedock. See Iohnson pag. 59. Wheate and other Corne. France (as Strabo witnesseth) hath great store of Corne and Acornes. There is no place unoccupied but where there are Marishes or woods. It aboundeth with the be^ Wine, which they transport to Brittany, Normandie, Picardie, Germ^^ the Low-Countries, England, and other Countries where Grapes can a^taine to no maturitie or ripenesse, by reason of the coldnesse of the Ayre. Also Athenaeus and Strabo doe witnesse, that France had My^ of Gold and Silver, but now they are supposed to bee exhausted. T^^ part of the Countrie which is occupied by tillage, doth feede and b^ up all kinde of Cattell, by reason whereof it aboundeth with Flesh, Milke, Butter, Cheese, Wooll, and other things. The French-men (...) peaceably possesse all France, under the reigne of King Clodoveus, wh^ first of all was madeAnno 485. Monarch of all France, and first of all professed the Christian Faith, which the Kings of France doe use even unto th^ day. Hee did beare for his Armes the threeHeylin, pag. 104. out of Paradine affirmes, that the Armes of France in the dayes of Pharamond the first King, was Gules, three Crownes Or: but Charles the sixth altered them to Azure 3 flowre de luces Or. Lillies or Flower de (...) which some doe suppose were given him fromPezelius Mellif hist. part. 3. pag. 67. proves this to be fabulous. heaven. After him, as they write, there reigned now in a right succession, now in a collateral Childebertus, Clotarius the first, Cherebertus, Childericus the second, Ch^rius the second, Dagobertus Magnus, Clodoveus the second, Clotarius (...) third, Childericus the third, Theodoricus, Clodoveus the third, Childe^ the second, Dagobertus the second, Childericus the fourth, Theodo^ the second, and Childericus the fifth. Hee in the eleventh yeare of (...) raigne, and in the yeare of Christ 75, by the authoritie and command of Pope Zacharie, (to whom Pipine in a Booke sent unto him had pai^ out his opprobrious and reproachfull life) was deprived of his Kingdome, and enforced to become a Monke. In his place his Accuser ^pine was made King, the Sonne of Charles Martel, otherwise calledBecause hee was base Son to Pipin, who was Prefect or Controller of the Pallace to Dagobert the Great. Reade Heylin p 100. ^pin, surnamed the Short, being before Prefect. After him there followed Charles the Great, Ludovicus Pius, Carolus calvus or Charles the (...) Ludovicus Balbus, Ludovicus the third, Charles the grosse,Or Eudes. Odo, Ch^ the simple, Rudolphus, Burgundio, Lodovicus the fourth, Clotharius, and Ludovick the fifth, being the last of the posteritie of Charles the great, who being poysoned, the Kingdome was translated to Hugh Capet, a chiefe man of France, Earle of Paris, and titulary Duke of France (...) Burgundie. After Capet there succeeded Robert surnamed Pius, Henry the first, Philip the first, Ludovicus the sixth, Ludovicus the seventh, Philip the second, Ludovicus the eigth, Ludovicus the ninth, Philip the third,Ph^ the Faire being the fourth, Ludovicus Huttinus the 10,Who caused the S^l^que Law to be enacted. Philip the (...) surnamed the Long, Charles the fourth surnamed the Faire, who dy^ without any male IssueOr Ph. of Valoys, in whose time was sought the great battell of Grecie. Philip of Valoys was chosen in his place, be^ the Sonne of Charles the first Earle of Valoys. After him there follow^In whose reigne was fought the battell of Poistesres by Edward the black Prince. Iohn of Valoys, Charles the fifth called the Wise, Charles Bene-natu^ the sixth, Charles the seventh, Ludovick the 11, Charles the eigth, Ludovicus the 12, Francis of Valoys the Sonne of Charles the first Earle of A^lime,Who drove Charles the fifth out of Germanie. Henry of Valoys the second, Francis the second,The Author of the great Massacre at Paris. Charles the ninth
map of FranceFRANCE.

Henry the third, who being slaine by the hand of a Iacobine Monke,Who also after hee had driven the Spaniard out of France, and had enjoyed about ten yeares time of peace, was most villanously slaine by Raviliac. Henry of Burbon the fourth, being the Sonne of Anthony Duke of Burbon was proclaimed lawfull Successour to him, and the most Christian King of Navarre and France. The French-men are cheerfull and enclined to warres. Concerning their valour, it will be worth our labour to heare Strabo a skilfull man, by birth a Capadocian, by learning a Grecian, in judgement ancient, and that had travell'd through many Countries. The whole Nation (saith hee) of those people which are now called the French or the Galatae, delighteth in Martiall affaires, and is of a couragious stomack, hot at the first on-set: They are of a curteous and faire condition, and doe abhorre all wicked manners; so that being provok't by any injurie, they will presently fight and quarrell, without any respect of the danger ensuing. Also no man is ignorant how great a terrour the name of the French-men was once to the Romans, the Grecians, and the Asiaticans, when heretofore they came from their owne Countrie to spoyle and destroy the Oracle of Apollo Pythius, unto which they resorted from all parts of the world. Also when they tooke Rome and set it on fire; when they besieged the Capitoll, and when they built Cities in Italie, as Mediolanum, Comum, Brixia, Verona, Bergomum, Tridentum, and Vincentia. France now is not so large as it was heretofore, for that part of Italie which lyeth between the Alpes and Ancona was called heretofore Gallia Cisalpina, but now it is called Lumbardie: and a great part of Belgia or the Low-Countries now belongeth to Germanie, which by the description of Caesar, Ptolemie, and ancient Writers did once appertaine to France. For they divided GalliaHeere note, that though it be beyond the Alpes, in respect of Italy, whose Inhabitants were the originall of this name, yet in respect of us it is on this side of the Alpes, and therefore Gallia Cisalpina, as on the contrary the Italians Cisalpina is our Transalpina. Transalpina, or that part of France which is beyond the Alpes, called by Plinie Comata, and by Ptolemy Celtogallia, into three parts, Celtica, Belgica, and Narbonensis: Ptolemie divideth it into foure parts, Aquitanta, Lugdunensis, which is the same with that which Caesar cals Celtica, Belgica, and Narbonensis. They bounded it then with the Pyrenaean Mountaines, the Rhene, the Ocean, and the Alpes, when now all that which lyeth from Cales Eastward, is reckon'd as part of Germany not of France; and the Germans doe challenge a great deale on either side of the Rhene. The chiefest Cities are Lutetia Parisiorum or Paris, Massils, Narben, Lions, Pictavium, Burdeaux, Naeomagus, Iuliomagus, Orleance, Rothomagus, Rupella, and many others, of which wee will speake more largely in the particular descriptions.The Lakes. France hath many Lakes, and the chiefe of them all, is that which they call in Latine Lemanus, and the most doe call the Lake of France. Concerning which, seeing it is described in a particular Table of this Volume, I will adde nothing more in this place, but referre the Reader thither. Not farre from a Towne called Bessum there is a Mountaine and on it a great Lake, being so deepe that it is thought to have no bottome, no water, as farre as may be discerned, doth flow into it; if any one cast any thing into it, hee shall straight-way heare it thunder, and see it lighten, beside much raine and haile will fall afterward. Not farre from thence is the Lake Crypta, the round mouth whereof is commonly called Creux de Souleis, being a deepe Abysse, whose depth cannot bee found out: and if a man cast a stone into it and afterward lay his eare unto it, hee shall heare a great murmuring noise, like as if it thunderd a farre off. In the Summer time, though nothing

bee cast into it, yet a noyse is heard in the hollow cavernes of it. And it is supposed that there are windes in them, which doe warre, as it were, one against an other. Abitacum or Avitacum, being a place in Avernia neere Claromont, is so lively described by Sidonius in his second Booke, Epist. 2. as if it were delineated in these times. Concerning the Lake Rubressus, you may reade Pomponius Mela lib. 2. in the Chapter wherein Narbon is painted forth; Plinie cals it the Rubrensian Lake, but Strabo and Stephanus name it Limne Narbonitis. France hath innumerable Rivers both great and litle. Ausonius Eidyllio 3 doth reckon up many of them, where hee speaketh thus of Mosella:
Non tibi se Liger anteferet, non Axona praeceps, etc.Liger shall not preferre her selfe 'fore thee,Nor yet Axona, whose swift waters beeStill running on, nor Matrona that doth glide'Twixt France and Belgia lying on each side:Nor yet Carantonus, the which doth flow,And back to the Santonick Bay doth goe:Yea France shall make her Tarnis come behinde,Though sands of gold are unto it assign'd.And her Aturnus, though it madly runneInto the purple Sea, yet will not shunne,But first adore the River Mosel, asIts Mistresse ere 'twill to the Ocean passe.
And a litle after.

BothA River breaking out of the Alpes, and now called Dronia. Druna and Druentia which doth flow
'Tweene crooked bankes, and so doth winding goe,
Shall reverence and adore thee, and so shall
The Rivers that downe from the Alpes doe fall.
And Rodanus, who as shee along doth glide,
Doth name that Banke which lyes on the right side:
Thee with blew Lakes, with streames that greatest are,
And with Sea like Garumna Ile compare.

But the chiefe Rivers are Sequana, Ligeris, Garumna, and Rodanus. That which is called in Latine Sequana, Ptolemie cals Zekouana, Strabo Zekouanos, Stephanus Zekoanos, and Benjamin Sihan; but it is commonly called Seyne. It riseth in the Dukedome of Burgundie, and having visited Paris, where it maketh a litle Isle, and Rotomagum or Roan, at last with a great mouth it breaketh into the Brittish or Norman Sea. It hath a very dangerous harbour for ships to ride in, and it requires much care to passe out of it, or come into it. The Normans doe commonly call it la Bare: for Scyne having entred into the Sea straight way, contrary to the nature of other Rivers, doth flow back againe, rising up with a horrible noyse as high as any speare. Heere those that are carelesse and negligent doe run themselves upon unexpected dangers. The Seyne as it runneth along, doth receiveNine navigable streames, saith Heylin. p. 84. divers Rivers, of which the chiefest and most noted by the Ancients, are Matrona, commonly called Marne, Esia,Which now they also call Isara. Yse, commonly

Ayse, Axona commonly called Ayne, Aisne or Esne. Liger, which I named in the second place, is a River famoused by Caesar and others. It is called Ligeros (or as it is better in some copies Ligeris) by Strabo in his fifth Booke, and by Ptolemie, but now it is called Loire andOn this River stand the Citie Orleans, Nantes, and many others. Leire. The head thereof is at the Towne Velaunum, which is called commonly la Font de Leiro. It is larger than the rest, so that it is worthily called the Father of the Rivers of France. And having runne with a cleare streame through divers Countries, (for it did anciently divide theThat is, the Inhabitants of Gallia Narbonensis, which comprehends the Provinces of Languedock, Provence, and Daulphine, and this Countrie was so called from Narbone a Citie in Languedock. C^ltae from the Aquitani, as Strabo noteth) it doth exonerate and disburthen it selfe into the Westerne Ocean, by a mouth almost foure leagues wide, but somewhat troubled with sands. Two leagues and a halfe within, there are rocks, which are called the Hogges. It receiveth into it many great navigable Rivers, as Elaver commonly called Allier, Carus now called Cher, Vigenna now Vienne, Viane, and Vignane, Meduana now called Mayne, and others. Garumna followeth, by which Caesar divided Gallia from Aquitania: Strabo lib. 4. calleth it Gorounas, Ptolemie G^^na, and Frontinus Garonna, which name it still retaineth from its head, even to the Castle Blavia, but afterward it is called Geronde and Gi^^^. Gulielmus Brito calleth it Gerunna. It riseth out of the Pyrenaean Mountaines, not farre from a Towne which is commonly called Gua^^^^. And so having visited Tholous, Burdeaux, and other places, mingles it selfe with the Aquitanian Sea, by a mouth of two leagues breadth at the entrance whereof there are some rocks, which are called the Asses. The Dutch Mariners doe call the Northerne side Noorder-Esel, the Southerne side Suyder-Esel, having a high watch-tower on it, which is commonly called la Tour Cordan. It receiveth these navigable Rivers; Tarnis commonly called Lo Tarn, in French le Tar: Egercius, which the Vascones doe call Gers; Oldus commonly called Ooldt, or with an Article le Old; D^ranius now sometimes called la Dordogne, sometimes Dordonne, and others. I have given the last place to Rodanus: This River was knowne by all Writers both the Greeke, who called it Podanos, and the Latine. The French-men call it le Rosne, but the Inhabitants le Ros: Oppianu^ (...) Halieuticis lib. 4. and Philostratus in the lives of the Sophisters, doe call it Eridanus. Plinie writeth, that it was named from Roda a Colonie of the Rhodians in that Countrie. It riseth not farre from the Fountaines of D^nubius, Rhene, Arola, Ticinus and others, neere a Mountaine which is commonly called Briga; and having entred into the Lake Lema^^, neere to the Towne Nova-villa, or Neuf-ville, it runneth through it, so as it preserveth its colour, and so proceeding to the Towne of Gene^^, it runneth afterward with a violent course into the Mediterranean Se^ with seven mouths or inlets, as Apollonius writeth in his Argonanticks, with five, as Diodorus thinketh and others; with three, as Artimedorus i^ Strabo, Plinie, and Ammianus suppose; with two, as Polybius and Ptolemy thinke; with many, as Livie wisely doth report, lest hee might be convinced of falshood in a particular enumeration: at this day the Inhabitants doe name five and more, as Gras Neuf, Gras de Orgon, Gras Paules, Gras Graunt, Gras d' Enfer, and Gras de Passon, which being toward Massilia, Plinie calleth Mossaleoticum, and Polybius Massalioticum: Rodanus doth receive Arva; andThis River is called by Marcellinus Sangona or Saugonna; by Polybius Scoras; and anciently Brigulus, as some have written. Araris, now called Saone or Sone; also Isaris now

called Isere: also Druna, which is now called Dronia or Drosne; and Druentia now called Durance. But so much shall suffice concerning the Rivers for the present. The Brittish Ocean, where it lyeth against England beateth on France on the North, and also on the West, as wee said before; but on the South the Mediterranean Sea: toward both these Seas there are many famous Bayes; on the Ocean side is that which Aethicus, and others call Sinus Aquitanicus, and Lucan most elegantly cals Tarbellicus Ancon. There are also many other famous Bayes in the same Sea, in whose inward parts are seated the Townes of Diepe, Constantia, and others. Toward the Mediterranean Sea there are two Bayes called the Greater and the Lesse. That part of the Mediterranean is called the Greater, where Rodanus doth powre it selfe into it. Marcus Portius Cato calleth it Angulus Gallicus, or the French Corner, butLib. 26. and 30 Livie,Lib. 43. Iustine and others call it, for the excellence of it, the French Bay. Strabo writeth that the Lesser was neere the Pyrenaean Promontorie, which is called Promontorium Aphrodisium; and this Bay Mela calleth Salsus. Antoninus placeth also the Gamblacian Bay in Gallia Narbonensis. France had heretofore, as also it hath now, many famous Havens, of which Lucas Aurigarius hath written fully in his fifth Chart, and the foure following, the chiefe whereof are Staliocanus, Vindana, Brivates and others, named by the Ancients. That which Ptolemie cals Staliocanus, some suppose to be that of S. Paul de Lyon in Brittaine, but others Roscon, to whom I am induced to subscribe, because the later is more safe and convenient than the former, for though it hath the Island commonly called De Bas lying over against it, yet it affordeth a safe comming in for ships of seven Ells deepe. Over against the formerlyeth threatning Taurus (an Island commonly called Le Taurean) which hath innumerable rocks lying round about it, some being hidden and some standing forth, that are very dangerous to Marriners, except they take heede. Not farre from thence in the same Britannie towards the South, behinde the bending of the Promontorie called Gobaeum, is the Bay of Vindana, which is now called Fenstiers, or Conquest; Iovius (though erroniously) calleth it Brest; for that Haven which Ptolemy calleth Briovates, is now called Brest. Plinie maketh mention also of the Haven Zetoor, which is now called Lusson or Luxo. And of the Haven which Ptolemie cals Santonum, but now is called la Rochelle, as Villanovanus supposeth. The Mountains and Woods now follow. Concerning the Mountaines, France is more mountainous in some places than in others. The highest parts are Daulphine, Provincia, Subaudia, and Burgundia. The Andegavensian Countrie hath also some Mountaines, which doe runne out into the borders of Brittanie and Poictou. Ancient Writers doe chiefly celebrate these Mountaines of France, namely Cebenna, Vogesus, and Iura. Cebenna is a Mountaine, which, as Caesar writeth, divideth those of Avergne from those of Vivaretz; Plinie cals it Gebenna, Lucan and Ausonius doe name it Gebennas, and Mela Gebennicos. The true and genuine writing of it, as Scaliger noteth in his letters to Merula, is Cebenna with a C: for they are called at this day Montaignes de Cebenes and Cevenes: Ptolemie and Strabo call them Cemmeni, some Latines doe call them Cebenna, Venetus cals them Cevennae, and Villanovanus calleth them Montaignes d' Anvergne:

part of these Mountaines is now called Tarara (as Guileelmus Bude^^ witnesseth in his fourth Book de Asse) which lyes in the way to Lyons; on the top whereof there is a seate cut in a rock, into which they set those Merchants, who have not formerly used to trade at Lyons. It is commonly called la Chere de la verite, for they are enforced to sweare the truth, whether they have ever beene at Lyons or not, and to promise afterward to make them a feast in honour of the Citie. There is also a Mountaine which Caesar lib. 4. de bell. Gall. Lucan. lib. 1. Pliny, and others doe call Vogesus. Tacitus in the first Booke of his Historie doth corruptly call it Vocetus or Vocetius, as it is noted by learned men. S^phanus in his fourth Booke calleth it by the name of the Alpes, now it is called Mont de Faucilles, and it hath also other names. It doth separate Burgundie and Alsatia from Lotharingia; it doth send forth the Riv^^ Mosella, as Caesar witnesseth, and infinite other Rivers, the most where^^ doe runne into the Rhene. That part from whence Mosella floweth is called Kratzer: which Ortelius writeth, hee understood out of a Bo^^ written by Magnus Gruberus, in which he describeth Rhene: add^^^ withall, that in the Chorographicall Table of Lotharingia, accurately delineated by Iohannes Scyllius, by the Dukes command and change, th^^ Countrie is called in French Estaye, and Auff der Stay: and the f^^^ Scyllius doth witnesse, that there groweth nothing there but the he^^^ Asarum. Vogesus in the Valley Leberia doth yeeld pure silver, but (...) Munster noteth) not very much. I know not whether I shall call I^^^^ Mountaine of France or of Germanie: heeretofore it was all of it, together with Helvetia, esteemed to bee in France, but now a great parts thought to be in Germanie. The beginning thereof is placed on the confines of Basil, neere the Rhene, over against Waldzhut. It is high, and raised up with many great stones. Caesar, Plinie, and others doe mention it, Ptolemie cals it Iurassus, Strabo Iurasius and Ioras. In our times the Inhabitants in divers places doe call it by divers names. Not farre from the Castle of Hasburg, neere Burg, (which is a litle Towne, so called i^ the German Language from the Bridge which is there built on one arch over the River Arola) it is called Botzberg, from the Village B^^^, which, together with many orhers, is seated at the foote of the Mountaine. Munster, Scudus, Lazius, and others doe thinke, that this port^^^ Iura was that which Cornelius Tacitus called Vocetus or Vocetius. But O^telius thinketh, that it should be read in Tacitus Vogesus. There is also by this part of this Mountaine a great Valley called Frickthal, from a certaine Village therein of the same name. And here and there are other Valleyes, as Lauffen-thal, S. Imers-thal, and the like, but none of the^ doe crosse the Mountaine, so that wheresoever you would passe ove^^ you must clime very high. Moreover betweene Araris and Farspurg this Mountaine is called Schaffmat, which in Latine is as much to say as O^num Pratum, or the Sheepe pasture. Betweene the Towne Olten and the Prefectureship of Humburg it is called Nider-Hawenstein, or the Lower-Cut-Stone, for that there is a way made through the rocks. Betweene Walnburg and Balstalium it is called Ober-Hawenstein, or the Higher-Cut-stone, where loaden Carts are let downe with ropes from the steepe parts of the Mountaine. Toward the West it is called Wasser-val, that

is, the Ruine of Water. And as you goe farther it is called by the Sabaudians Iurten. That arme thereof which extendeth it selfe toward Basil, and neere to the River Byrsa, is called Blowen; and it growes higher and ruggeder untill you come to Delsperg, where againe it openeth into a Plaine. A litle farther, as you goe to the French Monasterie of Bellele, it riseth againe in heigth, and afterward not farre from thence it lesseneth and growes very low: from thence againe the Mountaine extendeth it selfe from the East Westward with a stone ridge: which (as it is reported) Iulius Caesar did first make passible, by digging, as it were, a Gate through the stones: Some doe name this Gate Pierreport, others the Rock-Gate, and some doe call it Pierre-pertus, and Petra pertusa: Merula who once passed by it witnesseth, that it is truly and accurately described by Sebastian Munster. And the same Merula mentioneth a faire Inscription over the Gate, but that the letters of the first word are more worne out than the rest. This is it,
N:::.. Augusti via ducta per ardua montisFecit iter Petram scindens in margine fontis.This is the way which once Augustus madeThrough this Mountaine which his power obey'd.Hee cut a way quite through this rocky mountaine,Even neere unto the brim of a faire Fountaine.
By this Fountaine the Poet understandeth the River Byrsa, which breaketh there out of a rock with a violent streame of water. From thence Iura runneth Northwestward, betweene the Helvetians and the Sabaudians, and then by Burgundia, which it leaveth upon the South-Southwest (whence Caesar saith in his first Booke, that Iura in two places divideth the Sequani from the Helvetians) and by divers Lakes, the chiefe whereof is Lemanus, where the Mountaine of S. Claudius running farre and wide, at last endeth neere to the River Rhodanus. Concerning other Mountaines which doe also belong to France, and namely the Pyrenaean Mountaines, I have spoken in the Description of Spaine: and I will discourse of the Alpes when I come to entreate of Italie. I will therefore now speake something of the Woods in France, which are many, yet not so great or thick of trees, bushes, and briars as in other Countries: there are many among theA people of Gallia Lugdunensis. Cenomanni, as Les Forests de Versay, Longoulney, Persi, Sille, Charnay, Audain, Maine, Concise: In Lower Brittaine there are le Forest de Bostblanc, de Toriant, and de Guierche: Amongst the Picts in Poictou, there are le Forest de Mouliore, Dyne, Bresse, Ligne, and others. Amongst Bituriges in Berry, the wood Roberto may be seene with others. And amongst theA people of Gallia Lugdanensis. Andegavi, there are the Forests of Loursaie and Marson. The whole Countrie of Bononia is, as it were, one entire wood, the parts whereof are Le Bois de Surene, Celles, Hardelot, Dalles, and Boursin. Among the Verumandui, not farre from Perona, there are the woods Recoigne and Bouhan. In Picardia there are Bois de Baine, de Beaulieu, de la Fere, and de Coussi. Neither doth Lotharingia want woods, as Warned-wald, le Banbois, Bois de Mondon, de Heyde, de S. Benoyt, de la Voyge, Mortaigne, and Doseync. In Burgundie there are many woods, whose

names I cannot now rehearse. I passe by also the other woods which are dispersed all over France. Also for the Forrest of Arduenna, the chiefest part of it is in Low-Germany, and therefore it is to be described there, though Claudian call it the French Wood; and Caesar lib. 6. de be^ Gall. call it the great wood of France. Not onely ancient Monuments and Records, but also Churches, and other places dedicated to Religion, of which there is a great number in the Cities and Townes of France, doe witnesse, that the French-men were very much addicted to Religion, and were the chiefe of those that embraced the Christian Faith.The publick workes. In the Citie of Paris alone there are 69 Churches, but the fairest of them is the Cathedrall Church, dedicated to the blessed Virgin Mary, the foundation whereof being long before laid, it began to bee built in the reigne of Ludovicus, in the yeare 1257, and is the chiefe wonder of France. It is borne up by an hundred and twenty Pillars: the length is 174 p^ces, the breadth threescore, and the heigth an hundred. The Quire is built of faire Stone, on which are engraven divers Histories out of the Old and New Testament. It hath in the whole compasse of it 45 Chappels, strengthened with Iron Grates: the Gates are eleven in all. On the front of the Church there are three double Gates, beautified and ado^ned with the Statues of 28 Kings. On the sides there are Towres, or rather Steeples, which are 34 Cubits high. The greatest Bell, which taketh its name from the Virgin Mary, requireth twenty men to ring i^ and the second thereof, when the ayre is cleare, may be easily heard seven leagues. It were an infinite thing to describe the other Churches which are heere and in other places, or to reckon up the Abbyes, the Friaries, the Monasteries, the Hospitals for strangers, the Hospitals for the sick, the Hospitals for the poore, and the Hospitals for Orphans. What should I speake of the Castles, or of the Kings faire Pallaces? What of the faire houses belonging to Noblemen and Knights? What of the other publick and private buildings? Concerning these matters I had rather be silent than speake too litle.The manner of Government. The State of France is not Monarchicall: which kinde of government Aristotle thought was most ancient and divine. The King thereof is borne, not chosen by suffrages; and none can governe but one of the Masculine Sexe, as theSo called from the words Si Aliqua so often mentioned therein. Salick Law doth require. The Subjects doe so love, adore, and reverence their King, as nothing more. The arbitrating and judging of all matters is in his power. There is in France a Colledge of twelve Peeres, instituted bySome also say, that these Pairries were erected by Hugh Capet, but others more truly think the^ to be instituted by Lewis le Ieune Anno 1171, to ayde and assist the King in his Councell. Charles the great, in his warre against the Saracens, and they are commonly called les Pairs de France, because they were next and, as it were, equall in dignitie to the King. They have power to consecrate the King, and put him into possession of the Kingdome. Sixe of these are commonly called Laicks, the rest are called Ecclesiasticks, or Clergy-men: The Laicks are Dukes or Earles, as the Dukes of Burg^^die, Normandie, and Guienne: the Earles of Campania, Flanders, and Th^louse. The Ecclesiasticks also are Dukes and Earles; the Dukes are the Archbishop of Remes, the Archbishop of Laon, and the Archbishop of Langers: the Earles are the Bishop of Chaulons, of Noyon, and Beav^^. There are also eight chiefe Senates in France, which they commonly call Parliaments; from which it is unlawfull to make any appeale, as the

Parliament of Paris, of Tholouse, of Rotamagum or Roven, of Grenoble, of Bordeaux, of Dijon, of Aix, and of Bretaigne. As concerning the Ecclesiastick State, there are twelve Archbishopricks in France, to wit, the Archbishop of Lyons (which is the Primate) of Aix, of Vienna, of Rhemes, of Narbone, of Tholouse, of Burdeaux, of Aux, of Bourges, of Tours, of Roen,The Universities. and of Sene. There are these Universities in the Kingdome, to wit, Paris, Poictiers, Bourges, Tholouse, Burdeaux, Nantes, Lyons, Orleans, Mompellier, Cahors, Grenoble, Valens, Rhemes, Angiers, Caen, Avenion, Dol, and Massils, which is the ancientest of them all, and founded by the Grecians. Out of these, as it were, out of so many Trojan Horses, an innumerable sort of learned men both Divines, Lawyers, Physicians, and others have come forth, whom if I should endeavour to number, I should take upon my selfe a great taske, and should be tedious to the Reader. The Nobilitie of France doe in generall follow the studies of good learning, with earnest diligence and continuall paines, so that they excell in all kindes of Disciplines and Arts. You may see there those that are of great birth, and descended of noble Families, plying their Bookes night and day, and busying themselves with the sacred Mysteries of the Muses. There are those, who, to the great admiration of those that heare them, without any premeditation, can in an admirable method, very readily discourse or speake of any matter that shall be propounded. There are many Libraries in this Kingdome, especially the Kings Librarie at Paris, and the Librarie of S. Victor.The Libraries. That I may omit other publick and private Libraries, furnished with the best and rarest printed Bookes, and with the choysest manuscripts. Now I come to speake of their manners: Diodorus and Strabo doe witnesse, that the French-men are very sharpe-witted, and reasonable good Schollers. Symmachus in many places doth commend their studies in good letters and learning. Marcus Portius Cato, Originum lib. 2. saith, that the most part doe follow two things very industriously, to wit, Warfare and Eloquence, that we may know that the ancient French did carrie away the glory of eloquence from other Nations. Strabo doth attribute to them a curteous Nature, voyde of malice. Iulianus an eye witnesse doth report of them, that they know not how to flatter, but that they live freely and justly with all men.Their manners. They have no more knowledge of Venus and Bacchus than serveth them for marriages for procreation, and for the moderate drinking of their owne wines. Those things which some speake on the contrarie, are to be esteemed as rayling speeches, proceeding from an envious minde. For who seeth not, that hath read ancient Writers concerning the disposition of the French-men, and compar'd it with what it is at this present, that that is fals which Servius reporteth? namely, that the French-men are dull-witted; and that which Iulius Firmicus annexeth, to wit, that they are blockish; and that of Iulianus, who forgetting himselfe, saith, that they are stupid and rustick; that of Polybius, who saith, that they doe not give their mindes to Learning and good Arts. That which Diodorus, Athenaeus, and Clement Alexandrinus doe avouch, namely, that they are unfaithfull, given to gluttonie and drunkennesse; that which Livie and Polybius report, to wit, that they are soft and effeminate; that of Mela, who affirmeth, that they are desirous of

gold, ambitious, proude, and superstitious; that of Solinus, who saith, that they are vaine bablers: and lastly that which Plutarch speaketh is the life of Pyrrhus, namely that they are insatiably covetous of money. Neverthelesse it is confest, that the French-men may be corrupted with many vices, by having commerce and traffique with other Nations. Florus saith lib. 3. cap. 10. that no man can say, that the French are onely fierce, seeing they deale fradulently, and by wiles. Ammianus lib. 15. sheweth, that they are quarrellous: Diodorus doth reprehend the French-men for their intemperancie in speech, and also noteth, that they use a short and obscure kind of Language, that they speake many things ambiguously of purpose, that they talke much in praise of themselves, (...) in disgrace of others, and that they are detracters and selfe-conceited or opinionated. Strabo also noteth their boasting, which is that French ostentation which Caesar speaketh of lib. 7. and is exemplified in many of his other Bookes: such is the boasting of Helvetius Divicon lib. 1. while he extols and magnifies the vertue of the Helvetians, and d^^^ upbraid the Romans with the remembrance of their overthrow. So Vecingetorix braggeth, in his Oration, that hee alone would cause a Councell to be called out of all France, which the whole world could not resist. Concerning the Religion of the ancient French-men, and the^^ manner of worship which they used, Marcus Tullius is not to be reg^^ded, who writeth thus in his Oration for M. Fonteius, The French-men are not moved with any Religion: Let us rather heare Livie, who though in other matters hee doth unjustly taxe this Nation, yet hee affirmes, that they are not negligent in matters of Religion: and C^^^ lib. 7. de Bell. Gall. who knew this Nation well enough, when hee saith, that it was very much given to Religion. Caesar saith, that they especially worshipped Mercury: Max. Tyrius doth witnesse, that the Cel^^ (...) French-men did worship Iupiter, and for his sake they honoured the highest Oake. Strabo testifieth, that Diana had a Temple at Mass^^^^^ Polybius lib. 8 as also Plutarch doe mention, that Diana was worshipped and adored by the Gallo-Grecians. Lactantius, Lucan, and Minuti^^ Felix doe report, that the French-men had Esus or Hesus, Te^tates and T^^nes for their Gods: which most of the Learned doe interpret to bee Mars, Mercurie, and Iupiter. Ausonius maketh Balenus to be the French-mens God, whom Herodian calleth Belis, the same perhaps with th^^ which Tertullian cals Tibilene, whom the Greekes and others thinke to be Apollo. Also the French-men did worship Abellio, of which, as Ioseph Scaliger, writing to Ausonius, lib. 1 cap. 9. noteth, there doe still rem^^^^ some monuments. And Lucian reporteth, that they did worship He^^les by the name of Ogmius. Athenaeus writeth, that when the anci^^^ Gaules worshipped their Gods, they did turne themselves to the right hand. They did offer humane sacrifices to their Gods, especially to Mo^, as Caesar witnesseth. But they never offerd any sacrifice without their Druides, as Diodorus witnesseth. These Druides were Priests, heretofore much esteemed by the French-men, as also their Bards were, of wh^^ Lucan thus writeth:
Vos quoque qui fortes animas, belloque peremptas, etc.Then you that valiant soules and slaine in warreDoe celebrate with praises that still areImmortall, so that vertue never dyes,You Bards securely sung your Elegies.You Druides, now freed from warre, maintaineYour barbarous Rites, and sacrifice againe.You what heaven is, and Gods alone can tell,Or else alone are ignorant; you dwellIn vast and desert woods: you teach no spiritPlutoes pale Kingdome can by death inherit.They in an other world informe againe,Death long lifes midle is (if you maintaineThe truth) the Northerne people happie areIn this their errour, whom feare greatest farreOf all feares incures not, the feare of death;Thence are they prone to warre, nor losse of breathEsteeme, and they doe thinke it is a shameTo spare a life that will returne againe.
And so much concerning the French-mens Religion, now let us adde something concerning their customes and fashions: Livie testifies, that the French-men doe come to Councell in Armour; Strabo writeth, that it was the manner of the French Councels, that if any one did interrupt a Suiter, a publick Officer went to him, and drawing out his sword, did threaten him, and command him to keepe silence: and if hee did not then hold his peace, the Officer did in the same manner as formerly, the second and third time; and lastly he cut off so much of the Interrupters cloake, so that the rest was good for nothing: Caesar saith, that the French-mens Councels are rash and suddaine, and that they are unconstant in Councell, and desirous of innovation. The same Caesar noteth, that the French-men, when any matter of note happeneth, are wont by a speedie way, to notifie it unto the Countries round about, and that is by acclamations and shouting with the voyce, for from them the others receive it, and they againe by the same meanes make it knowne to their neighbours. They doe not suffer their Children (saith Caesar) when they are growne to ripenesse of yeares, to come unto them openly, because they should not neglect the service of the warres: and they thinke it an unseemely thing for the Sonne in his Childehood to sit in publick in the sight of his Father. The men doe make their wives a dowrie according to the portion which they receive with them, both which are put into one stock, so as that which ariseth from it is kept to their use: and which soever of the parties doth out-live the other, he or shee hath both parts with the use and profit which hath arisen from thence. The French women are beautifull, and like men for strength and stature, as Diodorus saith; they are fruitfull, and when they bring forth children, they give them good education. Servitude was usuall in France according to the manner of other Nations. And Caesar saith, lib. 6. that the most of them when they are oppressed either with debt or by great taxes, or by the power of great men, they betake themselves to the service of Noble-men, who have as much power over them, as Masters

have over their Servants: yet they use them with more humanity and curtesie than the Romans did. For the French Lords had these Servants, or (as Caesar calleth them by a French word) Ambacti, who attended or them to increase their traine, and they us'd them in service of warre. Moreover they commonly used (as Diodorus witnesseth) thicke earthen Cups, and wrought with flowres on them. They did all suppe sitting not on seates but on the ground, upon the skins of wolves and dogges spread thereon, the younger youths serving them at meate. And neere unto them there was a fire made, and pots of flesh set thereon, especially with Swines flesh both fresh and salt. But for the most part, as Stra^^ writeth, their meate was Milke. Athenaeus thus delivereth his minde out of Posidonius concerning this Nation: The French use to drinke upon a litle hay spread under them, having litle woodden Tables before them. Bre^^ (which, as Plinie noteth, they make light with leaven) is there a comm^^ foode. They use much rosted and broyled flesh: and they take up whole joynts (...) both hands like Lions, tearing them in pieces with their teeth, and that wha^ they cannot pull in pieces, they cut it with a litle knife. Those that live (...) Rivers or the Sea-coasts have fish as a common service at their Table, wh^^^ they broyle on fire with salt, vineger, and cummin, which they put also in (...) drinke. And a litle afterward he saith, The rich and wealthy men doe dri^^^ wine which is brought out of Italie or out of Massilia, and that either pure by it selfe, or sometimes mingled with a litle water. But Plinie reporteth lib. 22. cap. ult. that they make a kinde of drunken drinke of fruite. Diodo^^^ saith, that they made a drinke of Barley, which they called Zythum, and an other of water and honey.Their Habit. Concerning their habit, they wore a kinde of Cassock, as Strabo noteth, woven of thick wooll, this Garment they called Laena, by which is meant, as Ioseph Scaliger doth note, those garments which the French-men doe now call Lansanguies, quasi Laurangis, from the figure of a Laurell or Bay-leafe, which is like unto a Rhom^^^, The French did use loose or straite Breeches, which Tacitus cals a barbarous covering. Strabo saith, that the French in stead of Cloakes used to weare short Coates that reached downe but to the buttocks: the shape of which Garment may be seene in that which Germans commonly call Pallatrock, or by contraction Palt rock. Diodorus saith, that they use to weare Rings on all their fingers, and without distinction: Plinie in his naturall Historie lib. 33. cap. 1. saith, that they wore them onely on their middle finger. But of these things enough, I come to the particular parts of France.



BRITANY, NORMANDIE, and BELSIA.
BRITANNIA, commonly called Bretaigne, did receive both name, Lawes, and Inhabitants from the Brittaines, who being driven out of their Countrie by the Saxons, seated themselves there, in the reigne of Vortigerne,The Countrie whence so called. by whom they were called from thence to ayde him against the Scots. It may bee, that before this time there were some Colonies of Brittaines in this part of France, which being then increased by the exiles and banished men of Brittaine, they used the same violence to the Aremoricans which they had suffered at home, and expulsed them, as Scaliger saith in his Description of Cities,
Vicit Aremoricas animosa Britannia Gentes,Et dedit imposito nomina prisca jugo.The Brittaines the Aremoricans orecame,And gave unto the Countrie their owne name.
From these Armoricans, the Countrie was heretofore called Armorica, especially that part of it which lyeth toward the Sea, and is now called Lower-Brittany: For, as Camden witnesseth, Armor doth signifie, in the ancient Brittish Speech, that which lyeth neere or upon the Sea. On the East it hath Normandie, and the Cenomani Inhabitants of Le Maine, and the Andegavenses Inhabitants of Aniou:The Situation. and on the South it hath Poictou: the other sides are enclosed with the Brittish Sea. It runneth forth into the Sea farre beyond all the other Provinces, like a Peninsula, whence it is not unfitly called the Horne of France, and doth resemble the shape of a shooe-sole, the exterior part whereof being round looketh toward the Sea, the inward part toward the Mediterranean. The length thereof is sixe dayes journey, and the breadth thereof three. It is a pleasant and fruitfull Countrie.The fruitfulnesse of the Soyle. It hath many faire medowes and Pastures for Cattell to graze in: and also veines of Silver, Iron, and Lead. The Brittaines grew on a suddaine so powerfull, that they opposed the Gothes, and hindered them from taking possession of all France; for their King Riothimus brought 12 thousand Brittaines to ayde the Romans against the Gothes, as Iornandes reporteth. Callimachus also witnesseth, that they were at the Battell against Attila. And a weighty argument to prove the power of the Brittaines is, that the Kings of France granted this Countrie (of the conquest whereof they despaired) to the Normans, as being more accustomed to warre, to subdue and conquer it.The ancient Government. Neither did this counsell want good successe: for the fiercenesse of the Brittaines was taken off by the Normans sword, and so it became to bee obedient to them, whereas it was subject before to the Kings of France. Afterwards it had Dukes of its owne; the last of them was Duke Francis,

who dying in the yeare 1490, left one onely Daughter to bee t^^ inheritrix thereof. Shee being betroathed to Maximilian Archduke (...) Austria and King of the Romans, passing through France, was taken a way by Charles the eigth, who afterward maried her: by which marriage Brittaine was annexed to the Crowne. It is now two-fold, the Higher and the Lower, that being neere to Liger, this to England; and it is otherwise called Ripiensis.The Cities. The Metropolis of the Higher Brittaine is the Citie commonly calledThis Citie is by some called also Corbilum. Nantes, Ptolemie cals it Kondiovi^^^ Nannetum, as Ioseph Scaliger and others doe thinke. It was heretofore the Seate of the Dukes of Brittaine having the title of a Countie, and (...) belongeth to the Dukes eldest Sonne. It is situated neere Liger, and (...) other litle Rivulets in a convenient place, not farre from the Sea, being a Bishops Seate, as also the foure other Townes following, Vrbs Red^ca or Rhenes, Condate Redonum, as Ptolemie cals it, and as Antoninus C^^date: Dolum, now a Towne, but heretofore a Castle commonly called Dol or Doul, and Fanum Briocense commonly called S. Brien, a fa^^ Town where there is a high rock which affordeth an harbour for ships, and a Castle built thereon for the defence of the Citie. There is moreover the Towne of Sanctus Machlovius, called in their owne language S. Malo: And Dina a very faire Towne, which the Dukes of Britt^^^ sometime much delighted in. There are also other Townes of Highe^ Brittany as Rieulx, Chasteau-briant, Lambellum, Vitray, Iugon, S. A^ll^^ du Cormier, Montcontour, Plerel, Iocelin, Malestroit, Pontigni, S. Iulian, and Encenis: Lastly toward Poictou, Clisson, RaiZ, and others. In the Lower Brittaine there are these famous Townes and Cities: Venetia now called Vannes, Fane de S. Paul, S. Paul de Leon, Triguier, Blavet, Morl^^^, Quimpelray, Conquerneaux, Quimpercorentin, S. Renant des bois, and others. The Dominions are the Countie of Montford, the Vicountship of R^b^^, and Grello,The Rivers. the principall place thereof is Chasteau Andron. Also the Countrie of Gueel, Baignon, Montfort, and Vannetais. The Rivers of Brittaine are Liger,The Sea. Rausa, Ella, and others. The Brittish Sea is fit for traffique, and out of it the Inhabitants doe extract salt, which being hardened in the Sunne,The Havens. they sell to the neighbour-countries. As for the Havens, besides the above-named Cities and Townes, these Townes doe afford the most convenient, to wit, Brest, Ancrayum, Hancbont, and Pontsecrot, where great plenty of Oysters are gotten. The Archbishop of Dol hath these Bishopricks under him, the Bishoprick of Nantes, of Vannes, of S Brien, in which three they speake both the French and the Brittish Speech: also the Bishoprick of Cornovaille, S. Paul de Leon, and Triguier; in which the Brittish Speech, which they call Briton Britona^^ is in use, which they suppose was the Language of the ancient Trojanes. Also the Bishopricks of Saint Malo, Rhenes. All the Inhabitants have not the same cheerfulnesse of minde,Their manners. nor the same curtesie: the most of them are warie and desirous of gaine, and they are wont to debate of weightie matters amongst their cups.
Normandie whence so called.NORMANDIE was so called from the Northerne people, for N^^ in the German Speech signifies the Northerne part of the world, and Man joyned with it is as much to say as the North-men. It is a Countrie of France which was given as an habitation to men that came from the
map of Britain, Normandy, and BelsiaBRITANY, NORMANDIE, and BELSIA.

Northerne part of the world out of Denmarke and Norwey, the inc^^sions of the Normans into Germany and France are signes hereof. Normandie is divided on the West from Brittaine by the River Crenon,The Situation. on the North it is bounded with the Ocean, on the South with the Cenoma^ that inhabite Le Maine, and on the East it hath France properly so called, from which it is divided by the River Epta: All the Countrie therfore doth not belong to Gallia Lugdunensis, but some part of it doth appertaine to Belgia. A good foot-man can scarce travell over it in sixe dayes. It is a fruitfull Countrie, and hath abundance of Corne, besides plentie of Apples and Peares,The fruitfulnes of the Soyle. that the Inhabitants doe make their drinke of them, and transport them to forraine Lands: there are also gre^^ store of Cattell. Rollo a Norman, making cruell inrodes and incursio^ into those parts of France which are neere theHee so plagued and ransacked the Sea-Townes, that it vvas inserted in the Letanie, From plague, pestilence, and the furie of the Normans good Lord deliver us. Sea-coast, and from thence into those which lye more inward, brought Charles the Si^pe the King of France into so great a strait, that hee married his Daughte^ Gilla to Rollo, being converted to the Christian Faith, and gave him^ West-rich for her Dowrie, besides a great part of Brittaine. Hee it was that was created the first Duke of Normandie. The chiefe Citie of it is Rotomagum commonly called Roan or Roven. It is seated by the River Sequana or Seyn on the South, and this River bringeth up great ships, (...) the great increase of traffique; on the East it hath the lesser Rivers ^^^cus and Aubetta; and on the North it hath faire fields, medowes, and high mountaines. The Seyne here hath a faire Bridge over it, curiously and artificially built, so that it is as great a wonder as any in France (...) it is built of Free-stone, and hath strong Pillars and faire Arches, very broad and high, to the number of thirty and one. This Citie is fam^^s for the Archbishoprick and Parliament held there. There are also these Townes, Aurenches, Eureux, Bayeux, Sais, Constances, Lisieux, Al^^^^, Aumale, Longue-ville, Eu, Harcourt, Tancarville, Maleurier, Mortam, M^gomery, Thorigni, Gisors, Caulx, etc. Some make Normandie two-fold, the Higher and the Lower. In the higher there are three Dukedomes, Alencon, Aumale, and Longue-ville. The Counties are Eu, Har^^^^, Eureux, Tancarville, Maleurier, Mortaine, and Mongomme^^. This Memandie doth also containe that part of the Countrie which is commo^^^ called Vult, in which is Gisors or Caesortium the Metropolis of the C^^^tie, and the Baronie le Aigle. The Lower is divided into lesser pa^^s which are thus called, Caulx, Bession, Constantine, Hovivet, Royau^^^ Yvetot,The Ecclesiastick State. and Le vaulx de Vire. In Normandie is the Archbishop of (...) under whom are these Bishops, the Bishop of Sais, of Constances, of L^eux, of Aurenches, of Baieux, and of Eureux. All the Countrie is naturally hot, and subject to no forraine Lawes: They live according to their owne Customes,Their Government. which they very stiffely defend. They are very cunning and contentious, but otherwise given to Learning and Religion.
BELSIA, commonly called La Beausse, is a very drie Countrie, and wanteth water very much; yet it is fruitfull, and hath abundance of Corne:The fertility of the Soyle. It is three-fold, the Higher, the Midlemost, and the Lower; the Higher being called Le haut Beausse, beginneth at a Village which is commonly called Ablys, reaching to the Countrie of the Carnutes or

Carnoti, and farther. There are in it the Countrie of the Carnutes,The Situation the Dukedome of Andegavium or Aniou, and the Countie of Perche. The Territorie of the Carnutes, commonly called the Countrie of Chartrain, cleaveth on one side to the Countie of Perch, and on the other sides to the Dukedome of Orleance. It is inferiour to no other part of France, both for fruitfulnesse and pleasantnesse, for it aboundeth with all kinde of Corne, Fruite, and Cattell, and is not wanting in Wine. The chiefe Towne is called Carnutum, Ptolemie cals it Antricum,The Cities. but now it is called Ch^tres. To this Territorie are wont to bee reckoned the Counties of Dr^ux and Montfort, wherein are two Townes of the same names. The Dukedome of Andegavium hath an especiall and peculiar Table to it selfe. The Countie of Perch is divided into two parts, the one whereof is called the Lower, commonly le Perche Govet, the chiefe Town whereof is Nogent Retrou: the second is called the Higher, in which is the Towne Mortaigne. The third is the Midle, which lyeth on either side of the Bankes of Liger, from Roven to Vendomium or Vendosme; and from hence on the right-hand Banke of the same River Liger it extendeth it selfe from Castellodunum even to the Countrie of Touraine. It excelleth the other parts of Belsia in fertilitie. Lower Belsia remaines. It is all Field-ground and plaine, abounding with Corne, so that it is accounted the Barne or Store-house of France.It vvas anciently called Genabum, but in these times Aurelia, for that in the year 276. The Emperour Aurelius built it out of the ruines of old Genabum. It lyeth betweene the Bishopricks of Orleance and Chartres, and runneth out from the Towne Estampes toward the East to Sens, and on the South to the Bridge of Orleance. In this Countrie is Aurelia commonly called Orleance, being situated neere the River Liger. It is honoured with the title of a Dukedome, and adorned with an Universitie. Heere are also the Territories of Lorriacum and Solonium, and the Archbishoprick of Tours, which hath under it the Bishop of Le Mans and Angiers: As for the Bishops of Chartres and Orleance, they are under the Bishop of Sens in Campania.



LEMOVICIVM
LEMOVICIVM was so called from the chiefe Citie (...) movicum;The names, and whence so called.The Situation. but it is not knowne from whence the (...) thereof is derived. Some doe referre it to Lemovices, (...) first establisher of this Countrie. It is commonly ca^ Pais ou compte deIt is called Limosin, quasi in limo sita. Limosin. On the North and North (...) side of it lyeth Berry; on the East Burbon, on the South and South (...) Arvernia, on the West and West-South-West Pericors: and lastly o^ North-West Poictou. There is a great ancient Elme standing N^ward betweene the Village called La Maison Nefue (from the new (...) that is in it) and Argentonium (a Towne of Berry) toward the No^ which doth bound and limit foure Countries, Berry, Burbon, Arv^ and Lemovicium, so that it is reported, that the foure Princes of (...) Countries did heere talke and conferre together, and every one of the stood in his owne Territorie. The Soyle is not every where eq^ fruitfull,The qualitie of the Soyle. being, for the most part, somewhat barren, yet it produceth (...) kinde of fruites, especially Wheate, Barley, a kinde of Graine (...) Panicum, Chesse-nuts, and Wine, but of an inferiour small kinde, ye^ the lower parts of Lemovicium they have a richer sort. Some (...) have the Lemovicians (for so Pliny calleth the ancient Inhabitants, wh^ Strabo calleth Lemobikes, and Ptolemie Lemovikoi, from the Citie L^vick) to be the native and ancient Inhabitants of this Countrie, and (...) make Lemovices to bee their Founder, being descended from the G^ritae or Galatae,The ancient Government. as some doe thinke. Some doe suppose, that hee was (...) the blood of the great Lybian Hercules, who when he had come thre^ Spaine, and passed over the Pyrenaean Mountaines, lived a while in Fr^^ This is peculiar to this Province onely of all France, that whereas W^ters doe onely name other Provinces of France, and doe not ment^ from whence the people of the Cities were so called, heere the conu^ happeneth: for Caesar maketh mention of the Lemovitians and their ^tie, and writeth, that they were the first that yeelded unto him, for the (...) were lovers of peace, and haters of discord. But after that the Le^^^cians had made a league with Caesar, they obeyed a Prince who was jo^ned in confederacie with the Romans, to whom they were subject u^ the Gothes did repell them, and possessed all Aquitania. They write th^ the French-men afterward, having driven out the Gothes, did governe (...) Lemovicians, and did set Earles and Dukes to rule over them, the one (...) manage their Battels, the other to administer Justice. The most (...) divide Lemovicium into two parts, the Higher and the Lower. Le fl^ and bas Limosin. The Higher (which is properly called Limosin) is plai^ than the lower part,The Cities. and the Metropolis thereof is Lemovicum. So ma^ doe thinke that A. Hirtius did call it lib. 8. de Bello Gallico, but now it (...) called Limoges: Fulvius Vrsinus calleth it Limonum, by the authoritie (...) ancient Bookes; Ptolemie cals it Ratiaston in Aquitania, as Ioseph Sca^ writing to Merula supposeth, Villonovanus also assenting to him. (...) Bertrandus thinketh that it is called Rahastum in stead of Raiz, by the (...)

map of Lemousin^EMOVICIVM.

finitie and likenesse of names. This Citie is seated partly in a Vale, and partly on the top of a litle Hill, being well fortified with a Castle, and strong Wals: it hath abundance of water, which springeth from a cleare Fountaine in the higher part of the Citie. This Citie is the Nurserie of diligence and industrie, and the prison-house of sloth and idlenesse. The women doe honour and much esteeme of chastitie and mercifulnesse. It is the Seate of a Bishop. Heere are also other Townes, which in the Language of the Inhabitants are called La Soubsterraine, L^ Boisson, Barat, Dorat, Consolat, and others, which for brevities sake I omit. Amongst them Chassusio is not to be forgotten, as being famous for the yearely Faires of Cattell and horses, which are kept there on Saint Georges day. There are also Abbies in this hither part of the Countrie, amongst the which are the Abbies of Grandimont, and S. Leonard. The lower part of Lemosin, being more mountainous than the higher, is properly called La Marche de Limosin, limited with Avernia and Perigort. The chiefe Citie thereof is Tutela or Tulla, commonly called Tulle, being situated in a rugged mountainous place; and being the Seate not onely of a Bailiffe, but of a new Bishop, built out of the ruines of an old Monasterie. In Latine hee is called Tutelensis Episcopus. There is also Vsarche or Vsarche, a pleasant Towne, having a sweete Ayre, and seated neere the River Vezer. Fame boasteth, that this Towne is impregnable, and that it cannot be taken; whence there is a Proverbe, Cui Vsarchae est d^mus, arcem eum possidere in Lemovicum ditione: i. Hee that hath an house in Vsarcha, hath, as it were, a Castle in the Countrie of Lemosin. Histories doe speake much of the vertue of the Citizens, and doe report, that they resisted the English, even when they conquered all Aquitania, and that they remained constant and faithfull to their Prince the King of France. There is the Towne Briva, seated on the pleasant and fertile Plaine, environed with woods, and having many Vineyards: It is the Seate of a Chancellour. Heretofore, it is thought, it belonged to the Countrie of Perigort, and that Charles the sixth King of France did joyce it to Limosin. There are also other Townes, as Treignac, Donzenac, Alessac,The Families. Bellus-locus, Meissac, Vsset, and Bello-mon. There are many illustrious Families in this Countrie;The Nobles. in the Higher there are the Families of Pi^^re-Bussire, Chasteau-neuf, and Carsic, which are honoured with Vicountships, also Roche. Covart which is one of the ancientest Families in Aquitania, Maygnac, and others. In the lower part is Pampadoura, Aument, Roffignac, San-Iala, Gemma, and infinite others. The Inhabitants of L^movicium are very sparing in their meate and drinke,Their manners. being content with a litle; they hate dainty meates, but are great eaters of bread, so that the Proverb saith, A Lemovician is a Bread-devourer. In the Villages they doe not use to drinke Wine. They are industrious, ingenious, and warie, as being very provident in all things. The Common-people are covetous, and sluttish in their houses; the Nobility are magnificent, of a high spirit, and liberall. The most of them doe live untill they be very old, for there are those which doe see their Grandchildrens Children. They say, that heere neere Cousins, without any dispensation from the Pope, doe marry amongst themselves, and do not part their goods Belleforestius writeth, that hee saw Families, in which a hundred linkt together

by the affinity of marriage did live together, so that they seemed to be like Colledges. I will heere adde for conclusion that which Iohannes Puncteius writeth concerning the originall of the Lemovicians.


Ecce Lemoviculae sedes gratissima genti, etc.
Behold the Lemovicians pleasant Seate
In fortie five degrees and halfe compleate
Of Latitude, which doth it selfe stretch forth
To take a view of the cold frozen North.
The Longitude even from the setting Sunne,
Stretching it selfe toward the East, doth runne
As farre as the Avernian Mountaines, and
Toucheth beside the Biturigian Land.
But where that Phoebus dips his horses in
The Sea, till they to plunge therein begin,
Angolmum it doth view, and doth behold
Part of Pictavia: as towards the cold
North, on the Biturigians it confines;
And Southward to the Petragorians joynes,
With whom in manners they doe more agree
Than with the others that their neighbours bee.
Faire Aquitania doth containe this Land,
Which for good manners comes behinde none; and
Vienna, that doth from the Mountaines flowe,
Watereth the upper grounds as it doth goe
With winding streames, which runne out many wayes,
While thousands of faire kine doe by them graze:
This the Inhabitants in their speech doe call
Vigana, which from thence doth headlong fall
By Lemovicium's Citie, which doth lye
Part in a Vale, part on a Hill so high,
Where Saints doe glorie in its Churches state,
Which unto holy Stephen's consecrate.
Fame doth report, that French-men of the line
Of Gomer held this Countrey at that time,
Nohemus off spring troupes of men did leade,
Which into divers Countries they did spread:
From thence the true originall then came
Of Lemovicians, who ne're chang'd their name,
Vnlesse you'le have the Phrygians for to change
Their Seates, while they did with Alvernus range,
And Limovices for to finde new land,
And ease their griefe which they at home sustain'd.
The Soyle is barren whence no fruite doth grow,
And no faire swelling Rivers in it flow.
It flourisheth with men that in it are,
And is enrich't with many kindes of ware.
The Land is strong in Armes, and heretofore
The valiant English could not passe it o're,
But were enforced on the mountaines high
The French-mens quick resisting force to trie:
Yea this same Citie valiantly sustain'd
The Visigothian siege, and honour gain'd:
Nor could the English furious attempt
Oppresse it, when to take it they were bent:
And after threescore yeares were past, the Towne
And wals thereof decayed, there were showne
Many strange Reliques which most ancient were,
For some the face of Senatours did beare.
And quick-silver even by the Pensils Art,
Or by Perillus skill, did there impart
Much grace unto the halfe-consumed eyes
Of the dead statue which unmoved lyes.
Moreover, for the wals on Southerne side
A Lionesse in shape may bee espi'd.
Who folding two whelps with her crooked feete
Hath these three Verses underneath her writ.



The Lionesse doth cruell Dukes bring forth, and also crowne,


The madde and wilie off-spring doth this nurse oppressing frowne,


But suffers underneath the weight wherewith hee's pressed downe.






SANTONIA: OR LE PAIS DE XAINGTONGE. THE ECCLESIASTICALL STATE.
Santonia hath a Bishoprick, namely of XAINTOGNE.
SANTONIA, called commonly Le Pays de Xaintogne, or Xaintongeois, and by the ancient Inhabitants the Santones, the Marshalship of Guienna, hath on the North Poictou,The Countrey whence so called. on the East Limosin and Perigort, on the South the River Garumna, and on the West the Ocean,The Situation. where are the Islands commonly called Les Isles d' Oleron, in which there are great store of Cunnies and Hares. Heretofore the boundes of Santonia were larger, which wee may collect out of the Author of the Ephemerides concerning the French warre, who writeth, that it reached almost to the borders of Tholous; and that in the geeat warre against Caesar, the Councell of the Princes of France did command, that twelve thousand men should bee levied out of it, when eight thousand onely were levyed out of Poictou, and ten thousand out of Lemosin. The Countrey of Santonia doth abound with Corne and Wine,The fruitfulnesse of the Soyle. and it is counted one of the best Countries in France, as sending forth many commodities into Spaine, England, and other Countries. The Santones were formerly seated heere, for Caesar with others mentioneth them lib. 1. de Bello Gallic. In some of his Bookes they are called Xantones: In his second Booke hee cals them Santoni; and lib. 3. de Bell. Civili, Santonae: Strabo calleth them Santonoi, and Ptolemie Santoones, as Stephanus writeth. The chiefe Citie of this Countrie is Santonum, which in the native Language is called Saintes, by a plurall termination, as all the other French Townes which end in S, namely Paris, Rheims, and others. It was built by the ancient Frenchmen; and no doubt but that Towne which was anciently called Mediclanum is this Xantonum or Santonum: for Antoninus cals it Mediolanum Santonum: the Itinerarie Table corruptly cals it Mediolanum Saneon, and Strabo and Ptolemie call it Mediolanon. Besides, there are divers things which shew the antiquity thereof, as first many pieces of ancient wals standing heere and there; also famous Amphitheaters without the wals toward the West; thirdly in the Bridge over the RiverThis River is called by Ptolemie Canentelum. Caroutonum or Charente, which floweth by the Citie, there is an old arch with a double

inscription, on one side whereof there are these words, Caesari Nep. Di^ Iulii Pontifici Auguri; on the other are some letters which are almost worne out, so that nothing can be gathered from them. Lastly there (...) many ruines of an Aquaeduct in the high way from Mediolanum to A^geriacum. This Citie is called Santonus by Ausonius in his 23 Epistle, (...) also by Lucan (if I bee not mistaken) lib. 1. And the same Auso^^ calleth the people Santones, Epist. 14. and 18: as also Tacitus lib. 5. (...) August. and Sidonius Apollinaris lib. 7. Epist. 6. It was called Me^num, for that the French-men (as T. Livius doth witnesse) did build in the Countrie of the Insubres or Mediolanenses, which is very likely, t^^ I may not say certaine with Causabone. If Strabo had more diligen^ considered and beheld the Countrie lying round about this Citie, he would not have said, that it is sandie and barren, but that it is rich (...) fruitfull. The Citie is situated by the fertile River Carantonum, which riseth in a place commonly called Charemac, betweene the Townes ^moges and Angoulesme. It is an Episcopall Citie, whereof Belleforre^ numbreth 63 Prelates: S. Eutropius was the first, being sent thither (...) S. Clement. And hee, after hee had converted this people to the Ecclesiasticall Faith, suffered Martyrdome under the Emperour Domi^ The last is called by Belleforestius Tristamus Bisetus, or Tristand de (...) There is in this Citie the Monasterie of the Friars of the blessed Vl^ founded by Godfry Earle of Santonia, and his wife Agnes Anno 10^ The thirtieth Bishop of Santonum, being called Petrus Confoulanti, (...) build and reedifie the Bishops house in the yeare 1102, and caused ^^wals of the Cathedrall Church to bee repaired. After Mediolanum (...) as some Latine Writers doe call it Santonia) followes Rupella, called (...) their Language la Rochelle. This seemeth by the description of Ptole^ to be called Zantonoon akron, or Promontorium Santonum; but it is call^ by VillanovanusThis Citie is called by some Maluason. Blaye, which is interpreted Santonum Portus. The Citie is seated in the most fertile part of all France, neere the Bay of the Sea, which hath twice a day the Sea ebbing and flowing in it. It is (...) ancient, but lately built by the Kings of France, in regard of the comm^ditie of the Haven, and to represse the invasions of Pirates, who (...) waste the whole coast of Armorica. The conveniencie of the Haven (...) is so great, that the Citizens may have commerce with all Nations (...) Europe, and wage warre both by Sea and Land against their enemies for it is capable of many ships, it hath a great conveniencie for their ^ing in and comming out, and is a safe and excellent harbour for ther^ This Citie is thought to be impregnable by the strength of man, for great Bay of the Ocean doth fortifie the South side thereof, the No^ side the marishes and boggie places (commonly called Salantes) (...) strengthen: and the other parts are fortified with wals, ditches, tow^ and strong Forts, which have severall names, so that no Ordnance, (...) Cannon can make a breach into it. It is a free Citie, which former Pr^ces and others have adorned with many and great immunities and priviledges, and especially those which belong to Sea affaires, for the C^tizens chuse a Maior and Aldermen out of their owne Corporati^^ which governe the Citie, and they are not compell'd to admit of (...)Their freedome is now lost for they were lately compelled by the now King of France to receive a Garrison of Souldiers in the City, and to undergoe the yoake of subjection. forreine government, neither are they kept in awe by any Garrison^

map of Santonia^ANTONIA.

Souldiers. Rochelle did sustaine a grievous seige, in the 1573, by Henry of Valois Duke of Anjou, and afterward King of Poland and France, of whom all Historiographers doe make mention. In this siege, he did use the thunder and lightning of Ordnance both by Sea and Land, as also furious assaults, stormes of shot, scaling Ladders, underminings, and all manner of engines which could bee invented or used. And on the besieged side, you might have seene men, women, and children with great courage of minde the sustaine the furious assaults of their enemies, and with constancie and cheerfulnesse repaire the ruines of the wals, keepe down those that would have ascended up, drive back their enemies to their trenches, pursue them, and at last fight it out, for the most part, with good successe. Moreover you might have beheld them wearying the besiegers with daily sallying out upon them; and lastly subsisting after nine assaults, in which though their enemies did fight valiantly, yet they were enforced to retire with great losse. At length the Ambassadours of Polonia comming the 15 of Iune, that they might bring with them Henry Duke of Anjou, whom the States of the Kingdome had chosen for King, God used this as a meanes to free Rochelle, being now exhausted and drawne drie of Corne, and being weakned in warlike fortifications, besides the losse of many thousand men, for now the King by Articles of peace confirmed by his royall solemne edicts did grant, the Rochelle, Montalban, Nemansum, and other Cities which did defend themselves, should bee free to use their owneNow the Rochellers are compell'd by the now King of France, to exercise their Religion without the Citie. Religion, such an eve^^ had this grievous siege, which endured almost for seven moneths. In which time more than twentie thousand men perished in conflicts, sallies, besieges, by wounds, hunger, and sicknesse. Rochelle is a consta^^ Seate for presidiall Senatours, and other Lawyers. The other Cities and Townes of note in Santonia, are commonly called S. Iean d' Angely, (...) or Pont l' Oubleze, Blaye, Taillebourg, Borbesieux, Brovage, and Iosac, S. I^^^ d' Angely, otherwise called Angeliacum and S. Ioannes de Angeria, is a new Citie, although it be one of the speciallest and greatest of all S^^nia. It renewed its name from an Abbey, which was built in that place, to the honour of S. Iohn the Baptist; the foundation whereof happened to be in the reigne of King Pipin, who kept his Court in the Pallace of Angeria, neere the River commonly called Boutonne, in the Countrie of Alnia; for hither (as they say) came certaine Monkes out of the Holy Land, who brought with them the head of S. Iohn Baptist, by whose comming, the King obtained a famous victorie over his enemies, and therefore in remembrance thereof hee built in that place where was the Pallace of Angeria, the Abbey of Saint Iohn, there placing religio^s men, and endowing them with great revenues, that they might there devote themselves to the service of God: now by this meanes people flocking thither, and building round about the Abbey, by degrees it began to be a Citie, as it is now at this day, and was called by the name of S. Iohn. All these things happened about the yeare of our Lord seven hundred sixtie eight, while Pipin waged warre against Gaifer King of Aquitania, whom hee overcame, as it may bee read in the Historie of the Foundation of this Abbey. This Citie the Duke of Andegavium

or Aniou did besiege in the yeare 1569, and it was yeelded to him after 50 dayes siege, the King granting the Citizens these conditions: That they should march forth of the Citie with their Armour, Horses, and Colours displayed. Santonia raiseth great store of money by its Corne, which the Spaniards every yeare doe transport from thence, or Merchants which sell it unto them. And the Citie of Rochelle is very rich, in regard of its neerenesse to the Sea, and especially because of the traffick of the English and Dutch, whose shipping doe often arrive there.



AQVITANIA.
AQVITANIA, (whose Southerne part is delineated (...) this Table) some would have so called from the wa^^^^ wherewith it doth abound;The Countrie whence so called. and some derive it from (...) Towne Aquis, or Aqs. It was extended (according (...) Ptolemie) from the Pyrenaean Mountaines even to Lige^^^* But now (as Ortelius witnesseth) from the River Garumna to the Ocean* and the Pyrenaean Hils. Towards the North-West it hath the Ocea^ which is called the Aquitanick Bay; on the West Spaine, on the No^^^ Gallia Lugdunensis, and on the South Gallia Narbonensis. In it (according to Mercators account) there are five Dukedomes,Vasconia. twentie Counties, (...) sixe Seigniories. The Dukedomes are Vasconia or Guienna, Avernia, the Countrie of Engoulesme,The Situation. Berrie, and Turonia. Vasconia or Guienna being situated neere the Sea,The fruitfulnesse of the Soyle.The Cities. betweene Bayon and Burdeaux, yeeldeth g^^^^ store of wine, which is transported from thence into other parts of ^^rope. The chiefe Citie in it is Burdigala or Burdeaux; the other Cities (...) Nerac, Condom, Mirande, Nogerat, Orthes, Bazes, and Dax are of no g^^^^ note: yet Dax is famous for her hot Fountaines, Salt-pits, and Ir^^ mettle. Burdigala, so called by Ptolemie, is situated in a marsh, which the overflowing of Garumna maketh, and is adorned both with a Parliament and an University,Avernia. in which the Professours of all Arts and Sciences doe instruct Youth. Avernia, or the Dutchie of Avergne is partly (...) plaine,The Situation. and partly a mountainous Countrie. It hath on the East F^^^^ on the South Languedock; on the West Quercy, Perigort, and Lem^^^, and on the North Berry and Bourbon. Avernia is two-fold, the Higher and the Lower. The Higher, which is called Le hault pays d' Averg^^ and (...) Avernia,The Cities and Townes. hath one prime Citie in it calledThis Citie is called by Ptolemie Rovesium and Ru^sium, and by Mercator Rieux. S. Flour, being seated on a high Rock: the other Townes are commonly called Ori^^^, Carlatum, Muratum, Buillons, le Puy, etc. There is also in it the Territor^^^ and Bayliwick of Beaucaire. The Lower is rich and very fertile, being full of excellent Wine, Fruit, Honey, Saffron, Cattell, Wooll, Me^dowes, and Woods. The Metropolis of it isThis Citie was anciently called Arverna and Gergobia. Clarimontium, commonly called Clermont: It is proude of her Castle, and is a Bishops Seate. The other Cities or Townes are 13 in number, of whichCalled by Antoninus Sirion, and by others Serion. Engoulesme. The Situation. The fruitfulnesse of the Soyle.The Cities and Townes.Turonia. Rion, Monfe^^^^ and Isoire doe excell the rest. Engoulesme on the North joyneth to P^^ctou, on the West to Santonia, on the South to Perigort, and on the Ea^^ to Lemosin. It hath abundance of very good Wine, fruit and Hemp^^* The Metropolis of it is Inculisma now called Engoulesme, being an ancient Citie. It is seated on a hill which hangeth over the River Char^^^ in a remote place from the Kings high way. The lesser Towns are those which are commonly called Marton, Chasteau, Neuff, Blaisac, Chaba^^^^, Confollant, Cuffec, Aigres, Gourville, la Roche-Foucault, Marveil, La^z^^, Villebois, Momberon, and Bouteville. Concerning the Countrie of Bo^^^ wee will speake in a Table by it selfe. Turonia commonly called T^^raine, beginneth somewhat beyond the Citie Amboise, towards Bel^^^^* and endeth at the towne which is commonly called la Chapelle Blanc^^*The Situation.

map of Aquitania^QVITANIA.

being subject in spirituall matters to the Bishops of Anjou and Chous^^. For they appoint and set downe limits betweene the Turonians and A^digavians. The sweetnesse of the Ayre doth make this pleasant country more delightfull, so that it is called the Garden and Orchard of France. It is fruitfull in Wine and Corne, and hath woods convenient to hu^^ in.The Cities. The Metropolis or Mother-citie of this Dukedome is Caesarodunum Turonum, called in French Tours. This Citie excelleth for wealth, and faire edifices or buildings. On the East side the River Ligeris or Liger, on the South and West sides the River Idra doe flow neere unto it. The lesser Townes in it are Amboise, Langes, Chinon, and others. The Counties of Aquitaine are Tholouse, Narbonne, Albret, Armignac, Bigorre, B^^, Estrac, Commingeois, and Foix. Also Ventadour, Pompadour, Montign^^ i^ Poictou,The State Ecclesiastick. Perigort, Fronssac, Esparre, Lymosin, Touraine, Marche, the Vicou^tie of Aulnay, and Basque. The Signories or Lordships are Planes, Gra^^, Chaloces, Saintonge, and Aulnis. There are moreover five Archbishops, first the Archbishop of Narbon, under whom are these suffragans, to w^^, the Bishops of Carcassone, Agde, of S. Pont de Tomieres, Alet, Memph^^, Elne, Besiers, Lodeut, Nismes, and Vsetz. Secondly the Bishop of Bourges, under whom are ten Bishops, namely the Bishop of Clermont, of R^^des, of Lymoges, of Mande, of Alby, of Cahors, of Castres, of Tulies, of S. Fl^^^, and of le Puy. Thirdly the Bishop of Burdeaux, under whom there are eight Bishops, namely of Poictiers, of Lucon, of Mailezais, of Sainctes, of Engoulesme, of Agen, of Codon, and of Sarlac. Fourthly the Bishop of Tholouse, which hath these Bishops under him, the Bishop of Pami^s, of Mirepoys, of Montauban, of La Vour, of Rieux, of Lombes, and of ^^pons. Fifthly, the Bishop of Aux, under whom are the Bishops of A^^, of Comminge, of Tarbe, of Basas, of Lescure, of Lictoure, of Conser^^s, of Oleron, of Bajone, and of Adure, which some call Ayre.


The Kingdome of Arelatum.
THe Kingdome of Arelatum is so called from the Citie Arelatum. It containeth those Countries which lye betweene the Rivers R^^danus and the Alpes.Sabaudia whence so called. And there are in this tract Sabaudia, Delphin^t^^ or Daulphine, and Provinciae. There are divers conjectures concerning the name of Sabaudia or Savoy; some derive it a Sabatiis vadis, from the S^batican Fordes; others give it that name quasi Sabbatorum Pratum, which Volaterranus calleth Sabaudiensis Auwe, that is, the Sabaudian Land: some would have it called Savoy, quasi Saul voje, a way through Ofiers and Willowes, or quasi Sauve Voye, that is, the safe way; which I know not who is feined to have made by fabulous Writers, as being before dangerous in regard it was full of theeves and robbers. Neere to Sabaudia on the North lyeth the Countrie of Burgundie,The Situation. and Helvetia, having the Lake Lemanus lying betweene them: On the East it hath Valesia and Pedemontium, which have no certaine bounds, but that high Mountaines doe runne betweene them; and on the South and the West is Daulphine, with some part of Rhodanus, separating Sabaudia from the

Dukedome of Burgundie. The Ayre of Sabaudia is pure,The fertility of the Soyle. and the country is very mountainous. In the Valleyes and Plaines the Soyle is very pleasant and fruitfull, especially toward the North, neere the Lake Lemanus, where it yeeldeth most excellent rich Wine, which is called Ri^^lium, from the banke of the Lake. The pastures doe bring up and feed all sorts of Cattell, and especially there where the lesser Mountaine of S. Bernard doth rise in heigth. The Metropolis or Mother-citie of Sa^^^dia is Chamberiacum commonly called Chamberri, in which there is a Parliament. The Citie is seated in a Vale, and encompassed round about with Mountaines. The Counties of Geneva, Morienne, and Taren^^is, the Marquesate of Susa, and some other Signiories are described with Sabaudia as parts thereof: and lastly the Countrie of Bressa. The Countrey of Geneva Antoninus calleth Cenava. It is a very ancientThis Citie is in compasse about two English miles, and is supposed to containe about 17000 Soules. City, ^eated by the Lake Lemanus, and divided in two parts, which stand upon the two bankes of the River Rhodanus, but joyned together by a wooden bridge, on both sides whereof there are houses, though the greater part of houses be toward the South, and the lesser toward the North. The Countrie of Morienne doth extend it selfe to the River Archus, where there is a faire Towne called S. Iean de Morienne. The Countie of Taren^^se, is almost enclosed with the Alpes, and the Rivers Archus and Ara: ^t is so named from the Citie Tarantais, which the Inhabitants doe now ^all Moustier, the Germans Munster in Tartaansen, and the Latine Writers Munsterium. The Marqueship of Susa is so called from the Towne Susa, ^ot farre from the head of the River Doria or Duria,Daulphine whence so called. which doth dis^harge and exonerate it selfe into the River Padus, called by the Italians ^o. There are also other Townes of Sabaudia, as Aiguebelle, Mont Belial, Bell^y, Ni^y, Montmelian, In^illes, etc. Delphinatus followeth. Some would derive the name thereof a Castello Delphini, which is called in French ChasteanSome say it had its name from Dolphine, wife to Guigne the second Prince of this Province. Dolphine. Provincia cleaveth unto it on the South, and ^resse on the North, the River Rhodanus running betweene them: on the West side is the Countie of Viennois, and on the East lyeth Pedemontium,The Situation. ^nd Sabaudia. The Archiepiscopall Cities heere, are Vienna and Ebro^num. Strabo calleth Vienna the Metropolis of the Allobrogians, Ptolemie ^ls it the Mediterranean Citie of the Allobrogians:The Cities. Stephanus calleth it ^^ennus, and it is commonly called Vienne. Ebrodunum Ptolemie cals ^^orodunum, and Strabo Epebrodunum. It is a famous Towne of the Ca^^igians of the maritime Alpes, which lye neere the Sea. Antoninus cal^^^h it Eburodunum, but in French it is called Ambrum. There are five ^^ties which have Bishops, Valentia, Dia, Gratianopolis, Augusta, and ^pingum. Valentia (according to Antoninus and Ptolemie) is common^^ called Valence, and is the title of a Duke. Dia is called by Antoninus (...) Vocontiorum, but commonly Dio, and is the Metropolis or chiefe ^^tie of the Countrie, which in French is called Pays de Diois. Gratia^^lis was heretofore called Cularo, Isidorus calleth it the Citie of Gra^^opolis, but it is commonly called Grenoble. Augusta, neere to the ^^^er Isere, Plinie cals Augusta Tricastinorum, where the great Senate of ^^lphine is kept, Sidonius Tricastina Vrbs, but now, as Ioseph Scaliger ^^leth, it is called S. Antony de Tricastin. That which Antoninus cals ^^ingum, or as some reade it, Vapincum, and the Itinerarie Table Gap,

is now called Caput agri, and in French Gapencois. It is environed ro^^^ with Mountaines. It was formerly, and is also at this day a famo^^ Towne; the Inhabitants doe call it Le col S. Digo. I passe by the lesse^ Townes. Provence is to be described next, but before I come unto it, (...) will adde something out of Mercator concerning the State Ecclesiastic^^ Heere are five Archbishops: as first the Archbishop of Tarentais in ^^baudia, under whom are the Bishops of Sitten and Augusta. 2ly the Arch-Bishop of Ambrum; under whom are the Bishops of Ligne, of Grasse, (...) Lena, of Niza, of S. Glande, of Valne, of Vap, which some call Gap: (...) Briancon, and of S. Pol. Thirdly the Archbishop of Vienne, to whom the^^ are sixe suffraganes, the Bishop of Valence and Dye, the Bishop of Viv^^ of S. Iean de Morienne, of Geneve, of Grenoble, and of Romans. Fourthly the Archbishop of Aix, under whom there are five Bishops, the Bis^^^ of Aps, of Frejul, of Sesteron, of Eres, and of Vapinte. Fifthly the Archbishop of Arelatum or Arles, under whom are the Bishops of M^s^^^ of Vasison, of Tricaste, of Cavallion, of Avignon, of Orange, of Carpe^^^ and of Tollon. The Archbishop of Lyons and Primate of all France, h^^^ his residence in the Citie of Lions, and hath foure suffragan Bishop^ under him, as the Bishop of Autun, of Mascon, of Chalon by the Ri^^^ Saone, and of Langres.



PROVINCIA, OR PROVENCE.
HItherto wee have described Aquitania and the Kingdome of Arelatum: Provincia followeth.The Countrie whence so called. This most excellent part of France from beyond Rhodanus even to the River Garumna was called Provincia, because the Romans many yeares before the Nativitie of Christ did reduce it into the forme of a Province, which name it still retaineth in a small portion thereof (wherein is Massilia and Aquae Sextiae) by way of excellencie, to declare that it had preheminence both in order and dignitie above all the Provinces of the Roman Empire. Daulphine lyeth neere to Provincia on the North side,The Situation. being parted from it with the Mountaines commonly called the Mountaines of Velay, and by a great part of the River Druentius or Durance, running betweene. It is enclosed on the East side by the Alpes and the River Varus, on the left hand banke whereof stands the Towne Nicaea, where Italie beginneth, on the South the French Sea beateth on it, and the Westerne bounds of it are partly the Principalitie of Arausio or Orange, and the Countie of Avenio or Avignon, which did formerly belong unto it, though now they appertaine to other Princes: and partly the whole River Rhodanus, as farre as Lions and Arelatum, belonging to the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of Languedock.The temper of the Ayre. The Ayre here is gentle, milde, and very pure. The Countrie doth produce not onely excellent Corne, but also Fruites, with litle labour or tillage:The fruitfulnesse of the Soyle. and heere is as great plenty of Rasons and Figges, as may furnish the greatest part of Europe. Heere is such great store of Rosemarie, Juniper-berries, Chesse-nuts, Pome-Citternes, Lemmons, Oranges, Saffron, Rice, and the like, as if the horne of plenty were poured forth upon this Countrie. The Vines yeeld excellent rich Wines heere, and the Soyle is every where very good and fruitfull. Concerning the ancient Earles of Provincia some things are to be noted: Wee reade in ancient Annals, that in the time of Ludovicus the eigth King of France,The ancient Government. Raymundus Berengarius was Earle of Provence, and that Charles Earle of Anjou, and Sonne to the afterward King Ludovicus did marrie Beatrice his onely Daughter and Heire, and by that meanes got this Country. After him succeeded Charles surnamed the Lame, being Prince of Salernum, and King of Naples. After him his Sonne Robert succeeded, being Duke of Calabria, and King of Naples; and after him his Grand-childe Ioane (whose Father Charles Duke of Calabria was dead before) for by the last Will of this Robert she was made Queene of Naples, and Countesse of Provence. This woman, that shee might be revenged on her Adversaries, did adopt Ludovicus of Anjou, Sonne to Iohn King of France, and left him her successor both in other Principalities, and also in this Countie. After this Ludovicus, his Sonne Ludovicus the second was made Earle; and next after him his Son

Ludovicus the third, who was also adopted by Ioane the second Que^^^ of Naples, to be King of Sicily, and Duke of Calabria; This Ludovicus ^^ving no issue, by the consent of the aforesaid Ioane, instituted his b^^ther Renatus to bee successor in those Principalities. And he being (...) willing to resigne his right in the Kingdome of Naples, and the Coun^^^^ of Provence, to Renatus Duke of Lotharingia, his Nephew did passe (...) over unto his brother Charles, Earle of Maine, who made (his so^^ Charles dying) Ludovicus the eleventh King of France his heire. So^^ would have it that Renatus made him heire after Charles, by his last w^^^ although Renatus Duke of Lotharingia did justly expostulate with (...) concerning the same. Heere dwelled heretofore the Salyi, the Aq^^ses, the Arelatenses, the Sextani, the Sentij, the Ebroduntij, the Di^^^^^ the Vesdiantij, the Sanicienses, the Nerucij, the Vencienses, the Vulgi^^^^ the Aptenses, the Reienses, the Ostaviani, the Commoni, the Foro-Iuli^^^^ the Segestorij, the Albici, the Oxubij, the Deciates, and others. There (...) in Provence under the Aquensian Parliament, besides many Town^ (...) no small note, two Cities which have Archbishops, and eleven (...) have Bishops in them. The Archiepiscopall Cities are Aquae Sextiae (...) Arelatum. The Latines, Paterculus, Solinus, and others, doe call the (...) Aquae Sextiae Colonia. Plutarch, (in the life of C. Marius) Sextilia, the ^^^^nerarie tables, Aquae Sestiae. The inscription of a stone at Lyons, (...) to S. Benedicts Church, Colonia Iulia Aquae. Lastly a certaine ancient ^^scription, and Vespasians coyne, Colonia Iulia, Aquae Sexiae, Legio 25. was called Aquae, because there are bathes of hot water, whence als^ is now called Aix; and it was called Sextiae, from C. Sextius, who (...) Consul in the yeare from the building of the Citie of Rome, 630. (...) he having subdued the Nation of the Salyi, built this Citie, to the (...) that hee might place a Roman garrison therein, and that hee might d^^^^ the Barbarians from those coasts, which open a way from Massilia (...) Italy: seeing the Massilians were not able to suppresse them, (you (...) reade Livy lib. 61. from the 10. cap.) But concerning the same, it (...) called Iulia Augusta, from C. Iulius Caesar Augustus, who did enl^^^^ it with colonies, bringing thither the old Souldiers of the 25 Legi^^^ The Parliament of Provence is held here, which therefore is called P^^liamentum Aquense. Partly at this Citie, and partly in Italie did C. ^^rius overcome the Cimbrians a people of Germanie, and the Tiguri^^, (...) Abrones, French Nations that banded themselves with them: of whi^^ Historie elsewhere. The second Citie Orosius and Ausonius (Lib. ^^urbibus in Epigraphe and ipso carmine 7o) do callIn this town was called a Councell by Constantine. An. 313. for the quiet establishing of the Church. Arelas, the same ^^^nius, elsewhere doth call it Arelatus: Caesar calls it Arelate; as also S^^^nius (in the life of Tiberius) Mela, and others. Strabo calls it Areleta, P^^lemie Arelaton, Salyorum Colonia, and Pliny, Arelate Sextanorum; but (...) by a word of the plurall number it is called Arles. Festus Avienus (...) report that the Graecians heretofore inhabiting it, did call it Thelinis. ^^lius Scaliger witnesseth that in a faire inscription on a pillar which (...) had seene, it is called Mamiliaria, but the reason why is unknowne. (...) Constantinus the Emperour, did enact and ordaine that it should be c^^led Constantia, and that the assemblies and conventions of seaven P^^vinces, namely of Vienne, of both the Narbons, of both the Aquitan^^, (...)

map of ProvencePROVENCE.

Novem-Populana, and the Maritime Alpes, should be held and kept there; and Ausonius calleth it Gallula Roma, in those verses which I mentioned before. It is a Citie seated neare Rhodanus, on the left hand ban^e thereof. The Itinerarie table placeth it on the right hand, where now stands Languedocke. Ausonius affirmeth that Arelatum is divided with the River Rhodanus flowing betweene. Whence hee maketh it twofold in his booke of Cities; because Rhodanus divideth and cutteth it into two parts. But now, the forme and face thereof being changed, it standeth wholly upon that banke of Rhodanus which lyeth towards Italie, and is environed on all sides with Marishes, in which fierce Oxen are bred. Hence it is thought that it was once farre greater, and some beleeve th^ the other part of the Citie, which flourished heretofore was wasted by the Gothes. It appeares in Ausonius that it was a Towne of traffique. And wee reade that the Kings of Burgundy did formerly keepe their residence therein, and afterward the Earles of Provence. D. Trophi^^ was the first Bishop thereof, who was the Apostle Pauls Disciple; and in the second yeare of Neroes raigne came into France. From this man as from a Fountaine, as Sosimus writeth, the Christian faith was diffused and dispersed through all France. It hath now a strong Castle, and is famous for its two Prelates heretofore, Honoratus and Hilarius. So much concerning the Archiepiscopall Cities of Provence; the Episcopall are eleven, amongst the which the chiefe is Massiliae: the Latines, and also some of the Graecians doe call it Masilia, Strabo, Stephanus, and ancient coynes do call it Massalia, Ptol. Masalia: but now it is commonly called Marseille. It was once a Colonie of the Graecian Phocoeans, and was built in the 45 Olympiad, as Solinus witnesseth in the dayes of King Turquine, as Iustine noteth (Lib. 43.) Plutarch in the life of Solon writeth that it was built by Protus, otherwise Protis. Strabo sheweth that it is seated on a rockie place, neare the mouth of the River Rhodanus, and it a remote part of the Bay, as it were in the corner of the Sea, as Iust^^^ saith out of Trogus. Moreover M. Tullius doth so praise the Commonwealth of the Massilians, that speaking in defence of Fontejus before the people of Rome, hee durst say, that their Citie did exceed not onely Greece, but almost all other Nations for discipline and gravitie. They reckon and begin the number of their Bishops from Lazarus, whom Christ raised from death. So much concerning Massilia, the other Episcopall Cities are Dine, which Ptolemy calls Dinia: Grasse, Gland^^^, or Glan^te, which learned Latine Writers doe call the Citie of Glana^^ca, and some Authors Glamnatena: They are deceived who make Plyn^^^, Mela's, and Antoninus his Glanum, to be the same with Glannate. For Antoninus placeth Glanum betweene Cabellio and Arles, from which Glanata is farre distant: so that this Glanum is not now knowne. Also Sanas or Sanitium, a Towne in the Maritime Alpes.This Towne is now called Venza. Vintium a Town not farre from Senas, called by Dion, Ventiar, Apta Iulia, which Ant^nnus calleth corruptly Avia Iulia, and Abte-julia for in the Itinerarie table it is called Apta Iulia, and is now called Apte: Ries, or Reius, which in the Itinerarie table is written Reis Apolinaris: Feriuls, which Plar^^^ writing to Cicero, calleth Forum Iulij; Ptolemy, Forum Iulium; Augustus coyne, Col. Iul. Octav. It is now a Sea or Haven Towne, Ciste^^

which Antoninus and the Itinerarie table calleth Segustero. Iosephus Scaliger (in his Letters to Merula) Gestro; and Pliny, Cessero: But Merula thinketh that Plinyes Cessero is the same with Ptolemies Cessero, now called Castres. Lastly Tolon, which the learned Latine Writers doe call Telonium, and Antoninus, Telo Martius, being a Towne seated within a Bay of the Sea; nine leagues from Massilia: so much concerning the Episcopall Townes. There are also other Townes no lesse famous and ancient, as Antibe, which Ptolemy calls Antipolis, a Towne of Deciati; Pliny calls it Oppidum Latinum, and it is called a Colonie in the coyne of the Emperour Titus. Olbia, which is now thought to be that which is called Yeres, or Hieres, neare the Sea, almost three leagues from Telon. Over against the Towne lye those famous Ilands, which Ptolemy calleth Staechedes; and Stephanus Ligustidae. They are now called the Iles of Yeres, or Hieres, and the best sort of Corall is gathered there; even as good as that in the Ligustick Sea. Also S. Maximin, which Antoninus in his Itinerarie thinketh to be Tecolata, being sixe leagues from Massilia toward the North. Tarascon, which Ptolemy calls Taruscon, being seated on the left banke of Rhodanus; and over against it on the right hand banke Belloquadra, commonly called Beaucarie. The Townes which have the dignitie of a Countie, are Sault, S. Gilles, and others.



PICARDIE AND CAMPANIA.
ALthough the name of Picardie is not very ancient, yet no certaine reason can be rendred for it:The Countrie whence so called. some conjecturing one thing, some another. Cenalis professes that hee knowes not whether the Picardians borrowed this name from the Bigardian Hereticks: however, it is manifest saith he, that they were of greater antiquitie than the Inhabitants of this Country. Some suppose that they were called Picardians, because they were the first that used those Lances, which are commonly called Pikes.The Situation. On the West that I may make a plain description of the bounds thereof) is the Brittish Ocean, with some part of Normandie: on the North lie those Countries of ancient Belgia, which are now called Artesia, or Artois, and Hannonia, or Henegou: on the East lyeth Luxenburg or Lorraine: and lastly, on the South Campania, and that Country which by a more speciall name is called France.The fertilitie of the Soyle. It is a most fruitfull Countrie, and the Store-house or Granarie of Paris, and most parts of France. It hath but little wine, which proceedeth rather from the sloathfull idlenesse of the Inhabitants, than from any defect of the Soyle or Climate.True Picardie. Picardie is divided into three parts: the true Picardie, the Lower, and the Higher. I will onely speake here of the True Picardie, (called it French, La vraye Picardie). It doth containe in it the jurisdictions of Anbiana, Corbia, and Pequignya, the Counties of Veramandois, and Reteli^, and the Dukedome of Tirascha. Ambiana (or Visdamie d' Amiens) was so named from the Citie Ambianum, commonly called Amiens. Heretofore, as the Learned doe thinke, it was named Samarobrina; and by Ptolemie, Samarobriga. Antoninus in some of his bookes calls it Samar^^riva, and in others Samarabriga. Briga in the ancient Spanish language, and Bria in the Thracian speech,The Cities. doe signifie a Citie; yet some doe write that it was called Somonobriga from its bridge, (in Dutch called Brag) which standeth on the River Somona. Ambianum is situated at Sem^^^s, which divideth it into severall parts: (whence some suppose that the Emperour Gratian did name it Ambianum, quod aquis ambiatur, because it is encompassed with water). It is thought to be one of the stronged Townes in all France, both for the naturall situation, and artificiall fortification thereof: it is entrenched with deepe broad ditches, and is the key of that part of the Kingdome. There is a faireIn this Church Edward the 3. King of England, did homage to Philip de Valeys, for the Dutchie of Guienna. Church in it. The Inhabitants are reputed to be very honest and faithfull. The Countrie of Corduba is so called from Corduba, which is a Towne neare Som^^^, and is seated by a River which runneth there into it. Peguignya is so called from a Towne commonly called Peguigny: which received its name

map of Picardie and CampaniaPICARDIE AND CAMPANIA.

(if wee shall beleeve the common report) from one Pignon, a Souldier of Alexander the great. It is famous in Histories, because William Duke of Normandie, surnamed Long-sword, was slaine by an ambushment laid by Baldwin Earle of Cambray, who drew him thither under a colour of making a peace, as the Norman Annals doe testifie. The Countie of Veromandois (as Geographers that describe France doe note) containes under it the Counties of the Suessons, and Laudunenses, the Territorie of the Tartenians, and the Cities of Noviomagus, and Fane de S. Quint^^. The Suessones are commonly called Suessons, or Soissonois, whose Citie is now called Soisson, having in it a strong Castle. Antoninus calls it Suessones by the name of the Inhabitants; and Ptolemie, Augusta Su^^^num. The Countrie of the Laudunenses, now called Laonno^s, hath it^ name from Laudunum, (mentioned in the life of Charles the great) which is now called Laon, being seated on a hill. The Country of the Tart^ans is called in French Tartenois, the Metropolis whereof is Fera, commonly called La Fere. It is a Citie strongly fortified, and commodiously seated, neare the confluence and meeting of the Rivers, Oysa, and Serva, having also a strong Castle. The Citie Noviomagus, which A^toninus placeth betweene Soisson and Amiens, and maketh the seat of the eighteenth Roman Legion, is now called Noion: Ptolemy calls it ^viomagos Vadicassimum, and othersOrtelius thinkes it probable that this is that Citie which Caesar in his Commentaries calls Noviodunum. Noviomus. It is a Citie which seemeth to be very ancient, and is a Bishops Seate, the Prelates whereof stile themselves Earles of Noion, and Peeres of France. Fane de S. Q^^^tin, which was sometime the head Towne of the Country, and feate of the Earles of Vermandois was so called from Quintin, who suffered Martyrdome there: whereas before it was called Augusta Veromanduc^^^ so much concerning Veromandois. The Territorie of the Retelians (commonly called Retelois, is situate betweene Hannonia, Lotharingia, and ^^rois: The Metropolis thereof is Retelium. The chiefe Citie of Tiras^^, (called La Tirasche) is Guisa, having a stately Castle to defend it against the Luxenburgians.

Campania.
CAMPANIA, called in French Comte de Champagne, was so called, f^^^ the broad and long fields thereof,The Countrie whence so called. as Gregory Turonensis noteth. F^r it is a very plaine and champion Country, and fit for tillage. The Teritories of Brye,The Situation. Burgundy, Carolois, and Lotharingia, doe encompasse i^ on every side.The temper of the aire.The fertilitie of the Soyle. The skie thereof is very cleare, and the aire temperate. The fields do yeeld abundance of Corne, Wine, and all sorts of Cattle and there are woods which do yeeld great store of game both for ha^^ing and hunting. Campania is described both by it selfe, and also with the Principalities adjacent, and lying neare unto it. If it be considered properly by it selfe, it is twofold; the Lower, and the Higher. In the Lower is Tricassium, and the Territories which are commonly called Ivigny, Bassigny, and Vallage. Moderne Writers doe call that Tricass^^, which is now called Troyes:The Cities. It is a Citie neare the River Seyn. Ante^^nus

calls itThis Citie is also called by Gregorius Turonensis, Trecas. Tracasis, and placeth the two and twentieth Legion there: Ammianus names it Tricassa; Bede, Trecassa; Nithardus, Tricassinum: and anciently it was called Augustobana Trecasium, as Ioseph Scaliger noteth. It is now a Bishops Seat, and hath a strong Castle for its defence. The County of Ivigny doth seperate Campania from Burgundy. The chiefe Towne thereof is Ivigny, which is under the jurisdiction of the Baylywicke of Troyes. Bassigny is so called, because it is the better part of the Lower Campania, for Bas signifies in French beneath. It is encompassed with the Rivers Matrona, or Marne, Mosa, and a little part of Mosella, and it is watered with more Rivers than the other parts of this Country. The Metropolis thereof is commonly called Chaumont en Bassigny, which hath the title of a Baylywicke, and a stately ancient Castle feated on a Rocke which is well fortified. These Townes are reckoned in it, besides Langres, of which I shall speake hereafter: namely Montigny, Goeffy, Nogent le Roy, Monteclar, Andelot, Bisnay, Choiseul, Visnory, and Clesmont; being all strong Townes, and the most of them fortified with Castles. The Territorie of Vallage is thought to bee so called from the faire and fruitfull Valleyes which are in it. The Townes of chiefe note are Vassy, neare Bloisa, in the Countrie of Guise; Fanum S. Desiderij, or S. Desire: and Ianivilla, or Ianville, the inheritance of the Familie of the Guises; some write it Iont-ville. There are also in the Territorie of Vallage Montirandel, Dontlerant, Le Chasteau aux forges, Esclaren, and others. The Higher Campania is called Le Pays de Partoys, having its appellation from a Towne commonly called Perte. It is a most fruitfull Country, abounding with Fruits, Wood, and Hempe. The Metropolis thereof is Vitriacum or Vitry, seated neare the confluence and meeting of the Rivers Saltus and Matrona: And there are also contained in it Argilliers, Lasaincourt, Louvemen, and other Townes. Thus we have taken a view of Campania by it selfe, now we are to describe the adjacent places, as the Dukedome of Rhemes, and Langres, and the Counties of Catalaune, Ligny, and Motte, which are free within themselves, and not subject to Campania. The Dukedome of Rhemes (or the Duche Parrie, and Archivesche de Reims) is so named from a Citie which was anciently called Durocortorum, but nowThis Citie was called Rhemes from the Rhemi, once a potent Nation of these parts. Rhemis. Ptolemy calls it Durocottorum: Strabo, Duricortora: Stephanus, Dorocotteros: and Caesar Durocortum Remorum. It is a free Citie of Campania: the Archbishop thereof is a Duke, and the first Peere of France; under whom are these Bishops in this Country: the Bishop of Soisson, of Chaalon, of Amiens, of Noyon, of Senlis, of Beaurois, and of Laon: In this Citie the Kings of France are inaugurated andSee Heylin. pag. 120. annoynted with oyle. The Dukedome of Langres (or the Duche, Pairie and Evesche de Langres) hath a Citie which was heretofore called Andomatunum Lingonum, but is now commonly called Langres: Ptolemie calls it Andumatonon, and Antoninus vitiously Antematunum; Pentingerus his Itinerarie table, Andematunum; Tacitus Lingonum urbs: and Gregory of Tours, urbs Lingonica. It is a Bishops See, the Prelates whereof are Dukes and Peeres of France. The Countie of Catalaune (or Euesche, Conte and Pairie de Chaalon) was so named from the Citie Catalaune: the later Writers doe call it Cathelaunum, but now it is called Chaalon en Champaigne: It is a Bishops See, situated on a plaine neare to

the River Matrona, and adorned with high Towers, which stand up like aspiring Pyramides. In the Countie of Lignie is the Towne Lignium, venerable for antiquitie, neare the River Saltus. Concerning the Countie of Motte, (or Conte de la Motte) we finde nothing but the name thereof. The Countrie of the Briensians (whom Nithardus calleth Brionenses) is usually described with Campania, being an ancient Country, and now called la Brye. It beginneth at a Village called Cretelium, not farre from the bridge of Charanton, where Matrona mingleth with the River Sey^, the former whereof doth almost part Campania, and the latter Gastinois from the Briensians: for all that lyeth betweene these two Rivers, even to the Dukedome of Burgundy, is esteemed to be in the Countie of Brye. It was so called from a Towne, commonly called Brye or Bray, Conte Robert, which appellation it received from Robert, Earle of Brye, who had a mansion house there. The Cities of Brye are Castellum Theodorici, or Chasteau Thierry. Iatinum Medorum, or Meldarum urbs, which Ptolemy placeth by the River Matrona, and is now called Meaulx, and Prov^^sium or Provence, a Towne famous for sweet smelling Roses: the Archbishopricke of Sens, with the Towne of Pontium are reckoned and accounted a part of this Countrie. Under this Archbishop are these Bishops, the Bishop of Paris, of Meaulx, of Troyes, of Chartres, of Ne^^, of Orleans, and of Ausoire or Auxerce. Senonum urbs, formerly called Agendicum, but now commonly Sens, is seated neare the the River Icauna, which in French is called Yonne. Besides these aforesaid Countries, which we have mentioned, Mercator reckoneth these following, namely, Barsur Seine, Auxerre, Viconte de Tonnerre, Poursuivent, Braine, Grandpre, Mailly, Vertus, Roussy, Retel, Ivigny, and the Baronie of ^^^ville.




FRANCE.
THis Country, of which wee doe entreate doth comprehend under it the Prefectureship and Country (or as some would have it the Viecountship) of Paris, the Dukedome of Valois, and the Territories of Heurepois, and Gastinois. The Praefectureship of Paris, or la Proveste and Conte de Paris, is devided into Territories, Paris, Goella, the Ile of France, and Vexinum Francicum. We call that Parisium which is commonly called le Parisis. It contained heretofore whatsoever is beyond the Gate of Paris, even to the Bridge called Pontoyse, and from thence even to Claya, toward Prye. The name thereof is almost worne out, but that some Villages, as Louvres, Cormeille, Escova, and others, which the Parisians call en Parisis, and some taxations of the Parisian Parliament, as also a certaine Coyne commonly called Sols and Deniers Parisis, doe keep it in memory. Some thinke that the Parisian Gate was so called, because it was in the way to Parisium. The chiefe City of this Parisium, and the Metropolis of all France is Lutetia, so called by Caesar.The Cities. Ptolemy calleth it Leucotetia: Iulianus Lutetia: Marcellinus, Castellum Parisiorum: Zosimus Parisium, and latter Writers Lutetia Parisius. But it is now commonly called Paris. Some derive the name of Lutetia a Luto, from Mudde in regard of the Marishes neere unto it, and some from the Plaister-pits neere adjoyning, quasi Leukoteichia, for it is built for the most part with Plaister-worke. Paris was heretofore farre lesse than it is now, standing onely on the Iland which the River Seyne encompasseth, so that this great Citty was very small at the beginning. But so small an Iland could not at last receive such a multitude of men as daily repaired thither. So that Colonies as it were being drawne thither, and placed on either side of the Continent, Suburbs were added thereunto, whence it was so enlarged by degrees, that now it is the greatest Citty of all France. It is devided into three parts, the greatest whereof lying North-East on the right hand Banke of the River, is the lowest, and is commonly called la Ville: the lesser part on the left hand towards the South-west is raised somewhat higher by little Hills whereon it is seated, and it is called l'Vniversite; the middle is in the Iland, which they call la Cite: It is encompassed round with the River, being joyned with two Bridges to the lesser part, and with three to the greater part. Architremus an English Poet hath formerly celebrated the praise thereof in these Verses:
At length a place doth come within your sight,The Vniversity here is accounted the chiefest in Europe, as containing 55. Colledges.Which is another Court of Phoebus bright,For men it hath Cyrrhaea may compare,Chrysaea tis for Mettalls that there are.Tis Greece for Bookes, for Students Inda, byAthens it selfe judge its Philosophy.Tis Rome for Poets which have there beene found,It is the sweete Balme of the world so round,And its sweete fragrant Rose you would it thinke,A Sidonis for Clothes, for meate and drinke.The Soyle is rich and yeelds much Wine, yea more,Tis fitt for Tillage, and hath Corne great store.Tis very strong, and good Lawes it can shew,The ayre is sweet, their site is pleasant too.It hath all goods, and is in all things neate,If fortune onely made these goods compleate.
Not farre from Paris is a pretty Towne commonly called le Po^^ Charenton where the River Matrona mingleth it selfe with the Sc^^^. Here is an Eccho that will answere thirteene times one after another, (and which is more wonderfull) it will retort a word of foure syllables plainely and perfectly, foure or five times. So much concerning Paris: Goella followes, or la Goelle. The ancient bounds thereof are worne out of knowledge, and onely some places named from Goella doe keepe it yet in memory. There is in it la Conte de dam-Mar^i^, so named from a famous Towne heretofore called Dam-Marti^, though now it is become a small Village, seated on a little Hill. L^^^e de Fraunce as the Frenchmen doe limit it, doth comprehend all the Country from S. Denis to Passiacum and Mommorantium, which lyeth betweene the corners and windings of Seyne, on the one side toward Pica dy, and on the other side toward N^^mandy. Others doe give it other bounds. S. Denis in France is a pleasant pretty Towne, which the ignorant of Antiquity and those that are credulous to beleeve Monkes dreames, doe suppose was so called from Dionysius Areopagit^, Possia^um or ^oissy is a faire Towne;Aimonius called this Towne Pistas. where there is a Castle which the Kings of France heretofore much delighted in. In this Castle before the Castle of S. Germane was built, the Queenes of France were brought to Bed and delivered, and the Kings Children educated and brought up. Betweene Possiacum and Paris there is a Towne consecrated to D. Germane, commonly call'd S. Germane en Laye. The ancient Towne Mommorantium is called in French Mommoran^y. Next to the Iland is Vexinum Francicum, Vexin, or (as others call it) Vulxin le Francois. It containeth all the Country from the River Aesia or Oyse, even to Claromont, towards Picardy. The memory thereof had beene quite extinguisht, but that it is preserv'd in certaine ancient Charters and Records. So much concerning the Praefectureship of Paris, and the foure Territories thereof. The other part commonly called le Pais de Valois was so called from the pleasant Valleyes, which are the pride of this Country. Others derive the name otherwise. It was heretofore a County, but is now a Dukedome. The first Earle of Valois was Charles the Sonne of Philip the third, King of France, and brother to Philip the Faire: and afterward Philip the sixth being the Kings Sonne did by propagation adde many branches to the Stocke of the Valesian Earles. The Dukedome of Valois doth extend it selfe even to Picardy. The chiefe Towne (besides Crespy) is Sentis, called by the

map of FranceFRANCE.

Latines as some suppose Silvanectum, because it is joyned to a Wood. It is an ancient Towne having besides a Bishop, a Provost, and a Baily in it. The Praefectureship of Silvanectum hath enriched the Dukedome of Valois, with the Lordships which are commonly called Pierrefons, Bethisi and Verberie, and the Townes Angy, le Pont. S. Maxence, (which is encompast with Marishes, and is the bounds betweene France and ^icardie) Pongoing, Brenonville, etc. The same Praefectureship doth also containe Compeigne, once a Princes Seate; some call it Carolopolis, from Carolus Calvus, who enlarged the Praecincts thereof and fortified it. Under Compiegne are the Townes Magry, Thorette, and Creil. Silv^ce^t^^ doth also containe the Bayliwicke, Praefectureship, and Vicounts of Pons Aesiae (commonly call'd Pontois, and by some Pontesiumy under which are Ville-Neuve le Roy, and l'Isle Adam. Beside, la Conte de B^^^mont sur Oyse, is under Silvanectum, being an ancient Provo^^ship u^der which are Persang and Metu. Lastly under Silvan^ctum and the Dukedome of Valois, there is the County of Bellova^^^ which the French call La Corte de Beauvais, or Beauv^^sin. The Metropolis thereof of is Bellovacum, commonly called Beauvais. Caesar (as Ioseph ^ca^^ writeth to Merula) calleth it Bratuspantium, and the same Sco^^g^ saith that the Caesars did nominate and call it Caesaromag^um. But ^tium to speake the truth, Carolus Bovillus thinketh to bee ^^e so^^e which is now called Graviller, or G^attepance: some call it Cle^m^^^ Beauvoisin, and Vigenereus, Beaumont en Oyse. The City of Bella^^m hath a pleasant situation, and fruitfull Mountaines adjoyning to it, which are not very high, but fit for Tillage. It hath also good store of Wines. Ludovicus the 11. King of France in the yeere 1472. granted great priviledges to the Inhabitants thereof, especially to the Women, because they enforced Charles Duke of Burgundy to raise his Siege, and goe away without doing any thing. Not farre from B^llovacum is the Towne Clermont, fortified with a Castle. So much concerning Valo^; the third part of France followes called Heurepois. It beginneth at Seyne, and so from the little Bridge of Paris runnethly the same River to Corbeil, Melodunum, and Morer, where the River Verina doth separate it from Gastinois. It cleaveth to Bry^ toward ^^lumier, and containeth the Melodunensian Viccounty, and Bayli^^^. The Metropolis thereof is Melodunum, called by all the anci^^ Bookes of the Commentaries of the French warre Metios^d^m, but now Melun. This Towne is seated on an Iland in Seyn, like ^aris, and hath a strong Castle. The Towne now commonly called Corb^^^^ (...) in the life of S. Petrus Tarantasius, Corbelium a place famous for Fish, but especially for sweet Crabs, and hath a strong Castle. There is in He^repois a Towne called Fons Bellae-Aquae, in French Fountaine Belle^^^ where the King hath a pleasant Palace. Heretofore it was the Mansion Seate of S. Ludovicus, afterward of Philip, and lastly of Francis of Valois, and there are many rarities in it. I have given the fourth place in France to the Country of the Gastinensians, commonly called ^^stencis, which is separated from Heurepois by the River Verin^. It containeth under it the Dukedomes of Estampes and Nemours, the County of Rupes-Fortis, and others. The Towne of Stampae commonly called

Estampes, is in the mid-way betweene Paris and Aurelianensium, or Orleans, neere the River Iunna or Iuine, which as Corbolium dischargeth it selfe into Seyne. It was heretofore a County, but now a Dukedome: The Towne Nemours is seated neere the River Lonius which runneth into Seyne little below Moretum. It is one of the chiefe Dukedomes of France. Rupes-Fortis, called by the French Roche-fort, hath the Title of a County. In the Territory of Gastinois, besides Milly and Morer (which is the bounds betweene Gastinois and Heurepois) there is Montargium, so called, quasi Mons agri, that is, the Mountaine of the Field, as some doe argue, because it hath a faire prospect round about it. It was wasted by fire 1518. and afterward was re-edified. There are Castles in the two former Townes, and there is also in this, in which there is painted a Story concerning a Hound that revenged his Masters death, by killing him that had slaine him.



PICARDIE. THE ECCLESIASTICALL STATE.

That part of Picardie which is subject to the King (...) France hath 7. Bishopricks under the Archbish^^prick of Rhemes: the Bishops of Suesson, Silv^nectum, Beavais, (which is in France) Noy^^^ Laon, Amiens, and the Bishoprick of Bouloyg^^ This Bishoprick was formerly at Ternaen, but being suppressed it was agreed that the Bishops S^^ should be translated to Bouloygne, Anno 1559.

PICARDIE.
The Country whence so called.PICARDIE (as I said before) some thinke to be so ca^led, because the Inhabitants thereof were the first th^^ used Lances, which is not probable. Some say Picar^ was so called from the Towne Pequigny, or from a fam^ Souldier called Pignon, the first Founder of the Peq^^nians and Ambianians, who after the death of Alexander being (...) Captaine of the Warre, after he had conquerd many Nations, arrival with a Fleete of Ships at Neustria, now called Normandies; and ha^^sing those places hee gave them afterward his owne name. On th^^ West lyeth the Brittish Ocean with some part of Normandy,The Situation. on th^ North lye the Countries of ancient Belgia, Artesia, and Hannonis, o^ the East Luxenburg and Lotharingia, and on the South Campania, and that Country which is called by a more speciall name France. Picar^ as I have said also before is devided into three parts. The true Picard^ the lower, and the higher. The true Picardy doth containe Vidama^^ of Ambianum, Corbie, and Pequigny, the County of Veromandois, and t^ Dukedomes of Tirasche, and Retelois. Ambianum hath its name fro^ a Towne so called, situate at the River Samona. This Towne hath (...) very faire Church, built with great Art, graced and adorned with Images farre exceeding all the curious pieces of Europe, and in it (...) they fabulously report S. Iohn Baptists head is kept whole. It hath (...)

map of PicardiePICARDIE.

title of a Bayliwick, but yet the Civill government, as the ordering of the municipall Court, and the power to appoint watches which are to be chosen out of the Citizens. belongeth to a Consul appointed for that purpose, The first Bishop thereof was Firminus the Martyr, after whom 69. Bishops succeeded orderly, the last of which was Iohn Crequius, of the Canaplensian Family. The Inh^bitants are reputed to be very honest and faithfull, and therefore ha^e many pri^^ledges and immunities, as being exempted from serving ^n Forr^^^g^^ warres, and from paying of Subsidies. Here the most lea^ned ^^^cians Silvius and Fernelius were borne, and also the excellent Orates Silvius, who with great commendations imitated many Bookes of Ciceroes. This City (as we have said before) was built by Pignon a Souldier of Alexanders the great, if wee will beleeve many Writers. (...) the yeere r597. the Spaniards treacherously invading it, made it their owne, but Henry the 4. King of France by siege and force of Ar^^^ compell'd them to render it up againe. The Vidamante of Cor^^^ so called from Corbia, which is a Towne situated at the River (...) or Some. The Vidamate of Pequigny is so called from Piquigny built as I have before expressed by one Pignon a Souldier of Alexander the great French Writers doe testifie that those of the English which furti^'d after a certaine victory obtaind against them were all slaine (...) Towne, who could not pronounce the name thereof, for they pronounced it Pequeny in stead of Pequigny. The Geographers that describe France doe note that Veromandois doth containe under it (...) Territories of Soissonois, Laonnois, and Tartenois: and the Cities N^^, and S. Quintins. The City of Soissons is subject ^o ^hemes the chiefe City of Gallia Belgica, and was honoured by Caesar with the title of a Royall City. It was in the power of the Romanes, but was take^ from them by Clodoveus, after whose decease, his Sonnes restored it to that former honour which it enjoyed in Caesars time. The Inhabitants are a warlike people. In this City, in the raigne of Philip A^^^stus, there was a Cousell held by the Clergie of England and France (...) that the King of England having thrust the Bishops out of their Seats, had kept the Churches goods in his owne hands for 6. yeeres, and afterward had banisht the Bishops into France. In this Counsell he had excommunication, and warres denounced against him as an enemy to the Church, upon which he was overcome in Battell, and all his auxiliary Forces which he had out of Flanders were overthrowne the Suessones among the rest behaving themselves very valiantly aga^^^^ him. The Temple and Monastery of the blessed Virgin in the Ci^^ Soissons was built by Ebroynus the Tyrant who was Master of the Palace of France. The Bishops of Soissons from Sixtus to Math^^ (...) were 79.. The Country of Laonois so called from the City Law which is situated betweene the Rivers Ayne, and Oysa on a Hill, and ^igi^^^^us saith that Clodoveus in the yeere 500. did honour this City with a Dukedome and a Bishoprick. Hee constituted Genchaldus to bee the first Bishop thereof, and after him unto Iohannes Burserius, there are reckoned 72. Bishops. It is also a Bayliwick, under which are th^^ Cities, Soissons. Noviomagus, or Noyon, S. Quintins, Ribueria, or Ribe^^^,

Cu^y, Chau^y, Guise, Perona, Mondidier, and Rola. Next adjacent unto L^on is Compendium, called by the French, Compiegne, and by others Pa^opo^is, from Carolus Calvus, who in the yeere 896. did enlarge and fortifie it like Constantinople, erecting there also a Monastery to Saint Cornelius. The Church of Compiegne, and the Monastery of the Dominicans and Franciscans were built by S. Ludovicus King of France. The Metropolis of Tartenois is Fera, commonly called La Fere, being (...) City well fortified and commodiously seated, at the confluence ^nd meeting of the Rivers Oysa, and Serva, and having a strong Castle. Concerning the Cities Noyon and S. Quintins there is enough spoken ^n the Description of a former Table. So much therefore concerning ^rue Picardie. There are divers parts of the lower Picardie called (Le B^sse.) As Sancterra, Pontium, Bolonesium, Guinaeum, and Oyum. Sancterra, or Santerre lyeth betweene Mons S. Desiderij, Perona, Roye, and Nesla. Mons S. Desiderij, or Mondidier is a strong Place or Hold. Perona is situated at the River Somona: here Herebert Earle of Veromandois kept Charles the Simple King of France Captive, where he died and left the Kingdome much troubled. Roye is a faire Towne, fortified with a Castle. Antoninus calleth it Caesaromagnus, as also the Itinerary Tables. Nessa is a strong Fortresse as many other places are in this part of the Kingdome. In Sancterra have many famous men beene borne, and the ancient Lords thereof being Marquesses, formerly joyned in affinity and allyed to the Family of the Courtneys, which descended from the Kings of France. Pontium or in French Le Conte Ponthieu is so named, from the great company of Bridges and Marishes which discharge and empty themselves into the Sea, neere to S. Valeri. The chiefe Towne of the County is Abatisvilla, commonly called Abbeville neere the River Oyse, being a Bailiwick, and the Seate of a President, from whence Causes and Suites in Law are brought to Paris. The other Townes are Cretoy, Rua, Treport, and S. Richeri, besides Cressiacum, or the little Towne of Cressi famous for the slaughter of 36000. Frenchmen, under the conduct of Philip of Valois, in the yeere 1346. This Country also doth containe two other under it, to wit, the Counties of Monstreul, and S. Paul, some thinke the former was so called quasi Mons Regius, that is, the Royall Mountaine, but others imagine it to bee so named from a Monster which had his dwelling house here. Lower Picardie containeth the County of Bononia,The lower Picardy. commanly call'd Corte de Boleigne, and the County of Guisne, of which we will speake in the Description of Bononia. The chiefe Rivers of Picardie are Somona, neere to which lye the Towne Ambianum, or Amiens and Abbe-Villa,The River is called by Ptolemy Phrudis, and by Caenalis, Sambre.This River Caesar calls Axona, and Caenalis Disne. Oyse, or Esia, Scaldis, Escault, or Sceldt, and those which are commonly call'd Ayne and Scarpe. I come to their manners. The Picardians are of a good disposition, well set, courteous, Officious, valiant, and prone to anger, whence they are called hot heads: they are so soone assuredly given and addicted to wine, so that a man can hardly obtaine any thing of them, unlesse he will beare them company in drinking. Yet they agree so well among themselves, that if you offend one of them, all the rest will be your enemies. The Nobles are war like, and doe most of all delight in military affaires. So much concerning Picardy.



CAMPANIA, THE STATE ECCLESIASTICK*

Here is the Archbishop of Rhemes, under whom are eight s^ fragan Bishops: as the Bishop of Laon, a Duke and Peere France: the Bishop of Chalon an Earle and Peere of France the Bishop of Suesson, the Bishop of Terwaen, whose Seate (...) translated to Boulogne, the Bishop of Amiens, the Bishop Noviomagum, or Noion, an Earle and Peere of Fran^^ the Bishop of Senlis, and the Bishop of Beauvais; an Earle (...) Peere of France.
Here is also the Archbishop of Sens, under whom are seven ^^shops, to wit, the Bishop of Paris, of Chartres, of Orleans Nivers, of Auxerre, of Trois en Champaigne, and of Me^^^

CAMPANIA.
The Country whence so called.CAMPANIA called in French Comte de Champaign derived as I have said before, if we shall beleeve ^^rius Turonensis, from the great and spacious Field (...) of it consisteth. For it is a very plaine and Champaign Country.The Situation. The Territories of Brie, Burgundie, Co^^ and Lotharingia doe encompasse it on every side. The Tricasses, Li^^^ the Remi, the Catalaunians, the Meldae, the Senones, and others, wh^ now worne out of memory, were heretofore seated in this Co^ The Tricasses nominated in Plinies chiefest Bookes, Ptolemy calls ^kassioi, and Ammianus Tricassini, as also in certaine Panegyricks (...) in the Inscription of an ancient Stone. Hericus calleth the Trees (...) the life of S. Germane, and others call them by contraction Tres^^^ Their City is called Tricassium, and commonly Trois en Champaign Those which Caesar, Pliny, and others doe call Lingones, Ptolemy c^ Dongones, and the same Pliny, Faederati. That Province which contai^ their City which is Langres, is now called La Duche, Paire and Eu^ de Langres. Those which Caesar calleth Remi, Ptolemy calleth Rhe^ Pliny Faederati, and the Country in which is their City of Rhemes is called Duche Pairie, and Archenesche de Reims, as wee have before mentioned. The Learned doe thinke that the Cathelauni mentioned in A^^anus Marcellinus should bee written Catalauni. And so they are no^^nated

map of CampaniaCAMPANIA.

in Eutropius his Bookes. Their City is now called la Eves^^^^ Challon. In the Catalaunian Fields. Attila King of the ^unnes the yeere from the building of the City of Rome 1203. and after (...) birth of Christ 450.) was overcome by the Romanes, Gothes (...) Frenchmen, under the conduct of their Captaines Actius Pat^^ Theodoricus and Merovaeus, there being slaine on both sides 1620^^ ^cept 90000. Gepidaans and Frenchmen, who were slaine b^^ Iornandes cap. 36. doth delmeate and set forth these Fields, and (...) place of the Battell. The Melde Pliny calleth Lib^^^-Strabo Me^^^ Ptolemie Meldai: and an Inscription engraven on an ancient Sto^^^ Meldi. Strabo precisely maketh them and the Leuxovians to bee^ Parokeanitae, which are in the middle of the Country where there now the Towne Meaulx neere the River Matrona. The Seno^es (...) are celebrated by Caesar, Pliny, and others. Ptolemy calleth by the (...) name, and placeth them in Gallia Lugdunensis. St^^ah^ thinketh th^^ there are other Senones neere to the Nerviais, towards the West. The former of them did make those horrible incursions into Italy so (...) spoke of, and they did moreover wage a most fierce warre against the Romanes in the yeere from the building of the City (...) which they called The Senonick French warre. Their Captaine was Bra^ (...) Nobleman of France. After the Fight or Battell, they entred the City of Allta, and there having slaine all they met, and wasted all with fire, they besieged for many moneths the Capitall, unto which the Romane youth had fled for their safegard: but at last having made a peace with them for a certaine summe of money, contrary to faith and promise they were partly slaine, and partly put to slight by M^^rius Camillus the Dictator, who entred the City with an Army. All these things Livie Lib. 5. Florus Lib. 1. cap. 13. and many other Writer doe delineate in their proper colours. Campania is honoured with the title of a County, and was once the Inheritance of Eudo Nephew to Gerlo the Norman by his Sonne Theobaldus:The ancient government. This Gerlo was he that accompanied into France Rudulphus or Rollo the Norman, to whom Charles the Simple granted Neustria which was afterward called N^^mandie. After Eudo there succeeded in a right Line, Stephen, T^^^^dus the 2. whose sonne Theobaldus the third dying without issue, there succeeded him his Cosin germane Henry surnamed the large, the sonne of Stephen King of England, who was Brother to Theobaldus the second Henry had a sonne who was Earle of Campania, and the other Territories, but he dying without issue, his Brother Theobaldus invaded the County, and writ himselfe Count Palatine of Campania. This Theobaldus being afterward made King of Navarre upon the death of Grandfather by the Mothers side, brought the County to belong to the Crowne, and left Henry his Successor both in Campania, and in the Kingdome. Lastly, Ioane Daughter and Heir to this Henry being married to Philip the Faire King of France, Campania and the other Provinces were united to the Crowne of France, from which they were never after separated. Campania as I have already spoken, is usually not describ'd both by it selfe, and with the Principalities adjacent and lying round about it. As it is considered properly and by it selfe it is

twofold, the Lower, and the Higher. In the Lower is Tricassium, and the Territories which are commonly called Ivigny, Bass^g^y, and Val^ge. Moderne Writers doe call that Tricassium, which is now called ^rots. Those who were heretofore Earles of Campania, from this City were called Earles of Tricassium. It is one of the greatest and fairest Cities in this Kingdome. The Latitude thereof is 47. degrees, and some few minutes, towards the North. It is a Bishops Seate, and Bel^esorrestius reckons 83. Bishops thereof. Among these was that famous Lupus, whom Sidonius Apollinaris praiseth for his vertues, (Lib. 6. Ep. 1.4. and 9.) as also Paulus Diaconus (in Marciano) Bede (Lib. 1. Histor. cap. 17.) and others. This City hath a large Jurisdiction, and it is the seate of a President, of Counsellors, of Judges, and others of the Kings Officers. The Townes have reference to it, namely, Bar Sur Seine,The Cities. Mussil Evesque, La ferte Sur Auge, Nogent, Pont Sur Seine, Fruille, Chastel, and S. Florentin, being all Townes of Campania. The Territory of Ivigny separateth Campania from Burgundie. The chiefe Towne thereof is Ivigny, which is under the Jurisdiction of the Bayliwick of Tricassium. Bassigny is so named because it is the better part of Lower Campania, as we have before declared. The Metropolis thereof is named from the bald Mountaine, which Ivonus mentioneth (Ep. 105) commonly call'd Chaumonten Bassigny. It hath an ancient Castle seated on a Rock and well fortified, the Tower on the West side whereof is called in French Dony^n and La haulte fueille. This Castle the Earles of Campania did heretofore make their Palace. No River runneth by it, nor affordeth water unto it, but that which Cesternes doe yeeld, and a Fountaine at the foote of the Tower. There are also in Bassigny the Townes of Montigny, Goeffy, Nogent le Roy, Monteclar, Andelot, Bisnay, Choiseul, Visnorty, and Clesmont, being all strong Townes, and the most of them well fortified with Castles, besides Andomatunum Lingonum, commonly called Langres, of which we shall speake in an other place. The Territory of Vallage, is supposed to be so called from the Valleys in it which are both faire and fruitfull. The Townes of chiefest note in Vallage are first Vasseium, or Vassy, neere Blois, in the Country of Guise. Francis Duke of Guise comming hither in the yeere 1562. was the Author of that Vasseian Massacre, mentioned by the French Historia-graphers, wherein many that professed the reformed Religion were slaine on the Kalends of March. Not farre from thence there is a kind of earth found, of which Bole Armenack is made. The second Towne of not is S. Desire or Dedier, which was taken by the Emperour Charles the fifth, and afterward a peace being concluded was restored againe to the French. It hath a strong Castle. The third is the Towne of Ian-ville, (or as some write is Ioint ville) which some doe fabulously report was so called from Ianus. It belongeth to the Families of the Guises. Brye, so called from a Towne commonly named Brye, or Bray Comte Robert, is reckoned by some with Campania. The Country of Brye although it were heretofore and also now is very wooddy, yet in fertility and fruitfulnesse it is not inferior to any part of Campania. For it hath a cleare skie, and a sweete and temperate ayre. It is watered with great, wholesome, and fruitfull Rivers. The Cities of

Brye are Castellum Theodorici, Iatinum, Medorum or Meldarum, now ca^led Meaulx, Provinse, and others. Castellum Theoderick, commonly ca^led Chasteau Thierry is the Metropolis of the Country of Brye, having Baily and President in it. It hath also a Bishops Seate, of which B^^forrestius reckoneth 101. Bishops, the last of which number was ^^dovicus Bresius. Provinsij a Towne famous for the sweete red Ro^^ that are in it, and for the Rose-cakes, and Rose-water which (...) made of them in the Summer time. Here are some ruinous Mo^^ments of Antiquity. And so much shall suffice concerning Camp^^^^



THE COVNTRY OF BELLOV ACVM. COMMONLY CALLED BEAVVAIS, OR BEAVVOISIN. The State Ecclesiastick.
THE BISHOP OF BELLOVACVM IS A SPIRITVAL and temporall Lord, an Earle, and Peere of FRANCE.
The Country of BELLOVACUM.
THE Country or County of Bellovacum,The Country whence so called. called in French Comte de Beauvais, or Beauvoisin, did receive that appellation by name from the Metropolis or chiefe City Bellovacum. It is a pleasant Country, having Hills and Mountaines round about it not very high,The fertility. planted with Vines: here also Meddowes, and there Pastures and Fields fitt for tillage. Beauvois hath a thinne subtile kinde of earth found in it, of which divers kindes of vessels are made, and transported into many Countries, and it is famous for the Flax which groweth at a little Towne commonly called Bale. For those of Flanders and Hannonia, or Henegon, doe buy it, and doe make fine webs of cloth of it, which they sell at home and transporte abroad both by Sea and Land. The ancient Inhabitants of this part of France were the Bellovaci (whom Caesar and Pliny doe often mention) called by Strabo Bellolakoi, and by Ptolemy Belluakoi. Caesar witnesseth that these Bellovacians where the chiefest of the Belgians, both for prowesse, authority, and number of men, as being able to bring 100000. men into the Field. The Author of the 8. Booke de Bello Gallico writeth, that the Bellovacians did exceed all Frenchmen and Belgians for matters of warre. And Strabo in his 4. Booke saith, that the Bellovacians are the best of the Belgians, and after them the Suessones. Caesar doth in some manner paint out the Common-wealth of the Bellovacians, when hee sheweth, that they were wont to elect their Princes out of themselves as amongst the rest they did that Corbeus, who albeit his Army of Citizens was overcome, yet no calamity could make him leave the Field, retire to the Woods, or yeeld himselfe upon any conditions offerd to him by the Romanes, but fighting valiantly and wounding many, he did enforce

the enraged conquerers to cast their Darts at him. Caesar also dot^ mention the Senate of the Bellovacians and the authority of (...) common people: whence that excuse of the Bellovacian Senate (...) Caesar: That while Corbaeus lived, the Senate could not doe so much (...) the City, as the unskilfull multitude. But although the Bellovacia^ in Caesars time had a great opinion for their courage and fortitud^ yet at length being overcome they yeelded to the Romanes, a^^ were subject to them untill the Frenchmen passing over the B^^ possessed France. The Husbandmen of this Country in King (...) time did stirre up a sedition, which was commonly called laqu^^^ And they especially aymed at the Nobles, of whom they slew ma^^ and pulled downe their Houses. At length Charles the Dolphin (...) France (who was afterward King, and surnamed the Wise.) The Ki^^ of Navarre, the Duke of Bourbon, and other Princes and Nobles of t^^ blood Royall did quiet this sedition, as knowing what would be (...) event of it, and what troubles would spring there from, if it we^^ not extinguisht in time. The Metropolis or Mother City of th^^ Country is Bellovacum,The Cities. commonly called Beauvois. Guicciardine endeavoreth to prove by many reasons that this Bellovacum is that Belg^^^ which Caesar mentioneth in his Commentaries, wben he saith that h^ wintered part of his Army in Belgium, and addeth withall that it is the Seate of the most valiant Bellovacians: for hee saith that C^^^ meant by this name Belgium, not a whole Province, but a City, or (...) other particular place. They faboulously report that Belgius a (...) of France the Sonne of Lugdus did lay the foundation of this City, (...) of the City Lugdunum, a long time before the building of Troy, and called it Belgians whence Gallia Belgica hath its denomination. It is (...) ancient famous City, as having besides a Bishoprick, an Earle, who (...) one of the twelve Peeres of France, and there are also divers Mo^^ments found in it, which doe witnesse that it was once a great, (...) and populous City. It hath an excellent situation, and is fortif^^^ with Walls and Towers entrenched with broad deepe Ditches, (...) furnished with Ordnance, as also adorned with faire Churches. (...) chiefe Church whereof is the Cathedrall Church, consecrated (...) S. Peter, which is one of the fairest Churches in France, and in whic^ they report that the bones of Iustin Martyr, Eurotus, and Germerus (...) kept. The Bishops of Bellovacum doe write themselves Earles and Peeres of France. The first of them was S. Lucian, after whom succeded 84. Bishops, whom Belleforrestius doth reckon up, and maketh Charles of Bourbon the last of them. Bellovacum is governed by a Malo^^ (in like manner as the Merchants of Paris by a Proefect) and also b^ twelve Peeres, who are as so many Consuls being annuall Ma^^strates, and elected by the people, as the Magistrates of Rome we^^ usually chosen. This City is rich by clothing, and gaines this honour to itselfe, that the fairest and best Carpets in all France are ma^^ therein. A Nation Counsell was here held and kept in the yee^^ 1114. Here was borne the great Historian Vincentius a Doctor and Governour of the Monastery of the Dominicans, who lived in the yeere 840. In this City was also borne Guilielmus Durandus, who wa^

map of BellovacumTHE COVNTRY OF BELLOVACVM

first here a Canon, afterward Deane of Chartes, and last of all Bishop of Mande. He lived in the yeere 1286. There was the place of Iohannes Choletus his nativity, who founded a Colledge at Paris commonly called le College des Cholets, and was a Cardinall though of meane birth: and lastly, here was borne Iohann^s Michael Bishop of Angiers, whom i^ Anjou they esteeme as a Saint. This is an argument of the riches of this Territory of Beavais, that 11. or 12 miles round about this City, there are so many Townes and Villages, and those so neere one to another, that none of them are above a mile distant. This City was exchanged for the County of Sancerrane, which Roger Bishop of ^^^vacum surrenderd up to Eudon Earle of Campania, for the Country of Bellovacum, the Goods, Lands, and Dominion whereof he joyned to his Bishoprick. The Country of Bellovacum containeth Clerm^nt, not farre from Bellovacum, which is a County, and appertaineth to the Royall house of Burbon. Charles Duke of Burbon had by his wife (...) Daughter to Iohn Duke of Burgundie, two Sonnes Iohn and Peter. (...) the second of this name married Ione the Daughter of Charles the^ and dying without issue left his Dukedome to his younger Brother Peter. Peter the second Duke of Burbon of this name had by Anne the Daughter of Ludovick the eleventh Susan, the Inheritrix of Bu^^en, who was wife to the aforesaid Charles the younger Sonne of G^^^^, who also was the younger Sonne of the abovenamed Ludovick Earle of Montpenser, and Brother to Charles Duke of Burbon. But he having no issue, the Line of the eldest Sonne of Ludovick, who was the first Duke of Burbon, was extinguisht. Iames of Ponthium the younger Son of Ludovick the first Duke of Borton aforesaid, had Iohn Earle of Me^^h by Ioane the Daughter of the Earle S. Paul. After him succeeded Ludovick, Iohn Vendomensis the second of this name, Francis, Charles created Duke of Vendomium by King Francis the first: and also Antonius who was afterward King of Navarre. He had by Ioane Albretane Queene of Navarre (the Daughter of Henry the second King of Navane and Margaret Valesia Cosin-germane to Francis the first King of Fran^^ Henry the first of this name, King of France by his Fathers right, and the third King of Navarre of that name by the right of his Mother, the Father of Ludovick the 13. Let us returne to Claramont which is a Towne fortified with a Castle, and here the Lord de la Rocque a famous French Poet was borne. There is also the Towne Belmontium, or Bellus Mons, that is, the faire Mount, commonly called Beaumont which lyeth neere the River Aesia, commonly called Oyse. The County is commonly call'd la C^mte de Beaumont sur Oyse, being an ancient Praefectureship, under which are Persang and Metu. The County of Belmontius hath Princes of the Royall Stock of Vendomium which are Lords thereof. Neere to this Towne beyond the River Aesia or Oyse, the Country of Bellovacum beginneth. P. Merula supposeth that Beaumont was the same with that which Antonius calleth Augustomagum, and Ptolemy corruptly moveth Ratomagus. Some thinke it to be that Towne which Caesar describeth, Lib. 2. Belli. Gal. being well fortified by nature, as having high Rocks round about it, and on one side away into it, somewhat steepe. And so much concerning the Country of Bellovacum, I passe to Bolonia.



THE COVNTIE OF BOVLONGNE.
VVherein are these Countries: Guines, Ardres, and the Baronry of Fiennes. Also the Bishoprick of Tarvania, and Morinea, by which the other Countries in spirituall matters are subject.
The Meridians thereof are placed at the Parallels 50. and 45.
THE Country of Bolonia, or as some call it, of Bononia, in French Conte de Boulogne, is very large.The Country whence so called. All this Country is Sandy, having a kinde of Sande which they call burning Sand: whence some doe judicially thinke that it was called Bolonia from Boullir, whereas indeed it was so named from the Towne of Bulloigne, which is now devided into the Higher and the Lower. The County of Bononia beginneth at the Mountaines of S. Ingelbert:The Situation. and runneth forth to the River Cancha, which is the length thereof, and to the Wood Tournoth, which is the breadth thereof. Bolonia was made a County in the time of Carolus Calvus King of France, at what time S. Paul, Oye, Guines, and Artesia were honored with the same Title. It hath many Townes and Villages, and amongst the rest there is Bulloigne, which is twofold,The Cities. the Higher and the Lower. The former is seated on a high ground, on which was onely a Burrough Towne, before the English besieged it. The latter being seated in a plainer soyle is washed with the Sea, and they are distant from each other an hundred paces, or thereabouts. And a certaine Panegyrick written by an unknowne Author, and spoken before the Emperour Constantine calleth it Bononiense opidum, or the Towne of Bononia. Now it is commonly called Boulogne: and the Low-Countrymen comming neerer to the ancient appella, tion doe call it Beunen. Ioseph Scaliger in his Letters to Merula, Papirius, Masserius, Leland, Ortelius, and others doe think that it was anciently called Gessoriacum. Also Peutingers Table doth confirme the same in which Gessoriacum is put for Bononia. Antoninus calleth it Gessoriacum, and doth place there the 15. Legion, and otherwheres he calleth it Gessoriacensis Portus, or the Haven of Gessoriacum, or Gessoriagum: Ptolemy calls it Gessoriacum a Haven of the Moriakans: Iohn Talbot thinketh it should bee named Galesium, and others that it should bee called Saint Aud^mar: Turnebus calleth it the Towne of Soacum: and Boetius Slusa: Hermolaus Barbarus calleth it Brugas, and Bilibaldus Gandavum. Robert Caenalis distinguisheth Gessoriacum Portum, and

Gessoriacum Navale, and thinketh the one to be Benonia, and the other Cassell. Hence came that Godfrey of Boulogne, the Sonne of Eusta^^^ Earle of Boulogne, who was Duke of Lotharingia, and the first King of the Christian Solonians. Neere to Boulogne was the Haven Itius, which some thought to be the Towne of Calis, whom Ptolemy easily confuteth, who first placeth the Promontory of Itius behinde the mouth (...) the River Seyn, and afterward Gesoriacum a Haven of the Morinnian^ from which the Towne of Calis is above tweenty Miles distant. (...) Velserus is perswaded that Gessoriacum is the same with Itium. So^ thinke the Haven Itius to be S. Andomar, enduced thereunto bo^ because this City was in ancient times called Sitieu, as it were the B^ of Itium, and also by the situation thereof, which being very low, y^^ by the high shores which lie round about the City, it seemes it was (...) great Bay of the Sea. Camden in his Brittannia sheweth that the Have^ Itius was long accounted to bee in that place which they now ca^ Withsan: neere Blanestum. But we leave these things to be decided by others. Next to the County of Bononia is Guisnes which is parted from the County of Oye, by a great Channell; which making the Territo^^^ impregnable,The County of Guisnes. The Townes. and glideth by the chiefe Towne called Guisnes, bei^^ devided into two parts, one whereof is seated in the Marish gro^ the other on the Continent, and is naturally strong and well for^^fied. King Henry the second tooke it, Francis Lotharingeus Duke (...) Guise being sent thither in the yeere 1558. Concerning the Da^^ right heretofore, to the Country of Guise, Meyerus writeth much (...) the Annals of Flanders, and concerning this Country other Historiographers do write other things which are not now to be mentioned There are also other Townes, as Hartincourt, Peuplinge, Conquelle, the Nievelletian Haven. This Country hath under it the Baronies of Ardres and Courtembrone, which are so called from these two Townes Ardres and Courtembrone, and also the Barony of Fiennes.
Two miles from Ardres towards the Ocean is Calis, a Towne well fortified both by nature and Art, esteemed alwayes to be the Key and Gate of France, which Philip of Boulogne Unkle to S. Ludovick as the report, first walled about, it having a Castle with a strong Tow^^ which commands the entrance into the Haven. Edward the fifth, King of England tooke it the day before the Nones of August, 11. moneths after that cruell Battell fought against Philip the sixth, King of France, neere to Cressy in the yeere 1347. which Paulus Aemilius, (...) 9. lively delineateth. The English did possesse it 211. yeeres, (for Philippus Bonus a Burgundian did in vaine besiege it in the yeere 1431, his Flandrians forsaking him) and did keepe it (as the English were wont to say) as the Key of France, the Duke of Guises afterward tooke it, and the Frenchmen regain'd it in the yeere 1558. in the moneth of February. In the mid-way betweene Calis and Bononia towards the Mediterranean Sea is Teroane: which still retaineth that name, although Charles the fifth passed it, and call it Terrennerberch, Antonius nameth it Tervanna or Tarvenna, the Itinerary Tables Tervanna, and Ptolemy Tarvanna. Bovillus affirmeth that some doe call it Tarubanum, Trithemius in his History of France mentioneth the Terrubanians.

map of BolognaBOVLONGNE.

Some call it Tervana as it were Terra-vana, in regard of the meanenes^ of the Territory. In the Register of the Provinces; where the Cities of Belgia are reckoned up, it is called the City of the Morinneans, that is, l'Evesche de Teroane. In the Inscription of an ancient Store, which in former time was found in Gilderland it is called the Mori^^ans Colony. The Territory of Oyana or Terre de Oye, doth reach ever to Dunkerk, a Towne of Flanders. There are also beside Oya, some other smal Towns.The Rivers. I returne now to Boulogne which is watered with stre^es and Rivulets, which running by the Towne Arque, and S. Audoma^^ doe come to Graveling. Not farre from thence is the Bay of Scale^, flowing even to the Castle of Ardera. There are also two other Rivulets, namely, one in Marquisia, the other in Bolonia. There is also the River Hantia or Hesdin, which doth impart his name to the Towne Hesdin. There is also in this Country the Moorish streames of the Pontinians, and the River Cauchia. Some of these Rivers doe make Lakes and Fish-pits, which are full of Fish, and are denominated from the neighbouring Townes: as those which they call in French le Vivier, d'Hames, d'Andre, d'Arbres. All this Country toward the Sea is environd with sundry Hills, and in the inner part thereof there are those Hills which they call in French les Mons de S. Ingelvert, and les Mons de neuf Castel, and Dannes. All the Country is interlaced with many Woods, as the Woods les Bois de Surene, Celles, etc. The Inhabitants are accounted to be froward, and too much conceited of themselves.



ANIOV THE DVKEDOME OF ANDEGAVIA.

The Dukedome of Anjou containeth Counties, Baronnies, and Seigniories, as Craon 1856. 4743, etc. which I have not yet found out, nor can distinguish; these foure Counties, Maine, Vendosme, Beaufort, and La Val doe hold of it by Homage and Fealty.


THE IVRISDICTION.

The Praesidiall Seate of the whole Kingdome is Angiers, under which are these particular Juridicall Seates, Angiers, Samur; Bauge, 1945. 4725. and Beaufort en Vallee, 1940. 4716.

The State Ecclesiastick.

Angiers hath one Bishop of Andegauja, who is subject to the Archbishop of Turone.
The Meridians are placed according to the Proportion of the 47. and 15. Parallels to the greatest Circle.

The Dukedome of ANIOU.
THE Dukedome of Anjou followes in our Method, or la Duche d'Anjou. C. Caesar calleth the people of this Province Andes, and Pliny nameth them Andegavi. It beginneth at the Village Towne Chousay; and endeth betweene Moncontour and Herrant,The Situation. where the Territory of the Picts beginneth, lying South of it on the East; the Turonians and Vindocinians doe border on it: on the North the County commonly called Maine, and la Val: and lastly, on the West it joyneth to Brittaine. The Country is more fruitfull and pleasant than large, having every where Hills planted with Vines, and Valleies crowned with greene Woods, flourishing Meddowes, and excellent Pastures for Cattell. Here are good white Wines, commonly called Vins d' Aniou. In briefe, this Country doth afford all things necessary for life. In some parts also of this Province they digge forth those blue kind of Stones, with which being cleft in pieces they do slate their Churches and Houses to keep

off the weather; and in French they call them Ardoises. King of ^^^ticus, after the Earle Paul was slaine, got the City of (...) and left it to his Posterity, who were Kings of France: among whom (...) Calvus gave the higher part of the Province to Torquatus, (...) still the Royalty thereof to himselfe: and the lower part to (...) Earle of Paris, whose Nephew Hugo magnus by his Brother Rupert Earle of Andegavia, and Duke of Celtica, gave it to Fulco, the Nephew of Terquatus. After Fulco there succeeded in order Fulco the 2. and Gotefridus commonly called Grisgonella, Fulco the 3. Gotefridus the 2. Fulco the 4. Fulco the 5. who was King of Hierusalem, after Baldwin, whose Daughter, he being a Widdower had married: and lastly Godfridus Barvatus the 6. who was married to Machtildis, the Daughter of Henry the first, King of England. His Sonnes were Henry, who was the second King of England of that name, and Gotefridus the sixth and William were Earles of Anjou: whom when their Brother the King had overcome by warre, and droven them out of their Country, his eldest Sonnes did succeed him in the Kingdome of England, and Gotefridus the 8. in the County of Anjou. The Unckle Iohn King of England did wage warre against the Earle Arthur the Sonne of Gotefrid, and Duke of Brittaine by the Mothers side. Arthur had now done Homage and Fealty to Philip Ang^^ King of France, for his Principality which he had of him: by what instigation leaving to take away Picardy from his Unckle the King and having passed his Army over the River and Ligeris, the King comming upon him on a sudden tooke him prisoner, and brought him to Rotomagum, where not long after he was put to death. The Mother of Arthur Constantia by name, the Daughter and Heire of ^^nan Prince of Brittaine, did accuse King Iohn of Parricide, before the King of France aforesaid: who being summoned and not appearing the Peares of France did condemne him of parricide, and those Provinces which he had in France they confiscated to the King: which sentence the King executing, he tooke Anjon into his owne hands, and left it to his Sonne Ludovick the 8, King of France. After whom succeeded his Son Ludovick the 9. surnamed the Holy, who granted this Province to his Brother Charles by right. After him followed Charles the 2. who marrying his Daughter Clementia to Charles Valesius, he gave this Province with her for her Dowry. After whom succeeded Philip Valesius the Sonne, and after him his Nephew Iohn, who gave the greatest part of this Country, which was honourd with the Title of a Dukedome in the yeere 1350. to his Sonne Ludovick. After him there follow'd in a direct Line Ludovick the 2. and Ludovick the 3. who dying without a^ Heire the Principality came to his Brother Renatus. Hee having to issue living, made Charles his Brothers Sonne his Heire, and he made King Ludovick the 11. his Heire. And thus it was annexed to the Crowne of France, and continued so united, untill Francis the first gave the revenue thereof to his Mother Aloisia Sabandae. King Charles the 9. gave it to his Brother Henry, who was afterward King of Pele^^^ and France. The Metropolis or Mother City of the Dukedome is Andegavum, Paulus Diaconus calleth it the City of Audegavia; it is commonly called Angiers. Ptolemy calls it Iultomagus Andicavarum. It is seated

map of AnjouTHE DVKEDOME OF JANIOV.

on both the bankes of the River Maine, which hath a Stone bridge over it. It is well governed, having a Bishop, a Marshall, and a Baily, and a President. It hath a famous University, instituted by Ludovi^^ the second Duke of Anjou in the yeere 1389. Francis Baldwine being called thither, who professed the Law there. This Dukedome hath many faire Townes, some whereof are bigger than others. I will reckon some Townes according as they are called in French, as namely Samur neere Liguris with a Castle; also Montreneau, Bauge, Beaufort, B^ssac, Monstreul-Belay, Maleuvrior, Ghantoceau, Viliers, Duretail, la Ples^^e, Chasteau-Gontier, Segre. In this Province there are many Lakes at a Rivolets, and above 40. Rivers. There are also great Fish-pits, and an infinite number of Fountaines. The chiefe Rivers are Ligures, Lo^^^ Vigenna, called la Vienne, Viane and Vignane: Meduana now called May^ Sarta commonly called Sartra and Lorius. Beyond the City of Andegavum there are some ancient ruines, which are commonly called Gr^han. Here they say that the Romanes did heretofore build a The^^^^, and some of the Walls doe yet remaine. And great store of old coyne is digged forth. Besides other Counties, Baronnies, and Signiori^s, these foure Counties doe Homage and Fealty to this Dukedome,The Country of Maire. Maine, Vendosme, Beaufort, and la Val, of which we will entreate in order. The County of Maine, commonly called Conte de Maine is the first. In Ptolemies time the Cenomanians did inhabit this Country. And the Province of the Cenomanians was inhabited as soone as any other part of France. The bounds thereof were heretofore longer than they are now, which may be gathered by that which Livie, Polybius, and Iustine have deliverd concerning the irruption of the Cemonians into Italy.The nature of the Soile. One part of the Country is fruitfull, the other barren, and the Inhabitants live more by hunted flesh than by bread or wine, which yet they doe not altogether want, for some parts of this Province are so fruitfull, that neither Andegavia, nor Tutonia can excell it for good wine, or fruits. The Soyle is full of Herbage, and it for Pasturing of Cattell.The ancient goverment. But we reade that this Province being unprehended under Aquitania, was sometime subject to the Duke of Aquitania, untill the King of France Ludovick the 9. and Henry the 3. King of England, did agree that, that which belonged to the King of England in Aquitania, which was bounded on the North with the River Caranton, and on the South with the Pyrenaean Mountaines, should for ever belong to Normandy, and to the Countries of the Cenomanians and Andegavians, in consideration wherof 1500. Crownes were to be paid unto him. Iohn King of France gave Andium and the County of the Cenomanians to his second Sonne Ludovick. The Letters Patents of this Donation or Guift dated 1360. may bee seene in the Kings Rolles. After Ludovick there succeeded Ludovick the second, his Sonne, and Ludovick the third his Nephew. These three were Kings of Naples. Ludovick the third dying without issue, his Brother Renatus succeeded after him, whom Ioane Queene of Naples, the second of that name, did make her Heire both of the Kingdome of Naples, and of the County of Province. Renatus had by Isabell the daughter of Charles the Bold his Sonne. Iohn Duke of Calabria, who dyed

before his Father Renatus. This Iohn had by Mary the Daughter of Charles Duke of Burbon, Nicolas Duke of Calabria, and Marquesse of Pontum, who dyed without issue, his Grandfather Renatus yet living. Renatus would not resigne his right to the Kingdome of Naples, and the County of Province to his Nephew Renatus, but left it to his Brother Charles Earle of the Cenomanians: who dying a little after, did institute and make Ludovick the 11. his Heire. In former times the whole Country was devided into two parts. The City of the Cenomanians belongeth to the King of France, but the City Maena or Maine with the Marquiship, being now made a Dukedome acknowledgeth the Guises to be Lords thereof. The chiefe Towne is by the River Sartra, commonly called le M^ns. At the first it was a Bayliwick, and after Henry the seconds time it had a President, and divers Townes did bring their appeales and suites hither. The Dukedome of Vendosme or the Dutche de Vendosme beginneth at Baugencia^um, which is the bounds betweene the two Belsia, which are called Solonia and Vindocina, which stretcheth out farre and wide even to the Sautones. It is so called from the Towne Vindocinum, commonly called Vendosme. That which Ptolemy calls Ovindikon (for so it is read) is a City of the Aulercian Cenomanians in Gallia Lugdunensis We doe affirme nothing. For that Ovinaiken, is perhaps the Towne which is now called le Ma^s, which is Scaligers opinion also. The Earles of Vendosme are descended from from the Stock of the Burbons. We reade that the first Earle hereof was Ludovick Barbonius, the Sonne of Iohn Earle of Marc and Clermont, after whom there succeeded Lineally Iohn his Sonne, and Francis and Charles his Nephews, whom Francis the first, King of France did create the first Duke of Vendosme. Charles was succeeded by his Sonne Antony, who was Duke of Vendosme a Peere of France, and in the right of his wife Ioane Albreta, King of Navarre, of whom came Henry Burbon, the fourth King of France of that name, and the most potent King of Navarre, Prince of Bearne, Duke of Vendosme, etc. There are also Beaufort and la Val.




THE DVKEDOME OF BITVRICVM.
THE Dukedome of Bituricum, or le Duche de Berry, which followeth in our Method, on the North looketh toward Solonia the lower part of Belsia, from which it is parted by the flowing streames of Caris,The Situation. on the East is looketh toward the Hurepensians, Nivernensians, and Bubonians, being bounderd here with a little Rivalet called la Fay: on the South is Lemovicum, where the River Croure floweth; on the West are the Picts and Turonians, from whom it is parted by a little River, commonly calld Clery.The (...) It is fruitfull in Corne, Wine, and other things necessary for mans life. It chiefely aboundeth with Cattell, which the Inhabitants doe disperse through all France. Here the Biturigians were seated formerly, who as Strabo, Ptolemie, and others doe write were called Cubi. For the Biturigians a people of France we^ heretofore twofold, distinguished by their surnames, as the Bit^^ig^^ Cubi, whose Metropolis was Avaricum in the first Aquitania, and the Vibiscian or Viviscian Bituriges, whose chiefe Citie was Burdigala, in the second Aquitania. Both of them were free Cities under the Romanes, as Pliny witnesseth. The Register of the Provinces calleth it the Citie of the Bituricians or Berotigians in the first Aquitania or Sen^ Viennensis. Iohn Calamaeus writeth much concerning the appellation and name of this Country, who containeth the lustorie of the Bi^rigians in sixe Bookes.
When Hugo Capetus governed France, Gotefridus was Praesident so^ the King over the Biturigians.The ancient government. From whome that Harpin was descended, who bought of King Henry the first the County of the Biturigians. Hee not long after preparing to goe to the warres of Palestine, or the holy land with other Princes, sold it to Philip the first, who united it againe to the Crowne. Some yeares afterward Iohn Valesi^^ did obtaine this Countie, now made a Dukedome, of his Father Iohn Valesius King of France: who dying without any issue Male, the Dukedome returned to the Kingdome. It was afterward assigned to Iohn the sonne of Charles the 6. who had a plentifull ofspring and Progenie. He dying at Apais, left his brother Charles to be his successor, who being inaugurated King of France, and despising the marirage of Henry King of England, with Katherine his Cousin Germaine, when the English had tooke away the greatest part of his Kingdome, hee was called in scorne King of the Biturigians. After Charles the Father the sonne Charles the 7. succeeded, Brother to Ludorick the 11. King of

map of Bituricum^HE DVKEDOME OF BITVRICVM.

France. After him Margaret, Sister to King Francis being first married to Charles Duke of Alencon, afterward to Henry Albretanus King of Navarre, received the Dukedome of the Biturigians of her Brother to her owne use. And lastly Margaret, the Daughter of the same King Francis, did receave the Dukedome of Biturigum from her Brother Henry the second, when he married Emanuel Philibert, Prince of the Allobrogians. Caesar Antonius, and others doe call the chiefe Citie thereof Avaricum, which now in French is called Bourges, Ammianus and others call it Bituriga. It is also called Biturica, Bituri^ae, The City Bit^rig^, and the City Biturica. Some would have it called Avaricum from the River Eura, which washeth it. It is seated in a very pleasant soyle, abounding not onely with all kinde of Corne and Graine, but also with excellent Wine, Cattell, Fowle, and all sorts of fruits. It is enamold with foure Rivers, Anfron and Aurette flowing on one side, Yure and Molon on the other side. It is uncertaine who built it, as it also of other Townes. The ancient City was otherwise seated than it is now. For it lay towards the Marishes, the Walls whereof may bee yet seene, being still whole, and sollidly built, as all the workes of the ancient Romanes were. They begin at the great Tower, and so runne along by S. Stephens Church, S. Iohns streete, and the Got^i^a Gate, even to the New Gate called heretofore S. Andrewes Gate, from thence by the Street of the Amphitheater, commonly called des A^^nes, they stretch themselves to the Gate Turonensis, and from thence fetching a compasse towards S. Pauls Gate, they come by degrees back againe to the aforesaid Tower. After Charles the Great and others did so amplifie and enlarge the Territories of this City, that now it may compare with the greatest and strongest Cities of France: being long, faire, and spacious. It is fortified with 80. high strong Towers. The chiefe of them is that which I said was called the great Tower, in French la Grosse Tour, in regard of the unusuall thicknesse thereof, which Philip the second, King of France, Anno 1190. did streng^hen with lesser Towers, and with a Wall, and deep Ditches. It is ^o^^d, and very high. They say there was another Tower like it which is now ruinated, and that from these two Towers the Biturigians were so called Bituris. And Calamaus doth commend this Verse written by an ancient Grammarian:
Turribus a binis, inde vocor Bituris.From two Towres which the Wall doe fence,A Biturian I am call'd from thence.
Here are seventeene Collegiat Churches as they call them, and seventeene Parish Churches; This City hath an Archbishoprick, and a flourishing University, to which there is none equall in France, being Mother and Nurse of most learned men. The study of the Law is in greatest estimation there, of which there are excellent Professours. As Avaricum is the chiefe Tribunall of the whole Dukedome, where the Monarch of the Biturigians sitteth as President, and is commonly

called le Bailly de Berry. Hither are all appeales brought both from the City Praetor, and from all Magistrates of other places in the Territory of Bituricum. But the Prefect of Bituricum hath under him the Metropolis it selfe Avaricum. and 5. Dioeceses Yssoudum, Dum le Roy, Vierson, Mehun, Concressault. There are reckoned with the Metropolis, the County of Sancerre, and S. Aignan, the Barony of Mountfaulcon, and almost. Some suppose that Sancerra was so called from Ceres, who was there reverenced and worshiped: as it were the Chappel of Ceres. The more learned Latine Writers leaving this Etymologie doe call it Xantodorum. It hath the Title of a County, which in the yeere 1015. it exchanged with Bellovacum, and in the yeere 1573. it indured a hard Siege, that they were enforced to eate Dogges, Cats, Horses, Dormice, Mice, Moles, and after they had eaten Hornes, skins, and the like, they were compelled to eate their owne excrements, and mans flesh These Castellania are subject to it Sanceges, Beaufeu, Chapelle d'Anguillon, le Chastel de Boncard, lalonges, Tarenay, Verdigny, Menesme, Charentomry, Brie and others. S. Aignan is so called from the Bishop S. Anianus. The Barony of Mountfaulcon, which signifies in Latine Montem Faulconis, or the Mountaine of the Faulcon, doth containe the Signiories of Baugy and Gion, also la Fane, Lyvran, ^ony, Villabon, Seury, Marcilly, Marnay, Farges, Avor, Saligny, Percigny, Cru, Lassax, Boisboson, Nuissement, Villiers, Compoy. Lastly, the Castellania are Ays d'Anguillon, Sury en Vaux S. Soulange, S. Palais, la Salle du Roy, Bueil, Quantilly, Pomorigny, Francheville, la Chapelle, Nancay, Drye, Levreux, Beaulieu, Brecy, Beugy. S. Fleurant, Neufvisur, Baranion, Morthonnier. Maymaignes, Maubranches, S. Vrsin, Tillay, Brilliers, Vatan, S. Satur, Lury, Estrechies, Maulpas, Villeneusve, S. Crapaix. Ascilly, lussy le Chauldrier, la Corne, les Chaizes, Vaulvrilles, les Cloyes, Bouge. So much concerning the Metropolis and the large Jurisdiction thereof, the other Dioeceses are Yssouldun a Royall City and a Bayliwick, which hath under it the Baronies of Chasteauroux, Gracay, Ceracoy, S. Severe, Lynieres, to which is joyned the Castelania of Rizay: also Argenton, in which are the Marshalship of Ravennes, and the Praefectureship of Servignet. The Castelania are Bourssac, Chasteau Meillant, Marcul, Neffi S. Sepulchre, Rully, Puuldy: Massy, Cahors, Peronse, Chastellet, Messeuvre, Augurandae, S. Chartier, le Palleteau, Bommieres, Moche, Fully, Voullon, la Ferte, Nohant, Ville Dieu, Chastre, and Charroux. There is also Dunum Regium, or Dun le Roy, under which are these Castelaniae, besides others, Pradict Callaut a Baronnie: Chasteauneuf, neere the River Caris, S. Iulian. Vierzon, a royall City and a Dioecese having these Signiories under it, Champre, Motte d'Aisy, Saragosse, Brivay, Mery. Mehun hath under it the Castellania Love and Foici. Concourfault or Concressault hath under it Vailly, Argeny, Clemon, Beaujeu. This Country is watered with the Rivers Ligert, Souldra, Aurrena, Cherre, Theone, Iudro, Creusa,The Rivers. and some other smaller Rivulets. Here are no Mountaines of any note. The Country is interlaced here and there with Woods,The Woods, the chiefe whereof are Silva Roberti, and Lacenna Sylva, or Roberts Wood, and the Wood Lacenna. I come to the publike and private workes. At Avaricum besides the 34. Churches aforesaid.The publike workes. There are foure Monasteries of Menditant Friers: two Abbies for men, the one dedicated to S. Sulpitius,

being strong, rich, and standing without the Walls, the other within the City, dedicated to D. Ambrosius, and well endowed: and three Nunneries. Not long since a godly Magistrate thereof did build in Hospitall for the reliefe of poore and decreped people. Of all the faire Aedifices here, which are many, the chiefe is the stately and sumptuous House of Iames Cordus, who lived in Charles the 7. time. There are also the Almanes Houses, who were formerly the Kings Treasurers, before the Faires, to which a great concourse of Strangers were wont to resort. were kept at Lions. Here are infinite ruines both within and without the Walls of old Aedifices which were built with curious workmanship: and many are daily digged forth especially out of the Sand-pits, as they call them, where sometime stood the Amphitheater. The Archbishop of Bourges, hath these Suffragan Bishops under him: the Bishop of Clermont: of Rhodes: of Lymege^^ of Mende: of Alby: of Cahors: of Castres: of Tulles: and of S. Flour: but the Bishop of Puy is exempted.



THE DVKEDOME OF BVRBON.
THE Country and Dukedome of Burbon, or le Pays and Duche de Burbonneis, was so called from the Dukes of Burbon,The Situation who were Governours thereof. On the West it is neighboured with the Biturigians, and Lemonicians, on the North with the Nivernianis: On the East lyeth Burgundie, on the South are the Lugdunians.The fertility. The Soile for the most part is all pasture ground, and hath no Corne but in some few places. But there are very good Wines, and great plenty of Corne. Those people whom Caesar Lib. 1. de Bello Gallico calleth Boij, were supposed to have dwelt here formerly, and hee calleth their Towne Lib. 7. Gergovia, where hee also mentioneth Boia, which doubtlesse was the Boians Towne. Their strength was so greate that joyning themselves with the Cenomanians and Insubrians, they pluckt downe the pride and arrogancy of the Thuscians, possest their dominions, and seated themselves in that parte of Italie which is now calld Romania. The Romanes did call it Gallia Togata, because the Frenchmen who were subject to the Romanes, dwelt there. The Sugusians also did inhabit all that part which is called le Bays de Fores. All this Territorie, as many other bordering Countries, was heretofore subject to the Kings of Aquitaine. Afterward it had Dukes;The ancient government. who from a Towne of no meane note were called Dukes of Burbon. The last of them was Arcibaldus, who had one onely daughter and heyre, called Agnes. Shee marrying Iohn Duke of Bugundie, gave her daughter Beatrix, which shee had by him, the Dukedome of Burbon for her dowry, having married her to Robert the Son of Ludovick the ninth, yet with this caution, that it should be called after his wives name, and the house of the Burbons, that so the title thereof might remaine to posteritie. Which being done. Robert the sonne of Ludorick the ninth, who was canonized for a Saint, did propagate and enlarge the name of the Borbons. For his sonnes were Ludorick surnamed the greate, who succeeded his Father, Iohn Claromont Lord of the Towne of the Fane of Iustine in Campania: Peter Archdeacon of Paris, and two daughters. This Ludorick Philip Valesius the sixt created the first Duke of Burbon, in the yeare 1339. or thereabout, who had by his wife Mary the daughter of Iohn Earle of Hannonia, Peter the first who succeeded him, and Iames the Father of the Earles of March and Vendosme^, Philip Lord of Belloium, Ma^y, and Beatrix. This Peter was created the second Duke of Burbon, and Lord of Molin. Hee was slaine in a Battell fought betweene the Picts, and the English. Hee had by Isabell, the daughter of Charles, Earle of Valence. Ludorick the 2. who succeeded his Father: Iames the

Lord of March, and seven daughters. Ludorick surnamed the good married Anna, the daughter of Beraldus the Dolphine of Avernia, who was called Duke Simus, and of Ione Forrestaria, who brought him (...) who succeeded his Father, Ludovick, and Iames Lord of Prausium. Io^ the first of that name marrying Mary the daughter of Iohn, Duke of the Biturigians, was Duke of Burbon and Avernia, Earle of Clarom^^ Mompensper, Forrest, and Lord of Bellijocum and the Castle of China^ From him issued Charles, who succeeded his Father, Ludorick Earle of Montpenser (from whom the Dukes came of Montpenser) and Ia^^ Charles tooke the part of King Charles the 7. and Philip the good, Duke of Burgundie, with whome at last by the meditation and perswasion his wife Agnes a Burgundian, sister to Philip, hee made a peace with hi^ Agnes brought him Iohn who succeeded after him, Ludovick, Peter, (...) was afterward a Duke, Charles a Cardinall, and Archbishop of Li^^ Ludorick Bishop of Leodium, Iames and five daughters. Iohn the second was Duke of Borbon and Avernia, Earle of Clarom^nt, of Forrest, the Iland and March, Lord of Belliocum and of the Castell of Chin^^, (...) Peere and Constable of the Kingdome of France. Hee marryed thrice, but dyed without issue. Peter the 2. succeeded his brother John, (...) was high Chamberlaine of the Kingdome of France, and hee had (...) Anne daughter of King Ludorick the 11. one onely daughter called Susan, who succeeded her Father. Shee marrying Charles B^^ Earle of Montpenser (the sonne of Gilbert Burbon, Nephew to Iohn ^dorick the first aforesaid, Duke of Burbon, Earle of Montpenser, (...) Dolphine of Avernia) by her marriage made her Husband Duke of Burbon. This was that Charles who being Constable of France, (...) volting from his Prince Francis King of France, tooke part and side with the Emperour Charles the fifth, and besieged Rome where bei^ shot with a bullet in the yeare 1527. the day before the Nones (...) May, he dyed, having obtaind no victorie nor left no children. As^ the death of his wife Susan, the King getting Burbon to himselfe, (...) Dukes of Vendosme kept onely their armes, and their bare title by the right of affinitie. The Earles of Flanders did first lineally desc^^^ from the familie of the Burbons: and many great Kings and Prince have sought to bee linkt in affinitie with this royall and Prince^ house. Moreover the French Geogrophars doe make two parts (...) the Dukedome of Burbon, the lower and the higher. The lower co^taineth divers Cities, and two Countries. Concerning the Citie^ The Metropolis of the whole Dukedome is Molinum (or Melius) Towne by the River which Caesar calls Elaver, now Allier: it was (...) ancient Seate of Dukes: afterward it was a house of pleasure, and pleasant retyring place for the Kings of France. Some thinke th^^ that which Caesar calls Gergobina was a Towne among the Celta, wh^^ Caesar in the Helvetian Warre placed there. The Marshall of Bur^^^ hath his Presidiall Seate here, which was erected by King Francis the first of that name. Molins hath a very faire Castle, and a curious G^^den adjoyning to it, in which there are great store of Oranges and Citernes. In the Castle Xystum you may see the lively Pictures of the Dukes of Burbon, and their Genealogies. Here is also a faire Fo^^taine.

map of BourbonTHE DVKEDOME OF BVRBON.

The other Cities and Townes are Burbon, famous for antiquity, and which heretofore did name the whole Province. Caesar in his ^. Booke calleth it Boia. This City is situated betweene the Rivers Elaveres and Caris, commonly called Cher, well knowne and famous in the time of Charles the great. It hath a strong Castle and Baths: also L'Archimont, Montmerant. And Cosne surnamed en Burbonnois neere the River Loire, having a Castle, and in regard that the Territory is f^^^ for Pasturage it exceedeth other parts: also Montlusson, and S. Por^is, whose Fields doe bring forth excellent Wines, (yet some doe ascribe it to Avernia) also Cusset; Chancelle; Charroux; Vernueil, famous foe Wines: also Varennes a famous Towne by the River Elaveres; Ga^^ confining upon Avernia; also Le Mont aux Moines; Souvigni le Comte, (...) aux Moines; la Palisse, having a stately Castle: also Erisson, Sancoing^, the Fane of S. Peter, commonly called S. Pierre le Monstier, which is not very ancient. It hath a President, under whom are the Baylies of the same Towne; and the Townes which are commonly called Deuzi^^, Xaincois, Cusset, and others, one part whereof are seated in Averni^, and another in Nervernesium: there is also Ainay la Chasteau so named from the Castle S. Amand, and others. So much concerning the Cities and Townes. The Counties are two, which are commonly called Beaujolois and Forest. The former Bello Iolesius containeth all that lyeth betweene the River Ligeris and Araris, being situated towards the East betweene the Forestians and Burgundians: being the Patrimony of the ancient Burbons. The chiefe City is called in French Be^jea. The other is named not from the Woods and Forrests as the word doth seeme to intimate, but from the Forensians, for so I name those people: on the North lyeth Burbon, on the West Avernia, on the South the Lugdunians confine upon it: on the East the Bello-Jolesians. Heretofore it had Earles, from whose Stock did arise the noble of Bello-Iolesius. A certaine Earle of Forrest and Bello-Iolesius is celebrated by French Historians, who had three Sonnes, Arthauldus Earle of Lugdunum, Stephen Earle of Forrest, and Emfrid Earle of Bello-I^^s^^. When thus the Counties of Forrest and Bello-Iolesius had beene in a long time distracted, they were united againe by the death of G^^^d, Earle of Bello-Iolesius, who was Master of the horse in the time of Philip the 2. King of France, for his Sister Isabel, Countesse of Bello-Iolesius was married to Reginaldus, Earle of Fortest, who was discended of the stocke of Arthauld aforesaid, as shee from the ofspring of Stepha^, who was brother to Arthauld as is mentioned before. From this marriage there proceeded Guido, who was heyre to the County of Forrest, and Lugovick, who was Lord of Bello-Iolesius. After whome there is (...) certainety delivered. Henry the third King of France, before hee came to the Monarchie of France, possessed the Dukedomes of B^^bon and Avernia, the County of Forrest together with the Dukedome of Andigavia.
It containeth fortie walled Townes, and about as many faire Villages. The chiefe Towne of the Forrensians Roana, or Roanne, neere the River Ligeris, which hath a Bridge over it, which standeth in the way to Lions, and also a Castle. The second Towne of note is (...)

Segusian^rum, for so it was heretofore called which is now commonly calld Feurs: Ptolomy calls it Phoros of the Segusians: and the Itinerary Tables corruptly call it Forum Segustivarum. And from this Fotum, the Country corruptly is commonly called Le Layis de Forest, when it should bee rather called, de Fores. This is now a Towne of commerce and traffique for the whole Province. The other Townes are Mombrisonium, or Montbrison, being a Bayliwicke and subject to the Lugdunians, also the Fane of S. Stephan, and S. Estierne de Furan, where armor and Iron barres are made, which are transported from thence into all parts of France. The artificers Arte is much furthered by nature of the water, which doth give an excellent temper to Iron, and also the coales which are digged there: there is also the Fane of S. Galmarus, or S. Galmier, or Guermier, in the Suburbs whereof, there is an Alome Fountaine, which is commonly called Font-Foule: also the Fane of S. Germane, or S. Germain Laval, which hath abundance of wine growing about it: also the Fane of D. Bovet, or S. Bovetle Castell, in which the best tongs are made: also the Fane of D. Rembertus, or S. Rembert, having the first Bridge that is over Ligeris. The Country of Burbon is watered with two great Rivers, namely Ligeris and Elavera, being a River of Arvernia. Ligeris commonly called Loire riseth up in Avernia, in a place which in French is called La Font de Loire. Elever, commonly called Allier, riseth foure Miles above the Towne Clarumont, beneath Brionda neere Gergovia, and floweth not farre from a place which in French is called Vsco, where there is a famous mine of gold, and of the stone Lazulus. It is as bigge as the River Ligeris, and by so much more full of fish. Concerning the Manners of the Burbons, those which border on Avernia are of the same disposition with them, namely wittie and craftie, very laborious, carefull to get, and for the most part they are litigious, and violent men, and ill to be dealt withall. Those that dwell farther off are courteous and affable, subtile and well experienced, frugall and carefull housekeepers, greedy of gaine, and yet very bountifull and kind toward strangers. The Forensians also are subtile, acute, and witty, wisely provident and carefull in their owne affaires, loving gaine, and to that end they travell into remote and farre distant Countries to Merchandise and traffique with them. But they are mercifull and kinde to their owne Countrymen if they come to necessity and want in forraine Countries. Much warinesse and wisedome is to be vs'd, in despatching any businesse with a Forensian. Forrest doth send her workes in Iron and Brasse thorow the whole world, especially the Fane of S. Stephen, where there are very many Artificers, and as good as any in France. And there are many Merchants of this Country very rich, having great estates in other parts out of France.



THE DESCRIPTION OF THE ARCHBISHOPRICK AND COVNTY OF BVRDEGALIA.
BURDIGALIA having an Archbishoprick and Coun^ belonging to it, and the head and Metropolis of Guien^ is an ancient and famous City, which Strabo and Pliny ha^ mentioned, and Strabo Lib. 4. Geogr. writeth thus: Gar^ being enlarged with the receit of three Rivers doth (...) by the Biturigians, whom they call the Viviscians and Santones, being both Countries of France. It hath Burdigalia a Towne of Traffique seated by a certaine great Lake, which is made by the eruptions (...) breaking out of the River. Concerning the name there are (...) opinions. For some say it was called Aquita from the abundance (...) waters, whence also others doe derive the name of the Province (...) Aquitane, from Bourda and Iala, two Rivulets, the one whereof is ne^ to Burdigala, the other 4000. miles off, others bring other dertvati^ But I beleeve that the name was derived from Burgo, and Isiderus ^ginum lib. 15. cap. 1. seemeth to be of the same opinion: when he (...) That Burdigala was so called, because it contained a Colony of (...) French Burgians, others read it the French Biturigians. And S^ is of the same minde in his Burdigala. And these people, as it is aforesaid, were called Viviscians, to distinguish them from the Cubian (...) turigians neere the River Ligeris, which Ausonius a Poet of Bu^ testifies in his Verses, wherein he sings thus:


Haec ego Vivisca ducens ab origine gentem.


These things I, who by my Country am
Descended from the old Viviscian.


And this ancient Inscription doth confirme it.
AVGUSTO SACRUM
ET GENIO CIVITATIS
BIT. VIV.
Which besides famous Ioseph Scaliger, Elias Vinetus in his most lear^ Annotations to Ausonius, and Indocus Syncerus in his Itinerarie ad^ to his Booke of Burdigala, doe mention. This City when it came in^ the hands, was not onely freely permitted to use their owne Law as Strabo and Pliny affirme; but they adorn'd it also with faire Ae^fices

map of BurdigalaTHE ARCHBISHOPRICK AND COVNTY OF BVRDIGALA.

and magnificent Monuments and pieces of Building, of which there doe yet remaine some vast ruines For in the yeere 1557. when it was strengthned with some new Fortifications, some ruines of Baths were found neere to Iupiters Gate were found and discovered There are also two faire Aedifices which for the most part are in repaire and whole: namely, one which they call the Palace of Safety, and another which is commonly named the Palace of Galienus. The former stood heretofore our of the City neere Garumna, by the D^^^ which fortified the North side of the City (as Lurbeus writeth in his Chronicle, whose words I doe here set downe) but at length it was included within the City when the City was inlarged on that side There is a Quadrangular straite sided Standard, being 8^. foote lo^ and 63. broad, having 8. Pillars in length, and 6. in breadth, so the it had in the whole compasse of it 24. Pillars, of which there are (...) yet standing adorned with some Images and Statues. There is a Va^^ under it built after an old fashion, in which Wine is laid. It is doubtfull how it was used heretofore, and some beleeve that it was a Temple consecrated to the Turelary God, which appeareth by the (...) thereof, concerning which see Merula in his Cosmographie. The common people doe call it Pilas from the Pillars thereof. (...) there are some small ruines of a magnificent Amphitheater, w^^ were and are without the City. It was encompassed (as Vinctus saith with 6. walls. And betweene the outermost which was higher than the rest, and the innermost which was lower than all the rest the was 68. feete distance. The length of the Yard, which had Doo^^ on every side was 224. foote, and the breadth 140. foote: for it is their custome to build such Aedifices in an Ovall Figure. Also the ^^cient Walls are worthy of consideration, which are in the middle if the City, and were in good repaire in Ausonius time, which hee (...) mentioneth.

The Walls are square having Towres thereon so high,
That the tops thereof doe reach unto the skie.

After those times it suffered many calamities, being first washed (...) the Gothes, and then burnt by the Sarazens and Normans. But afterward it was re-edified and enlarged, so that now it containeth 45. Acres of ground, so that it is as bigge as a third part of (...). For the Romane Empire declining, the Gothes obtained it in the 400. yeare from the building of the City, who being expelled, and Mari^us being slaine in Picaady, and those which remained, cut off in the Ar^^ Fields which were so named from that slaughter neere to Burdgi. it returned againe to the Frenchmen. But when the Frenchmen g^^^ slothfull and carelesse, the Aquitanians about the yeere 727. shaking off their subjection to the French did create Eudo Duke thereof. T^^ Sonne of this Eudo was Caifrus, who being forsaken by his owne m^^, was slaine in the yeere 767. and was buried without the City in a Moorish place, neere the Castle Farus, where now the Capuchi^s have built themselves a Religious house. Afterward Hunold whom

the Aquitanians had made Duke, being vanquished and droven out by Charles the Great, this Province was restored to the French, and to keepe it the better in obedience, there were Earles placed in divers parts of Aquitaine, and especially at Bourdoaus there was left Sigumus the Father of Huon of Bourdeaus, and after these other Earles and Dukes did governe the people under the King of France. D. Marttalis was the first that converted those of Bourdeaus to the Christian faith, who as it is reported built a Temple there, and dedicated it to S. Andrew the Apostle, afterward it became the Seate of an Archbishop, on which these Bishopricks doe depend, Santonensis, Pictaviensis, Lussonensis, Mallacensis, Petragoricensis, Serlacensit, Condomiensis, Agimensis. And as this City is large, so it is beautified with divers Churches, for there are two Collegiate Churches, one of which is Metropolitan, 12. Parish Churches, 8. Frieries, one Nunnery, and a Colledge of Jesuites. There is a faire Church-yard of S. Severine without Iupiters Gate neere the Amphitheater which is worthy to bee seene, both because it is more ancient then the rest, in which S. Amandus, and S. Severinus were buried, and divers other Monuments are shewed, and also because there hollow stones laide on Sepulchers, which are full of water or empty, according to the increase or decrease of the Moone. Many Knights are here interr'd who were slaine in the time of Charles the great by the treachery of Ganelen. The University is an Ornament unto it, the Professors whereof doe instruct Youth in all Arts and Sciences. In which both heretofore and of late Tiberius Victor and Minervius a Rhetorician whom D. Ieromimus mentioneth in his Chronicle, and maketh another Quintilian. And Attius Celphidius, whom Ammianus Marcellinus calleth a vehement Orator, were Latine and Greeke Professors. And also Pomponius Maximus Hirculanus, and many others, of whom Ausonius maketh a Catalogue with severall Eulogies. The most noted in our age were, Andr. Goveanus, Ioannes Gelida, M. Ant. Muretus, Ioannes, Costanus, Georg. Buchanan, Nicolaus Grachius, Withelmus Guerentaeus, and of late Elias Vinetus, a learned man, and a light to his Country. This University had many priviledges, honors, and liberties granted unto it by the Princes of Aquitaine, the Kings of France, and the Popes of Rome: and at last was beautified by the Aquitaine Colledge, from whence many learned men as Lights of France have successively come forth. But let vs speake somewhat of the Parliament, which is the ancientest seate of Justice in France, whither the Burdigalians, the Valatensians, the Aginnensians, the Condomiensians, the Armeniacensians, the Cardurcians, the Leniovicensians, the Petrocorensians, the Augelismensians, the Santons, and Ruxellensians, have recourse by way of suite. But afterward the Provinces of Armenium, of Santome, of Ruxelles, and the greatest part of Cadurcium did withdraw themselves and came to the Parliament of Paris and Tolouse. But when King Ludovick had granted Aquitania (which was now circumscribed with new bounds) to his Brother Charles to hold of him by Fealty, the Parliament was translated to the Picts, but after Charles his decease in the yeere 1472. and all Aquitaine returning to Ludovick, it was brought back againe, and not long

after Charles the 8. by his Edict dated in the yeere 1483. made it to consist of three Presidents, and 18. Counsellors. Francis the first is the yeere 1519. in the moneth of of May added to them a Decurie of new Counsellors, to judge of criminall matters, which they call Tonell. But when by sedition the Parliament in the yeere 1540. wa^ changed againe. King Henry the 2. restored the former ample dignity of the Senate to Burdigala, and received the Citizens into favour. Here the Prefect of the Province of Aquitaine hath his Seate, who is called the Marshall and also the Admirall. There is also in the same City a Colledge of Questors or Auditors of accounts. The government of the Common-wealth of Burdeaux as it is at this day began is the raigne of Henry King of England who in the yeere 1173. granted that the Citizens should freely decree a Prince of the Senate whom they call the Maior of the City, but at first the Maiors held their office continually, and did yeerely chuse a Substitute out of the sworne men, whom in his absence was to be Governour of the Colledge of sworne men. Henry the 2. did change this custome, so that the Maiors office should not be perpetuall, but for two yeeres. After him the sworne men as they call them should succeede: Who being fifty at the beginning were reduced to 24. and in the yeare 1378. they were contracted to 12. according to the number of the parts of the Citie. But at last they came to be sixe, and those to rule two yeares: so the three were changed every yeare, and they continued in their Mairoalty for two whole yeares. To this Colledge of the Maior and the sworne men, there were added 30. chosened Citizens to assist them in counsell and above three hundred more were added, if a matter of consequence were handled. It hath a fruitfull Soile for Wines, which is transported from thence into other parrs of Europe, the praise whereof is celebrated by the ancients, as also Pliny and Columella, and it hath abundane of all other necessaries. Besides it hath convenient Rivers, the greatest whereof are Garumna, and Dordona. There are many Townes subject to Burdeaus, as these neere to the Sea Esparus or Caput S. Mariae, in which place Ptolemy seateth Novioparrum, which is now not to be knowne: also the Fane of Macarium, Larmont, Connaria, also Liburnium, which is a pretty small Towne, seated at the mouth of Dardona, and others. But it is most famous, because Ausonius was borne here, who celebrateth the praise of his Country in these verses.

My too long silence I doe now condemne,
That thee O Countrie fam'd for witty men,
And for thy pleasant Rivers, and thy Wine,
And Senate, art not here amongst the prime
Mentiond by mee, as if thou wert a small
Citie, and didst deserve no praise at all.
Burdigala is my native Country where
The mild ayre makes the earth much fruite to beare,
The Spring is long, the Winter short belowe,
The leavy Mountaines shadowed Rivers flowe,
Whose hasty course doe imitate the Seas.
Then the wayes within and houses you may please
To admire, and that the streetes doe still retaine,
Though they are large, and broade their former name.
And yet through the Citie a fresh streame doth glide,
Which when the Ocean filleth with his tide,
You shall behold when as the Sea doth come,
How by the Ships which ride there it doth runne.




THE COVNTY OF PERTICA.
THE Country of Pertica confineth on the Carnuten (...) and dependeth also on their diocesse, and hath bee^ long time a famous County. First it came by ma^ age to the familie of the Druides, and afterward to Alenconians. For Robert a Frensh man Earle of the D^ides, marryed the widdow of Rotrocus Earle of Pertica, who was sla^ at the seige of the Castle of Rotomagum. After him Robert le^^^ the sonne of Charles, and brother to Phillip Valesius, who died with issue, being slaine in the Battell of Cressy in the yeare 1346. was (...) of Pertica. It is divided into two parts, the lower which is ca^^ Pertica Goveti, is as it were inserted into Carnutum, the head T^^ whereof is Nogentum of Rotrocus, which in the yeare 1428. was (...) by the Earle if Salisbury an Englsh man, and all that were found were hangd. But afterward in the yeare 1449. Charles the 7. i^verd it againe. This Towne is called Nogentum of Rotroc from Earle thereof above mentioned, who marched in the yeare (...) with his English troupes into Syria, against Fulco Earle of the A^ans, and King of Hierusalem, and Yvo Carnutensis doth name it (...) Epistle to Pope Pascall, thereby to difference it from the oth^^ ^entum. Sigebert about the yeare 1170. doth mention Godefrid^ of Pertica, who by rebellion lost his Earledome. There are also (...) Townes besides Nogentum: as Basochium, Govetum, Alugium, mons ^lij, ^rovium, Anthovium, Maulbesium, the Towne of red Maill^^^, Condatum seated by the River Huisne. The higher part of P^ called the County, and it hath the Towne Mortenium, with a (...) seated on a Hill, in which the Praefect whom they call the Bayly his residence, also the Townes Pentletum, and Belesmia, a Towne (...) a Castle. Whence the ancient and famous families of the B^ is descended, out of which came Robert ^elemy, who sided with B^tus, intending to make warre against his brother, King of England ^^^cerning whom see Thomas Walsingam in his description or patterne^ Neustriae: on the frontiers thereof toward Normandy are Vernolium, (...) Memertium towards Cenomania. Some would seate the Vnelly here people once of France, whom Caesar mentioneth Lib. 3. de bello Galli^^ these words. While these things were done at Venice, Q. T^^ Sapinus came with his army which Caesar had given him, into the Co^try of thf Vnelly, Viridovix was Captaine thereof, and did governe those Cities which had revolted, out of which he levyed a great ^my. And a little before at the end of the second Booke: at the (...) time came P. Crassus, whom hee had sent with one Legion to the ^^netians, the Vnelli, the Osismi, the Curiosilitae, the Sesuriij, the (...)

map of Pertica^HE COVNTIE OF PERTICA

Rhedones, which are maritine Cities neere to the Ocean etc. Bla^^ Vignerius in his Frensh translation for Vnelli doth put, du parche and (...) parche, and Renat Chopinus. Concerning the Municipiall Lawes of the Audians doth in like manner calling them ceux de perche, which hee ranslateth the Vncli. But when Caesar maketh them to be neere unto the Armorican Cities (which is a Maritaine Nation) some thinke that this name belongeth to the Lavallij, but I leave these things to more curious inquisiters. In this Country the learned and Noble Poet Anocre^^ was borne, who was worthily called the Remigium Bellaq^^^ of his age, who in his Pastoralls did lively expresse and paint forth that elegant fiction of the Arcadia of Zamazius, which exceedeth all the rest. His Poeme concerning Gemmes and pretious stones, d^^ deserve the lawreth wreath, to which Ronsard the Prince of French Poets hath alluded, in an Epitaph which hee made on him, which is to be read at Paris, which I have rudely heere translated into Latine.



BELLAQUIO artifices quid splendida saxa paratis?
En gemmis tutulum condidit ipse sibi.

Artificers why doe you now provide?
Faire shining stones that may Anacreon hide,
For hee a Tombe of pretious stones compos'd.
Wherein his pretious body is enclos'd.





THE DVKEDOME OF TVRONE.
THE Province of Turone in regard of the incomparable pleasantnesse of the place, and the abundance of all kind of fruites, is worthily called the Garden of France. Which the Princes thereof have alwayes much delighted in and honoured it, both as I said for the conveniency of the ^mation, and for the overflowing plenty of all things necessary. The Country is large, and hath round about it the Bellovacians, the An^egavians, the Pictavians, and the Biturigians: it hath many faire Cities and Townes, it maketh also a part of the Parliament of Paris ^s they call it, and it is honoured with a Seate of Judgement. The Metropolis and Mother City thereof is Turon, commonly called To^s, being seated at the confluence and meeting of the Rivers Ligeris and Carus. Ptolemy calls it Caesarodunum, concerning the name and antiquity whereof there are many reports, but not credible, and therefore we omit them. Let it suffice that the great Romane Emperour Iulius Caesar doth reckon the Turones among the chiefe people of France, who joyned themselves to the Romanes, and in his 2. Booke de bello Gallico, about the end thereof are these words; He having brought his Legions to Winter at Carnutes, Andes, and Turones, which were Cities neere unto these places, where hee waged warre, went into Italy, as also Lib. 7. Hee speedily joyneth to himselfe the Senons, the Parisians, the Pictones, the Cadurcians, the Turones, the Aulercians, and others which dwell neere the Sea. Also Lucan mentioneth them in this Verse.



Instabiles Turones circumsita castra coercent.



Round pitched Tents doe keepe in there,
The Turones who unconstant were.


It is a neate City, having long cleane streets, and very faire houses. It had heretofore divers Bishops famous for Sanctitie and Learning, as Martinus, Bricius, Perpetuus, Volusianas, and others, and almost all the Bishops of Britaine, of the Andians, and Cemonians noted by others, are Suffragans unto him. The chiefe Seate of Justice when the Parisians rebelled, was translated hither by King Henry the third. Traffique in Silkes, and also Cloth is much used in Toures, both which doe enrich the Merchants. And the Inhabitants have revenues out of

their Lands, on which they live gallantly. The City is adorned w^ faire magnificent Temples, among which is that which was dedica^ to D. Gratian, built by the English with a Clock-dyall on it. And (...) other consecrated to D. Martinus, in which his bones and ashes (...) rest, which the By-dwellers doe honour with religious worship. (...) Gregory who from his Country was called Turonensis was borne (...) flourished about the yeere of Christ 600. whose Writings for the (...) story of those times are much esteemed by posterity. It containe^ the ashes of that great Poet P. Ronsard, who they call the French ^mer, and Pindar. It was sometimes governed by Earles, afterward (...) the Dukes of Brittaine, but when Iohn his Nephew Arthur being sla^ possessed the County, the Province was confiscate to the King by (...) sentence of the highest Senate of France. After which the King (...) France did make it a Dukedome, and gave it for a time to the M^rite Friers. Here foure chiefe French Counsels were kept. H^^ also a Money Mint famous for the antiquity thereof. It is gover^ by an ordinary Magistrate, and hath two Prefects, besides a M^^ and Auditors, to maintaine the rights, privildges, and liberties of (...) Inhabitants. There is also a Court of the Quaestors, Auditon, (...) Receivers of the publike customes and impositions. But to conc^^^ we will set downe an elegant description of this place, being (...) out of Brittons Philipeides.

Thence to the City of Turone they goe,
Round about which two shining streames doe flowe,
Here the River Ligaris, there Caurus, and
It in the middle betweene both doth stand:
Well seated, and faire streames doe it adorne
Being full of Trees, and having store of Corne,
Proud of her Citizens, and Clergie, who
Are very powerfull, besides she can shew
Great store of people, and much wealth beside,
And is with Groves and Vines much beautified.




map of Turone
THE DVKEDOME OF TVRONE.





THE COVNTY OF PICTAVIA.
PICTONIUM, or Pictavia, which followes, co^monly called Poictou,The Situation looketh Southward toward (...) Engolismes and Santonians, on the West it hath (...) Ocean: on the North it pointeth toward the Brittain^ and the Andegavians,The fertility. the rest is enclosed with the ^ronions, Bituricians, and Lemovicians. It is a very fertile Count^ both for Fruit, Cattell, Wooll, and Hempe, having abundance (...) Wine and Corne:The variety of Creatures. The ancient government. and great plenty of Fowle and wilde beasts so th^ here is much Hawking and Hunting. The Gothes did honour t^^ Province with the title of a Kingdome, whom Clodovaeus King (...) France drove hence, and also out of all Aquitaine. The Emperour ^dovicus Pius gave the Kingdome of Aquitaine to his Sonne Pipin; wh^ Sonnes Pipin and Charles when Charles the Bold their Unckle, had (...) out of Aquitaine, and shut them up in Monasteries, he himselfe inva^^ the Principality, and gave it to his Cosin Arnulph, and having ab^^gated the title of a Kingdome, he made it a Dukedome. After ^nulph there succeeded in order William Bonus; Eblo the first and seco^^ William 2. and 3. Guido, William 4. and 5. his onely Daughter and He^^ El^onor was married to Ludovick the 7. King of France, who repudiati^^ her for the suspition of adultery and treason, Henry Duke of Norm^^ married her, who was Successor to Stephen King of England. His Sonne Richard and Iohn did succeed after Henry as heires to the Kingdome (...) England and their Fathers possessions in France. But when Arthur (...) Sonne of Godfry (who was elder Brother to King Iohn) did stand competition with Iohn, preferring his owne Title before him, be^^ perswaded by Philip Augustus King of France, to take away Picardy fro^ his Unckle Iohn, and having attempted it by force, his Army w^^ overthrowne and scattered by Iohn who came suddenly upon hi^ and he himselfe was taken prisoner and brought to Rotomagum, wher^ he was punished for his temerite and rashnesse. Hereupon King Io^^ was accused of parricide by Constance the Mother of Arthur befor^ King Philip, and by him condemned: and his goods and also Picar^^ were adjudged to Philip as the Lord in Feefarme: which afterwar^ his Successor Ludovick gave to his Sonne Alphonsius the 8. who dyle^^ without issue, it came to King Philip the third, and continued in the hands of his Posterity, untill in the raigne of Philip Valessus, it was recovered by Edward the third King of England, and wholly possessed by him with all Aquitaine, by a peace established betweene him and Iohn King of France. Afterward King Edward made the Dukedome of Aquitania a principality, and gave it to his Sonne, who by imposing to a

map of Pictavia^HE COVNTIE OF PICTAVIA.

heavie a taxe on the Aquitanians lost a great part thereof by their revolting from him to Charles the fifth King of France, whose Nephea Charles the 7. did drive the English out of Aquitaine in the yeere 1453 and left it to his Sonne King Ludovick the 11. He bestowed it on his Brother Charles, after whose decease, King Ludovick did passe it over unto his Sonne King Charles the 8. and from that time, Aquitaine, (...) of which Pictavia is a great part, did remaine in the King of Fa^^^^ power. Caesar, Pliny, and Strabo do report that the ancient inhabitants thereof were the Pictones: Ptolemy calls them the Pictones, and A^mianus Marcellinus the Pictavi. Ausonius calleth it Pictonicam Regione^, or the Country of the Picts. In the Register Booke of Provinces it in the Aquitaine, cap. 11. or Vienna, cap. 7. it is called Civitatem Pict^rum vel Pictavo^um, the City of the Pictavians or Pictanonians, now it is called le Pays de Poicteu. I joyne with Pliny the people Agasi^ates with the Pictones. It is likely that some memory doth remaine of them in the Towne Aigounois, not farre from the Temple of S. Maxentius, which is a Towne neere the River Severus. They are farre wide, who doe confound the Aginnates with the Agesinates, seeing they are 5. dayes journey distant one from another. I will write something concerning the divers Principalities which are reckoned with Pictonia,The Citie Pictavia. but first I will speake something of the Metropolis and royall City thereof. And that is Pictavia. For so the Latines enstile it, which Ptolemy called Angustoriton, and Autonius Augustoritum. Gi^rius Turonensis calleth it the City Pictavia. It is seated in a pleas^^^ place, somewhat steepe with Hills, except in one part, which they call in their Country speech Tranchaea, which is seated on plaine ground: it is the fairest Citie of all France except Paris. The River Clauius doth encompasse and intile the most part of it. Here is an Unirersitie famous for the studdie of the Civill Lawe, and is second unto that at Paris. Charles the seaventh King of France did iustit^^ it in the yeare 1421. Of which Scaliger thus in his description of Cities
If studie from the minde, strength from the body comeIn both which kindes France hath much honour won^^Then let this Country studies onely love,While others warlike matters doe approve.So while other Countries like the bodie are,Pictavium is like to the soule most rare.
The Theaters, Galienes Pallace, and the Aquae ducts of Cond^^ which are now called les ducts, doe shew the antiquity thereof being certaine tokens of the Romane Empire in these parts. Some thinke it was built by the Agathirsians and Gelonians, the Successors of the Sonnes of Hercules (whom the Poets doe call Picti) for they being expelled their Country for stirring up Domestick sedition, came it to England, and from thence being encreased in number and multitude they passed over againe into France, where they were called Picts and built this City. Others write differently, when it is evident both in Pomponius, Mela, and Pliny, that there were Pictones long before the^ came out of England. This City is famoused by a Bishops Seate, which

D. Hilarius was sometime Bishop of a Prelate of singular learning and piety, and one that was an invincible Antagonist against the Arrian faction, and did write those 12. famous Bookes of the Holy Trinity, wherein he shewed much wit and eloquence.
The Court of Pictavia is governd by a President and two Substitutes, the one whereof doth judge of civill matters, the other of criminall. Many Townes of this Province have recourse to this Court:The Townes. as besides Pictavia it selfe aforesaid, there are also Niort which hath a Castle: here the Pictones doe keepe great Faires thrice in a yeare: also Fontenay le Conte, it hath also a Castle: the Rivulet Vendaeus (or Veudie) doth flowe by the walls of this Towne, which groweth afterward so bigge, that it doth overflowe the whole Territorie of Fontenaus, and the neighbouring parts thereunto: also the Towne Lusig^an, where there is an ancient Castle which is commonly cal'd Mulustre etc. Also Montmorillon, Chastelleraud, la Basse Marche, Dorat, S. Maxent, and others: to which is added Sirray a Marshalship, and having a strong Castle. There is also in the Principalitie of Pictonia, that I may come now to that parte (besides Talmont, so called as it were Talon du Monde, Calcanus Mundi, or the heele of the world as some would have it) Rupes super Ioanna, or Roche sur-Iohn, who was of the Royall familie of Burbon. Our Grandfathers did know Ludovick Burbon, the Sonne of Iohn Earle of Vendosme, when he was Prince of Roche sur^^h, Earle of Montpenser, and also his sonne Charles Castellum Heraldi, or Castelherault neere Vigenna; is dignified with a Dukedome. The Viecountships are Tovers. By the River Tovius, also Brosse, Bridieres, Ro^be-Cho^art. There are many Townes which are Baronies and Signiorles, which I will deliver as they come in viewe: first Manlers, where there is good fishing for Salmones, and a little King of fish, which is an enemy to the Tuny, but especially there is good fishing for Whales and Codfish, which being dryed and hardened in the winde, and cold are usually transported into other Countries: also the Townes Partenay, S. Maxent, Melle, Chizay, Chauvigny, Lussac, Bressuyre, Charrou, Chasteneraye, S. Mesnin, S. Gillis, Chasteaumur, les Sables d' Anlonne, S. Hermine, Montaigu, a Towne with a Castle famous for Salt-pits: Also Mireban, l'a Motte, S. Beraye, Vouvant, S. Hilaire, Mortemer, Luzaz, S. Savin, l' Istle Iourdain, S. Benoist du Sault, Bourg-neuff, Moloil, Merxant, Brige, Vouver, Villefaignax, and others. And it is gathered out of Antonius his Itinerary that Limonum was in Pictavia, because B^rdigala is called Augustodunum. Some thinke it to bee the same with Augustorito, or Poicters. Wee dare affirme nothing. In the third Comentarie of A. Hirtius there is mention of Limonum. The Rivers that water this Countrie are Clanius, Vigenna, now Vienne,The Rivers. or Venda^^ and others, which are very full of fish. Heere we needes must speake of the Amphitheater, in Pictavia,The publicke workes. standing neere to the Towne Doneum, in the workmanship whereof Art doth strive to immitate nature: for it is made hollow and cut out in the Mountaine, having no externall matter, as lime, stone, or wood in it. In Iustus Lipsius in his Booke of the Amphitheaters which out of Rome cap. 6. there is a large description of this Mountaine and Amphitheater, according

to the relation of Levinus Kesmakerus, sometime Consul of Zirickza^^, and governour of Zeland at the first beginning of this warre, who addeth that the Village Towne Lonaeus was heretofore farre larger, as may bee seene by the workemanship thereof, not like to Village Townes, and by the ruines of the publike wayes and streetes, which lay toward the Bridge, commonly called Pon^du Sey, part of which way may bee seene yet in divers places. But the greatest part is r^inated, and the stones of the aedifices are consumed and carried away. About halfe a Mile from the Citie Pictavia, in the high way to B^^rigum, there is a great fouresquare stone, underproped with five other stones, and from thence called la Pierre Leurce. Of which there is this Distich.



Hic lapis ingentum superat gravitate Colossum


Ponderis, and grandi Sydera mole petit.



This stone exceeds a great Colossus waight,
And even to the starres doth penetrate.


The State Ecclesiastick hath three Bishoprickes, which are under the Archbishop of Tolouse: as the Bishoprick of Poi^tie^s, in which there are 27, Abbies: the Bishoprick of Lucon or Lusson, in which are 10. Abbies: and the Bishop of Maillezay, in which (...) 4. Abbies I come now to their manners. The Husband men have a peculiar speech of their owne: and hee is held wise that does not trust the^. A kind of men who because they are prohibited to hunt wild be^^s, doe persue contentions:Their manners. They are litigious and cunning in stir^^^ debate and strife. The Citizens are unlike them in nature and disposition, being courteous, bountifull, liberall, candide, and ha^ing impostures and deceits, lovers of learning, and learned men, of which there are many heere. The Nobilitie are provident, and more bold and c^ring then strong.



CADVRCIVM, LE PAYS DE QVERCI.

The Ecclesiastick State.

Cadurcium doth containe two Bishopricks, namely, of Cahors, and Montalban, which are subject to the Archbishop of Tolouse.
CADVRICVM, commonly called le Pays de Querci, or as others pronounce it Crecy,The Situation. is encompassed with the Petrocorians, the Nitiobrigians, the Rutenians, the Avernians and Lemovicians.The fertility. The Country of Cadurcium though it bee indented with Mountaines, yet it excelleth both for beauty, richnesse, and fertilitie, and it wanteth nothing necessary for the sustenance of life. The Cardurcians did formerly inhabit it: whome, besides Pliny Lib. 4. Cap. 19. Caesar doth mention with many other people of France, who calleth them the Elcutheri, or Eluteori, that is Freemen. For so the word is to be taken, and we are not to assent to them, who would from thence deduce a new kind of people. Cadurcium hath two Diocaesses, Doveona Cadurccerum, and Mortalbanum Doveoona, well knowne to Ptolemie,The Cities. which some badly interpret Ducona. It is commonly called Cahors, neere the River Lothus. Some learned men doe call it Divona. Truly howsoever it is written Ioseph Scaliger in his letters to Merula thinketh it to bee the Metropolis of the Cadurcians, and also Vinetus writing to Ausionius and others. Iustus Lipsius in his golden Booke concerning Amphitheaters, supposeth that Doveona is a Towne, commonly calld Dowe, about halfe a dayes journey distant from Ligeris, on that side where the way lyeth from Andegavia to Pictavia. And so the name doth intimate, but then Doveona according to the opinion of Ptolomie, cannot bee the Metropolis or mother Citie of the Cadurcians, which is 60. leagues from that place. Besides that which Antonius calleth Annedonacum, and Peutingers Tables Avedonacum, in the way betweene Burdigala and Augustodunum, cannot be the same with Ptolomies Doveona, which is commonly called Cahors. For Aunedonacum and Mediolanium of the Santonians, are 16. Miles asunder: but betweene Doveona and Mediolanium, called in the Country speech Cahors and Sanites, there are about 40. leagues, which make almost an hundred Miles. Besides the Metropolis of the Cadurcians standeth so farre Eastward, that it cannot be in the way to Burdigala. Let us therefore conjecture with Merula, that Aunedonacum is that Towne commonly calld Aulnay, being distant Northward from the Mediolanum of the

Santones, somewhat more than sixe leagues. Ausonius doth designe and shew the Metropolis of the Cadurcians, Lib. Professorum, at the 18. verse, concerning Exsuperius a Rhetorician of Tolouse.



Decedens placidos mores tranquillaque vitae


Tempora praedives fimsti sede Cadurca.



Thou dying rich, at Cadurcum didst end
Thy life, which thou so quietly didst spend.


In this Citie there is a Vniversity and a Marshalship. The Cathedrall Church is dedicated to S. Stephen. The Bishop hereof are Earles, so that the Bishop is both a spirituall and secular Lord, so that whil^ hee solemnely celebrateth the Masse, hee hath sworde, gloves, and other ornaments of that kind by him upon the Altar, and bootes o^ his legges, which hee weareth in a Pontificall manner by speciall priviledge. Pope Iohn the two and twentieth of that name was born^ here, who held that seate 19. yeares and 4. Moneths. Also Cleme^ Mar^tus one of the chiefe moderne french Poets was borne at Dor^^* The other diocaesse is Mont Ibanum, now called Montalban, or Si^^odard de Montalban. The Citie is situate and built on the bending side of a hill, having a Castle neere the River Tarnis, commonly called Tarn, having a Bridge over it, the middle part whereof is in the Co^^try of Langedock. Neere the Bridge of this Citie, there are are arch^vaults under the Earth. The Churches are wasted by warres. M^^taulban was a common receptacle of the fugitives of the reformed ^eligion, so that it endurd greater miseries in the first civill warre, th^^ other Townes of Aquitame: insomuch that it was besieged three times in eleaven Moneths space, and that which was worst of all, the^ did not onely contend with the enemy without, but also they had sedious mutinies within their walls. And it was so hotly assaulted (...) the enemies, that after the King had graunted them peace, for m^^ then a Moneth it was still closely straitely besieiged. And tho^^ it were violently assailed by the neighbours round about it, yet (...) valiantly resisted their force, and did frustrate and shunne all the^^ deceitfull stratagemes, to the great admiration of all men that (...) unfortified Citie, and unfurnished of Souldiers, should delude the a^tempts of their enemies. The first siege was laid against it by Mo^^^cius 23. May in the yeare 1563, who came with a thousand horse and five thousand foote, to besiege the Citie: but after some light sk^mishes, having destroyd the Corne hee departed. For a suddain^ feare without any cause did so invade the besiegers, that withal spee^^ and much perplexednesse of mind, they raised the siege and went away. And this was the event of the first siege, in which thirtie onely of the besiegers were slaine. Three monethes afterward Mon^^cius returned againe, and having joyned Buria in confaederacy wit^ him, hee laid siege to it the second time. They had 9. troupes of common Souldiers, and a great company of Gentlemen Voluntaries, and of Muskatiers, horsemen and footemen, they had 9. Stewards. Ni^^

map of CadurciumCADVRCIVM.

bandes of Spanish Souldiers, in which there were twelve hundred Souldiers: five battering pieces of ordinance, three greater and five lesser culueringes, which they planted against the wall. At the first meeting they had a little skirmish, in which Monluccius lost many men, and on the Townes side there were 12. slaine, and many wounded on both sides. The two next dayes following there were in like manner some light skirmishes, in which the besiegers had still the worst. In the meane while Durassius going to Aurelias with a strong armie, by chance marched that way, and sent to Monluvius, to desire him to appointe the day and place to joyne battle in. But then Monluccius had no minde to fight, who lookt for a better oportunitie, which hee afterward obtained, and gave the Durassians a great overthrowe. But lying there in vaine, the Citie being defended with such strong forces, hee raised his siege, in which hee lost 60. Souldiers, and the Towne thirtie. Then Durassius proceeded in his former journey, but when hee departed, the garrison of the Citie was much leaned and diminisht, so that by his comming, the Citie receaved more losse then good. For two foreine Cohorts followed Durassius, so that the Citizens were left destitute of all helpe. But as the favour and aide of men did decrease, so the Citizens courage did increase. For they tooke an oath altogether, that they wo^^d suffer all extremities in the defence of their Country, rather than open the gates of their Citie, to their malicious enimies. Monluccius being certified by one of the Captaines of the army, called Fontgravius, both of their want of munition, and the small number of the besieged, marcheth thither in all hast, and the enimies in the third watch of the night did assault the Walls in three places with Scaling ladders, and Musket shot. In the meane time while the Citizens ranne to defend that part of the Wall, a strong band of Souldiers well armed without making any noise, came to the Fortresse of the Ialobites, thinking so to come upon the watch unawares, because the Citizens were busie in fight elsewhere. But they in the watch Tower having discover'd them before they could approach to the Wal^^, cryed out that they were discover'd, they clapt sealing ladders to the Walls, and made a breach in them with an iron Ramme, which 12. men drove against the Walls, and set up two Colours or Bonnets on the Bulwarke, with the sound of Drum, Trumpets, crying out to their companions that followed, that the Citie was taken, but yet the Townesmen encountred them so bravely, that they were enforced to found a retreate with the losse 200. men, and to leave their Ramme and scaling Ladder, there being but one slaine of the besieged. But seeing that cunning stratagems did not prevaile, they determined to besiege the City the third time. First Terrida came and brought 21. Cohorts with him two wall peeces of Ordnance, and 7 Colveri^s: which being planted against divers parts of the Wall did batter it shroudly, but all in vaine, seeing that men, women and children ran cheerefully to repaire the breaches, and brought earth and other Materials to mend them, which succeeded so well, that although the enemy had made 500. shot against the walls, yet there were but 5. men

slaine. But when the Besiegers saw that their Ordnance did no good, and the Citizens diligence did frustrate their attempts, they turned their assault into a Siege, and so built Towres and Fortresses round about the City, and placed a Garison in them, that no man might goe out of the City, or come in, and so to cut off all ayde or succour from them, that so either famine or length of the siege might enforce them to yeeld. After this they had many other light skirmishes, in which the besieged had alwaies the better. The siege endeth with conditions of peace, which yet were not declared to the Citizens untill the 15. of Aprill, although they were published at Orleance and Paris the 26. of March. In all the Sieges there were slaine on the besiegers side 2000. men, and 60. of the besieged. But of this enough. The other Townes of Cadurcium are Castel-Sarrazin, neere the River Tarnis, the water whereof is of a red colour because it passeth thorow a clayie earth: there is also Monhec where M. Arnald Sorbinus was borne, a great ^an and Chaplaine to the King: also Moissac situated in a faire, pleasant, and delightfull soyle, having great store of Vineyards. It is a Towne of traffique and commerce, especially for Corne, Wine, Oyle, Saffron, Wooll, Salt, Fish, and other commodities. King Clodoveus did here found and build the Church of S. Peter and S. Paul. There is also the Monastery of S. Benedict, in which the body of S. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage was buried. Not farre from Moissac is Lausette situate on a Rock, where there are the fairest and best Cellers or Store-houses in all Guienna. There are also the Townes which are commonly called Burelle, Nazareth, Sovillac, Gourdon, and Martel. Neere the Towne Martel on the Frontiers of Cadurcium, as our Author noteth Lib. 8. de bello Gallico, is Vxellodunum; which is also called Vssoldun and la Pu^^ha' Vseldum, that is, Podium Vxelloduni, or the Gallerie of Vxellodunum, because it is situate on a very high steepe place. And so much concerning Cadurcium, let us passe to Lotharingia.



BRESSIA, OF TH^ SEGVSIANS.
BRESSIA is a Country lying under the Alpes in S^^dia, where Caesar heretofore placed the Segusians acco^ding to Villonovanus; although Ptolomy doth make (...) a City of the Segusians. At the least these people (...) next to the Aedus, which he affirmeth lib. 7. de bello G^^ in these words. His constitutis rebus, or Aeduis, Segusian^^ qui sunt finitimi ei Provincioe x. millia perditum imperat. These things ^^ing thus setled he levieth 10000. Foote out of the Aeduans and ^gusians, which are Provinces neere unto him. Also Pentingers C^ doth hereabouts place Segusione in the Alpes. Ammianus, who li^^ in the time of Iulian the Apostate, in the 15. Chapter of his His^^^^ maketh mention of the Towne Segovium, situated at the foote of (...) Alpes. Bressia therefore is situate betweene the Rivers Rhoda^^^ (...) Araris, now called Saona, and Marcellinus Sacona, at the beginning (...) the Alpes in a fruitfull place, so that it may compare with any Co^^try of France, for plenty of Wine, Corne, and all kindes of fruits, (...) for Rivers, Cattell, and Woods. It is neighboured with the Bu^^^dians, and was sometime subject to the Princes thereof, afterward (...) was a part of the Kingdome of Arelatum, which being devided (...) divers parts, was afterward governed by Earles, one of which (...) Earle of Bresse and Baugenciak lived about the yeere 1300. who (...) enlarged his Territories, and left one onely Daughter and Heire ^byll of Bressia who was marryed to Amades the fourth, the 8. Earle Sabaudia, who brought her Husband beside a large Inheritance, (...) County of Bressia, which being afterward united to Subaudia, re^^^ned in that Family 300. yeeres even untill our age, when Henry t^^ fourth, King of France for his vertue surnamed the Great, under^^^^ding that the Saluffians a people of France were possessed and overcome by Sabaudus by treachery and deceit, and that Henry the third was almost oppressed by his rebelling Subjects, and was engaged in (...) dangerous Warre, he thought it fitt to recover that part of France a^^ seeing the Duke of Sabaudia did delay the restitution thereof by m^king many exceptions and deceiving promises, which by reason he could not doe, he thought it meete by force of Armes to regaine th^^ which was lost, and having levied an Army he tooke Bressia, by th^ helpe and assistance of the Marshall Byroone, and brought the Duke (...) that straite, and was content to end the matter by exchange, and th^^ the King for the Salussians taken from him, should have the Breff^^^ the Brengeans, the Virroneans, and generally all that belong'd (...) France on the other side of Rhodanus, so that all that Country whic^ lookt toward France from the issuing of that River out of the Le^nick Lake, should be afterward united to the Kingdome of France* And so the Duke should wholly deliver into the Kings hands t^^

map of BresciaBRESSIA.

strong Castle of the Towne, with all the Warlike furniture thereof, by which Bressia and all that Province were as it were fetterd and manacled, so that France was secured from any future attempt from those parts. And so Sabaudus learnt with his owne losse how dangerous a thing it is, to use violence with those that are stronger than our selves, since such rashnesse redounds to his harme that attempts it, and most commonly he is compell'd to restore againe unto them with interest that which he had so gotten.



THE PROVINCE AND CITIE OF LIONS.
THE Court of Lions is the last and remotest of all the Presidiall Courts which depend on the chiefe Senate of Paris. But Lions is the chiefe and principall City of Gallia Celtica, which from thence is called Lions, being a strong Fortresse of France, being the Primate Seate of all France in spirituall matters, and being the Shop for Trading and commerce for the whole World. The Bressians confine on it on the North, on the East the Sabaudians, on the South the Allobrogians and the Narbonians along the River Rhodanus; and on the West the Avernians. It is situate in the most beautifull and convenientest soyle of al Europ, for there is no place which hath two riches fruitfuller Nurses, than the Rivers Rhodanus and Arar are unto this Country, in whose bosome the horne of plenty, filled with the Goda bounty doth rest, and is largely powred forth upon it, so that it alwayes enjoyeth a continuall plenty. The ancients called it Lugdunum, as if you should say the happy or blessed Mountaine. Titus Livius calleth it an Iland, Lib. Hist. 21. In these words the next day Amiball marching on the contrarie banke of Rodanus, went up into the Mediterranean parts of France: not because it was a straiter way to the Alpes, but the more he went from the Sea, the more hee should bee sure not to meete with the Romanes: with whom he did not purpose to fight before he came into Italy. Hee came with the fourth part of his Camp to the Iland, where the Rivers Arar and Rhodanus running out of divers parts of the Alpes, and having encompassed some part of the Country, doe meete together, from whence the Country in the middle is called the Iland; which words may seeme to be translated out of a credible Writer who lived about the same time, and was familiarly acquainted with Scipio, but that he addeth that this Iland being populous, and abounding with all things necessary, was (...), that is, abounding with people, and well stored with food. Plutarch in the life of Ainnbal doth deliver the like, but more plainely, and calleth it Lions, whose words according to the Translation of Acciarolus. He remov'd his Tents, and marching by the banke of Rhodanus up against the streame, in few dayes he came to that place which the French men call the Iland, which the Rivers Rhodanus and Arar flowing out of diver Mountaines doe encircle, where there is the City of Lions the most famous City of all France, which long time afterward was built by Plancus Muratius. Some call it the City of Sequanians,

and Maxima Sequanorum, which appeareth by an ancient. In se^tion on S. Peters Church, which is this.
JOVI OPT. MAX.
Q. ADGINNIUS UR BICI FIL.
MARTINUS SEQ. SACERDOS
ROMAE ET AUG.
AD ARAM AD CONFLUENTES
ARARIS ET RHODANI
FLAMEN. II. VIR IN CIVITATE
SEQUANORUM.
And Seneca doth celebrate the praise of this place in his (...) concerning the death of Claudian.

I sawe a Hill that hangeth or'e two streames,
Which Phaebus rising glideth with his beames.
Where the great River Rhodanus doth flowe,
And Arar doubtfull whether he should goe.
Thorow quiet Foords his course along doth guide,
Washing the Bankes as he along doth glide.

But when the Romanes had subjected all France, in the ra^ Augustus. L. Mun. Plancus, who in the yeare V. C. 765. had beene ^^^ful with C. Silius, and after he had obtain'd the dignity of a cen^ triumph'd over the Rhetians, did reedifie it, and built it al^ new, and remov'd it to a hill, and so bringing colonies from ^tie of Rome, he enlarg'd it, and then it was called Colonia Lugd^^^^ the Colonie of Lions, which Pliny also sheweth Lib. 4. Cap. 18. (...) be saith: Segusiani liberi, in quorum agro Colonia Lugdunorum. The ^tians are free, whose Country is the Colonie of Lions. In this (...) as Suetonius witnesseth was Claudius the Romane Emperour (...) who as also the succeeding Romane emperours did much e^^^ and beautifie this Citie, which at this day infinite monuments ^tiquitie doe sufficiently declare. Besides they made the Inhabi^ Citizens of Rome, and did give them many honours, priviledges (...) liberties. And here they established the first Money Minte (...) France, and erected and built many famous Schooles, which ^shed for a long time by the frequent comming of the French and ^talian youth thither, and were famous for elojuent men, eve^ S. Ieremes time. This Citie first received the Christian Religion, (...) it, and observ'd it, and had many Martyrs, among which were ^nus, Iereneus, and other Doctors and Bishops of Lions, so that (...) Church was the primate of all France. The Cathedrall Church ^tofore consecrated to S. Stephan the first Martyr, was afterward ^cated to S. Iohn Baptist, so that it is inferiour unto none, eith^ (...) dignitie or antiquitie, nay it may compare with any other Ch^ Europe, for the fairenesse and beautie thereof, it hath also stately ^tious Pillars, which were brought out of S. Augustines Church, a (...)

map of Lyon^HE PROVINCE AND CITIE OF LIONS.

Walls are hanged with tapestrie wrought with curious Art. But one of the chiefest ornaments thereof, is the Clock wrought with cunning workemanship, which sheweth in a wonderfull manner the houres, dayes, monethes, and severall seasons of the yeare, and also the course of the Sunne and the Moone. The Archbishop hath infinite priviledges above others, which if any one desire to know i^ particular, he shall finde it in Paridines the French writers Booke, concerning Lions. But it is worthie of observation, that the Deane of this Colledge is a Duke, and every one of the Cannons is an Earle, and some beleeve that a certaine King of Burgundi did grant the^ these titles, some with more likely hood doe thinke that they ob^^^ned them themselves, by purchasing some part of the Countie of Forrest, which is now a Countie. Many Princes have desired to be Cannons thereof, as the Kings of France, the Dukes of Sabaudia, and ^^gundie, the Princes of Barrens and Vienna. There are many other Churches, Colledges, Monasteries, and Chappells in the Citie, which (...) brevitie sake I omit. In this Citie both Provinciall, Nationall, and Generall counsells have beene kept, in which heretofore the holy Bishops Nicetius Priseus and others were Presidents, as also (...) the 4. Pope of Rome, in the time of the Emperour Frederi^^ the ^^venth. But that wee may not bee more prolixe and tedious in (...) things than the present brevitie of the matter requireth (...) w^^^^ hasten to the secular government, but first by the way wee will (...), that heretofore the Rulers of Provinces and Cities did give iudgement in the Princes name by whome they were instituted, and did take upon them and resigne the government acording as they pleased: and lastly the Posteritie of Chares the great cloathed the ^^ked dignities with the titles of Dukes and Earles, and made them hereditarie. Such as were the Earles of Lions, before the Citie and Province were govern'd by Prelats, namely as they are found in (...) writings, Odo, in the time of Charles the bald; Gerard in the time of Remigius the Archbishop, William, under Charles the Simp^can: (...) and a little before lived Artaldus Earle of Lions, whose houses (...) supposed, remaineth yet in the Citie. After this the Countie was translated to the Church, by whome it was governed untill the^ (...) of C. 1292. at what time Philip surnamed the faire King of France did hands on it, and tooke it into his protection, untill Ludovick (...) did at length unite it to the Kingdome of France, which historie ^^^dine doth largely prosecute Lib. 2. Cap. 64. For those of Lions disconstantly defend their libertie, which they had enjoyed from the time of the Romans, which Pliny mentioneth, and also Paul^s ^. C. in his Bookes of Distributions, which the Praelates endeavored to take from them. But albeit this Citie and Province doth enjoy so many and so great commodities and priviledges as aforesaid, yet sometime it endur'd much miserie. For after it was reedified by Numatius one of the Plancian familie, in the raigne of Nero, the most part of it was burnt, and Verus being Emperour, much Christian blood was shed in the Citie. Afterward it felt the fury of Sep. Severus, who expos'd it as a booty to his Souldiers, and in King Phillips time it was burnt

through a dangerous sedition which arose in the Citie, and thereupon it lost that libertie which it had preserved so many ages, and having endurd many miseries, it lay dead a while buried as it were in the ruine thereof. But at last by the liberalitie and favour of the Kings, and vigilancie and industrie of the Inhabitants, Lions grew to bee as famous in our age as it was formerly. The Magistracie of the Citie doth consist of twelve Consuls, as Campegius relateth, who doe governe the Commonwealth, sixe of them are yearely chosen before Christmas, and sixe of those formerly chosen are in office, for the yeare following, and they are confirmed by name in S. Nicetius Church, on the 12. of the Kalends of Ianuary. And in the Towne Hall which was formerly the Archpraesident house, they meete together to consult of publike affaires. But the Roans house is designed to bee the Court or Praesidiall seate of Iustice, on which dependeth the Court of Iustice at Lions, also the Merchants Court in the same place. The Praetors Court of Matisconia, Forest, Bellijocum. Here besides the Kinges Iudges substitutes, Henry the second King of France did establish 8. Senators with a Clarke or Notarie. In this Citie bes^de, the ancient Schooles which I have mentioned, there is an Universitie which hath flourished from the yeare of C. 1328. famous for the Professors of the Common Law. There are great Faires kept here, to which at certaine times of the yeare a great company of people doe resort. It hath strong Fortresses to resist the assaults of the enimie, for S. Iohns Bulwarke is the chifest in all Europe, so that on the top thereof 3000. Souldiers may be trained and set in Battell aray. King Charles the 11. Anno 1564. built a Castle there which was thought impregnable, to suppresse the assaults of enemies, and the attempts of the seditious Citizens. And this is worthy of observation, that as often as you digge there somewhat deepe into the Earth, some Reliques and Monuments of antiquity, as Stones, Marbles, Coynes, Lamps, Vines, and ruines of Aquaducts or Conduits, Bathes, Theaters, and such like Aedifices are found there, so that it is credible that many of such kinde of Reliques are found and discoverd here, than in all the rest of France.



LANGVEDOC A PART OF AQVITAINE.
THE Occitane Country of France, commonly called L^guedoc, is a part of Aquitane, and is so named as some conceive from the Gothes the Possessions thereof, as if yo^ should say Land-Got. That is, the Gothes Province: Som^ derive it from the word Lingua a tongue and the word (...) I suppose that these conjectures are more vaine than Sicilian toye^ and are but meere vulgar trifles. The ancients tooke it for the Province of Narbon, neere the Pyrenaean Mountaines. Strabo calleth (...) Tectosages, the Metropolis whereof Tolouse is accounted one of th^ chiefe Cities of France, having an Archprelate, a Senate, and a U^^versity. Some derive the name thereof from those which fled from Troy. Caesa mentioneth it in his first Booke of Commentaries, where he speaketh thus: It was told Caesar, that the Helvetians purposed (...) travell thorow the Sequans and Aeduans Country, unto the bor^^^ of the Santones, which are not farre from Tolouse, which is a City (...) Province: and also Lib. 3. concerning P. Crassus: Moreover valiant (...) being levied out of Tolouse, Carcasson, and Narbon, which are Cities (...) France neere to Province, etc. Ammianus Marcellinus giveth it the ^^rogative above all the neighbour Cities. Neither can we omit th^ worthy El^g^e of the ancient magnificence and power thereof, written by Aus^mus a most famous Poet, and a Consull of Rom. in prais^ of his Nurse and Foster-mother in these Verses:
Non unquam altricem nostri reticebo TOLOSAM,Coctilibus muris quam circuit ambitus ingens.Perque latus pulero perlabitur amne GarumnaIn^umeris cultam populis, confinia propterNirgida Pyrenes, and Pinea Gabennarum,Inter AQUITANAS gentes, and nomen IberumQuae modo quadruplices ex se cum effuderit urbes,Non ulla exhaustae sentit dispendia plebis:Qu^s genuit cunctos gremio complexa colonas.My Nurse Tolosaes praises I will found,Which with a Brick wall is encompas'd round,And faire Garumna runneth by her side,And many people doe in her reside.Cause the Pyrenean Ningidae confinesUpon it, and the Pinean Gabinines,Betweene the Country of faire AQUITAINE,And Iberus which now is called SPAINE:



map of Aquitaine
LANGVEDOC A PART OF AQVITAINE.




And having yeelded people unto foure
Large Cities out of her abundant store.
Yet in her no want of people doth appeare,
Which done within her bosome nourisht were.

Whence the Visi-Gothi, having droven out the Romanes from thence, did make this City the royall Seate of the Kingdome, untill they were quite expulsed by the French, in the raigne of Clodoveus the first Christian King, at what time all that Province was subjected to France. Concerning the State Ecclesiastick, the Tolousians were instructed in the Christian faith by Martiall, who was their first Prelate, after whom succeeded Saturninus, Honoratus, Silvius, Hilarius, Exuperius, and many others, even to Ludovick Siculus the Sonne of Charles the 11. King of Sicily, in whose time this Bishoprick was translated into an Archbishoprick: under whom are these Suffragan Bishops; the Bishop of Montalban, Mirapicensis, Lan^rius, Lombesius, of S. Papoulus, newly created by Pope Iohn the 22. And as this City is large and populous, so it hath many faire built Churches, and also Colledges and Monasteries. The chiefe Church belonging to the Bishop is consecrated to S. Stephen: It hath also an University famous for Learning and for the great number of Students which study there. Here formerly Playes in honour of Flora the Goddesse of Flowers were celebrated, of which there doe yet remaine some tokens. But the Family of the Earles mingling with the Royall Stock, this Country was united to the Kingdome of France. It will be here convenient to nominate some of them: as namely Corsonius, William ^eringerus, Berna^d and others, Capetus reckoneth the Earles of Tolosa among the Peeres of France, who enjoyed that dignity unto King Ludovicks time, surnamed The Holy; who after the decease of his Brother Alphonsus, did unite the County unto his Kingdome. There are also among others these Townes in Languedoc, Narbon, Mons Pessulanus, Carcassona, Nemausus, V^^s.



THE DELPHINATE OF FRANCE.
ON the South Province is neere to the Delphinate, and on the North it hath the Bressians, who are parted from it by the River Rhodanus flowing betweene them, on the West is the County of Venusinum: and lastly on the East the Pedemontian and Sabaudians doe encompasse it. Caesar by one common name calleth those of the Delphinate, and the Sabaudians, Allobrogians, who were then confederate with the Romanes: The Country is now devided into the higher part, the chiefe City whereof is Ebrodunum; and the lower part in which the prime Cities are Gratianopolis and Vienna. Those of the Delphinate who dwelt beyond Rhodanus, were hertofore a part of the Kingdome of Burgundy, and then of Orleans, and afterward of Burgundy, the head City whereof was then Arelate, which afterward from that City was called the Kingdome of Arelatum, but when that Kingdome came to the Emperour Conradus the 2. after the decease of Rodolfus the first, the last King thereof, there arose one Guigno, a man of base birth, who was called afterward the fat Earle Grinmand, hee through his owne industry and the confusion of the times obtained most of the chiefest Cities of this Country, so that at last he possessed Gratianopolis and made himselfe Lord of the whole Province, which to honour his Sonne who had married Delphina the Daughter of the Earle of Albon and Vienna, he called it the Delphinate. After this the Province of the Delphinate became subject to Provinces who ruled it, untill the time of Philip Valerius King of France, who annexed it to his Crowne about the yeere of Christ 1348. which was the cause that Humbert Delphine of Vienna having lost his eldest Sonne in the Battell of Cressey, and his yonger Sonne dying by sicknesse, when hee was provoked to warre and set upon by Amades the 6. of that name, he determined to put himselfe into the Kings protection, and to leave him Heire to his Dominions, on this condition, that from thenceforth the eldest Sonnes of the Kings of France, during their Fathers life time, should beare the Armes and Title of the Delphinate. And so this Country came into the Kings hands, who thought fit to annex so noble a Prince neighbouring on Italy for ever to his Kingdome. The Delphinate therefore being one of the chiefe Countries of France, is devided as I said before into the higher and lower part and hath many faire Cities and Townes in it. In the higher there are Ebrodunum, which hath a Prelate, also Valence, Dium, and S. Pauls Church: In the lower is Vienna,

which was formerly the Metropolis and Mother City of the who^^ Delphinate, which is now Gratianopolis, there are also Romanium, Bri^^conium, Mons-Limartium upon Rhodanus, a Towne much frequented (...) Merchants, where there are also many Monuments of Antiquity, (...) so S. Antonies Church, Valerians Church, and the Monastery. Gr^nopolis was so called from the Emperour Gratian, who reedified it, a^ beautified it with many Buildings, now it hath a Parliament, and President, with Senators, and other Officers belonging thereun^^ and it hath a Prelate, who is one of the chiefe men of the Provinc^ under the Metropolitan of Vienna. But Vienna venerable for An^^quity hath a long time had a Metropolitan Bishop. Valence is c^^verted and raised to a Dukedome, and hath a Bishop and a Unive^^^ty, in which the Romane Lawes are read and declared, in (...) Iames Cujacius taught, who was the Prince of all those Lawyers w^ flourished in former times, whose name shall live as long as La^ continue in the world. Here are found Romane Inscriptions, an^ther ancient Romane Monuments. King Francis intended to (...) newly fortified Gratianopolis against the invasion of enemies, but h^ left it undone.



map of the Delphinate of France
^HE DELPHINATE OF FRANCE.





THE DVKEDOME OF LOTHARINGIA.
THE SOVTHERNE PART whereof is painted forth in this Table.
The Country whence so called.AFter Pictavia according to my method the Dukedom of Lothari^gia, followeth, Lothoringia according to the Latines was so called from Lotarius the Sonne o^ Nephe^ of the Emperour Ludovick King of France. Truely ^^^^vick Pius had foure Son who warring like Par^acid^^ against their Father, and having shut him up into a Monastery among^^ Suessons they devided his Principalities amongst themselves (...) it a Tetrarchie. Afterward by the meditation of the Nobles of the Empire, the matter came to that passe, that Lotar^us the eldest Sonne should enjoy the Title of the Empire, with Italy, Gallia Nar^^^us, and those Territories, which were called by the name of (...) and that Ludovick should possesse Germany; Charles should (...) from the River Mosa to the Ocean: and lastly Pip^^, or his So^^ should have Aquitaine. Lotarius had besides Lud^vick who succeeded him in the Empire, a Sonne named L^tarius, King of Lo^^^ing^a. And as the Germanes as first called it Lotar^ri^^k, or Lot-rey^^, that is the Kingdome of Lotarius, so the Latines afterward called it L^th^^^g. The Inhabitants, and the other French doe call it L^ra^ne as it (...) Lotregne.The Germans call it Lottring. The French Writers doe report, that the bound of ^^ringta were heretofore larger, and that it was heretofore called ^strasia, or Austria, or O^st-ey^h (having Westrasia or Westria (...) West-reych, and corruptly Neustria, a Westerne Kingdome) lying (...) against it, and that being devided into the higher and the lower and contained betweene the Rivers Rhene, Scaldis, and Mos^; the lowe^ part hath divers names, and is subject to divers Princes: and that (...) higher part which is called M^ssellanica and ^ulling^^ is all except some parts thereof under ones command: so that o^ the East of ^taringia there lyeth Alsatia,The Situation and West^asia: on the South Burgund^^ the West Campania, on the North it is bounded with the Wood ^^enna (the Leuceburgians, Treverians, and other people borderi^^ thereon) which were heretofore the chiefest parts of ^^tha i^gis, i^taringia, although it be full of high Mountaines and thick Woods^^^ it needeth not the supplies of forraigne Countries,The fruitfulnesse. for it hath good store of Corne and Wine. It hath divers kinde of Mettalls as Silver, Brasse, Iron, Tinne, and Lead: It hath also Pearles for which th^^

map of LotharingiaTHE DVKEDOME OF LOTHORINGIA.

is excellent fishing at the foote of Vogesus. There are also certain Stones found, which the Inhabitants in regard of their blue col^^^ doe call Lazuli, and doe make great benefit of them. There is also certain substance, of which they make Looking-glasses, the like whe^ of is not found in other Provinees of Europe. Here are also Calcidones great bignesse, so that great cups are made of small pieces thereof. ^ produceth divers kindes of living Creatures:The variety of living creatures. The ancient government. especially excelle^^ Horses, like to Neapolitan and Turkish Horses. Lotaringia was heretofore a Kingdome, as appeareth in the French Writers. But th^^ are not mentioned above two or three Kings thereof. For Charles (...) Bald presently after the decease of his Unckle Lotarius, invaded ^^ Territories, and joyned them to his Principalities. And not long ^^ter it was made a Dukedome. The first Dukes are scattringly men^^^ned by Historians and divers Writers. In the raigne of Henry the Gotefridus held Lotaringia, hee, who afterward having sold his Dukedome Boulogne, together with his Brothers Baldwin and Eustathius (...) a memorable expedition to the Holy Land, and carried his con^^ring Army thorow Asia and Syria even to the City of Hierusalem, (...) was created King of Hierusalem. After him succeeded Baldwin, and after Baldwin Eustathius. Afterward King Henry the fifth gave (...) Dukedome to William Earle of Lovania, after whom Theodore, The^^ Frederick, and others were created Princes of Lotaringia, whom from Earledome was passed to Frederick Earle of Vadimontium, fro^ whom the Dukes of Lotaringia are descended. Mercator doth plaine^ describe it in two Tables, in one whereof he painteth out the ^^therne part, in the other the Southerne part. Heretofore the ^^^diomatrices and Leuci did inhabit Lotaringia. Lib. 4. Tacitus, (...) Strabo, and Ptolemy doe call them Mediomatrices: and Caesar also L^^ calleth them Mediomatrici, whose Metropolis is called Divoduran, now Metz. In the Register Booke of the Provinces of Belgia it is called Civitas Mediomatricum, or le Evesche de Metz, le Pays Messin. C^^ lib. 1. Lucan lib. 1. and Pliny doe call the Leuci Liberi: Ptolemy also ^^ them Leuci, and maketh their Metropolis to be Tullum. And so^^ called in the Register Booke of the Provinces of Belgia, Civitas L^^rum, that is Tullum, or l'Evesche de Toul: also Antoninus his Itiner^^ doth acknowledge Tullum or Leucor. Some also doe referre th^ which Caesar calleth Tulinges to Lotaringia. The Metropolis of La^^gia is Nancejum, commonly call'd Nancy: it is no great Towne, but y^^ it hath a faire and commodious Seate, in a plaine place, the forme it being fouresquare, in the which there is the magnificent Palace^ the Dukes of Lotharingia. The River Murtu floweth by the walls ^ Nancy, which three miles of, a little beyond the Castle of Candens entreth into Mosella. Peter Divaeus and others doe thinke that that which is now called Nanceum, was that which was called Nasion, and which Ptolomy calls Nasium. Antoninus in his Itinerarie placeth it betweene D^vodurum which is in the way from Durocortorum. But he that conside^ that journey more neerely, hee shall easily finde that Antoninus (...) Naesium cannot be seated in that place, where Nanceum is now: so that that Nasium is not that which we call now Nanceium, but a Towne i^

^^^stant from it not farre from the River Mosa in the Barrodu^^^ince, which is commonly called Nas, as appeareth by the ^^ion of stone digged up there. It is manifest by the rubbidge ^^es thereof that this Nasium was somtime a very large City: also Elemens Trelaeus Mosellanus witnesseth in Ortelius. The next of note to Nanceium is Fanum St. Nicholai, commonly called ^^, being two miles distant from thence neere the River M^rta, ^^ plaine and fertile place. This Towne by the recourse of (...) unto it, is so much enlarged, and is growne so bigge, that ^ were Walled, it would not seeme a Village Towne, but ra^^^ of the fairest Cities of all Lotharingia* for it hath such neate (...) well contrived Streetes, and such a multitude of Inhabi^^^^ it is compleate in all things: but it is especially commen^^e trade of Merchandise, and manufactures of all kindes. It ^^ wealthy Merchants who are richer than their neigh^^ ^^mit other Townes of lesser note, lest I should be tedious to ^^r. A mile distant from Nancium is Fruat: three miles off is (...) a little more than three miles off is Bayon and Luneville: (...) off is le Pont a Monson, and Gerbevillar: five miles off is Char^^^ ^iles off is Castenoy, Morhanges and Vaucoleur; a little more ^^iles is Maxen soubs Bresse: seven miles off is Dompaire, De^don Chasteau. eight miles off is Ramberville, Raon, Bellemont, ^ean, Mugstat, Marchain-Ville: nine miles off is Espinal, Bruyeres, a miles off is Ormont, Walderfing, Beaurams: thirteene miles (...) foureteene miles off is l'Estray. The Towne called in ^^^dement, is five miles from Nancy. Chaligny on the right side (...) halfe a league from Nancy. Also Amance seven miles ^^ty Mediomatricum towards the South: which the Latine (...) Almentia: It was the ancient Chancery of Lotharingia, as ^olls doe witnesse, which Rosierus produceth. Also Riche^^ ^^re from the Lake, which is commonly called la Garde lac, ^^^n a River floweth, which betweene S. Nicolas Church and (...) Rosieres doth mingle it selfe with the River Murta. Also (...) the left side of Mosella, making an Iland there, is seated on Southerne part of Lotahringia: Aimoinus the Monke placeth ^astle Rumaricum: in Regino it is corruptly read Adromarici, ^^trici, the word being devided. Spigelius calleth it in the speech Rimelsberg. Not far from thence are Valleyes which ^^monly called l'Estraye, and Vagny. La Mothe is seated by the ^hich by and by doth discharge it selfe into Mosa. There is ^^itory called le Sanctay. There ore also the Townes Kirchingan ^^kenburg. Blankenburg, which the French call B^anc-mont, is a ^aire, and pleasant Towne. There is an ancient, spacious, and ^ent Castle, unto which the Dukes new Palace, being a curi^cture is joyned. The Inhabitants give themselves to Hus^^^ The Barony of Nomenium is on the right side of the River ^ee miles from the City Mediomatricum, Southward. The ^^^s or Signiories in it are Marsal on the left side of the River farre from the Lake Linderus, in which there is an Iland having

a Towne in it called Techemful. Remereville is three miles from Nancy. S. Bellemont is as farre from Mota. Rambert-Ville is on the right side of the River Morton, not farre from the Spring-head, where there is the wood Morton. Rosieres is by the River Murta, neere St. Ni^^^ Church, two miles from Nancy. Homburg is more than a league dista^e from the Towne Sarbruch, by the River, which presently afterward runneth into Saravus. Mariem^nt so called from the Mount on which the Towne is seated, is a mile off from the Lake Lindo, Southward, Sandacourt being in the mid-way betweene Vandimont and Motta, in a Country commonly call'd Sanctoy, being a City of the Medioma^^cans, and heretofore together with Tullus and others an Imperiall City, Henry the second, King of France did reduce it into his power. It is now commonly called Metz, and moderne Writers do call it Mee and Gregorius ^ur^^ensis and others doe call it Vrbs Me^ensis. The A^cients did call it Divodurum Mediomatricum. And in the Itinerarie Table Divo Durimedio Matricorum: Ptolemy calls it Divodu^^^n: and Tacitus lib. 4. and Antoninus doe call it Dividorum. I purpose not to insert divers trifling conjectures concerning the new name. It was heretofore the Seate of the Kingdome of Lotharingia. Co^cerning which Peter Divaeus hath written elegantly in his Itinerarie. The City (...) is situated on a large Plaine, which the River Mosella deviding itselfe into divers Channels doth water, and part of it floweth gently by the walls on the left hand, and part of it goeth under the walles serve the Cities use, and so it runneth generally, even to the nether side of the walls, where having received the River Sel^a, which ^^eth the right side of the City, it runneth againe in one Channell (...) the City is very pleasantly and delightfully situated, for having plaine levell lying round about it, yet the plot of ground where it standeth riseth up a little, whereby wee may observe in what manner the ancients did build their Cities. For they goe up many f^e^ before they can come into the Cathedrall Church, neere which there is a Market place on the highest part of the ground, which by degrees bendeth downe toward the Walls, yet one part of the descent thereof is tooke away, by two streetes paved with stones, which doe crosse by one another. The Citizens are called Mediomatretes i^ at inscription which is at Moguntio neere S. Alban. That Towne which is called in French Toul, was heretofore called Tullum: Ptoleme calls it Tullon a Towne of the Lucians: Antonius, Tullus: The Itinerarie Tables doe now call it Tullium. That which is called Verdan, the Latines doe now call Virdunum and Verdunum: Antonius calleth it Verodunum And in the Register Booke of the Provinces, it is called Civitas Verdunensium, or l'Euesche de Verdun. And the three Cities foresaid have Counties belonging to them.



THE DVKEDOME OF LOTARINGIA.

The Southerne part.

OUR order and Method doth now require, that we should reckon up the chiefe Rivers of Lotaringia, but first wee will speake concerning the Lakes. It hath many Pooles and Lakes which are full of fish: Among which there is one that is 14. Miles in compasse, in which there are great Carpes of three foote long, which are so pleasant in taste, that they farre exceede the Carpes in other Countries for sweetnesse. The Duke of Lotaringia receaveth 16000. Franks every third yeare, for fish taken in this Lake. It is watered with these famous Rivers, Mosa, Mosella, Saravo, Voloia, Mortana, Murta, Sella, Hidia, and others. Concerning Mosa it appertaineth to lower Germanie. The other Rivers doe properly belong to this Dukedome: the better part of Mosella and Saravus, the rest wholy. Mosella riseth in the Mountaine Vog^sus, not farre from the Springhead of Araris, a little above the Towne which is commonly called Bussan, and so gliding downe from Vulturnum to the West, having view'd those Townes which are call'd in French l' Estrate, Remiremont, Espinal, Charmes, Baton, it bendeth his course from the East west ward, and runneth straite forward to Tullum, an Episcopall Citie, whence running againe Eastward, it bendeth Northward even to Fruardum, and having visited the Mediomatricians, the Treverians, and other people it runneth into the River of Rhene. That which the Germanes call Mosel: the French call Moselle. It is thought that Rhenanus, ^tolemie Lib. 11. Cap. 9. and others did call it Ob^i^gos. But Iohn Herold noteth that Chringen so called by Ptolemie is not a River, but a part of Land neere the River ^heme which is now called Ober Rhingham: also Clemens Tr^len Mosellanus witnesseth as Abraham Ortelius writeth, that a certaine Country of Land neere Mosella is yet called Obrincum. Ausoniu^ E^dyll 3. doth celebrate the praise of Mosella in learned verses, both for the clearenesse of the water, and easy sayling thereon: and for the Townes and Pallaces which beautified the bankes thereof: and also for the fish therein, as the Mullet, the Trout, the Barbell, the Salmon, the Lamprey, the Perch, the Tench, the Bleake, and the Gudgeon, of which i^ hath great store; and lastly for the Rivers which runne into it, as Pronea, N^mesa, Sura, Gelbi, Erubra, Desura, Drahona, Salmon^, Saranus, and Misontia. D. Vetus in the Raigne of Domitius Nero the Emperour, attempted to joyne Mosella and Araris, by making a channell betweene them, that the armies being convey'd out of Italie by Sea, and afterward on the Rivers Rhodanus and Arar by that channell,

and so passing by the River Mosella into the Rhene, might at last be brought againe to the Ocean: that so the jouney might bee more easie, and the westerne and northerne shoares betweene them might be made navigable, as Cornelius Tacitus writeth Lib. 18. Of which A^sonius:
Te foutes vivique lacus, te caerula noscentFlumina: te veteres pagorum gloria, luci:Te Druna, te spar sis incerta Druentia ripis,Alpinique colent Fluvij, dupitemque per VrbemQui meat, and dextrae Rhodanus dat nomina ripa,Te stagnis ego caeruleis, magnumque sonorisAmnibus, aequorea te commendabo Garumnae.The Fountaines, Lakes, and blew streames shal know thee,And woods which of Villages the glorie be.Thee, Druna, thee Druentia that doth glideWith winding course betweene his bancks so wideAnd all the Rivers on the Alpine hillShall thee adore and reverence thee still.And Rhodanus that doth through the Citie flow,Naming the right hand banck as it doth goe,With the blew Lakes, and streames that greatest are,And Sea-like Garumne I will thee compare.
Saravus rising not farre from the Salmensians, is the greatest of all those Rivers which runne into Mosella, it is navigable, and famous for the receipt of other Rivers, and after it hath view'd the Cities and Townes, which are commonly called Sar-Burg, Fenestrange, Sar-Vieden, Sar-Abben, Guemund, Sar-Pruck, Waldersing, Sar-Brug, and others, at length it meeteth with Mosella neere the walls of Augusta of the Treverians, not farre from Kontherbruck, Ausonius mentioneth it is praysing Mosella. It retaineth that name still. For the Inhabitants call it Sar. And the ancients did call it Sarta, as appeareth by and inscription which was brought to Trevers from a Towne seated by the River, which is now called Sarpruck, that is Sarrae Pous, or Sarra Brigd^


CAES RO. EXER. IMP. P.P.
S.C.A u. TREVE. INGR.
ES SUM. H. CASTRA. SARRA
FLU. PRO. MIL. CUSTODIA
BIENN. POTITUS. EST.


Veloia is a River that hath pearles in it, which neere the Towne Charmeni runneth into Mosella. Mortana neere a Towne of the same name mingleth it selfe with the River Murta. Murta or Meurta having receaved many Rivers into it, commeth to Mosella in a plaine place among the Medowes, and accompanieth him for a long way together, keeping an equall course with him, having but a little

map of LotharingiaTHE DVKEDOME OF LOTHORINGIA.

ground betweene their channells, untill at length a little above the Castle Candejus, which on the right hand is seated on a Rock, by a Towne of the same name, it maketh a sharpe angle with the Channel of Mosella, and mingleth his waters therewith. The River Sella also joyneth it selfe with it, neere to the Citie Mediomatricum, which riseth out of the Lake Linder, which is rich in Salt, and fishing. And the two Nigidas meeting together at the Towne Northenium, doth discharge it selfe into Saravus, 2. Miles belowe Bosnois-Villa, an Abby so called. There is in the Vale of Deodatum a Fountaine, which hath a soveraigne qualitie given it by nature to heale many diseases. There are also saltpits, in which there is very fine Salt, being sweete in taste, and whiter then Scythian Snow, out of which saltpits the Duke of Lotaringia receaveth yearely an 100000. Francks.The Mountaines. This Province is environd with very high Mountaines, which doe farre excell the Pyrenaea^ Mountaines for their abundance of all sorts of Mettals, but especially Silver Mines, which yeeld so much Silver, that hee receiveth a great revenneue out of it. Also the Mountaine V^gesus in the Valley Leberia doth yeeld pure silver, but not so great a quantitie. Moreover Lotaringia hath many thicke woodes,The Woods. some of which wee will set downe according as they are called in French, as Warned-W^^, de Bennoit, le bois de Mortaigne, Boseyne, Bois de Mordon, le B^n b^is, le B^^ de la Voyge, de Heyde, and others. Concerning the publike workes, there is at the Towne S. Nicolas 2. Miles distant from Nam^^y, neere the River Mu^ta,The Publike workes. a great Church not very ancient, but curiously built, and very light. The Pillars which beare up the roofe of it are very greate, and yet their height make them appeare to bee so slender, as if they were unfit to sustaine so great a worke. It hath two Towres, on one of which Charles Cardinall of Lotaringia, Bishop of Metz's, and Prior of this Church, hath set on the top thereof an Emblematicall divise, which is a Spire of a Steeple wrapt about with Ivie, with this Motto or Inscription, Te stante virebo: Thee standing, I shall flourish. Neere the Towne Wasserbillich where the River Suras mingleth his waters with Mosella, there is another Towne commonly call'd (...), where on a high place standeth that venerable Monumet of Antiquitie, which is more famous than any beyond the Alpes, and which the Italians themselves may admire: it is a pile of stone, which is built or a square Baisis or foundation of 22. foote over, and so riseth by degrees untill it bee about 74. foote high, being engraven round about with divers Images, on the toppe thereof there is a piece of an Eagle, sitting on a Globe, with his wing spread abroade, and it seeme^ that there was a Vaile before his breast. There is at Nancy S. Georges Church, in which there is the Monument of Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundie, being slaine in a battaile by the Helvetians and Lotaringians on the Nones of Ianuary, Anno 1477. whose ashes and bones, Bots^tus, the Cryer of the order of the golden Fleece, by the command of the Emperour Charles the fifth, his Nephewes sonne, did solemnly carry from thence to Luceburg 1550: and afterward by the command of Mary Queene of Hungari, they were carried to Bruges. There are also in the same Georges Church, the Tombes of divers

^kes of Lotaringia, which have no inscriptions: as also in other ^^urches. The most of the late Dukes doe lye in S. Francises Church. ^ere is the stately Monument of Renatus, who obtained a Victorie ^inst Charles Duke of Burgundie. There doe lye also in the same ^^ce Duke Antony, and his sonne Francis, and Claudea Valesia, wife to ^^ke Catolus, and Daughter to Henry the second King of France. There ^an Armory in Naucy, furnished with all kind of warlike Engines* ^here is also a Church in the Citie of Metzs consecrated to S. Stephen, ^^d others, concerning which Dinaeus saith. The Church is named ^om S. Stephen, the Patron of the Citie, being a most faire and re^^wned worke, as any which we saw in all our journey, and which ^a ^ariety, it was compleately finished in all parts. It is said that ^^ere was in it a woodden Crucifixe, covered all over with golden ^nes, we saw a red coloured Cesterne of Porphyry of a great capa^^le, being above 10. foote long, in which they keepe their holy wa^^, There are also many other sumptuous Temples in this Citie, and ^^re were many in the Suburbs thereof, as the S. A^ulphis Church, ^hich is famous in regard that the Emperour Ludovick Pius, and his ^^one Charles, and some of King Pipins daughters were buried here. ^^t the warres have wasted these things, so that now there is no part ^f Suburbs remaining, so that beyond the Walls there is nothing but ^eld-ground. Not far from Metz, neere the Towne Iovy, there are some ^okens in the River Mosella of an ancient Aquaeduct or Water-course. Concerning which Dinaeus thus in his Itinerarie. In this journey there ^ a Towne commonly call'd Iovy, betweene the foote of the Moun^aines and Mosella, where it seemes that there was an Aquaeduct or ^onveyance of water all the way betweene both the Mountaines, as ^ppeares by the ruines yet remaining. There are yet many of the ^^rches, which are of white stone cut like vnto brikes: and there are ^ome a^ches of the same worke on the other banke. The Inhabi^ants doe affirme that there is in this place a Fountaine ignorantly ^hinking that these Arches did serve for the Bridge, and they said ^hat there were other lesser arches on the top of this Mountaine, ^hich did runne out towards the Citie Metz, which is a Mile off. It ^s about 60. foote high, neere the banke, whence we may conjecture ^hat a great worke it was, and how high the Arches were, which ^tood in the Channell of the River, of which there is nothing now ^emaining. The Inhabitants doe report that the upper part of the Arches is plaine being daubed over with red colour'd Morter, and ^hat in the middle of it not many yeares since there was a little house, open on both sides, which wee suppose was that part of the house, which should have covered the Conduit Pipe. Hen^y the second, King of France (as we said before) did subject the Citie of Medriomati^^m to him, which was sometime an Imperiall Citie. A Magistrate ^ent from the King sitteth as President in the Senate of the Citie. The Tribunall in the Citie of Mediomatricum hath three Bishops belonging to it, who are under the Metropolitian of Trevers, as the Bishop ^^ Metz, of Tullum, of Verdunum, so called from their severall S^^^e*



THE DVKEDOM OF BVRGVNDIE.
The Country whence so called.LET so much according to our Method suffice co^ning Lotharingia. The Dukedome of Burgundie foll^^ or lower Burgundie. The name of Burgundie com^ from the Burgundians, who being a people of Ger^^ descended of the Vandalls, and so called from the (...) Burgis, that is from the Townes of Garrison, being disturbed by Almaines (who violently seated themselves in their Countrie w^^ is now cal'd the Palatinate) under the conduct of Theodesius the (...) of Arcadius the younger, they drove out the Sequeans and Aedius, a possest themselves of this part of ancient France,The Dukedome of Burgundie. with the N^^^ whom Tacitus mentioneth. Peter Sancto-Iulianus deriveth the Ex^^logie of Burgundie from a certaine place commonly call'd Burg^^ in the Countrie of Langrenid. It was heretofore a Kingdome a^^ the yeare 1034. and afterward it was divided into a Dukedome Countie: the former toward the East called the lower and (...) Burgundie, the latter toward the East called the higher and Imper^^ Burgundie. Wee will entreate of the Dukedome in this Descripti^^ and of the Countie in the next.The Situation The Dukedome is encompas do^^ East side, with the Counties of Saba^dia and Burgundie, having the ^ver Rhodanus flowing betweene them: on the South is the Territo^ of Lions; on the West the faire fields of the Nevernians and Borb^ans, on the North lies Campania. It is a Champion Countrie, and ^feriour unto none for fertilitie and fruitfullnesse,The Fertility. for here is pl^^^ous stoare of Wine and Corne, so that Bacchus and Ceres seeme to co^tend, who should exceede the other in bestowing their guif^^ liberally upon this Country.The ancient government. Richard Earle of Augustodunum a (...) man, and well experienced in warlike matters, was created Duke all Burgundie beyond Araris, by Odon King of France, who was afterward Duke of Burgundie 32. yeeres. Hee left Burgundy to his So^^ Rudolphus, who was afterward chosen King of France, and Hugo N^^ his Brother succeeded him in his Dukedome. After him succee^^ Odo his Brother, or his Sonne, (for I finde Authors of both opinio^ After whom followed Henry his Brother, who dying without I^^ Robert King of France, got the Dukedome of Burgundy, Henry having ^ it him (as they say) by his last Will and Testament. After him suceeded his Sonne Robert, and after Robert, Hugo his Nephew. After h^^ followed Otho; and after Otho, Hugo the third. And after Hugo the Odo the Sonne. After whom there followed in order Odo the thi^^ Hugo the fourth, Robert the third, Hugo the fifth, Endo, and Philip, w^

map of BurgundyTHE DVKEDOME OF BVRGVNDIE.

dying without Issue Iohn King of France followed after him, after whom succeeded Philip his Sonne surnamed the Bold to whom his Father gave the Dukedome of Burgundie. Iohn surnamed the Stout succeeded his Father Philip, and after him Philip the Good or Gentle, his Sonne. And after succeeded Charles who in regard of his service in divers Warres, was surnamed The Warriour. After whose decease Ludovick the 11. possessed all this Country. The Metropolis or chiefe City of the Dukedome is Divionum which Gregory Turonensis calleth Divionum,The Cities. and the French Dijon. Divionis is thought to be the Builder there, but we rather suppose that Aurelianus the Emperour was the re-edifier thereof, and the enlarger of the Precincts. Some think it was so called ab Divis, or from the Gods who were much reverenced there. It is the fairest City in Burgundy. It is situate on a most pleasant Plaine, and the two Rivers Suzione and Oscara (called in French Suson and l'Ouche) doe wash the walls on either side: the former doth usually overflow the City making dangerous exundations; the latter is very full of fish, and floweth in a quieter Channell, and yeeldeth many commodities. The walls are built as high as is convenient for defence: being lately fortified with Towers and Bulwarkes. There is a Seate of Justice there, and a Parliament: out of whose bosome, the Lawes of the Country are as it were fetched. Hee that is chose^ to be Maior of this Towne, is compeld though against his will to take a burden on him rather than an honour, and to take his oath it the Temple of the blessed Virgin, which the Kings Proctor repeateth ^nto him, namely that he will be faithfull unto the King, and that ^ee will defend the Lawes, Liberties, and Priviledges of the City, against the King himselfe, and all others, as often as occasion shall require. On the Mountaines neere the City there doe grow excellent Vines. Moreover the Episcopall Cityes are Augustodunum and Cabill^us, both venerable for antiquity. The former was called Augustod^^^, from Augustus, (whether Octavianus or some other it is not greatly to be stood upon: for those that derive it from Auge the wife of Aph doe but relate Fables) who re-edified it when it was ruinated by the warres which Caesar maintained against France. It is now called A^s^^. It was heretofore a very faire City, but now it is not so beautifull Here are many ruines of Theaters, Aqueducts, Pillars, and Pyrami^es to be seene: and there are daily old Coynes, and other ancient Monuments digged up, it hath also now many faire Churches and publike Structures in it. It is seated at the foote of those Mountaines, which are commonly called les Monts de Civis, neere the River Arrasius. So much concerning Augustodunum,: there followeth Cabinum, or Caballionum, Aeduorum: commonly called Challon sur Saone. It is not knowne who built it. This City is situate on the right had banke of Araris: the Fields are fruitfull, and the ayre wholesome. It is very commodious for transporting Merchandise downe the River Araris, whence Caesar chose this place to make provisionin, and to convey it from hence to his Army which lay in divers parts. This sometime was the royall Seate of Guntchrannus. Afterward Lotarius the Sonne of Ludovicus Pius did burne it all downe, so that there remayned

no appearance of a City. But in regard of the conveniency of the place it was afterward reedified, and at this time it is a rich Towne of trading. So much concerning the Metropolis, and the Episcopall Citties: there followes now some Townes of lesser noate which are in this Dukedome. In the midde way betweene Caballinum and Matiscon, there is a Towne commonly called Tornus; Spartianus and Antoninus call it Tinurtium. It is situate in a fertile soyle, being every where encompas'd with the River Araris. The Hills in the Country of Suburbicaria doe bring forth excellent Wine. And in the mid-way betweene the City Matiscon, and Carballon, is the Towne Cuysellum, which belongeth to the King as Parad^ne thinketh, which Ammianus calleth Secusium. Being situate at the foote of the Mountaine Iura, and though it be now very ruinous, yet it is venerable for antiquity. On the East it hath high Mountaines, and cleare Rivers, whose waters are very sweet to drink, from whence a wholesome Fountaine, springing out of the high sandy Rocke is convey'd into the Towne by woodden Pipes. On the West a Plaine spreadeth forth it selfe. Three leagues from the City Cabellon Northward is Belna, commonly called Beaulne, neere the River which the Inhabitants call Beur-soize. Some would have it to be that which Caesar and Strabo call Bibracten. Others are of another opinion. This Towne is situated in a Fennish place, which as Paradine writeth can easily make a Lake about the City, for a mile round about, to keepe of^ the enemies. All the City is encompassed with strong walls, and hath Bulwarks, which can resist the force of Ordnance. The Country of Belnia is rich, and of a good soyle. It hath the best Vines in all the world, which make the best Wine. In the same Country is Cistertium called so from the Cisternes, built at Duke Odoes charge in a great Wood, under the Priory whereof there are above a thousand and eighty Frieries, and as many Nunneries, of the same Order, which from hence is called the Cistertian Order. Semurium, commonly called in French Semur, is situate in the middle of the Territory, which is commonly call'd Auxois, a faire Towne. In the mid-way betweene Divion and Belni is Nuithonium, commonly call'd Nuys. This Towne was alwaies famous for making of good Swords. That Towne which is now call'd Avalon, Antoninus calls Aballon, where he calleth it also the 16. Legion. That which in French is called Sanlieu, Antoninus calleth Sidolucum, who placeth there the 18. Legion. That which is called Flavigus, halfe a league Eastward from Semurio, it is thought was formerly called Flavia Eduorum. There are also other Townes of Burgundie, which for brevity sake I omit to describe: as are Ausone, having a Castle, which is the Easterne Key of the Dukedome, the River A^^^is gliding by the walls thereof, also the Townes Noiers, Ravieres, ^eigne, Mombard, Chastillon, S. Seigne, Seloigne, Crevant, Viteau, Verdun, Ar^n, Seure, Tonnerre, which Antoninus calls Tronoderun. There are three ^ther Episcopall Cities accounted to be in the Dukedome of Burgun^^e, Nevers, Ausserre, and Mascon. The first whereof is a Dukedome, ^he Territory thereof (called Duche de Navernois) is very large, and is ^atered with three Navigable Rivers, I^auna, Elavere, L^geris. There

are 12. walled Townes therein, the Metropolis whereof is Nivers^^^, having Jurisdiction over thirty Castelships as they call them. That which Caesar calls Noviodunum, is a Towne strongly walled, and well fortified with Towers and deepe Ditches. Among the chiefe Townes of the Dukedome of Nevers are Dezisa, which Antoninus calls Decise and Decetia: also Clamecyum, Dousyum, Milinium, Angilbertsum, Corbigri^m, St. Leonards Church, Luyzium, Premecyum, and others. Anserre followes: which Antoninus calls Antissiodorum, and placeth here the 22. Legion Ammianus calls it Antosiodorum, or l'Evesche d'Auxerre. The Territory of this City, commonly called le Pays d'Auxerrois, is famous for wire, called after the name thereof. The City which is now called M^s^^, Caesar calleth Matiscona: and the Itinerarie Tables Matis^^, and the Register Bookes of the Province of France, and Anton^^us doe call it Matisconense Castrum, who placeth there the 10. Legio^^, and it ^^ ancient Roll it is called Mastico, as Philip Bugnonius noteth, who writs History of this City. Paul Diaconus calleth it Machaon (...) Turonensis, and others doe call it Matissana, being like or Calali^^, both for situation, manners, and Arts. It lyeth by the River (...), which hath a faire Bridge over it, lying strait forward (...) the other side are like unto a Bow. In Burgundy and the (...) thereof are these Counties, Dijon, Austun, Tonnerre, Cha^on (...) Mascon, S. Martin, Nevers, Langres, Ausserre, S. Iangou, Charo^^, (...) or Chagni; Monliet or Montit, Auxone, Rogemont, Mussy, strestem^e^, Mombys, Senegnon, Gilly, Valenion, Tirecourt, Chevigni, Ain^-v^^le, Esp^^i Epiryen, Tarvant, Brasey or Brasse, Rochefort, Aincourt, or Agin^^our^, V^^ To which also are added Arley, Ragny, haligny, Mommariu^, Laugey, ^^^champ, Couches. There are the Bishopricks of Augustodunum, or ^^^ensis, of Austum, of Mascon, of Chalon, and of Langres, which are sub^e^ to the Archbishop of Lions. This Dukedome hath these Rivers S^^on, Oscarus, Araris, Icauna, Ligeris, Elaveres, and others.



THE COVNTIE OF BVRGVNDIE.
THE Countie of Burgundie followes, or Burgundie the higher, in French it is called Franche Conte, that is the free County, for the Province is governed by the Earle thereof, and is free as they say from all tributes and exactions. It belongeth to the Emperour,The (...) and is under the protection of the Burnensian Heluetians. On the North Lotaringia and high Germanie doe confine upon it, on the West the Dukedome of L^^gundie, on the East the Helvetians, on the South the Allobrogians and Segusians. The length is 90. Miles, the breadth 60.The (...) It is a very fruitfull Countrie, replenished with all things necessarie for mans life, and the soile is fit for tillage, for planting of Trees, and Vineyards, and for feeding of Cattell. There is every where great store of Wheate, Rye, Barley, Oates, Beanes, and other Pulse. And no lesse abundance of Trees. The Contrie especially the middle part hath hills which doe bring forth and yeeld most excellent Wines. The Arbosians, and the Vadamians have Winevessells so great that they seeme to be as bigge as a house. Neere the Palace of the ancient Kings of Burgundie, which the Inhabitants call now Chambrette au Roy, they digge out of the earth a kind of plaister, like Lime. There is also in the Countrie of Dolania Marble digged forth,The variety of livi^^ Creatures which the Greekes did call Alablaster, of which they made Tombes and Monuments for great men: and another black kind of Marble enameld with purple spots. There are also divers kindes of living creatures, and great store of Oxen and Cattell. All doe approve of the travelling Horses of Graunell, and the fierce Dogs that are in this Country. Many things are delivered concerning the ancient Earles of Burgundie. Eudo was the first Earle and Palatine of Burgundie,The (...) Government after whom succeeded his Nephew Philip; who dying without issue, Iohn King of France gave the Dukedome of Burgundie to his sonne Philip, who was surnamed the bold, but Margaret his Nephew succeeding after Philip, got the Dukedome of Burgundie, after whom succeeded Ludovick Malanus her Son, and after him Margaret Malana her Daughter, whom Philip Duke of Burgundie surnamed the bold married. After him there succeeded in order Iohn his sonne surnamed the stout, Philip Bonus, or the good, Charles the Warriour, and Mary marryed to Maximilian of Austria, Philip of Austria, the Emperour Charles the 5. etc. Philip King of Spaine. This Coun^tie is divided into 3. Diaeceses or Praefectureships, which are commonly call'd Bayliwicks: the higher and the lower, and Dolins. The first is Vesulium, the second Polichum, the third Dola. But D^^a hath a strong Castell, and is the Metropolis or chiefe Citie of the whole Countie, and the fairest of all the other Cities, it is situated

by the River Dubis, which devideth it selfe here into two arme^ Some suppose it to bee that which Ptolemie calls Didattion Lib. 11. Chap 9. a Citie of the Sequanes, very faire and beautifull. Here is a ne^^ spatious Market place, almost foure square, but that it is a little longer than broad. On the West side is the Court, and the Prison. Th^ chiefe Church which is very faire and admirably carved, is consecrated to the Virgin Mary. There are also many other Cities as Ves^^^ commonly called Besancon, an Imperiall Citie, called heretofore Chrysopolis: it is seated in a commodious and fertile Territorie. T^^ River Alduasdabis doth runne through most part of it, and do^^^ circle most of it, but the River doth not wash the other part, (...) the Gate in the way to Dola. There is also Nozerethum, or N^^^ which was formerly called Nuccillum from the Nut trees grow^^^ there, but Ludovick Cabillonensis returning from the warres of Ierusalem did wall it about and call'd it Nazarethum. This Earle hath a C^^ which is called the leaden Castle, because it is cover'd with (...) There is also Salina, a faire Citie, and famous through the which world, denominated and so called from the salt Fountaines, and (...) salt which is usually made there, which being very white is tran^^ted ted into other Countries, and the Countie hath a great revelation out of it. We omit for brevitie sake the description of other Co^^tries:The Lakes. Burgundy hath great and wonderfull Lakes: One of the chief whereof is that which is called the Wherlepoole: which is a ^^^derfull worke of nature. For there is mud above the water which so hardened, that it seemeth firme land: yet Horses and Cart^u^^ not passe over it, but onely footemen. In raynie cloudy wea^^^ doth not rise, except it be against faire Weather, and then is ^^^leth up presently, and watereth the Columban Plaine. Moreover ^^tween Nozerethum and Riparia there is another Lake in Bonualli, (...) is full of Pikes, Pearches, and other fish, which every 7. yeare some weekes hideth it selfe, and after riseth up againe, which i^ ^^^ry miraculous, and most incredible. The Southerne part of (...) Countie hath many Lakes. There is the Lake called in Freach^^ leteux, both the greater and the lesser, also Narlay of an inc^^^ depth:The Rivers. also Vernoy, the two Chamblici, Frogeay, Ronchault, and (...) Many Rivers doe divide it, as Dubis, Longnonius, Danus, Lpuus: all ^^^bis doth appertaine to this Countie, Ptolomie calls it Doubis, and (...) Alduabis, if Fulvius Vrsinus conjecture rightly: in other Bookes ^^ corruptly read Alduasalubis and Alduasdolis, commonly Doux. It is (...) out of the Mountaine Iura, a little above the pleasant Villag^ (...) Moreover Dubis taking his course from the South Northward, gli^^^ by the Lake Pontium, and so with many windings runneth by Palum, Mortua, and Vasrum, and so to the Church of S. Hyppolitus, (...) from thence bending Westward, it goeth to the Towne Chas^da, so flowing by Vesuncio, and making an Iland neere Dola, after (...) winding turnings and having received many Rivers, it mingleth waters with Araris neere Virdunum. Longnonius also wholly beleueeth to the higher Burgundie, commonly call'd Lougnon. Davum sp^^^eth out of the high Mountaine, which hangeth over a great and

map of Burgundy^HE COVNTIE OF BVRGVNDIE.

Towne called Syrodus: there are also Lupus or Lupa, commonly called Love,The ancient government. Ararus, and others. Concerning the Politicke state of this free Countrie, when the Provinciall assemblies are held, the three states doe meere, being summon'd in the Earles name by the Prince of the Arausians, and the Lords of Nozereth and Arbe. The three States doe consist of the Nobles, the Clergie, and the Citizens. The Earles of the higher Diaecese are the Earle of Montbelliart, the Earle of Roche and Varax, of Montrivel, or Thalamey and Vaulgrenans, of Vergey, of Rey, Listoneis. The Abbates are of Croissant, of Charite, of Bitaine, of Corneul, of Tulley, of Clarfont, of Luxeul, of Bellevoulx, of Grace-Dieu, of Charleu, of three Kings, or Trium Regum. The Priors are of Vaueluse, of Lantenans, of Cusance, of Marteret, of Iussey, of Portsus Saosne, of Montreul neere Sagona, of S. Marcelli. The Canonici are of Calem^stier, and others of other places. The Cities are Gray, Vesoul, Month^^son, Iussey, Palma, Portsus, Saone, Cromary, Mont-Iustin, Faulcogney. The Lords are: of Montmorot, and S. Loup. of S. Martin, of Taulens, of Villeneufve, of Rupt, of Montgevelle Chastillon and Belvoye, of Constandey, of Monb^illon, of Velleson, of Dicey, of Vgny and Chemylly, of O^zelet* of Cicon, of Trasves, of Raincounieres, of Costebrune, of Sombern^m, of Villefault, of Bermont, of Avilley, of Mugnay, of Vereur, of Tourai^^, of Ci^^^, of Provanchieres, of Grand-mont, of Velle Chevrelous, of Voser, of Damparre, of Frotey, of Breutal, of Matey, of Noironde, of Tromarey, of Milles^ of Mailler^ncourt, of Myon, of Benaenge, of Vellerot le boz, of Clere, of Betoncourt, of Mortaillotte, of Amondans, of Fraisne, of Chav^rey, of Mon^^ of Mons S. Legier, of Cuvry, of Montereul, of Sorans and Lambry: and many others. The Earles of lower Burgundy, are of Ruffer, of S. ^^bin: and the Barron of Chevreaulx: The Abbots are of S. Engends, of Beaume, of Balerne, of Mont S. Marie, of Mont-Benoist, of Baylien, of Ra^^^res: the Priors are, of Mainnaul, of Vaucluse, of Bonlieu, of Mente, of L^^slesaulnier, of Arbois, of Mote, of Syredus, of Vallis supra Polichinum, of Mortau. The Canons are, of S. Mauritius, of S. Anatolius, of S. Mi^^ael all in Salina: also of Arbosium, of Polichnium, of Nozere^ and of other Cities. The Cities are Salina, Arbois, Poligny, Pontarlien, Nezre, Castrum Caroli, Monmoroti, Orgelot. The Lords are of Co^longuired Andelest, of Courla^u and le Pin, of S. Amour, of Argento, of (...) of Poupet, of S. Sorlin, of Darna and Tramelay, of Borsia, of Cressia, of F^tigny, of Chambery, of Montena, of Vecles, of Rosait, of Marigna, of Be^fort, of Nasey, of Aigle, of Courboson, of Vertamboz, of Largi^^a, of Main^, of Estoille, of Chasnet, of Aresche, of Coges, of Bar and Iousseaul, of A^ges, of Muy^e, of Charrin, of Charlin, of Chaumes, of Bretterieres, of (...) of Cogna, of Chaulx, of Montnet, of Vadans Villette, of Arb^is, of Aig^^erre, of Chastelvillaine, of S. Iulian, of Descrilles, of Verges, of Cham^^ag^, of Beaulchemin, of Villeneufve les Orgellet, of Chastres, of Ioulx, of V^n^e^, of Vismeaulx, and many others. In the Diecesse of Dola there are the Lords of Givrey, of Longepierre and Rahon, and of Clervaulx. The Abbots of Billon, of S. Vincius, of S. Paulus Bisantius, of Acey. The Priors, are of Loye, of Leval, of Damparis, of Iouhe, of Monterot, of M^te, of Faye, of Mostier in Se^usia. The Cannons are, of Dola, of Bisantinum, and others in other places. The Citties are Dola, Quingejum, Orn^^^,

Lya, Rocheford, Vercelle. The Lords are of Vauldrey: of Rainnes, of Rye of Mentfort, of Mont-Richard, of Fertans, of Maillot, of Bermont, of Cleren, of Verchamps, of Dossans, of Port, of Chasteau, of Roillault, of Abbaus, and Marchault, of Reculet, of Chantrans, of Mont-gros-pain, of Mutigney, of Chassey, of Paressey, of Choisey, of S. Iley, of Faye, of Parrel, of Chemin, of ^abus, of Champdivers and Rastonnieres, of Rainche-court, of Paintre, of Mentrambart, of Salans, of Goussans, of Chavirey, of Ancier, and others. There is greate store of Nobilitie (as wee see) in this Countrie. And there are foure families which are either descended from the Kings and Princes of Burgundie, or are allyed to them by affinitie, namely the Noble Lord of Vienna: of Vergy, who is called the stout; of Chalon who is called the rich, and Prince of the Arausians, and of Neuf Chased, who hath a greate estate of Lands. But all appeales are brought out of the three Dieceses, or Bayliwicks, to Dola, to the high Parliament of this Countie. Concerning the state Ecclesiasticke, the Archbishop of Bisuntine, under whom are three Bishops, the Bishop of Bas^ in Germanie, of Lausanum in Helvetia, and of Bellicensis in Sabaudia, is the chiefe for Ecclesiasticall government, and the Prince of the Empire. The Archbishop of Bisuntium, and the Citie Besoncon, which is a free imperiall Citie, and heretofore the greatest Towne of the Province of the Sequans, and the Presidents seate, are parts of the Empire of the fifth circle. The thenth Circle of the Empire is the Burgandian, because it consisteth of the house of Burgundie, and doth containe the chiefe Princes of the Lowe Countries, which are the Duke of Burgundie, H. Bergen and Waelhem, Count Egmond and Iselstien, Count Nassau in Breda, and Count Bergen.



THE DVKEDOME OF SABAVDIA.
MAny doe make great inquisition concerning the name o^ Sabaudia.whence so called. Some doe derive it a Sabatijs Vadis, or the Sab^tian Fords. Pliny calleth it Sabatium Vadum, a City of U^guria, which Pomponius Mela calleth Sabbatta, Ptolemy Sabata, and Strabo Zabbatoon Ouada. Others call it Saba^^^a as it were Sabbaterum Auwe, that is the Field, or Meddow of the Sabatians, whom Volaterranus calleth Sabbaudians. Some call it Sa^voie, as it were a way thorow Flints, Bryars, and rugged places. Some call it Saulve-Voie, that is, the Safe way, which was once very dangerous and full of Theeves as fabulous Writers doe report. Saba^di^ (...) often named in the Register Booke among the Provinces of Ga^^ Narbonensis. And former Writers doe mention it, sometimes calle^ it Sabaudia,The ancient and sometimes Sapaudia. On the North and West it bounded with the County of Brssanium (which the Duke of Saba^^^ passed over to the King of France in Exchange, for the Marquishing ^ Salutium) and with Helvetia, and the Lake Lemane, which lyeth betweene them: on the East with Valesia and Piemont, and the Mountaines which runne betweene them: and on the South is the De^^nate. In the Valleys and Champion places, the soyle is pleasant and fruitfull, especially toward the Nouth, by the Lake Leman, where it bringeth forth excellent Wine, which is called Ripalium, from the banke of the Lake. There are excellent Pastures for feeding all so^^ of Cattell, especially neere S. Bernards Mount. All this tract of gro^^d which containeth Sabaudia, the Delphinate, and other confining Provinces, were heretofore a Kingdome, as it appeare in Livie, lib. 2^. where we read that two Brothers who contended for the Kingdome of the Allobrogum did choose Hanniball to Arbitrate betweene them That part of the Kingdome of which we entreate, namely, Sabandis had afterward divers Lords and Princes, it is now governed by Dukes: whose bounds were shorter formerly. For then they were onely called Earles of Mauriemia: the first whereof was Berthold^^ who being enforced to change his owne Country, went into that part of Burgundie, which the Allobrogians call the County of Mar^enna: which County he obtained for some service done to the Empire, which his Sonne Humbert the first, having more fully received o^ the Emperour Henry the third did passe over to his Sonne Amades the first, and Humbert the second, his Nephew, who by the successive right of Adelheida, the Wife of Humbert the first, were also Marquesses o^ Segusium, and had Tarantasia joyned to their Territories. The Sonne

map of SabaudiaTHE DVKEDOME OF SABAVDIA.

of Humbert the second, was Amades the second, the first Earle of Saba^dia, and Marquesse of the Taurinians and Segusians. After him there followed in a right line Humbert the third, Thomas, who got by warre the Principality of Piemont, also Amedes the third, who got into his owne possession the Country of Chablasium and Vallis Augustae Petra, having no Heyre Males to inherit them, and also Boniface, who dying without issue, his Unckles succeeded after him, Peter, who much enlarged his Principality, having taken all the Townes neere to the Lake Leman, and Philip, formerly Archbishop of Lions, who for want of issue did passe over the better part of his Inheritance to Amedes the fifth, his Brother Thomases Sonne, who was surnamed the Great. After him succeeded his Sonnes Edward who had no Heire Male, and Amedes the fifth. After whom succeeded Amedes the 6. who founded the Order of the Knights of the Post: also Amedes the 7. and Amedes the 8, whom the Emperour iSgismund did create the first Duke of Sabaudia, in the yeere 1416. whom after a voluntarie resignation of h^s Principalities unto his Sonne Ludovick, became a Monke, and the Fathers of the Counsell of Basil, made him Pope after Eugenius the 4. and called him Pope Felix the fifth. Nine yeeres afterward he yeelded up that dignity to Nicolas the fift, being content to be a Cardinal onely. He dyed in the yeere 1452. at Ripalis, neere the Lake Lenu. Moreover there were 8. more Amadesses.
The Metropolis of Sabaudia is Chamberiacum, commonly called Chamberi, which the Ancients did call Camerinum, as Paradine noteth in his Sabaudia. Pinetus thinketh that the Ancients did call it ^^^ Voconij, which Pliny mentioneth, lib. 3. cap. 4. and Antoninus in his Itinerarie. So that it cannot be that they should count Forum Vo^^^vs among those Townes, which are in the Province neere unto the Mediterranian Sea. Also Peutingers Itinerarie Table doth place there Forum Voconij, not farre from the French shore, betweene Forum his, now called Frieul, and Mataron. Varerius vainely trifleth in his Chorographie of Portugal, who maketh Forum Voconij, to be Forum Voceris, as if it were the Metropolis of the Vocontians, when the chiefe City of that Country is Augusta Dia Vocentiorum, now called Die. Canalis also and Castilion doe thinke that Chamberry is Cinarum, which Cicero mentioneth in his Epistles. Moreover Chamberry hath a Castle, and the Dukes of Sabaudia have a House there, who have established here a Seate of Justice for the whole Country, and a Parliament. The parts of Sabaudia are the Counties following. I will adde something concerning the Lordships. Fossigni is neere the Lake Leman. In it they say is Ripalia, allusively Ripam Alos, or the Sea-banke, (for some of the Inhabitants doe call the Leman Lake the Sea, and truely it rages oftentimes like the Sea) it is commonly called Ripaille. It is a pleasant place, and famous because Amedes the 8. the first Duke of Sabaudis, did there live a Monke, having formerly resigned up his Principalities, and was chosen and consecrated Pope by the Fathers of the Counsell of Basill after Eugenius the fourth, the 9. before the Kalends of September, in the yeere 1440. and was called Faelix the 5. he lived a while, and built some smal Aedifices, which I saw in the yeere 1585.

He dyed there in the yeere 1452. in the moneth of January, having three yeeres before for quiet sake passed over the Papall dignity to Nicolas, he being content to be a Cardinall onely. Elenor Daughter to the Lord of Fossignij married Peter the sixt Earle of Sabaudia. And also Mary the Daughter of Amedes the fourth, the 8. Earle of Sabaudia, of the Brabantine family, was married to the Duke of this Country. Amedes the third got the Principality of Chablasius, which is neere to Fossigni Eastward, commonly call'd Chablois, and joyned them to his Dominions, seeing there were no lawfull Heires Male to inherit it. Some doe reckon the Townes of Tononium, Evianum, Guingaunum, and others, which I am afraid to write, as having no warrant for it. Concerning the Lordship commonly call'd Val d'Osta, we will speake in a more convenient place in the Description of Italy, where we will entreat of Piemont.
The chiefe Mountaines are the Alpes, which now as it were a wall doe separate Italy from France, and Germany. Festus thinketh that the Alpes were so called from their whitenesse, and the most doe affirme that the Alpes are the highest Mountaines in Europe. And many names of the Alpes are found in ancient Monuments, which doe shew that there were many parts of the Alpes, but we will by the way touch onely those parts, which for the most part doe lye in and about Sabaudia, as the Sabbatian Alpes, from whence it is thought that Sabaudia is denominated, which begin neere to Samona, neere a place called V^y, which the ancients call Vada Sablatia, from whence they bend like a Bow towards Monegne, which was heretofore called Portus Herculis Monaeci, and from thence they doe stretch out toward the River Var or Varo, which parteth France from Italy. There are also the Sea Alpes, but these we passe over as we goe towards Province, as also the Sea Penine Alpes. The Cottian Alpes follow, which begin at a place called Saulteron, where there are two wayes, both which doe encline towards the Marquiship of Salutium. In these Alpes there is the Mountaine Agno, and the Mountaine Viso, which the ancients did call the Mountaine Vesulus, through which there is a hollow passage from France into Italy, after this passage there are two wayes, the one whereof leadeth toward Verguel, the other toward Rauel, which are Fortresses to the Marquiship of Salutium. And betweene this Mountaine and the hollow-way three Fountaines doe spring up, and flow-into one Channell doe make the famous River of Po. In this Country is the Hill of the Crosse, and the Mountaine Genebre or Genevre, ther Mountaines end neere Luze, where the River Doria separateth them from the Graecian Alpes. The Graecian Alpes doe follow, the name whereof is derived from Hercules the Sonne of Amphytrio a Graecian, who travaild over these Mountaines out of Italy into France. In that part of these Mountaines which is toward France the Ceentronians were seated, who are now called Tarantasy, by whom the way to Chamberry lyeth. There are also betweene these Mountaines the Veragri, who containe the lower Valesians, and the Countries Gauot and Focigny: and the way of these Mountaines is called, the Mountaine

of S. Bernard. There are many others besides, which for brevity sake we omit. The nature and quality of these Mountaines is miraculous; for he that passeth over them meeteth still with new variety of wayes, because now the way is wide, and by and by it growes strai^ now the Mountaines seeme to touch the ayre, and by and by doe descend againe, there is a Plaine, and here a Vale enclosed with high Hills: neverthelesse the Valleyes in many places doe bring forth good Corne, on the Mountaines also there is much Grasse for Pastoring of Cattell: and in some places there is Wine. There are also divers Mines, and some kindes of living Creatures, which are not found any where else, and many other rarities, which for brevity sake we omit. Besides Rhodanus these Rivers doe water Sabaudis, Aravis, Isura, Doria, Arva, Danius, and others. There are also the Lake Leman, de Nicy, de Bourget, etc.



HELVETIA VVITH THE NEIGHBOVRING CONFEDERATE COVNTRIES.
NEXT to Lions Mereator placeth that Country, which the Romanes called Helvetia. Now it is called,The N^mes. Whence derived. or the greatest part of it, Sutcia or Suitia, from the Vitians a people of Saxonie, who being throwne out of their habitations for their often violating of the faith, Charles the great seated them on the Alps, as in like manner hee convay'd some thousands of the Nordalbingians into Flanders and Brabont. Or else it was so called from the Suecians, who in the raigne of King Sigebert did re^ove out of Suecia into Helvetia, being compel'd to leave their former Habitations, either by the inundations of waters, or by populousnesse of the Inhabitants, o^ lastly it is so called from the Towne Su^tium: it is commonly Switscherland. It is called the Land of Confederates, and in their owne speech Eydignoschaft, from the League and confederacie, which is betweene the Helvetians. These Eu^^opius did sometime call Quadians. Moreover Helvetia is situate betweene the Mountaine Iura, the Lake Leman, Italy, and the Rhene, and it hath on the East the County of Tirolum: on the South the Cottian Alpes, Lombardie, the Dukedome of Mediolanum, and Piemont: on the lowest Sabaudia and Bu^g^gie: on the North the River Rhene. Helvetia is 240. Miles long, as Caesar saith Lib. 1. de bello Gallico: and 80. Miles broad, which Casar maketh somewhat larger. The Countrie hath a whole ^^me ayre,The fertility. and though it have many high rugged Mountaines, yet it is so well husbanded by the Inhabitants, that it is no where barren: but that it produceth not onely things necessary to sustaine life, but also many del^cacies. It bringeth forth abundance of Corne, although in many places, unlesse the gleabe land be burnt, it is in vaine to sowe it, but the labour and industrie of the Husbandman doth helpe this inconvenience. It produceth in many places exellent wine, which doth farre exceed Rhenish wine, both in state and quantitie. Besides there are fat Meddowes, in which many flockes and heards doe graze, to the great commoditie of the Inhabitants. This Countrey also doth breed great store of wild Beasts, as Beares, Harts, Does, Goates,The variety of living creatures. Leopards, Boares, and others, so that the Inhabitants have great store of game to Hunt, there are also Fowle which they take in great abundance. Helvetia is a free Anarchie, and subject to no Prince, since that time that the Helvetians being encited and stirred up by the unmercifull and unjust government of the Rulers there, did enter into confederacy with the Vlrian Nobilitie, and so shaked off the yoke of ^bjection, and got their owne libertie. The first that began this confederacie

were the Urians, the Silvanians, and the Suitensians, (...) their owne Townes. By whose example nor long after, the othe^ Cities being still provoked by the great men, their neighbours (...) the like, and entring into League with them, they grew as strong (...) their neighbour, and being strengthened with auxilian forces th^^ became a terrour to their enemies. The Country of Helvetia is div^ded into foure parts, which by a Germaine word they call Gow, whi^^ signifieth a Country or Village, and they are these Zurichgow, Wif^purgerg^w, Argow and Turgow, but the Common-wealth of Helvetia do^ consist of thee parts. In the first part there are 13. Villages, whi^^ the Italians call Cantones, and the Germanes Ort. These Ca^ have this priviledge above the other confederates, that they in (...) like meetings doe deliberate and consult of all matters appertain^^ to the Commonwealth of Helvetia, and doe give their voices, and (...) sharers in all commodities or losses belonging to the Citie, and (...) equally governe the Prefectureships which they have gotten, a^^ have an equall part in any publike bootie: namely Tigurum joyned ^^^selfe with the 3. confederate Townes, Anno 1351. And Bernei^^ yeare 1355. Lucerna was joyned to the 3. first Townes by a perpe^^all league in the yeare 1322. Vria, Vren: Sultia, Swit^ Vnder-W^^ did first enter into confederacy among themselves Anno 1308. T^^ and Zug were added to the 6. Townes, in the yeare 1363. Glarius so and Tugturo entered into the same league. Basilea, Anno 1301. ^^ter'd into confederacy with the 10 Townes. Also Fritburgum and ^^^loau^um, by common consent were received into the number of Cantones, in the yeare 1481. and so the Citie of Helvetia did consist 10. Vilages or Contones. Schaffhusen in the yeare 1600. was received into the number of the Cantones or Villages. And Abbatificall the yeare 150^. The Countrie belonging to this Towne is divi^e unto 12. par^s which they call there Roden, 6. whereof are joyned the Canton, which are called the innermost parts, and 6. are called the outward parts. And there are 12 Senators chosen out of e^^ one of these severall parts, who are to consult of all affaires of ^^^ Country, and they are in all 144. Senators. The second part of the confederates, are Abbas and the Towne S. Galli, which was joyned league with the 4. Townes of the Helvetians in the yeare 1455. A^^ afterward Anno 1455. they were joyned in pepetuall league with the 6. Townes, Tigurum, Berna, Lucerna, Suitia, Tugio, and Glorona. Th^ People Granb^ndier of the Rhetorians made a perpetuall league with the 7. old Townes, in the yeare 1497. And the Curiensians, whose societie was called the house of God, did joyne in confederacy with them Anno 1418. The 3. Societie, which was called the Societie of the 10. Iudgements, did not joyne themselves with the Helvetians but because it is confederate with the 11. former Cantons, therefore it continues in amitie and faithfull societie wi^h the Helvetians. Sodunum and Valetes did enter into perpetuall league with the Bernadans, (...) 1475. And afterward when there arose a controversie concerning Religion, Hadrian Bishop of Sedunum and 70. Townes of the (...) into confederacy Anno 15^3. at Friburg, with

map of HelvetiaHELVETIA.

these 7. Townes of Friburg, Vria, Lucerna, Suitia, Vnderwaldia, Tugium Filburgum, Saladorum, all adhering to the Church of Rome Rotweil first entered into confederacie with the Helvetians Anno 1463. for 15. yeares, which being many times renew'd, at last in the yeare 1519. it was perpetually established betweene them. Mulhusen was joyned in confederacy with the Helvetians Anno 1468. Bienna Biel joyned it selfe in confederacy with the Bernatians, in the yeares, 1303. 1306. 1352. and 1367. Geneva did bargaine for the right of a Citie, with the Bernatians Anno 1536. but yet it was joyned to the Common Citie of the Cantons. The 3. are the Prefectureships gotten by force of armes or voluntarie yeelding. Turgea or Turgow was subjected to the Helvetians in the yeare 1460. which is governed by 7. ancient Townes. Aquensis Baden was subdued in the yeare 1415. and is governed by 8. of the chiefe Townes. Rhegusti which was gotten Anno 1491. was governed by 20. of the chiefe Townes. Sa^unetum or Sarung^ns Anno 1483. was sold by George Earle of Werenberg to the 7. chiefe Townes, by which it is also govern'd. The free Provinces taken Anno 1415. are governed by these 5. ancient Cantons or Townes, Luganum, Lucarnum, Mendrestum, and Vallis Madia, these 4. Prefectureships were given by Maxamilian Sforza, Duke of Mediolanum to the Helvetians Anno 1513. and are governed by all the Cantones except Abbatisella, Biltionum and Bellizona: the goverment hereof was afterward granted unto 3. chiefe Cantons, Anno 1513. Valesia which is contained also in this Chart, doth containe 3. people, and 3. confederacies. The two former are the Viberians and Sedunians, who are called by one generall name, the free higher Valesians, and they are divided into 10. tythings which they call Decimas or Desena^ the Veragrians who are called the lower Valesians are governed by the higher, yet the chiefe of them all is the Bishop of Sedunum, who hath the chiefe authoritie both in Ecclesiasticall and civill matters, and is called the Earle or Prefect of Valesia. Here is the County of Werdube^g and the Barrony of Saxony. This Province hath many great Lakes: the chiefe whereof are the Lakes of Lucernerze: of Zuriche^^e of Walenzee: of Nuwenburgerzee: and the greatest of al is the Lake of ^^denzee, which Solinus and Pliny call Brigantium, Ammianus Marcell^^^ calleth it Brigantium, from Brigeontium a little ancient Towne. The length thereof is 24. Miles, and the breadth at least 12. Miles. We have here set down Ammianus his words, because they containe a lively description of this Lake, and of the Cataracts of Rhene. The River Rhene runneth with a violent course through the windings of the high Mountaines, which nere the ^lep^ntius doth fall downe like the Cataracts of Nilus, the torrent at his first arising doth rush downe, and keepe his course with the supply onely of his owne proper waters, but now being strengthened with the melted snow, it weareth his bankes wider, it runneth into the round great Lake, which the Inhabitants of Rhene doe call Brigantium, it is inaccessible by reason of the thick Woods, except where the Almaine hath made it Habitable, contrarie to the nature of the place, and the intemperatenesse of the Climate. So that the River breaking into this Lake with a foaming

entrance, and passing through the still waters thereof, doth runne through the middle of it, as it were a contrarie element unto it, without augmenting or diminishing his owne waters, it commeth forth againe retayning the same name and strength which it had before. And which is a wonder, the Lake is not moved with the violent course of the water, nor the hasty River is not stayed with the muddy filth of the Lake, as if they could not be mingled together: and if it were not seene to runne through the Lake, it could not be discerned by the forcible course thereof.The Rivers. Moreover the Rivers which water Helvetia, are Rhene, Rhodanus, Adua, Ticinus, Limagus, Byrsa, Langarus, Sara, Taurus commonly call'd Dur, Aenus, Arola, and many others. It were needlesse to reckon the Mountaines, seeing the names of the Thetian Mountaines are knowne to all men. But least I should seeme too defective herein, I will mention some of them. The Mountaine of Gothardus is now called the high Alpes, after which the Penine Alpes doe follow: neere to the Salassians there are the Cottian Alpes and the Mountaine Silvius. Also the greater and lessers Mountaines of S. Bernard. The Graectan Alpes belong to the Lepontians: the Mountaine Adulas which the Germanes call the Mountaine der Vogel, toucheth the Misacians. The Iulian Alpes, and the Mountaine Permurna are in the Engadinians Countrie. From hence are the Mountaines Valerius and Brantius, neere the Vendanians: Rhetico is a Mountaine among the Rhucantians. The Mountaine Iurassus hangeth over the Lake Leman. The Mountaines call'd Abnobae are in the confines of the Tulingians. And these are the most famous Mountaines of this Countrie. But we will speake more largely concerning the Alpes in the description of Italie. There are innumerable Woods, which are but parts of the Wood Hiercynta, which beginneth here, although they are called by severall names, as the Brigantine Wood, the Wood Ryhnwalds, Bonwaldt, and others. The Helvetian Commonwealth is a mixt government of the Nobles and the people. For some of these People, of whom the whole Citie doth consist, doe use a Democraticall government, where all things are managed by the councell of the Commons, as in those Cantons which have no Townes, as the Uranians, the Suitians, the ^uderwaldians, the Glarovensians, and the Abbatiscellanians: and in the same manner are the Tuginians, although they have a Towne; the other Cantons are govern'd by the Nobles, as all the other Cities of Helvetia, as Tigurum, Berna, Lucerna, etc. But seeing the people have the chiefe power, and doe chuse the Magistrates, these Common wealths are mixt, and some parts are more Aristocraticall, and some parts more popular.



ZVRICHGOVV, AND THE PROVINC^ OF BASIL.
I Have spoken in generall concerning Helvetia; the pa^^ doe follow. Which Mercator in the three followi^^ Chartes doth lively describe. In the first are those t^ Provinces which are called in their speech Zurichgow (...) Basil; in the second Wiflispurgergow; and in the third Argow is delin^^ted, of all which I will make a Chorographicall Description, tog^ther with the Lake Leman. As concerning the former Provin^^ which is painted forth in the first Charte, it is called in their ow^ speech Zurichgow,The fertility. and Caesar calleth it Tigurinus Pagus. The soyle of th^ Country, and especially by the chiefe City Tigurum is very fruitfull, and bringeth forth great store of Wine and Corne; yet the Wi^ the most part is tart and sharp, neither can it come to perfest ^^^nesse and maturity, because the Alpes are so nigh unto it. But t^^ Wine ripeneth and groweth more pleasant after it hath beene k^^ some yeeres in the Vessell. The chiefe City of this Province is call in Latine Tigrum, and of late Thurogum, and in their owne speech ^^rich.The Citie Zurich. It is an ancient City and pleasantly seated, at the end of the great Lake, which sendeth forth the River Lindmagum, commonly c^^led Limmat, which not farre from Glarona it receiveth againe, a^^ devideth the City into two Cities, the greater and the lesser, which are joyned together with three faire Bridges, on which the Citizen^ doe often walke. It hach a very great Corne-market, in which great store of Corne is sold weekely. The Lake Tigurine doth furnish the City with great store of Fish. There is also a Market for all kinde^ Provision and the Lake is convenienter for carrying it to divers p^^ces. But albeit Tigurum was the fift that joyned it selfe to the Helvetian confederacy, yet neverthelesse it is held to bee the chiefe City both for beauty and strength, and still it hath the preheminence given it in publike Assemblies, in Embassages, and other publike actions: it hath had many brave famous men: as Conradus Pellican, who was very skilfull in the Hebrew, Chaldean, and Arabick tongues: also Theodore Bibliandrus: Conradus G^sner, that most excellent Historian, an^ many other excellent men. The Canton Tigurum hath without the City greater and lesser Prefectureships. The greater are nine, Ky^^^ a County: the Prefectureship of Groeningia: also Regensperg, Vadis^^^na, Wadischwyl: Lauffa neere the Catracts of Rheneor, Laussen: Andelsig^^^ Grifensee, and Eglisow a free Province, the lesser are 22. the Townes Vitodurum, Winterhur, and Steina, doe belong to the Tigurinians, yet they have Magistrates of their owne, but they are governed by the Tigurinian Edicts, and doe serve them in their warres, but they beare their owne Colours in the Field. The Canton ^ugium, commonly
map of ZurichgowZVRICHGOVV.

called Zugis reckoned to be in this Province,The Towne Turgium. The Situation. a Towne with a Country of the same name, lying Northward neere Suitia, it is situate betweene a Middow, and a Hill planted with Vines, neere the fishfull Lake, which is called from the City, the Tugine Lake, which streatcheth Southward toward the Towne Artense. It hath a soyle fit for Basturage, and it yeeldeth great store of Wine and Corne. The first Inhabitants thereof are said to be the Tuginians, but Strabo Lib 7. calleth them the Toygenians, who entring into a league with the Tigurians and Cimbrians, did oppose themselves against the Romanes. See Plutarch in the life of Marius and Eutropius, Lib. 5. Tugium was sometime governed by the Nobles, but afterward it came to be under the power of the Austrians: Those, in the Helvetian warre did keep a continuall Garrison there, unto the great molestation of the Suitians and Tig^rians. So that in the yeere 1352. the Tigurinians with foure other Cantons, made an expedition against Tugium. But the Garrison, not trusting to the Fortification of the Towne, forsooke it before the Helyetians comming, but yet the Citizens to shew their fidelity to the Austrians, did hold out the Siege for 15. dayes. At last they yeelded it to the Helvetians, and tooke an oath of them on this condition, that if the Duke of Austria within such a limited time brought to Army to free them from this Siege, they should be free from the oath which they had taken to the Helvetians, and might yeeld themselves up unto him. But when they saw there was no hope of the Duke of Austria's comming, they joyned themselves in confederacy with the Helvetians. The Canton of Tugium hath two parts, and foure hundreds in them, out of every hundred, eleaven Senators are chose^ to governe the Country. The Towne it selfe standeth for two hundreds, the Countrie next unto it hath three, as Montanus, Vallis Eg^^, or Aquae Regiae, and the Parish of Bara. But the Townes of Tugi^^ by Prefects resident in the City doth governe these places: the Town Cham, Andrewes Village, Hunelbergo, Waccheville, Steinhuse, S. Wolfa^g^. So much concerning the first Province of this Card, the other followes, namely Basil, so called from the famous City Basilea. It is called also Sungonia, which name we may easily conjecture was derived from the Seqnanes, which Rhenanus also approveth in his third Book of Germany. The Country is fruitfull, and bringeth forth good Wine and Corne, so that it supplieth the Neighbour Countries that want Corne. There are also faire Pastures for Cattell. Those whom Ptolemy calls Rauricians and Caesar Rauracians (as Scudus witnesseth) did heretofore inhabit this Country, who as he reporteth taking example by the Helvetians, did burne up all their Townes, Villages, and Houses. Basil is now the chiefe City of the Country. Some would have it so called from a Basilisk found here, but their opinion is absurd. Others from Basi^eona the Mother of Iulian the Emperour. ^heranus would have it call'd Basilea because it was a royall passage. And he addeth, it is likely that there was a passage in this place, while Augusta was yet standing, because here in regard of the Valley through which the Torrent floweth out of the Lake Byrsa, the banke is lower, and thereby more easily to passe, but neere Augusta it is more steepe.

But Munsterus doth reject this conjecture, by the authority of Marcellinus, who calleth that City by a Greeke word Basileian, that is a Kingdome, as it were Regnopolis, or the Royall City. This City is watered with the River Rhene, which devides it about the middle of it, where it is united and joyned together againe with a Bridge. The River Rhene is very commodious to the City, because it is Navigable, and bringeth up many great Vessels to it. Two hundred yeeres since it was much shaken with Earthquakes, but it was afterward re-edified, and Pope Pius in the yeere 1460. did adorne it with an University, which he endowed with all the Priviledges, Statutes, and Immunities which the Universities of Bononia, Coline, Heidelberg, Erdford, Lipsick, and Vienna doe enjoy. Basil hath these Prefectureships, Faren-Sperg Castles; ^infeld seated on a high Mountaine: the Towne Wallenburg: Homburg, Munchenstein, Ramstein, the County of Toggius, where I suppose is Togryl, which is subject to the Abbot of S. Gallus, when the Citizens of Teggius belong to Suitia and Glaronia: also the County of Rapperswijl, which I suppose should be the County of Straesberg: and the Barony of Rilehberg. The other Townes of Tuginum and Tigurinum are in the Table of Argow. The Townes in the Country of Abbatium, which are neither mentioned in Suevia, nor in all Germany, are these, Reicheno^w, Schaffusen, Kreutslinge, Pfeffers, or as I suppose Pfefficon. This Country is watered with many Rivers and little streames, all which the River Rhene at last receiveth. Among which are the Rivers Rhene, Byrsa, and Wiesa. Byrsa floweth out of the Mountaine Iura thorow many Valleyes even to Basilea, carrying downe with it many Boat-loads of Wood. On the other side the River Wiesa doth part it from the Black wood, and much Timber for Building is brought downe this River, and afterward it filleth many Cisternes, and serveth many Houses in the lesser Basil with water. For it driveth a Mill which saweth Trees into Bards and square Studdes, it grindeth Corne, and Grindstones to sharpen Carpenters tooles, it serveth to draw Iron into thin Plates, and for many other uses, besides it hath excellent fish, especially Trouts. And though it be lesse than the River Byrsa over against it, yet it is fuller of Fish than it, and serveth for more uses, although Byrsa doth drive many Mills and is very commodious for Paper-men, who have Houses by this River, or rather neere the little Rivulet which parteth from it, and runneth even to the walls of the greater Basil. There are also here Tolderus, Largus, and other Rivers. But of this enough. It remaineth that wee should adde something concerning the government of the Common-wealth in these Provinces. All that are admitted to publike Counsell, are chosen equally out of the severall Cantons, as well out of the Tugurians, as Basilians. But there are two publike Counsels which have chiefest authority in these Cities. The greater when many meete together in behalfe of the Commons, and this for the most part is called when there are some serious waighty affaires, which appertaine to the Common-wealth. The lesse is that which looketh daily to the government of the Common-wealth, and determines matters of controversie betweene the Citizens. The greater Counsell of Tigurum doth consist

of 200. men, that of Basil of 244. The lesse Counsell of Tigurum hath 50. men chosen out of every Tribe, and Basil it hath 60. For 12. are elected out of every Tribe to make up the greater Counsell, besides at Tigurum there are 18. chosen out of the Nobles. To the lesser Counsell of Tiguri the severall Tribes doe send three men, at Basil foure men, and to these are added two Counsels in every City, who are the chiefe Heads of the City; and moreover at Basil there are so many Tribunes, whom they call the Heads of the Counsell in like manner as they doe the Consuls: besides at Tigurum there are 6. chosen out of the Nobility to make up the lesser Counsell, when there are but 3. chosen out of the other Tribes, and moreover 6. others are chosen by free Suffrages, out of any Tribe which the Magistrate shall thinke fitt. The lesser Counsell is devided into the old and the new: they call those the old Senate who have borne office halfe a yeere: the other although they are called when the Senate is held, yet they are not alwaies called, and there are some matters which the new Senate doth onely dispatch. The greater Counsell also at Basil is devided in the same manner, and of 12. men chosen out of the Tribes, 6. are joyned or added to the new Senate, and so many to the old. The lesser Counsell doth meete for the most part thrice, and sometimes 4. times every weeke. There is one Consull belonging to the Senates, whom in their speech they call Burgermeister, that is, the Master of the Citizens, and the greater Counsell doth choose him. The Tribunes are next to the Consuls in power, whom the Tigurinians call Oberistemeister, and those of Basil call Zunffrmeister, there are 3. of them at Tigurum, and two onely at Basil, who together with the two Consuls are called the foure Heads of the City. But thus much shall suffice. He that desireth to know more let him have recourse to Iosias Sim^er, who discourseth copiously and learnedly concerning these matters, out of whom we have taken that which we have written here.



VVIFLISPVRGERGOVV.
THERE followes in our Author the Aventian Cantons commonly called Wiflispurgergow. It is so named from the Towne Wiflispurg, which heretofore in Iulius Caesars time was the head Citie of Helvetia, and was called Aventicum. The Countrie is contained within the bounds of ^abaudia, although it be subject to the Bernatians and Friburgensians, as also the Countrie seated over against it, and beyond the Lake of Biel or Neoburg. It is sufficiently stored with Wine and Corne. But in this Table the whole Cantons of Berne and Friburg are contained. In the former the chiefe Citie is Berna. It is not verie ancient, but if you consider the excellent Situation, the manners and civilitie, the Lawes and Statutes, and the power and vertue thereof, it is not inferiour unto any Citie. Concerning the building whereof we reade thus. Berchtaldus Duke of Zeringia the 4. of that name, built in his time 2. Friburgis, that is free Castells, namely one in Brisgoia, and the other in Vehtlandia. And to the end that his subjects might dwell more safely in Vchtland, he purposed to build another Citie neere his Castle, which was called Nideck, in a Peninsula which was called Saccus, which was at that time a Wood of Oakes. And upon a certaine time when the same Berchtoldus was Hunting, he said to his fellowes; we will call this Citie, which we purpose to build in this convenient place, after the name of that beast which we shall first meete and after take. And so it happened that they tooke a Beare, which the Germaines call Bern. And where (as we said) there grew many Oakes in that place, in which the Citie was to be builded, yet all the trees were cut downe to build houses: whence the workemen would commonly say when they cut downe the trees: Holtz lassdich hauwen gon: die stat muss heissen Bern: i. e Arbores sinite ut secemini libenter: Quoni^m Civitas ista vocabitur Bern: that is, yee Trees suffer your selves to be cut downe willingly; Because this Citie shall be called Bern. This Citie is situated as it were in a Peninsula, which the navigable River Arola maketh. For on the South side of the Citie, this River floweth in a low place, from the West Eastward, and then winding back againe it runneth Westward, as far a as Cannon can shoote, which is the whole length of the Citie, so that the River is to the Citie as it were a ditch flowing with fresh water, but that on the West for the length of a Crosse-Bow shot, the foundation of the Citie joyneth to the Continent, which Isthmus if it were digged through, the Citie Bern would be an Iland. On the South and North it hath the water running beneath it for a prospect; on the East there is a gentle ascene unto the highest part of the Citie. The adjacent soile lying round about it is very fruitfull, but hath no Wine, yet not farre of the Bernatians

doe make very good Wine out of their owne Vineyards. Th^ doe grow also Vines on one side of the Citie, but they are of no a^count, and doe yeeld but little Wine. But Berchtoldus the 4. the b^^der of this Citie yed, before he had finish'd it, leaving the perfecti^^ of this worke to his sonne Berchtoldus the 5. and the last Duke of ^^ringia. He had by his wife the daughter of the Earle of Kiburg (...) sonnes, whom the Nobles of the Country made away by poison, this cause chiefely, because they supposed that Berchteldus out of tred and emulation towards them, had finished the building of the ^^ty, that so he might keep them under the yoke of servitude. Ber^^ (...) under it both Germane and French Prefectureships, among which Lausanna an Episcopall City. It hath a strange situation, being (...) on two opposite Hills, and a Vale lying betweene them. The Cat^^drall Church, and the Canons houses doe stand on the North Hill (...) from the Southerne Hil over against it, there is a great descent (...) to the Lake. The Court of Judgement is in the Vale. After the (...) of Charles Duke of Burgundie, Lansanna being redeemed by the Pri^^^ of Sabaudia, the Citizens of Lausanna in the meane time did enter i^ great familiarity with the Bernatians, even to the yere one thousa^^ five hundred 36. at what time Lausanna came to be under the Do^^nion of the Bernatians. But yet the Citizens do enjoy all their (...) Rights and Priviledges. There are 31. Germane Townes, 4. wh^^^ belong to the City, which as many Standard-bearers of the City (...) governe, and under their Colours all the Prefectureships doe (...) to Battell in the warres. Namely Haselis Vallis, Hasti: the Towne dersen or Vindersenwen: Simmia Vallis superior: Simia vallis inferio^^ ^tingen, Sana, Aelen, Thun, Louppen, Signow, Drachselwald, the Vale of (...) River Emm, Siconiswald, Burgdorff, Biereneck, Landshuot, Arberg, Nid^^, ^lach, Bippiurn, Wangen, Arwangen, Arburg, Baberstein, Schenckenbergh, Li^^burg. Also three free Townes in the Verbigenian Canton are full^ to the Bermans: Zoffingen, Araw, and Bruck: Also there are 9. M^nasteries endowed with Lands, 6. whereof are under a civill Ju^^^diction. There are also 8. French Cantons and Townes, as Ave^^^ Wiflispurg: Minnidunum, Mouilden: Yuerden, Morges, Novidanum, (...) Oron, Zilia with Vibiscum or Vivey: also Mercator reckoneth up the Monasteries belonging to the Bernatians: which are M^^^ Schwartzenburg, Granson, Chalan or Cherlin, over which the Bernati^^^ and Friburgians in their severall courses doe appoint and constitu^^ Governours for 5. yeere, so that if the Governour be chosen out (...) one City, they may appeale to the other, which may examine (...) take account of their government. Friburg is a Towne of the N^^tonians situate in Vchtland by the River Sana, it was built by Ber^^^dus the fourth, Duke of Zeringia some yeeres before Berne. For in th^ raigne of Lotharius, in the yeere 1527. William Earle of Vchtland dy^ as Nauclerus writeth, at what time the Emperour gave Vchtland to (...) Prince of Zeringia: who dying in the yeere 1552. his Sonne Ber^^^dus Duke of Zeringia, the fifth of that name succeeded after him. (...) founded and built both the Friburgs, Brisgoia, and Vchtland, (as we (...) before) in the yeere after Christs birth 1252. and endowed the^

map of WiflispurgergowVVIFLISPVRGERGOVV.

with large Priviledges. As also the succeeding Emperours did shew no lesse favour to both those Townes, than if they had beene Parts and Members of their Empire. Afterward in the yeere of our Lord 1218. Berchtoldus Duke of Zeringia dying, Fribu^g in V^htland with all the priviledges thereof, came into the hands of the Earles of Kibu^g, in the yeere of Christ 1260. Eburhardus Earle of Hasburg, governed this City. He in the yeere 1270. sold his right to this City for a great summe of money to King Rudolphus. Hence Aeneas Sylvius calleth Friburg the noble House of Austria. At last the Inhabitants being wearied with these frequent changes, for a great summe of money bought their liberty of the House of Austria. So that it is now under the Jurisdiction of Helvetia. And on the wall of Friburg there is such an Epitaph found: Dum, bis sexcentis ter senis jungitur annus,In Friburg moritur, Berchtoldus Dux Alemanus.Unto sixe hundred and eighteeneIf thou doe adde a yeere,Then Berchtold Duke of AlmaineIn Friburg dyed here.
The Towne it selfe is wonderfully well seated, for part of it s^^^deth on a Mountaine, and part of it in a Vale, and the River (...) doth flow about the Mountaine at the bottome of the Citie. The Iudgement Hall is situated on a high Rock, where there was formerly a Castle, from which in processe of time the Citie grew large, ^oth above and beneath. Two opposite Mountaines doe beare the Walls, although on the Easterne Mountaine there are almost no houses, but Munition and fortifications. Wheresoever you goe in the Citie, you must either ascend or descend. The Country round about it bringeth forth all things necessary, except Wine, of which they have none b^^ that which is imported and brought in. And so much concerning the Cities of this tract, now we will adde something concerning the Civill government of these Cities. The manner of the Common wealth in these Cities, is the same with that which is in the Cities of Helve^ta which are not divided into certaine Tribes, out of which the Magistrates are equally chosen. But in these Cities they cal the chiefe Magistrate and Head of the publike Counsell, Ein Schuld^hessen. This Germane word is used in the Lawes of the Longobardians, and it is written Schuldahis, but the Etymologie of the word seemeth to be derived from Debito a debt, for so Schuld signifies, and from commanding, because the Schuldahis doth command the Debtors to satisfie his Creditors. This Schuldahis hath great authority and power in these Cities. Here are also two publike Counsels, the greater and the lesse. The greater Counsell of Berne and Tigurum, is called the Counsell of two hundred men, although there are more than two hundred in it. But the lesser Counsell of Berne consisteth of sixe and twenty men. The manner of chusing the Senate at Berne is thus: The foure Standard-bearer

of the City doe chuse out of the Citizens sixteene honest sufficient men to joyne with themselves: and those twenty men, together with the Consull doe chuse the greater Senate: and afterward also the lesse: But the Consuls who have the chiefe dignity, are chosen out of either Counsell by common Suffrages and voices. In like manner the greater Counsell at Friburg consisteth of two hundred men, and the lesse of foure and twenty. The lesser Senate doth looke to the affaires of the City, and doth heare the Subjects appeales, except it bee those Sabaudian Countries which were last taken in warre, but those matters which appertaine to the whole Common-wealth, and are of greatest moment, are referred to the two hundred men, or the greater Counsell. The Consul who is President in both Counsels, is chosen by the people. The Earles in this part are Nuenberg, Nicdow, Arberg, and the Barony of Balm.




THE CHOROGRAPHICALL DEscription of the Lake Lemann, and the adjacent places.
By James Goulart.
IN this Table you may at the first view behold the Lake Lemann, in the confines of the Dukedome of Sabaudia, the County of Burgundie, the Baronnie or Lordship of Helvetia, and the Bishopricke of Valesia. About the Lake there are many Regions, Praefectureships, Baronnies, Iurisdictions, High-wayes, Rivers, Mountaines, Citties, Townes, Castells, and Fortresses. The People on this side the Alpes, which inhabite Sabaudia, doe speake French, who heretofore, as Iulius Caesar witnesseth, in the beginning of his Commentaries, were called Allobrogians, from Allobroges, a King of France, who flourished about the yere, 2433. And afterward, as the most famous Prelate Fauchetis witnesseth, they were called Baganda, and at length Sabaudians, in French Savoysiens, and in the Sabaudian speech Savoyarde. Earles have hitherto governed this Country, from the yere of our Lord 1126. and from the yere 1420, to this time it hath bin under the government of Dukes. It is reported that this Country was at first a long time inhabited by a company of theeves. But now in times of peace, the wayes there are safe and secure. The inhabitants doe complaine of the temper of the ayre, sometimes for cold, and sometimes for heate. And yet the Lake, and the River Rhodanus, are almost never frozen over. Moreover the heate is not so violent, as in the Delphinate, nor the cold so sharpe as in the low Countries, where Rivers are usually frozen over. The soile is fit for tillage and fruitfull; for it hath abundance of Grapes, Wheate, Pease, Rapes, Cauly-flowres, French-beanes, Melons, Leekes, Onions, Lentills: Also Barley, Hay, Oates, and other graines. These fruites are common heere, Nuttes, Apples, Peares, of divers sorts, sweete and sowre cherries, blacke and white Mulberries, Chesnuts, Almonds, but Figs are more rare. There is also great variety of Fowle, Fish, and Beasts: The Vvandalian Helvetians, who inhabite Lausanna and other places nere unto, are under the governement of the most illustrious Lords of Berne: Vnder whom certaine praefects for five yeares space, doe hold the Helme of the Commonwealth. According to ancient Chronicles, Arpentinus, Hercules Centenarius, layd the foundation of Lausanna in the yeare of the world 2790, from whom Carprentres the auncient name thereof was derived, which was changed when the Cittie was translated unto the Mountaine, in the time of

Martin Bishop of Lausanna, in the yeare of our Lord 593. The Citie of Nevidunum, heretofore commonly called Ben^vis, being desolate and ruinate before the comming of Iulius Caesar, was restored and reedified in the time of the Emperour Flavius Vespasian, by a Centurion of his, dwelling in it, called Nyon. Cassonex was built in the yeare of our Lord 442. And Abona was built in the yeare 456, and some yeares afterward. Geneva a free Imperiall Cittie, in which white and blacke money is coyned; was at first called Gen^^^a, as some suppose, because it is seated on a hill, amongst Iuniper trees, which seate Lemannus gave it (the Father of the Almania or Germaines) the Nephew of Priam, the sonne of Paris, in the yeare of the world 2994. Afterward it was called Aurelia, by Aurelianus the Emperour, because he was the repairer of this Cittie, which in the time of Heliogabalus, was burnt downe to the ground. Iulius Caesar and the Latines call it Geneva, and the Poets for their verse sake call it Geneva, and also by the Registers. The Germaines call it (...) the Frenchmen Geneve, to which Vengee is a fit Anagram, for it hath beene oftentimes miraculously preserved from enemies and Traitors, and especially on the 12, or 22 of December in the yeere 1602. ^he Castell Morgtarum was built, by the Emperor Clottartu^ ^n the yeere of our Lord 1135. Aquianum, commonly called (...) by Peter brother and Deputy, to Amades Earle of (...) yeare 1237. But this Lake of Geneva on that side which lyeth to (...) Helvetia, is sixteene miles long, and on that side which lyeth toward Sabaudia, it is 12 miles long, and it is foure miles broad. It (...) at least sixteene Ports or Havens.The Ports. Out of the Port Morgtens^s and ^^slensis, commonly called Rolle, the best wine is brought to Gen^^^ and out of the Port of the Promontory, commonly called Par^^^, and the Port of Nero, commonly called Nerny, great store of ward and coale is brought to Geneva.Rivers. The River Rhodanus, ^lowing into Lemann, from the first rising thereof, even to his entrance into the Lake, is not navigable for ships, neither from the Helvetian bridge in the Suburbs of Geneva, even to the next towne called Se^sel, which is seaven miles distant from the Cittie. The same River in a certaine place, five miles distant from the Cittie, falleth into a deepe pit under ground. Iurassus is such a long Mountaine, that the Geneva, did heretofore call the inhabitants thereof Long^mans.The Mountaines. For from the top of them you may behold the Churches of Geneva and Basil, being foure or five dayes journey distant one from another: Also there is a wonderfull rocke full of holes, which Sebastian Munster describeth in his Cosmographie. Also the virgins Castles built by Iulius Caesar. Also the Towne of Saint Claudus, because lame people came thither from remote parts for religion sake. Also a snowie fountaine in Summer time: also a naturall Pit, that is as broad as any Theater, and as deepe as a Church, and as darke as a Cave, being continually full of snow, Ice and Crystall. Not farre from the Lake Lemann, on the part which lyeth toward Sabaudia, there are Mountaines which in the midst of Summer, are covered with snow. There is a certaine Mountaine a mile distant, from the Citty Geneva, upon which some,

map of Lake LemannTHE LAKE LEMANN.

not without horrour ascend by steps cut out of the rocke, which are very narrow, and almost innumerable: And some setting their foote upon the last step, when they beheld the deepe praecipice beneath them, have gone backe againe. There is also another Mountaine not farre from Aquila, a towne towards Valesia, of whose wonderfull effects, we may reade the whole story in the memorable Histories of our time, in the Chapter of Earthquakes, lately set forth in French at Paris. The Mountaine of S. Sergius, is the most fruitefull of all the Chablacian Mountaines, among which there is one other very fruitefull. The other doe beare nothing but wood and shrubbes, and pasturage for Kine, which in the Summertime doe fatt themselves on the plaines of the Mountaines, and doe give good store of milke. But who can reckon the memorable chances or events happening there in the time of Warres? Or how great and fearefull is the Pr^cipice of the Mountaine Mustracensis, from which every yeare many horses loaden, and Merchants doe fall headlong. Concerning the rockes, which are sharpe like teeth or swords, we must write in a more accurate stile, or else be silent: Concerning the foote of the Mountaines of Aquiane, it is knowne that they are unknowne by reason of the depth of the Lake, from the bottome whereof they doe arise.The Woods. The most of the woods they doe yeeld Chesnuts, both to the poore and rich, and Acornes for Hogges and Swine, also fire-wood, and cart-timber, and plough-timber, for husbandmen. I^ these places there are few or no Churches,The publicke workes. which have reliques of Saints in them, because Idolatrie is banisht from hence. But there are many sumptuous and magnificent Temples, especially that at Lausanna, being built within of black Marble; and the auncient Temple at Geneva being full of Iron worke, being twice or thrice endangered by thunder, so that the leaden crosse of it was burnt, and the high Tower fell down; which was built before the coming of Charles the great. Adde to these the Temple of Viviacum, seated among the Vineyards, out of the walls of the Citty, and the Temple of Magium, lately beutified. But all the Images are defac'd. Geneva hath an hospitall for Orphans, and for the sicke, but both of them are included in the Hospitall for strangers, in which there dwelleth a Catechizer and a Schoole-master, who doe take paines in comforting the sicke, and reading prayers to them; it hath also a Physician and an Apothecary belonging thereto. The Municipall Court in Geneva in which every day five and twenty wife and pious Senators doe meete together to consult of affaires,The Court. The Senators belonging to the Common wealth, and in which also the written records and bookes are kept, is watched every night by the Cittizens. On one side of the Gate there is placed a magnificent seate of judgement, commonly called the Tribunall. On the other side of the Gate there is a notable monument of time, occasion, and the means of the renovation of this state. And neere the Court there is an Armory well furnished. There are also in and about this Cittie many high bulwarkes fortified with shot. There have beene and are many Castels in this Country, one of which is called S. Catherines Castell, in which those warlike engines or instruments

were layd up, which were provided for the seige of Geneva, and brought thither in the yeare 1590. It was taken by King Henry the fourth, who commanded it to be rac'd Anno. Dom. 1601. The other Castle, which the Genevians built over against it, for peace sake and for sparing of charges, they suffered to fall to ruine. The third Castle commonly called Ripaille, by the ayde of the French Cohorts came to be under the power of the Genevians, Anno 1589, and is now desolate, as also the fourth, which belonged to Versouius, when the Genevians tooke it. There are some Towers cunningly and ingeniously raised, one of which is called Turris Magistra, or the Mistris Tower, which defends Geneva, on that side which is next the Lake and Sabaudia; the other is called the Towre of the Island, or Caesars Tower, which is seated on a high Island for the defence of the Bridg, which heretofore appertained to the Heluetians, and as it is reported it was built by the same Emperor.The Lawes and Statutes. The Statutes and Laws of the Common wealth, and Colledge of Geneva, may be read in a printed book. Here is a great number of noble families.The noble familes. As concerning men famous for wit, and the profession of Arts, and sciences; there have beene many who have gotten much fame by their divine, and Philosophicall workes. As Peter Viretus Verbigenensis, Gulielmus Farellus,The learned men. Ioannes Calvinus, Antonius Sadeel, Petrus Cevalerius, Nicolas Colladonus, Cornelius Bertramus, Alberius, Alizetus, Sequierius, Bucanus, all of which in the former age were a long time diligent Preachers and professors, at Geneva, Lausanna, Morgium, and Albona: after whom there succeeded these famous writers, Theodorus Beza Veselius, Simon Goulartius Silvanectinus, Antonius Faius, Ioannes Lacomotus, Iames Lectius a Senator; Ioannes Deodatis of Geneva, professor of Divinitie, and the Hebrew tongue, Isaac Casaabon, the Kings Professor for the Greeke tongue, and Gasparus Laurentius, professor of the same Language. Moreover the publike Librarie at Geneva is adorned with many excellent manuscripts.The Libraries. And that at Lausanna, is furnished with many excellent workes of the Fathers, and other Divines. Concerning the common people, they are full of Civilitie, and they receive and entertaine strangers, very lovingly and honourably:Their manners. and it transporteth and sends into other Countries, great Troutes, fat Capons, good Cheese, gold, wire, and fishing lines,Their trading. besides other commodities.



ARGOW.
ARgouia, commonly called Argow, was a part of the Kingdome of Transiura, which comprehended all the Countries lying from the Mountaine Iura, even to the Alpes; of which heretofore the Heluetians, the Rauracians, and part of the Allobrogians, and now the Dukedome of Sabaudia, Vehtlandia, Brisgovia, Suntgovia, Cremerlandia, and the Praefectureship of Tigurinum, or the Cantons of Heluetia, doe now hold. But in this Table, the Townes Lucerna, Vren, Switz, Vnderwald, and Glarona, are contained: Lucerna is a Citty of Helvetia which Meyerus calleth Lacocerna, it is situated upon the River Rusa, where it breaketh out of a great Lake, by which there is a passage by boate to three Townes, unto the foote of the high Mountaine which they commonly call Fractum and Pilati Montem, that is, the broken Mountaine or Pilats Mountaine. The Lake is very convenient for the Citty, because there is a way by it into Italy, by the Leponius Alpes; which they call now the Mountaine of Saint Gothards from hence commodities are carried to the Alpes, and from thence by Packe-horses into Italy; and againe, Italian commodities are brought downe the Lake, and the River Rusa to the Rhene, and so unto the Ocean. Besides, the Lucernatians doe make more profit by the Lake, than of the adjacent soyle lying about it, although they have excellent Meddowes for the pasturing and feeding of Cattell. It is a very pleasant Citty, and rich, being the common Mart Towne of the Suitensians, the Vranians, and the Transiluanians. The originall of this City is uncertaine: it is reported that there were Castles on both sides of the River, which were built by the Almaines, but there are Cittizens houses in their places. It was so called from a Lampe or light which was hung out there, as a Sea marke for the direction of Marriners, and it is credible and likely that the auncient Tower served for this purpose, which at the higher bridge is now named from the waters; The like is at Tigurum, which is called from the Sea waves Wellenberga: the auncients did call these kind of Towers Watch-towers. Their owne Annalls doe report, that the Lucernatians did go to warre with Charles the Great, against the Sarazins, and that hee gave them some priviledges, and taught them the use of Hornes, with which in these times, they doe sound a retreate in the warres. The Colledge of the Cannonists, had heretofore the greatest power, which afterward came to bee under the authority of the Abbot of Murbaoum by the donation and graunt of King Pipin. Afterward Abertus, Emperour of Austria, bought Lucerna of the Abbot of Murbaoum. But not long after the Lucernatians oppressed by the heavie burdens layd upon them by the Austrian governours, being desirous of peace and liberty, made a league with them Anno 1323. There were two Praefectureships of Lucerna, which Mercator reckoneth, in

map of ArgowARGOW.

which the Praefects dwell in one place, which are as I suppose Wiken, Sempach. But the latter Praefect hath no power over the towne, but is onely overseeer of the Lake and the fishing therein: the Senators in the City doe governe the other Townes, which are: Willisew, Entlibuchia Vallis, Rotenburg or Rott, or some place neere unto it: also Habspurg, Berona, with the neighbour Country called Chelamt, that is, the Praefectureship of Michael; also Merischwanden, Waggis, Ebicena, Krientz: also the two Citties, Surseium and Sempachium, which are under the Lucernatians protection, yet they have a Counsell of their own, which doth judge both civill, and criminall causes: but the chiefe man of the Surseian Counsell is called Sculthes, who giveth an oath to the Lucernatians: but the chiefe of the Sempachian Counsell is chosen out of the Senate of Lucerna, but yet out of the number of the Citizens of Semphachium. The next is the Towne of the Vrians or Vrania. In Iulius Caesars time, the Romanes did call the inhabitants thereof Taurisci, and the name of Vrians, by which they are now called, is thought to be derived from the Vranians, whom the ancients did call Tauriscians, as also they now call the Stebentalensi^^s, Taurians, after the Germaine manner. Moreover, the armes of this Country is a black Bulls heads in a yellow field. The Vrians Car^e is divided into ten parts, which they call Gnossaminem, that is, to sha^^, or participations, because those Senators onely, which are elected out of them, are capable of publicke offices, and are called to the (...) all meetings.The Towne Suitia. The next is the Canton of the Suitians: Suitia or Suttia, is a Towne which communicateth his name to all Helvetia, for they first built it, who fled hither out of the Kingdome of Suecia to seeke themselves new habitations. There is one of the three Cantons, who joyned themselves in confederacie against the insolencie of the nobility, and it brought forth many stout and able men for service, who were often a terrour to their enemies. All the Country doth live upon the fruites which the earth bringeth forth. From this Towne or Canton, strangers and forrainers doe call the Helvetians Suitzers, because they fought first for liberty in their Country, or because they contended long with the Eremitans, and were the first of the 3 Towns of the Austrians, that was inforced to breake into the Country, and was the chiefest in power of al the three Cantons; and the other Cartres were comprehended under their name, as being of most noate, and from the name was afterward communicated, to all the confederates: or lastly because the Vrians, Silvanians, and Suitensians, begin the confederacy in their Towne. The Country of the Suetzers is divided into five parts, which they call Quartas, retaining still the name of the new division,The towne Vnderwaldia. in this new and sixtfold division. There is also the Canton of lower Silvania, which is commonly called Vnderw^ldia. This is a free Canton, being mutually joyned in confederacy with Suitia and Vrania, in the yeere of our Lord 1315. It is environd round about with the Alpes; it hath pleasant pastures, for breeding and feeding of Cattle, by which the inhabitants of Syluania doe reape much profit. But the Vrians, the Suitensians, the Silvanians or Vnderwaldians, although by some covenants they were subject to the Abbies

of certaine Monasteries, yet they had liberties of their owne, and received Praefects from the Empire, which they call Vortos, by a Greek word, as heretofore the Praefects of the Romanes. For their office was the same with the Burgraues in these Countries. For they had power to give judgement of life and death. I conjecture that the other forme of governement remained from the auncient Monarchie of the Romans, in which the Paefects did not live as they listed, neither did create magistrates out of their owne number, but they received them from the Senare or the Emperour. But the Canton of Vnderwaldra, is divided by the wood Kernwald into two parts, namely the higher and the lower, yet all the Country neverthelesse is comprehended, under the name of Vnderwaldia.Glarona. There remaines Glarona, commonly called Glaris, a Country of the Helvetian confederacy, neere the River Limagus, not very large, being three Germane miles long, and taketh its name from the speciall Towne in this Countrie, being three parts of it encompassed with the high Alpes; on the South and North it joyneth to the Rhetians, on the West to the Vrians, and Suitians, on the North to a Country called Castra Rhetica or the Rhetian Tents, where the River Limagus entereth into the Vale.The auncient government. The jurisdiction of this Countrey, and the revennewes thereof, was given in the time of S. Fridoline by a certaine Earle to the Monasterie of Seekingense, namely in the time of Clodovius the first Christian King of France, in the yeare of our Lord 500, who was the first King of France, that raigned and governed Rhetia, Almania, and Helvetia. This Land afterward obtained her liberty, and her owne jurisdiction, and did joyne it selfe in confederacy with the Helvetians, in the yeare of our Lord 1252. The Inhabitants doe now live upon milke, Cheese, butter, and flesh. Among the straites of the Mountaines there is little ground sowed, and few Vines are planted. They have Orchards full of fruit, and flourishing Meddowes. Wine and corne are brought in from other parts. The Lakes afford fish;The Lakes. and the wooddy Mountaines doe furnish them with fowle and flesh, of wild beasts. Henry Glareanus, and Aegidius Yscudus, two learned men were borne in this Countrie. To these is joyned the Countie of Hamburg, and the Baronie of Humbert and Ringenbereg. But Glarona is distributed into 15. parts, which they call Tagwan. Werdenbergen doth command the Country, which they bought, Anno 1517. They and the Suitians doe by turnes send praefects to Vzenacum, or V^snac, and into the Rhetian Tents at Wesome. But so much hitherto, let us now adde something in generall concerning this part of Helvetia, and here the Lakes are first to be considered, among which is the miraculous Lake, called Pilates Lake, which is situated on the broken Mountaine as they call it, not farre from Lucerna, almost on the top of the Mountaine it standeth solitarily, being encompassed on every side with Woods, so that none can stirre or provoke it. For they report, that if any thing be purposely cast into it, it will stirre up a great tempest, and make it over-flow, as many have found by experience: but those things that fall in by accident, doe occasion no danger at all. It is a place fearefull to behold, and the water standeth still in

the channell of it, neither hath it any vent, neither doth it receive any River into it, neither is it encreased by snow or raine water. It is scarsely mooved with the winde, but the waters thereof are alwayes blacke, and strangers are not permitted to come unto it, least they should rashly cast any thing thereinto, whereby the neighbouring Country may be endangered. Among the other Rivers which doe water this Country,The Rivers. there is one called Limagus, which riseth in Glarina, and in the middle of the Country, it receiveth Serniphius another River which runneth out of another Valley. Afterward beneath Vrna (which is the name of two Townes) above the Laterician bridge (for so they call it) having borrowed some water out of the Lake Vesenius, it parteth and divideth Marcha (which was heretofore the boundes betweene the Helvetians, and the Rhetians, for so the Helvetians call a bound) and the Tents of the Rhetians. Afterward entring into the Lake Tigurinum, at the mouth thereof it divides Tigurum a large Cittie of the Helvetians: and from thence it slideth to those waters which the Graecians, call Bathes, which are so famous for their hot waters. And not farre from thence it mingleth it selfe with the two Rivers, Vrsa and Arola. The River Vrsa, which by transposition of the two former letters, they commonly call ^ass, ariseth on the top of the Alpes, which are now called Saint Gorberis Alpes, and so runneth straite North-ward, when on the other side Ticinus, arising out of the same Mountaine runneth by the Lepo^^s Southward, first through Vrsula or Vrsella a Rhetian Valley, and afterward it commeth to Vria of the Tauriscians, the remainder of the French Nation, where it mingleth it selfe with the Lake, where it watereth the Vrians, the Suizians, the Silvanians, and Lucer^^^, foure Citties of the Wood, for so they call them now. Afterward having received the Rivers of Tuginum, it glideth by Bremgarte, and Mellige, (which are Townes of Helvetia) and so beneath Bruges m^^gleth it selfe with Arola. And at their confluence, or meeting together, three Rivers of Helvetia, Limagus, Vrsa, and Arola, doe discharge themselves into the Rhene. But let so much suffice concerning Helvetia, and the parts thereof, we passe to the Low Countries, or lower Germany.



THE RHETIANS novv called the GRISONES.
THe Rhetians are accounted an auncient people by the consent of all men. For some ages before Christs birth the Tuscians being beaten by the French out of their owne habitations, under the conduct of their Captaine Rhetus, seated themselves in an Alpine Country, which was called from their Captaine, Rhetia, and they themselves Rhetians. But whereas this Countrie was heretofore very large, and that the name of the Rhetians, for warlike matters grew famous amongst their neighbours, so that they were a terrour unto many which Ovid declareth in this verse: Rhaetica nunc praebent Thraciaque arma metum.The Thracian armes, now every where,And the Rhaetian doe put us in feare.
At length being conquered by the Romanes, they made two Provinces of it, namely the first, and the second Rhetia: which did not onely containe the Alpine Countries, but a great part of Suevia and Bavaria. Now by this name we understand those people, whom they call Grisones, for their grisely habit which was made of their owne Countrie cloth; but the Germains at this day doe call them Grauwbuntner, who doe inhabite the ancient Alpine Rhaetia, neere to the Spring-heads of the River Rhene and Oenus, who are perpetually joy^ed together by a threefold tye of amitie, and confaederacie. The first confaederacie, which is called the higher, hath eighteene assemblies in it, among which the chiefe heretofore were, Disentinus the Abbot, the Barons of Rhetia, and the Earles of Misaucium; but those families are long since worne out and extinguished. Although they that now possesse the Castle of Rhaetia, doe challenge that title, from the Plantinian familie. The severall conventions or assemblies, have one chiefe annual Magistrate, whom they cal Ammanus; hetogether with the Iudges chosen by the same assembly, judgeth of controversies, doth lay mulcts and fines upon offenders. The second confaederacy is called the house of God, or der Gotthuss bunt, in regard of the Bishopricke and Colledge of Curiense; it hath 21. conventions or partnerships in it, which are sometimes contracted into eleaven greater. The Citty Curia is the head of this confaederacie,

and hath a speciall Commonwealth; not unlike unto Tigurinum. After them the chiefe partnerships, are Ingadinus, and Bregalianus, in whose Territories are the heads of the Rivers Athesis and Oenus. The third confaederacie hath 10 Iurisdictions, the first whereof is Dav^sian, so called from the Towne Davosium, in which is the Court for this confaederacie, and the Assises for all the jurisdictions are held. The second is the Belfortian jurisdiction, the third the Barponensian, the fourth the Praelonganian, the fifth of S. Peter, the sixth the Caenobiensian in the Rhetian Valley, the seaventh the Castellanean, the eighth the Aceriensian, the ninth the Malantiensian, the 10 the Maievillensian. But these 3 confaederacies have 50 jurisdictions, of which one Common-wealth is framed: For albeit the most of them have meetings of their owne, and also Magistrates, Lawes or rather customes, and power to judge of civill and criminall matters, yet the Senate of (...) three confaederacies hath the greatest power and authoritie. A^^ sometimes they haue entred into other confaederacies, notwithstanding this perpetuall confaederacie. In the yeare 1419. the Bishop and the Curiensian Colledge made a league with the Tigurinians (...) 51. yeares, having formerly entred into societie with the Glar^ui^^. The Rhaetians also of the higher confaederacie, did a long time joy^ themselves with the Vrians; and the confaederates of the house of God, did joyne themselves in perpetuall league, with the 7 Can^^ (as they call them) of the Helvetians. He that desireth to know more concerning these matters, let him have recourse to Sprecheras his Rhaetia, and Egidius Scudius his Rhaetia, and Simlers Helvetia. I will onely adde, that the length of Rhaetia at this day, if it be taken from the South, unto the North, is about 15 Rhaetian or Germaine miles, accounting 8000 paces to every mile; the breadth of it from the (...) to the West, is thirteene miles, or there abouts.



map of Grisons
THE ^HETIANS Novv called the GRISONES.






A DESCRIPTION of the Low COVNTRIES.
BEing now to describe that part of France which belongeth to the King of Spaine, I will follow that order which I have observed in the description of France.

The Index of the Tables of the Low Countries.
1. The Low Countries in generall.
2. Flanders.
3. --The Easterne part.
4. Brabant.
5. Holland.
6. Zeland.
7. Gelderland.
8. Zutphania.
9. Vltrajectum.
10. Mechlinia.
11. Groeninga.
12. Transisulania.
13. Artesia.
14. Hannonia.
15. Namurcium.
16. Lutzenburg
17. Limburgh.

I Have hitherto faithfully described the Kingdome of France, now I come to the Low Countries, being my dearest and Nati^e Country. And first to begin with the name. Some would have this part of Europe, the which is now called the Lower Germanie, to be called Belgium by Caesar, in which he writeth that he billited three Legions, and Hircius foure. But Martianus and Glaro^nus doe take it for a Cittie not for a Country. But Vegetius will hardly beleeve that one Cittie can containe five Legions. And Caesar himselfe sheweth in his fourth booke, that many Citties were comprehended within Belgium, where he saith that they did inhabite the Sea cost of Br^^taine, who passed over out of Belgium, to get some prey and boo^ie, who were all called after the names of those Citties, from where they came. But yet he doth not undestand by Belgium all Gallia Belgica. For in the same booke, he doth distinguish the Nervians, the Morimans, and Essuans, who are people of Belgica, from Belgica. Therefore it seemeth by Ortelius that he calleth a part of Belgica Belgium, and that part most likely which is toward the North, which doth containe Holland, Zeland, Flanders, Gelderland, and Cleve^^^ Some call that Belgica which Caesar maketh the third part of Fra^^^ which name some doe derive from a famous Cittie in this Countrie, others from Belgius, a certaine Captaine of the Belgians, and other from other occasions. Hadrian Iunius, supposeth that it was called

map of low countriesTHE DESCRIPTION OF THE LOVV COVNTERIES.

Belgium from the fiercenesse of the Nation, being named Belgae as it were Velgae, that is, fierce and violent; or else they were called Belgae by changing of the second vowell into the first, as it were Balgas, from their hotnesse and pronenesse to fight: for Balgen signifies to fight. But the Country which we now entreate of, is but the halfe part of Belgia. It is called now Lower Germany; Germany, because it differs little in speech, manners, lawes, and customes, from the Almaines, and the other Germaines. It is called the lower, because it is neerer the Sea than the other part of Germanie, and in respect of the higher Germany, the fields and grounds doe lye lower. It is commonly called the Netherland, the French call it Le Pais Bas. It is called also almost throughout all Europe by the figure Synecdoche, that is, by taking a part of the whole, Flanders, either in regard of the power and beauty of that Country above the rest, or for the chiefe and famous Mart Townes, or the ancient Faires kept at Bruges; or lastly because it is better knowne, and is neerer to France, England, Spaine, and Italie. And so much concerning the name, the situation and quantitie followeth. The bounds of Lower Germany or Belgians (for these words I will use promiscuously) are on the North the O^an: on the South Lotaring^a, Campania, and Piccardie: on the East the Rivers Rhene and Mosa; on the West the Sea. These Princes are neighbours unto it, the Earle of East Friseland, the Bishop of Mun^^r, the Duke of Cleveland, the Bishop of Colen and Trevers, and the King of France. This is the situation: the quality of the soyle followeth, which ariseth from the Climate. Low Germany is under the middle of the seaventh and all the eight climate, betweene the degrees of longitude 22 and an halfe, and 30, and betweene the degrees of Latitude 48, and a halfe, and fiftie three and a halfe. The longest day in Summer towards the middle of the Climate is 16 houres long, and at the beginning of the ninth climate, it is 16, houres long, and three quarters. It containeth all the Parallels, which are betweene 16 and 21, the Aire in the Low Countries is moist, yet wholesome to the inhabitants. The summers are delightfull, pleasant, and temperatly hot: they have not too much heate, nor no great store of flies and gnatts, nor sildome any thunder, or earth-quakes. The winters are long and windy, and when it is a North or East winde, it occasions sudden frosts: but when the winde is in the South or West, the ayre is more milde, and the cold is turned into raine. The soyle for the most part is sandie and gravelly, as a great part of Flanders, and almost all Brabant, it is reasonable fertile in producing corne, and other fruites, and some places are very fertile, as Zeland, Flanders, Hannania, Artesia, Gelderland. And it hath abundance of Corne, Baile^, Rye, Hempe, and Cotton. It produceth also all kindes of fruites in great plenty, as Apples, Peares, Prunes, Cherries, Mulberies. Peaches, Apricockes, Filberts, Medlars, and in some places Chesnuts. And heere is abundance of Madder gathered for Dyers, and a great gaine is made of it, by transporting it into other Countries. There are no mettall Mines of any great note: As concerning the trees; they doe yeeld a pleasant prospect, standing thicke and very orderly, and

being loaden with fruite, and besides they serve for fire-wood and timber for building of houses, being very high and wondrous thicke, and there are great store of them here. There are few Bay-trees, and Cypresse trees. There are also great store of Teile trees commonly called Linden, which are like to Elmes in shape, and leaves, but they be bigger and doe sooner come forward. For in 16, or 18, yeeres they will be as big as a mans middle. They use them also in building: and they make coales of them which are better to make gunpowder than Willow coales. Betweene the Barke and the wood there is a kinde of downe like Cotton, of which they make roapes and cordage. But many beasts will not eate the leaves thereof though they be new budded forth. As Virgill sheweth in this verse:
Nec Tiliae leves, nec torno rasile Bruxum;Neither the light teale TreeNor Boxe that cannot turned be.And Ovid.Nec Tiliae leves, nec Fagus, and innuba Quercus,Not the light Tealetree, nor Beech which spreads,Nor the Oake that never weddes.
It hath also great plenty of Ew trees which is a poysonous tree, but excellent Bowes are made of them. Of the juyce thereof a poyson is made, with which Caesar reporteth that Cattivalcus king of the Ebure^ians did make away himselfe. There is also another kind of tree which is not found any where else, which is like a white Poplar, the inhabitants doe call it in the plurall number Abeelen. There is great store of them in Brabant, which serve for divers uses, especially at Bruxels. The Low Countriemen may prayse the goodnesse of their soyle for bringing up of Cattell. For Oxen, horses, sheepe, and great heards of cattell are bred there. And especially great, strong horses fit for service in the warres. There are also the best Oxen, especially in Holland and Friesland, where an Oxe often waigheth a thousand and two hundred pound waight. Ludovicke Guicciardine an Italian, unto whom our Country is much beholding for making an accurate and true description thereof, saith that the Earle of Mechlin had an Oxe given him which weighed two thousand, five hundred, and eight and twentie pound, which he caused afterward to be painted in his Pallace. The Kine have loose great Vdders, and full of milke. For in some parts of Holland in Summer time, they will give foure and forty Pints of milke. I passe by many other things, least should bee tedious. For hunting they have abundance of Does, Harts, Goates, Boares, Badgers, Hares, and Conies, and other games besides. And for Hawking they have Hernes, Kites, Vultures, Partridges, Phesants, Turtle Doves, Starlings, Thrushes, Storkes, Duckes, Geese, Woodcockes, or Snipes, which Nemesianus describeth thus.


Praeda est facilis and amaena Scolopax
Corpore non Paphijs avibus majore videbis,
Illa sub aggeribus primis, qua proluit humor
Pascitur, exiguos sectans obsonia vermes:
At non illa oculis, quibus est obtusior, et si
Sint nimium grandes, sed acutus naribus instat
Impresso in terram rostri mucrone, sequaces
Vermiculos trahit, atque gulae dat praemia vili.


The Woodcocke is easie to ensnare,
Their bodies no bigger than Doves are;
And by some watry ditches side
Feeding on wormes he doth abide:
Not by his eyes though they be great,
But by his bill he finds his meate,
Thrusting his bill into the ground,
Where when he a worme hath found,
He drawes him forth, and so doth live
By that foode which the earth doth give.


They have also Affricke Hens, and great plenty of other He^^. But enough of these things, let us now proceede to other matters; It is worth your knowledge to know how the Provinces of the low Countries were united, and grew to be one body, and how it fell to Charles the fifth and his sonne Philip. Ludovicke Malanas Earle and Lord of Flanders, Nivernia, Rastella, Salina, Antuerp, and Mechlin, and after his Mothers death, Earle of Burgundie and Artesia, marryed Margaret, daughter to Iohn Duke of Brabant, by which marriage he came to be Duke of Brabant, Limburg, and Letaringit. By his wife he had one onely daughter, who was the inheriti^^ to her fathers Lands, who in the yeare 1369. at Gandave married Philip Valesius Duke of Burgundie, who for his singular Valour, was s^mamed the Bold. He lived 70 yeares, and dyed at Halla neere to Braxells, in the yeere of Christ, 1404. He left these children behind him, Iohn, Antony, and Philip Valesius: Catharine, Mary, and Margaret. All of them did encrease their Patrimonie by marriage. Catharin^ married Lupoldus Duke of Austria: Mary married Amedees Duke of Sabaudia: Margaret married the Earle of Holland, and Han^^t, Antonius Vaselius was made by his father Duke of Brabant, L^taringia, and Limburg, he married Elizabeth Dutchesse of Lutze^berg, by whom he had these sonnes, Iohn who married Iacoba Countesse of Holland, and Philip, both Dukes of Brabant. Antonius, and his younger brother Philip Valesius, were slaine in the French warres neere Teroana in the yeare 1415. Antonius his sonnes, dying afterward without issue, left their Vncle Iohn Valesius, their heyre, and Iohn Valesius, who was called the Vndanted, being the elder brother, succeeded his father in the yeare 1404, and obtayning by his brothers and Nephewes death many large possessions, was miserably and unjustly put to death, in the yeare 1419, by Charles the Dolphin, for the Duke of Orleance, with whom he alwayes lived in continual enmitie and hostilitie. He left these children, Philip, Margaret, Isabell, and Catharine. Philip surnamed the good or godly succeeded his Father, in the three and twentyeth yeere of his age, in the Dukedome of Burgundie, the County of Flanders, Burgundie, Artesia, in the Marquiship

of the Empire, of Salina, and Mechlin. He at Atrebatum made a league with Charles the 7 and with the Duke of Orleance, and freed him out of prison, having beene five and twenty yeares prisoner in England, and payd his ransome, and gave him his sister Mary to wife. He after the death of Theodericke, Earle of Murcium was made heyre of this Countie: and after the death of Philip, he had the Dukedome of Brabant, Lotaringia, and Limburg: and after the death of Iacoba, he had the Counties of Hannonia, Holland, Zeland, and Friesland: And also the Dukedome of Lutzenburg, came to him by his wife Elizabeth, the widdow of his Vncle Antonius: so that it came to passe, that the large and rich Provinces of both Burgundies, of Brabant, of Limburg, of Lutzenburg, of Flanders, of Artesia, of Hannonia, of Holland, of Zeland, of Namurcium, of Friesland, of Mechlin, and the Marquiship of the Empire were all subject to Phillip the good. Hee had to wife Isabell, daughter to the King of Portugall: he lived seaventy two yeares, and dyed in the yeare 1457, leaving one sonne called Charles the Bold, to be heyre unto so many Provinces, who did not onely keepe his fathers Empire, but also enlarged it, by joyning unto it Gelderland, Zutphania, and the Iuliacensian Dukedome. And this is that Charles who was the Grandfather of Charles the fifth, who was borne in the yeare 1500 of Ioane the daughter of Ferdinand King of Arragon, the wife of Philip of Austria: which Phillip was the sonne of Maximilian of Austria, by his mother Mary the daughter of Charles the bold; under whom, these Provinces which before had many Lords, being united, grew to be one body, and now they are commonly called the Low Countries. Long since the Low Countrimen were accounted brave souldiers. And Caesar Lib. 1. Commentaries, concerning the French warre, doth call them the valiantest of all the Gaulls. For he writeth thus. The valiantest of all the Gauls are the Low Countriemen, because they care not for trimnesse of attire, and merchants have not frequent recourse unto them, and therefore those commodities are not brought to them which doe effeminate the minde; and they are neere to the Germaines, who live beyond the Rhene, with whom they wage continuall warre; by which reason also the Helvetians doe exceede the other French-men for valour, because they have dayly skirmishes and fights with the Germaines, when either they drive them forth out of their borders, or they doe make inroades into their Territories. And hence wee may collect their strength and courage in defending their liberties, that in the time of C. Caesar, they endeavoured to shake off the Romaine yoke of subjection. And so they mustred and joyned armies to contend with them. The Bellovacians set forth 6000 souldiers, the Suessones 5000, and the Nervians (who were then so wilde and uncivill, that they would not suffer Merchants at that time to bring them wine or other commodities) did set forth 5000. The Atrebatians and Ambianians did set forth 10000, the Morineans five and twentie thousand. The Menapians 60, thousand. The Caletians 10 thousand; the Velocassians and Veromanduans, did set forth 10 thousand a piece: the Ad^aticians 18, thousand: the Condrusians, Eburonians, and Caemanians,

40 thousand. So that the whole summe of choyse Souldiers was 273 thousand, as Orosius witnesseth: or as Caesar himselfe delivers, their number was 368 thousand, whereby it appeareth that the Low Countrie men were alwayes noble Souldiers. And Caesar in the second of his Commentaries saith, that it was they alone who in our fathers time did vexe all France, and did keepe out the Tentomanes and Cimbrians, out of their Territories; whereby it came to passe, that the memorie of their atchiuements, did make them valiant and full of courage in Militarie affaires. And forreine armies have found it in our age, who being fresh souldiers and joyning battell with the old souldiers, they found that the Citizens, Countrymen, and Sea-men, were al stout of courage. There are 17 Provinces in the low Countries, all of which the Emperour Charles the fifth did possesse: in which there are 4 Dukedomes, the Dukedome of Brabant and Limburg, which together with the Countie of Dale and the Lordships of Valckenburg, and Rode le Due, is joyned to Brabant, and it dependeth on the Chancerie of Brabant: also the Dukedomes of Lutzenburg and Gelderland. There are 7 Counties, Flanders, Artesia, Hannonia, Holland, Zeland, Namurcium and Zutphania: also the Marquiship of the holy empire, which hath foure principall Citties, Nivella, Lovanium, Braxells, and the Metropolis Antwerpe; it is now a part of Brabant. There are five Lordships, or Signiories, of West-Friesland, of Mechlin, of Vltrajectum, of Trans-Isaliana, and Groneland. There are many Citties, in the Low Countries, which are well fortified, the number whereof as also of the Townes and villages you may finde in Mercator. But the chiefe Citties are Lovaine, Bruxells, Antwerpe, Silva Ducis, Gandavum, Bruges, Hipra, Mechlinia, Cameracum, Atrebatum, Tornacum, Valencena, Insulae, Dort, Harlem, Amsterdam, Lugdunum Battavorum, Namurcum, Neomagum, Trajectum and others. There is a great company of Lakes, Pooles, and Marshies, in the Low Countries, which doe not onely hold great store of fish, but doe also fortifie those Countries, against the invasion of enemies. Few Rivers doe rise in this Country, but many Rivers, which have their spring head farther off, doe glide through it, and doe much enrich it. The chiefest are Rhene, Mosa, Scaldis, Am^sis: the lesser are Mosella, Lisa, Aa, Sambra, Dela, and many others. Wee will speake of Rhene and Amasis in Germany, and wee have spoken of Mosella in Germanie, now we will describe the rest. Mos^ doth flow out of the Mountaine Vogesus, which is situate on the borders of the Lingonians, not farre from the Fountaines of Araris and Matrona, and so running Northward it glideth by the Church of Saint Theobald, or Saint Tibaut, where it beginnes to be navigable: from thence it slideth to Virdunum, and from thence bending towards Caecia, it runnes straite forward to Mosa and Maser^acum. From thence turning Northward, it visiteth Carolomont, Boviniacum, Dinantum, and Namurcum; and there growing wider by the receipt of the River Sabis, it turneth it selfe Westward, and so having viewed Hoium, and Leodium, and glided by Trajectum, and Stochemum, it passeth by Ruremunda and Venloium: where turning West-ward it

watreth Cuicka, Ravestienum and Megena: afterward being received into the Rhene, neere the Towne of Herwerd, and so afterward mingleth it selfe with Vahalus, and straite way they part againe, yet still keeping their owne names: and so they fall in two divided streames, into the River Lovesteinum: where they doe encircle the Bomelian Island, and so joyne together againe, and losing their ancient name they are called by the name of Merova: and so gliding by Worcomium and Gorcomium, they come at last unto Dort, and there making the Island of Iselmond, it is called Mosa, and so retayning still the same name, having glided by Roterdame and Vlaerdinga, it entereth into the Sea, about the Brill with such a violent current, that for a long way together it preserveth his water fresh and sweete. And Sturgions delighting in this sweete fresh water are allured to come up the River, and so are easily taken; which doth not happen to other Rivers, because they entring the Sea with a quiet gentle streame, thes^ water presently becomes salt, as Seyne, Iberus Thames, and many other great Rivers. On the contrary, Eridanus, Tiber, Rhodanus, Garumna, and other Rivers which runne into the Sea with greater violence, doe in like manner as Mosa allure and entice the Sturgeons to come up into them, but not in so great Plentie. Besides, the Sturgions which are taken in the Rivers Mosa and Rhene, are greater and more pleasant in taste than those in the Mediterranean Sea. They are of a silver shining colour, of a great bignesse. There are some taken which do waigh above 400 pound. Guicciardine doth report, that be saw in the Market at Antwerp a Sturgeon of 420 pound waight, and that it was above 12 feete of Antwerp long: and on another day in the morning he saw 70. Sturgeons together, the least of which was above five foote long. This fish is first seene in Holland, Zeland, and Friesland, in the Moneth of Aprill, and it is found three moneths together or longer, during which time great store of them are taken. And from hence transported into other Countries, especially into England, being salted up, and so kept from putrifying; and also at other times, all the yeere through, they take lesser sturgeon, which are delicate in taste. Out of this, being enticed by the freshwater, they come up into the mouth of the River Mosa, in which there are very fatte Salmones, Trouts, which are taken here all the yeere long, also Lampreys, Mulletts, Congers, and other kinds of excellent fish, which here for brevitie sake I omit. But this is wonderfull, that those fish are bad if they betaken in the Sea, but very good and fat, when they enter into fresh water. Besides, this River doth naturally breed besides other fish, Trouts, Lampries, some greater and some les, but more delicate in taste. Schaldis which Ptolemie calls Thahuda, the Low countriemen Schelt, the French Escault, doth rise in Veromanduum; neere Saint Martines Abby, as they call it, where it gently slideth betweene Castellet, and Beau-revior, two French Fortifications, and so runneth to Cameracum: thence going toward the Country of Hannonia, it watreth the noble Citty of Valence: and afterward growing navigable, having received the River Hania, it glideth by the Condatum; and afterward being enlarged by the receipt of the River Scarpa, it vieweth S. Amandum,

and so bending Northward toward Tornacum, it glideth by Aldenarda, and the famous Cittie Gandauum, where it receiveth the Rivers Lisa, and Livia, and other streames. From thence with many windings and Maeander-like turnings it runneth forward to Teneremunds: and there having received the River Tenera, flowing on the right hand, it goeth toward Rupelmunda: and there it receiveth Rupels, and a little after Dela: and being now growne bigger, it by and by washeth the walls of Antwerp, and maketh a faire Haven or Harbour for shippes before the Towne: afterward having runne a little further, it parteth it selfe into two channells, and so divideth Brabant and Flanders from Zeland: for on the left hand, it windeth and bendeth Southward, and so runneth by the shores and borders of Flanders, and is called by another name de Hont, from the barking noyse thereof; from whence it passeth by Zuytbeveland and Walachria into the Westerne Ocean: on the right hand leaving Brabant, it keepeth one continuall course in his old channell, by the Island of Scaldis, and so with a violent current runnes into the Sea. Moreover the tyde followeth up into this River, even to Gandauum, which is thirty miles from the mouth of it, if you count them by the winding course of the bankes. There doe come up into this River Sturgeons, Salmones, Troutes, great Lampreys, Turbotts, Congers, Cuckow fishes Mullets, Crabs, Lobsters, Sardins, and many most delicate fish, which come up out of the Sea into Scaldis, and doe there feede, and cast their spawne; so that for two or three monethes, betweene the Spring and the Summer, besides the greater fish, there is taken so great a number of small Frie, that many men doe live by them. Also many Sea Dogfishes, and Porpoises doe come up this River, which two kind of fishes doe not cast forth any spawne, but doe bring forth their young ones perfectly formed. The Dogfishes doe bring forth their young on the Land, and doe suckle them with their dugges, untill they are growne to a good bignesse. Moreover, this River without the helpe of the Sea, doth yeeld divers kindes of fish all the yeere long, of which these are the chiefe: Pikes, Barbells, Tenches, Carpes and Breames of an unusuall bignesse, so that they doe sometimes, weigh 20 pound; also Gudgeons, and many other kindes of fish both great and small. Also divers kindes of Eeles, and Crabbes, and in the mouth of the River, there are some Oysters, which come thither out of the Sea. And therefore this River for multitude of fish and variety, is not inferiour not onely to any River of France, but also of all Europe. Aa riseth neere Teroana, and so bending towards Caesia, it slideth by the Church of Saint Audomare, and so comming to Griveling (neere which in the yeere 1558 that famous battell was fought betweene the Burgundians and the French) it doth discharge it selfe into the Brittish Sea. Lisa commonly called de Leye, riseth in Artesia, in the Towne Lisburg, which taketh his name from this River, neere Teroana: and having viewed Aria, Armenteris, Wervicum, and Meenen, and from thence cutting through the middle of Cortracum and Gandauum, it mingleth it selfe with Scaldis: it hath abundance of very good fish. Sambra commonly called Sambre,

which Caesar calleth Sabris, doth rise in Hannonia, neere the Towne Novion; and so having view'd the Townes, which are commonly called Landrecy, Sassene, Barlaymont, Mabeuge, Merne, and Cassele: at last it glideth by Namarcum, and so discharges it selfe into Mosa, and is full of delicate fish. Dela riseth in Brabant, neere the Village Towne Tila, and so bending Northward it runneth to Waveta; and afterward it floweth by Louanium which is three miles distant from thence, and so keeping on his course for three miles, and afterward bending Westward, it embraceth Mechlinia with many spreading armes, and afterward foure miles from Rupelimunda, being now growne very bigge it falleth into Scaldis. The River La Seine, as it seemeth, was so named from the Senones a people of Brittaine, when they came into these Countries to vexe and disturb the French. It riseth neere the Towne Soigni in Hannonia, and so runneth to Halla, and having glided by Bruxells, it floweth by Viluorda: and afterward bending toward Caecia, it leaveth Mechlin on the right hand, and having gone a little further it powreth it selfe into the River Dela, Diza riseth neere the little Towne called Per: and so turning Northward it watereth Eindovia, and so keeping his former course it commeth to Silva Ducis, beneath which it powreth it selfe into Mosa. Demera doth flow forth neere the Tungrians, in the Dioecese of the Leodiensians, and so running West-ward it watereth Bilsenum, Hasselt, and Diest, and from thence gliding by Sichenum and Arschot^m, it powreth it selfe into Dela. Netha riseth neere the Towne Rhetum, and floweth by the Towne Herentalls, and from thence keeping a direct course, it runneth to the Signiorie of Grobendoncke, and having received the little River Aade, it passeth by Lira, and so watreth Dusten and Walem, and a little further it mingleth it selfe with Dela. Rucur, or Rhoer, which Tacitus calleth Adrana, as Ritheimerus writeth, doth rise neere the Towne Bullinge, and cutting through Caesia it glideth by Dura and Iuliacum, and at length neere Ruremunda which it nameth, it falleth into Mosa. There are also other lesser Rivers, which for brevitie sake I forbeare to describe. And I passe over also the Torrents, and greater Rivers, least I should be tedious to the Reader; which doe not onely yeeld great store of fish, but are also an ornament and fortification to the Country, and are very convenient for the passing of commodities to and fro. And the Country people by the helpe of these Rivers making Sluces and Dams to stay the water, doe afterward digge channells for some miles together, and after letting the water into them doe make them navigable: so that there is no Cittie which hath not great Barkes, which come up unto it. But this Countrie hath but few fountaines, or Springs of water, except in the Mountainous places. And thus having shewed the Rivers that are in the Low Countries, it remaineth that wee should speake somewhat concerning the Ocean: seeing in regard it is so neere unto it, it may be counted not only a member of this Province, but the chiefe head thereof. I say therefore that the Ocean is wide and large, and in rough weather, it is fearefull and terribly furious: for sometimes when tempests happen, the waves goe so high, that

it doth overflow and drowne whole Countries: and especially it breaketh oftentimes in about the coast of Zeland: but the inhabitants doe cast up trenches and bankes, which do prevent the danger which might ensue thereby: unlesse when a westerne winde doth contend and blow against the spring tide. The windes which doe most trouble the sea, and thereby doe endanger the Countrie, are the Northwest, the West and the South windes. Also it is much troubled at the New-Moone or Full-moone, and the two Aequinoctialls, at which time (as Cornelius Tacitus witnesseth) the Sea doth swell very much. For every new Moone, and full Moone, wee see that there are still the greatest tides and greatest tempests. These tides doe produce some good, and some evill effects. As for the former, it purgeth the water (as common experience doth teach us) and will not suffer it to corrupt: and also it maketh ships say le more speedily. For as Vegesius saith, Lib. 4. concerning Military matters, Cap. 42. Haereciprocantis meatus ambiguitas cursum Navium secunda adjuvat, retardat adversa: that is, Those tides if they be with a ship, doe hasten her course; but being against her doe foreslow and stay her course. The other evill effects, are the inundations, and violent irruptions of the Sea: For the Ocean doth sometimes come up into the land with such violence, that it driveth backe great Rivers, and doth overflow spacious fields, as we sayd before. Pomponius Mela doth write as much, and the miserable experience of many ages doth consume it. But so much concerning these things. And now having spoken of the Detriment and losse, which some Countries of this Province doe receive by the Ocean, when it is rough and troubled, we must speake somewhat of the commodities, which the whole Province doth reape by it, when it is quiet and peaceable, which commodities are so many and so great, that if they should want them, the Country could not sustaine the halfe part of the inhabitants. And hence it comes to passe, that this Province is as it were the Haven and Mart of all Europe, so that there is an infinite multitude of Merchants and Factors, and as it were a confused Chaos of inhabitants and forreiners. Besides, the Ocean bringeth many commodities to this Country, as Herring fishing, and other fishings, which serve not onely to satisfie the voluptuous desires of the rich, but also to sustaine the poore: and the inhabitants doe not onely get their foode, but all their wealth by it. For the over-plus of that which they take, doth furnish a great part of France, Spaine, Germany, England, and other Countries: yea great store of barreld salt-fish is sent even into Italy, especially Salmones and Herrings. Now there are three kinds of fish which they salt, namely Herrings, Codfish, and Salmones. But first we will speake of their Herring fishing of which they make a great commodity. Herrings are found in no River, nor in the Mediterranean Sea, nor the Spanish nor any other Sea, but onely in this Northerne Ocean: their bignesse, forme, and goodnesse is sufficiently knowne. And when they goe out of the Northerne Sea, which is alwayes in the Spring time, as if they fleeted from their owne native quarters, and went to seeke shady places, they come in such great shoales, that

no Nets can hold them, but that they breake through them, and do even darken the face of the Sea. And many broade bottom'd vessells, which they call Busses, are set out from Holland, Friesland, France, Brittaine, and Scotland; and doe all to avoyd contention, fish in severall parts, and quarters, either about England, or the Coasts of Scotland, and the Orcades. These fishes are unbowelled alive if it may be (for assoone as they are out of the Sea waters they are dead) by one who hath good wages for doing it; and then another salts them, and so they are presently barrelled up, and afterward sold; afterward the Herring men and Coupers doe salt them anew, and take out the Pilchers which have no Milts nor Rowes, they are barrell'd up againe with new pickle: afterward they are surveyed by men sworne for that purpose, and so sealed up, in like manner as Diana's Priest did seale up red Vermilion, as Galen witnesseth. And these are the first kind of Herrings which with Plautus we may call salt or pickled Herrings: the other sort are those which are lightly salted; and so dryed in the smoake, being as yellow as gold, whence they call them Soretum, because they call a red colour in their language Sorus. This Herrng fishing is very commodious and advantagious to the Commonwealth of Holland and Zeland, seeing not onely one Citty, but many Citties doe wholy depend and live on it, and the Citty and Country get their food by it, pay their debts, maintaine families, and doe get wealth by it. There is another speciall kind of fish which they use to salt, called in Latine Ascllus Major, or Cod-fish, thereby to difference it from that which is commonly ealled Caballian. It is a great fish, so that some of them are threescore pound weight. It is taken at many times of the yeare, but especially in Lent time, and chiefely in the Friesland Sea, and great store of it is usually salted up, whereby the whole country reapeth yeerely great profit. The third kind of salt fish is Salmon: being very good when it is fresh as well as salted. Holland and Zeland have store of this kind of fish, in all moneths, but most plentie in Aprill, May, and Iune: of which there is such great store salted up, that the gaine which is made of them amounteth to 200000 crownes. But of these things enough, let us proceede to the rest. The Low Countries are plaine and levell: there are few Hills in it, and fewer Mountaines, unlesse it be in Lutzenburg, Namurcum, and some parts of Hannonia, where they are very thicke, and there are many also in Leodium. It is every where beautified with Forrests and Woods, which both grace the Countrie, and afford much pleasure in hunting. The Forrest of Arden, in Iulius Caesars time, as he himselfe writeth, was the greatest of all France, running betweene the Treverians, from the River Rhene to the Nervians, and the Rhenicans, being above fifty miles long. And now at this time no wood in all France can be compared with it: but now there is a great part of it converted into arrable ground, so that it is farre lesser than it was: and that part which remaineth hath many glades made in it, which the husband men doe till, and call it by another name, but the greatest part of it is from Theonis Villa even to Leodium, which is thirty miles in length. In the middle of it is

the Citty of S. Hubert, which as Gemma Frisius witnesseth, lyeth under 26 degrees of Longitude and forty minutes: and 50 degrees of Latitude, and 4. minutes. This Wood hath all kindes of pleasant trees, which are very high, and broad-spreading, which afford both pleasure and profit. Strabo calleth it Arduenna, the Inhabitants Arddenna; Rhenanus, Luitticherwald, which signifies the Leodiensian Wood. Mormavia, or Mormau, is a faire wood in Hannonia, which beginneth neere to Quesnoy, and so runneth out Southward toward the Veromanduans: and hath many Townes in it, and Villages, and many cleare springs and pleasant Fountaines. Here is great store of Charecoale made: whence some supposed that it is a Part of the wood Carbonaria, but some affirme that the wood Carbo^na did lye more Eastward betweene the Rivers Mosa, and Sabis; and that the pleasant wood Archta is a part of it, in which there is a Towne of the same name, fortified with a strong Castell, and there the Lords of Berlaymont, were wont to reside: There is also in Hannont^ the pleasant wood of Saint Amand, which is also called the Ramensian wood, because it is neere unto it. It beginneth on the edge of Flanders neere the towne of Saint Amand, whence it receiveth his name, and so runneth forth Eastward toward the Valesians, with a great breadth. The Ramensian wood belongeth to the Lord of En^^^e, who is the chiefe ranger of Hannonia, which title belongeth unto him onely. Silva Faignensis, or le bois de Faigne, beginneth in (...) neere Avenna, and reacheth even to Masieris, which is sixteene miles, though heretofore it were farre larger. It seemeth that it was so called from the Fawnes and Satires, whom perhaps the Poets did therefore faine to have hornes, and Goates feete, because the first inhabitants of this Wood were so rude and savage, that they were like beasts. The Soniensian wood is three or foure flight shots off from Bruxells, and it runneth Southward toward Brenna, even to Alle^da, and the Castle of Brenna, for three miles in length. It is a great spacious Wood, so that it is seaven miles compasse round about^ and there are very may Citties, Towes, Abbies, and Monasteries in it, so that in Summer time many of the Nobles, and wealthier Citizens doe goe thither with their whole families for recreation sake, and carry three or foure weekes. Saventerloo is enclosed with Lovanium, Bruxells, and Vilvordia. It is a pleasant wood, and receiveth his name from Saventria, a Towne lying neere unto it. Also Grootenheat is a Wood in Brabant, which standeth not farre from Turneholt, in which the River Ada riseth, which doth afterward discharge itself into the River Natha. It is a great Wood, in which Queene Mary, to whom Turnholt did belong, was wont to hunt much. There is also Marlaigne, a Wood in Namurcum, which beginneth neere the Cittie Namurcum. and runneth Southward toward Phillipolis: and so reacheth even to Mosa. Niepa is a chiefe Wood in Flanders, not farre from the confines of Artesia, it is two miles distant from the River Lisa, from the Castell of the Morineans and Baliolum: it is a pleasant, spacious and ancient Wood, having a strong Castle in it. Also Nonnen is situate in Flanders, and extending it selfe Northward in a great

breadth, it doth containe many Villages and some Abbies. Poodsbergia is a great wood, between Flanders and Hannonia, not far from Gerardimontium and Lessina, and is pleasant in regard of the roundnes of it. Gulielmi Silva, or Williams Wood is situate in Artesia, nere Rentiacum where the Emperour joyned battell with the King of France, in the yere 1554. Engelerwallia, is a pleasant wood in Gelderland nere Arnhemum. The 7 woods, are 7 great woods, which are nere unto the Transilanians, from whence one part of Fiesland is denominated, which is now called Sevenwolden, that is to say, 7 Woods: every one of them is very spacious and hath many faire towns in them. But so much concerning the woods. I come now to the publick works. There are in these Countries innumerable magnificent Temples, and Churches, many Abbies, infinite numbers of Monasteries, and Friaries, many Hospitalls for strangers, for the sick, for the poore and for Orphans. Truly in Antwerp only there are 42 such like buildings: the chiefe of which is the Cathedral Church of S. Mary, which is very spacious, having a Tower Steeple, which is 400 and 20 foote high, being built of white Marble, from the top whereof you may view the Cittie, the River covered with ships, and the Countrie round about which is full of Townes and Citties. What should I describe the other Temples, Monasteries, and such like places, of which there are great store both heere and in other Citties and Townes? What should I reckon up the sumptuous Pallaces belonging to Dukes, Earles, and Noblemen? Or what should I mention the other publicke or private buildings? for if I should endeavour to reckon them up, I should sooner want time than matter; wherefore it is better to be silent, than to speake too sparingly. The politick state of these Countries both in generall and speciall is threefold: the first is the Ecclesiastick state, in which the Abbots are the chiefe, the second is of the Nobility, as the Duks, Earles, Marcgraves, Princes, Barrons, and great Lords. The third is of the Citties, which the chiefe Citties of every Country doe represent. These states the Prince calleth together, when they are to consult concerning matters appertaining to the Prince, or to the Principality, or to the preservation or utility of the Countrie. The Ecclesiasticke state is thus; there are foure Bishops in the Low Countries, the Camaracensian, the Tornaycensian, and the Atrebate^sian: these three are under the Arch-bishop of Rhemes, and the Vltrajectine who is under the Arch-bishop of Colen. I proceed to the Vniversities, which are 4, the Vniversitie of Lovaine, and Doway, of Leyden, and Flankford. Lovaine is famous for the many Colledges, Students, and learned men; the chiefe Colledges are Lilium, Castrense, the Colledge of Porus and Falcon, in which Philosophie is read. The Buslidian Colledge hath three languages taught in it, namely, Greeke, Latine, and Hebrew. This Vniversitie, at the request of the Nobles of Brabant, was first instituted and adorned with Priviledges by Iohn the 4, Duke of Brabant, in the yeare 1426. Martinus the fifth being Pope. The other were erected in our memory. Out of which as it were out of the Troian horse innumerable learned men have proceeded, and doe dayly come from thence. For in the Low

Countries there are learned men, skilfull in all faculties and sciences: and as heretofore, so now it produceth famous Schollers; whom it would be too tedious to reckon up. Here are divers Libraries in sundry places, which are replenished with excellent rare Bookes. Among which that at Leyden is the chiefe. The inhabitants are faire, quiet, not cholericke, nor ambitious, nor proud: not much given to venerie; civill, plaine, curteous, affable, ingenious and ready, witty, and sometimes talkative: laborious, industrious, faithfull, gratefull towards those that have done them a curtesie, capable of all Arts and Sciences, stout in defending their liberties, and Priviledges even to death. And this may truely be spoken in the generall prayse of them, that the Low Country men are frugall house keepers and thrifty husbands: who following the example of the Ant, do lay up before winter, that which cannot then be gotten; and doe buy fish and flesh, which they either pickle up, or doe dry it in the smoake. For every house, according to the number of their familie, doth kill in Autumne an whole Oxe, or provideth halfe an one, beside a Hogge, which they salt up, and then it will serve them to spend a good part of the yeare, untill the Spring returne againe. Yet many of them are very covetous, and desirous of wealth. The Women are beautifull, well behav'd and curteous. For according to their Country fashion, they are used from their childhood to converse familiarly with every one: and therefore they are very ready both in action or speech or any matter: neither doth this freedome or liberty make them lesse honest. Neither doe they onely walke alone through the Cittie, but they will goe for fellowship to the next Townes, without any the least suspition of dishonestie. They are very continent, and apt and ready in their affaires And they are not onely carefull of houshold matters, of which their husbands take no care, but they also use Merchandise, and dispatch and conferre of businesses belonging unto men: and that with so great dexterity and diligence, that in many of the Provinces, as in Holland and Zeland, the men do commit all their affaires unto them. And by this manner of living, joyned with the innate desire which women have to rule, they become for the most part too Imperious and proud. It is the fashion both among Princes, and men of inferior ranke, as also among other Nations, on this side the Alpes, to give the first born their Parents names, althogh they be yet living. And the Noble of what quality and condition soever they are, doe more esteeme of their eldest daughter, than the rest of the younger, although they have all an equall dowry: so that they marry the rest to those unto whom they denyed her in marriage, reserving her for a better husband. And they are to be praysed, because they easily contract marriages with forrainers, if occasion so require, and are not bound to match them in their owne Country, which is a matter very profitable and commodious: for these alliances by marriage are very advantagious to themselves and the Commonwealth. Moreover it is accounted undecent and absur'd, for young men to marry old women, or on the contrary for old men to marry young maydes: as also for a noble personage to marry an ignoble person, or a master

to marry his Maide, and a Mistresse her servant. But the Low Country men are chiefely given to Mechanicke Arts, but not of the base and servile sort, but the more nobler, as weaving, clothing, and making of hangings, and tapestry, which serve not only for the use of their owne country: but are also transported into France, Spaine, Germany, and other parts of Europe, and also into Asia and Affricke. For Pictures, there is no Nation that doth excell it, nor none doth excell in Musicke, or for variety of Languages. Iohn Eickius a Low countryman, did first shew the way how to mingle colours with oyle. And every one in Flanders, Brabant, or Zeland, can speake not onely their owne Country speech which is Low-Dutch, but also French. The Sea men, Merchants, and Schollers, can speake also Italian, Spanish, and Greeke for the most part: and some can understand Hebrew, the Chaldean, and Arabicke language. The Lowcountrie men are also skilfull Seamen. I come to their food, the Lowcountry men doe use Wheate, Rye, Oates, and Barly: they esteeme of no pulse but Beanes, and Pease: they have few Vetches and no Millet at all. For the great strong windes doe lay it, and spoyle it. The Common people maintaine their families soberly and frugally. Their drinke is for the most part Beere, which is made of Malt, into which they afterward put some ground Barly, and Hops. And this is a very good and wholesome drinke for those that are used to it; they doe also drinke much milke. The rich have wine. They eate commonly Rye bread. They are wont also upon Festivall dayes, especially those which beare their owne name, to make great feasts, and to invite their Parents, Kinsemen, and friends unto them, and to banquet sumptuously with them, and to shew themselves generous and magnificent. They keepe their houses very neate and cleane, being furnished with all kinds of necessary houshold stuffe. And truly it is a faire sight to see what store of housholdstuffe they have, and how well ordered it is, and how cleane it is kept; in which, without doubt it doth excell all the Nations of the World. But the Low Countriemen are too much given to the Vice of drinking, in which they take great delight, so that oftentimes they never give over drinking day nor night; and thereby besides other inconveniences, they do much wrong their bodyes and witts: and without doubt it is oftentimes the cause of their untimely death, according to that of Propertius: Vino forma perit, vino corrumpitur aetas.Wine maketh beautie fade,And strength by Wine is decay'd.
And they themselves doe know it, and confesse it, and condemne themselves for it: but in vaine; for the evill custome doth prevaile over them. Albeit they may be partly excused. For seeing the ayre is alwayes moyst and melancholy: they have no other meanes whereby to cure their hatefull, and unwholsome Melancholy: which Horace seemeth to intimate, saying: Vino pellite curas, that is;

With wine drive cares away,Which haunt us every day.
But it were to be wished that they would observe that noble saying of Terence: Ne quid nimis: Doe nothing too much, which now the civiller sort doe begin to observe. The inhabitants doe goe in good apparrell, and are well complexioned. Lastly, they use much trading and traffique, in which they are very skilfull. And all the Low Countries for the most part doth subsist by Merchandising and Maechanicke Arts.


THE COVNTIE OF FLANDERS.
FLanders although it be not of any great antiquitie, yet no reason can be given for the name of it.The Country whence so called. Some derive it from a Cittie of that name situated there where Ardenburg is now; Others derive it from Flandbertus, the sonne of Blesinda, who was sister to Clodion King of France: Flandbertus lived in the yeare of Christ 445. Some suppose that this Countrey was so named from Flandrina the wife of Lydericke the first Earle thereof. Some derive it a flatu and fluctibus, that is, from the winde and waves, which in regard of the neere Vicinitie of the Ocean doe beate upon this Countrie. So that even to the yeare 1340. it was a caution used in selling or conveying of land, that if the Sea broake into it within ten yeares afterward, the contract and bargaine should be then voyde and of none effect: The bounds of it now are on the South Artesia, with Hannonia, and part of Picardie: on the East Hannonia and Brabant: on the North the Ocean,The Situation: with Honta or the mouth of Scaldis, which parteth Flanders from Zeland: on the West the Brittish Ocean or Germaine Sea. It is three dayes journey in length, namely from Scaldis on the other side of Antwerp, even to the new ditch, which is 30 miles. The breadth of it is twenty miles. The ayre of the Country is temperate: the soyle fertile,The temper of the ayre. especially that part which is neere the Ocean, and France. There are faire Meddowes, which may appeare from hence, in regard that Horse-riders doe yearely bring Colts out of other neghbour Countries into Franders: which through the goodnesse of the pasture,The fruitfulnesse of the soyle. and sweetenesse of the ayre, being leane before, doe quickely grow fat and plumpe. It breedeth also diverse sorts of tame Cattell; very pleasant and delicate in taste,The variety of living creatures. and also an incredible sort of wilde beasts. There are also divers kindes of fowles, as Pheasants, Partridges, Peacockes, Hernes, and Storkes. The inhabitants of this Country were heretofore so addicted to warre, that they never scarsely lived quietly or peaceably: so that their armies have invaded Syria, and the holy Land, and Hierusalem. There are 30 walled Citties in Flanders. Gandauum, Bruges, Ypra, Insula, Duacum, Tornacum,The names of the Citties. Cortracum, Aldenarda, Alostum, Hulsta, Teneramunda, Birsletam, Newporte, Sluse, Dunkerck, Graveling, Burburg, Dammum, Dixmuda, Furna, Ardenburgum, Ninova, Berga, Gerardmontium, Castellum, Donza, Orchianum, Lanoyum, Axella, and Ostend. Besides these, there are also free Townes, which are not inferiour unto Citties neither for nobilitie, or Priviledges, nor magnificent structures, or populousnesse:

as Bella, Poperinga, Hondtscota, Eecloa, Gistella, Middleburrough, and twenty others. There are in all 1556 villages so that it is a usuall Proverbe, that Flanders doth exceed all the Countries in the world, and when the Spaniards came into this province with King Phillip, they thought that all Flanders was but one Cittie. It is now divided into three parts, the Dutch, the French, and the Imperiall part. The chiefe is Gandavum which was built by C. Iulius Caesar, when he stayed in Morinium: it is called in Dutch Gendt, the Italians call it Guanto, the French Gand. It is situate foure miles from the Sea, and is watered with foure pleasant Rivers. For Scaldis commeth to it out of Hannonia, Lisa out of Artesia, Livia out of the Haven or Sluce, and Moero from the Ambactae. It is ten miles distant from Antwerpe, and as many from Bruxells, Mechlin, and Middleburrough. The compasse of it within the walls is, 45640 Romaine feete, that is seaven Italian miles. It hath 26. Islands, and two hundred and eight Bridges, and foure water mills. And an infinite number of hand-mills. And an hundred wind mills. It hath five and fifty Churches, and five Abbies. The Cittizens of this Citty are famous for Nobility, wealth, and courage. Here the Emperour Charles the fifth was borne. It also brought forth these learned men, Iudocus Bad^^^, Iohannes Cornarius, Laevinus Brechtus, and the other, Laevinus T^rrentius, Baldvinus Ronsaeus, Vtenhovious, and many others. There are two and fiftie kindes of trades in this Cittie. And seaven and twenty sorts of Weavers, which were first instituted by the Earle Baldwin, the sonne of Arnold the Great, in the yeere 865. Brugae, or Brugges, taketh its name either from the many bridges belonging to it, or from the bridge Brug-stocke, neere Oldenburg, and Arde^burg; out of the ruines of which Cittie eight hundred yeeres before, the Castell of Brugges was first built; it is situated three miles from the Sea, in a plaine place. The compasse of it within the wall 26620 Romane-feete, that is, foure Italian Miles and an halfe. It is the pleasantest Cittie not onely in all Flanders, but also in all the Low Countries: it hath threescore Churches, the chiefe and fairest whereof, is Saint Domatians Church, which was heretofore consecrated to the blessed Virgin; it was built by Lidericke the first, Earle of Flanders, in the yeere 621. There are threescore and eight kindes of trades in it. Ypra is so called from the little River Ypra that floweth by it, commonly called Yperen; it was built in the yeere 1060. The foundation of this Citty is sayd to be of Lead, and that in regard of the many leaden pipes, which doe convey water through the whole Cittie. And these are the chiefe Citties. The Havens follow: Sluce is named from the Catarracts or falling of waters, which the Flandrians doe call Sluys, it is a Sea Towne: it hath a great Haven, wherein fifty ships may conveniently ride. Over against it is the Isle Cadsant, where George Gassander was borne. Ostend is situated neere the Ocean, being famous for that grievous seige, which the Arch Duke Albert layd against it, which it valiantly sustained and held out three yeares, and some monethes, with great losse of men on both sides. Nieuport is three miles from Ostend, being a Sea Cittie, where Iodocus Clichtoveus

map of FlandersTHE COVNTRIE OF FLANDERS.

was borne, neere unto which is the Abbey of S. Bernard, in which heeretofore there was the most famous, and best furnished Library in all the Low Countries. Dunkerke was built it the yeere 1166. by Baldwin the sonne of Arnold, and Earle of Flanders. It hath a very short Haven, which troubleth all the neighbouring Seas. This Citty belongeth to the King of Navarre. I passe over the other Citties of Dutch Flanders. In French Flanders there is the Isle so called from the auncient seate thereof; it was once invironed with Lakes and Marshes: it is a famous Cittie, both for populousnesse, wealth, and good lawes, and strongest except Antwerpe, and Amsterdam. Do^ay is situated by the River Scarpia, heere Robert Gaguinus was borne: It hath an Vniversitie, which was built not many yeares agoe by Philip the second King of Spaine. Also Orchies is in this tract of ground, and Lannoyum famous for the Lords thereof, and by ^rancis Raph^lengius Cittizen thereof; there is also Espinoyum, Armentiers and Tornacum, or Tournay. In the Emperiall part of Flanders there is Alostum, which is a faire Cittie and well fortified by the River Te^^ra, and adorned with the title of a Countie. It hath 170 Villages under it: 2 Principalities, the Steenhusensian and the Gava^ensian, and many Baronies: there is also the Territorie of Wassia, in which there are foure Townes: Hulsta, Axela, Bochout^ and Assenede, Rupelm^^d^ is a Castell by the River Rupella, which we cannot omit in this place, in memory of our Gerard Mercator, a most famous Mathematician, and Cosmographer,The Rivers. and the Ptolemie of our age. The Rivers are Scaldis, Lisa, Tenera, Livia, Ypra, Aa, Scarpa, Rupela, and others* there are few Mountaines,Mountaines. Woods. but there are many Woods and those every profitable, the chiefe whereof are Niepensian, and the Nonnensian. The Politicke state of Flanders consisteth of three members.The Government. The first are the Ecclesiasticall Prelates, as namely seaven Abbots of the order of Saint Benedict: as the Abbots of Saint Peter, and Saint Ba^s^, S. Winnocke in Bergen, Saint Andries, Saint Peter, of Ename, of M^rchiemie. Five Abbots of the order of Saint Bernard: of Dun^s, of Boudeloo, of Doest, of Ciammerez, of Marchiemie: and the Prior of Waerchot. Three Abbots of the order of the Praemonstratensian^: S. Nicolas in Vuerne, of Drogon, of S. Cornelis in Nienove. Seaven Abbots of regular Cannons: the Abbots of Eechoute, of Soetendale, Warneston, Sunnebecke, Cisoing, Falempium. Seaven Provosts of the same order of S. Marten in Ipera, Wormesele, of Watene, of Loo, of Eversa, and Petendale. The second member is of the Nobility, in which are five Viccounts. The Viecount Gendt, of Yperen, of Vuer^a, of Bergen, of Haerlebecke. Three Principalities: of Steenhuse, of Gavere, of Eshinoy. Foure Barons, 2 in the Counties of Cysoing and Heyne: 2 in the Lordship of Pamaele and Boelare. The Military Tribunes are of Banderheereen, in the Teutonicke Countie, also the Lord of Nevele, of Dixmunde, of Beneren, of Praet neere Brugges: of Haerskerke, of Watene, of Hevergem, of Wasteine, of Caecten, of Ingelmunster, of Pouke, of Gruithuse, of Male, of Maldegem, of Ostcamp, of Winendale, of Colscamp, of Ghistele, of Sevecote, of Rousselare, of Waestene, of Hondscote, and also of Cassel, of Norturie, of Haveskerck,

of Halewyn. In the French Countie are the Lords of Lille, of Waurin, and of Comene. In the Lordshippe of Flanders there are the Lords of Rhode, of Gavere, of Sotteghem, of Gontero, of Scorisse, of Poitz, of Liekerck, of Lumbeke, of Rotselar in Meerbeke: Also of Wedergraet in Neyghem, and of Steenehuse. The third member doth consist of the speciall Citties. In the Dutch Flanders, foure speciall Citties doe make up this member, Gandavum, after which Burgraviatus Gandensis, Oudenarde and Biervliet. In the Signiorie there are some certaine Fee Farmes of the Empire, as Ambachten, dat Landt van Waes, 't Graefschap van Aelst, and other free Lordships, as Bornhem, Dendermonde, Geerdsberge. Bruges by whom are censt both for armes and Subsidies, namely the whole Franconate ('t Vrie) and the walled and not walled Townes, therein contained. Ypra, under which both for matters of arme and subsidies, are Yperen-Ambacht, Bellen-Ambacht, and Cassel-Ambacht: the Champion Franconate (Het platte Vrie) under which Vuern-Ambacht, Bergen-Ambacht and Brouchorg-Ambacht. In the French part are three principall Citties, Lille, (Ryssel) Douay, Orchies. The Lordship of Tournay and the state adjoyned to Flanders, doth consist of three members: the Clergie, the Nobility, and sixe supreame Iustices. Flanders hath one Bishop of Tournay, who is subject to the Archbishop of Rhemes, which is neverthelesse divided into 4 Episcopal Dioecesses. Vnder the Bishop of Trajectum, there are five townes that doe homage thereunto, Hulst,The Ecclesiasticke state. Axele, Assenede, Bochoute. Vnder the Bishop of Tournay, are Gandavan, Cortracum, Aldenarda, with their Castells: the territories of Waes, Bruges, the Franconate and the Island, with their Castells. The Atrebatensian Bishopricke doth comprehend Ducacum, and Orchianum. Vnder the Bishop of Cameracum, is the Lordship of Flanders beyond Scaldis Southward. The Tarvanensian Bishopricke hath these Castelships under it; Ypra, Cassel, Vverne, Bergen, Brouchorg, Belle. In Dutch Flanders there are 14 principall Courts, Viesburg, Gandaui, Burgus Brugis, Sala Yprae, Castellum Cortraci, Curia in Harlebeck, in Tielt, Domus in Diense, Curia in Bergen, in Bruchorg, in Cassel and in Celle. In French Flanders there are three Court Leetes, Sala in Lille, Castellum in Douay, Curia in Orchies. In the Lordship of Flanders there are five Court Leetes, Tribunal in Aelst, Dominus in Vendermonde, Praetorium Wasiae, and Castrum Beneren. All these Courts and Iurisdictions aforesaid to appeale do the Princes Provinciall Councell, which is at Gandavum, and from thence to the Parliament at Mechlin. But of this enough, I passe to Brabant.



THE EASTERNE part of FLANDERS.
BEfore I come to Brabant, I will briefly describe that which this table doth exhibite, which the Printer pleased to insert, for the benefit of the Reader. In it that part of Flanders is described, in which in our memory many worthy acts have beene atchieved, as it shall appeare by that which followes, But that we may orderly describe this Tract,Wassia, with the 4 officiall Townes. in the first place wee meete with Wassia, commonly called 't Landt van Waes, which is a rich fertile territorie, having foure Townes which doe homage unto it, two whereof are walled, as Hulsta, and Axella: two unwalled, as Bouchouten and Assenetum. Hulsta, or Hulustum, is the chiefest of them, being a neate Cittie, and well fortified. It endured a grievous seige for some moneths in the yeere 1596. But at length after many assaults, and underminings, and the losse of many thousand men, it was yeelded up to the Archduke Albertus. Axela is a pretty towne, being foure miles and halfe from Hulsta, and foure from Ga^davum. In the third place is Bouchouten, which is two miles distant from Axela. The fourth is Assenede which is two miles distant from the aforesayd Axela. And these foure Citties have many townes under them, as Watervliet and Bouchoute, in which two armies were sometime Billited; the states armie under the conduct of Grave Morrice in the former: in the other the King of Spaines Generall, M. Ambrosius Spinola. Moreover there are in this tract many Castells and Fortresses, which may be seene in this table, among which are those which are commonly called Philippinen, Patientie, Ysendisc^e S. Philip, S. Cateline, Coxie, and others, the chiefest whereof and the best fortified is Ysendijcke. This with the three other following Castells Duke Mauritius in the yeare 1604 enforced to surrender themselves. In the Countrie of Ysendijcka, is Birsletum or Bieruliet situate^ in an Island of the same name.Birslet. There lived in this Cittie William Beuckelens, who they report did first pickle and barrell up salt Herrings, and did transport them to forraine parts, which was a happy invention, whereby the Low Countriemen got much wealth, in regard that forraigne Nations did greatly esteeme of salt Herrings both fo^ use, and delicacy. It was hereto a Towne of Note, having a convenient Haven. But as all mortall things are fraile and transitorie, an^

map of Eastern FlandersTHE EASTERNE PART OF FLANDERS.

subject to corruption; so we see that flourishing Townes doe decay, so that nothing remaines as it were but their bare Carkasses: and now it is onely a Fortresse. There followeth Sluce with the Island of Cadsanto. Sluce is a neate Towne in Dutch Flanders, which was heretofore called Lammerzuliet, as it appeareth by publicke letters: which was heretofore very rich, it is five miles from Middleburrough, and three from Bruges; where by an artificiall Aquaeduct, or great channell, all the water in the Countrie, is collected and gathered into one place, and so brought to the Citty by navigable ^hannells: and so gathering it together againe into one pond as it were, at the Towne called Damme, they bring it from thence to the cataracts or fall thereof which they call the Sluyse: at the mouth or issue whereof, there is a famous Haven which sometime did enrich Sluce, when the Hanse-merchants dwelled there as well as at Bruges. It is able to receive an hundred shippes, as also the Annalls of Flanders doe testifie, that in the yeare 1468. a little before Christmas, there arrived in this Harbour at one time an hundred and fiftie shippes of great burthen, which was a joyfull sight to the Townsmen. On the side of the Town there is an ancient Castell. In which the Duke of Bouillon, and the Admirall of the Seas, (the first being taken at Hisdinum, the latter at Saint Quintins Cittie,) were both kept prisoners. This Castle although it be now disjoyned from the Towne, yet it was formerly joyned thereunto, by many edifices, which the Brugians did purposely pull downe. For the Towne of Sluce wearied with their owne dissentions and their wars against the Brugians, and lastly the Prince having sold it unto them, they came to bee under their jurisdiction. Sluce is now a strong fortified Cittie, being entrenched with walls, and a double ditch. Grave Maurice, in the yeare 1604. did beseige it the Moneth of May, and 3 moneths after his coming thither hee compelled them to yeeld for want of food. Nere the Haven of Sluce on the six and twentieth of May in the yeare 1603 there was a Sea fight of 8 Galleys of Frederick Spinolaes, with three ships and eleaven Gallies belonging to the States of the confaederate Provinces, which lay at the mouth of the Haven of Sluce. In which fight the Admirall Spinola was slaine, and a thousand and 400 men were kill'd and drown'd. The Zelanders lost Iames the master of a ship, the sonne of Michael, and his Mate. There were in the Haven of Sluce 2 Block-houses, the one in the very mouth of the Haven commonly called (...) Hase schantse, the other is seated not farre from the Towne commonly call'd Beck-of: the former whereof was yeelded to Grave Maurice, and the latter taken by force. Over against this Cittie is a small Island which the inhabitants call Cadsant, in which there is a Towne of the same name. It was heretofore much larger, having a Cittie in it, and many pleasant and rich townes. Neere unto which at severall times there have beene many sea fights: when either the Brittaines, the Batavians, or any other enemies to Flanders did arrive heere. But this Island is more than half worn away by the tempestuous Seas, and by the tides and ebs thereof. In this Island there are two Fortresses the one whereof Grave Maurice tooke being unprovided, the other

commonly called ter Hofstede yeelded unto him. A mile hence from Sluce is Ardenburg, which was heretofore called Rodenburg,Ardenbug. and was heretofore the Metropolis of Flanders, containing Tourout and Ostburg, and Bruges, (which were not then walled,) and all the Sea coast even to Bononia. But now it is all wasted. It hath a Church consecrated to the Virgin Mary, which is the fairest and most sumptuous in all Flanders. There is also Middleburrough,Middleburrough. being two miles and an halfe distant from Bruges, being now walled and ditched about. Mauritius in the same yeare tooke these Townes. There is also Damme two miles from Sluce, which is a very rich Towne, being very populous, and full of Merchants, and a great Haven for wines,Damme. being a key of the Sea, in regard that it did shut and open the Ocean, both to those of Bruges, and to all Merchants. But now by the incursions of the French, and the civill dissentions of the Gandavians and Brugians, and having lost the recourse of Merchants, it is now but like a Towne or Village, and the Haven is a digged Channell, being onely navigable at a full tyde, three Flanders miles, even to Sluce. Bruges followeth, which we described before, with the Territorie of the Francones or Free-men, because they did shake off the Brugians Yoke, and freed themselves from it: and contayneth all that ground which lyeth eight miles round about Bruges, and is commonly called 't Landt Vanden Vryen; it hath jurisdiction over many free Townes. And these doe make the fourth member of Flanders. Lastly this Table containeth Ostend, which was formerly a poore fisher Towne, wanting munition, but in the yeere 1572 it was walled about.Ostend. It hath a convenient Haven. There came hither eight great Whales in the yeare 1404, every one of them being 74 foote long. Also in the yeare 1426, there was a great Sea Hogge taken, being like unto a Land-Hogge but that it was greater. But in the yeare 1099. and in the yeare 1200, in the Archduke Alberts time, the Flandrians to restraine the incursions of the enimie, did ditch it round about, and yet they could not hinder their inroades, although it were entrenched with 17 Baracadoes and Bulwarkes, as the Bulwark or Fort of S. Catherine, of Isabell, of Albert, of Clara; wherfore the Flandrians were very desirous to beseige this Cittie, which they attempted on the 5 of Iuly the yere 1601. The beginning of the seige was very terrible, and continued so to the end thereof, as it is well knowne; yea it was such a long and grievous seige as there was never the like in the memory of man, so that during the time of this seige, there were slaine on both sides about 110000 men. There was a Table book found about a certaine commissary of Spaine being dead, in which the number of men that were slaine, were set downe, and the number of women and children by themselves: of which this was the totall summe: Tribunes or Praefects of the Souldiers, commonly called Marshalls of the field 9. of Colonells 15. of Sergeants 29. Captaines 165. Ancients 322. Lieutenants 200 and 1^, masters of the Horse 101. Common-souldier 54663. Mariners 611, children and Women 119. The totall summe of all was 72126. It would be tedious to mention all their trenches and Fortresses, all their engines and warlike Instruments, and

other matters. Moreover, there was a battaile fought betweene Ostend and Newport, on the second of Iuly in the yeere 1600, between the Archduke Albert, and Grave Maurice, in which there were slaine on both sides seaven thousand foote and horsemen. The battell continued doubtfull for three houres together. But at length Grave Maurice got the victory, and overthrew the Spaniard. The Archduke Albert lost in that fight 6000 men; there were taken besides a great number of common Souldiers, the Admirall of Arragon, and with him many of the Nobles, and there were 105 Banners taken from the enemies foote troopes, and foure from his horse troupes. Yet it was a bloody victory to Grave Maurice, for there were a thousand slaine on his side. A mile distant from Ostend is Aldenburg. It hath onely one gate,Aldenburg. being an auncient Cittie, and heretofore a famous Mart towne. The other matters which are contained in this table are unfolded in the next description. And therefore I passe to Brabant.



THE DVKEDOME OF BRABANT.
BRabant for the most part doth containe the Countrie of the Advatians, Ambivaritians, and Tungrians:The Country whence so called. but it is uncertaine at what time this Country was called Brabant, some deriving it from Brennus a Frenchman; some from a Cittie of that name, of which there is no mention neither in the Country nor in histories: some derive it from Bratuspandium a towne of the Bellovacians, which Caesar mentioneth Lib. 2. Some doe mention a Captaine called Salvius Brabon, an Arcadian, who came with Caesar into the Low Countries, whose wife Suana was Caesars Nephew. Some also thinke that it was called Barbantia, from G^tefridus Barbatus Earle of Lovaine, and afterward Brabant. I had this name of late, which is manifest, but the originall thereof is unknowne. The length of Brabant from Gemblours,The Situation. even to the holy Mountaine of S. Gertrud, is about 22 miles. The breadth from Helm^ntium to Bergae, is 20 Miles. And the compasse of it is 80 miles. It hath on the North the River Mosa, which parteth Gelderland, from Holland. On the South Hannonia, the Countie of Namurcum, and the Leodiensian Bishopricke, which confineth on it on the East. On the West is the River Scaldis, with the countrie Alost.The temper of the ayre. The fruitfulnesse of the soyle. It hath a wholesome ayre, and a fertile soyle, abounding with all sorts of fruites, but yet the countrie of Kempen, is barren by reason of the sands; which part yet is not altogether unfruitfull. There are 26 Citties in this Dukedome. As Lovanium, or Loven, which is an auncient Cittie, and the first seate of the Grudians, in which the Duke doth binde himselfe by taking the Sacrament. It is a pleasant Cittie, and now somewhat enlarged, the compasse of it within the walls is foure miles. It is watered with the River Dela^ Brussells is a faire great Cittie, fortified with a double wall, and situate in a fertile soile, abounding with all things. It is a wonderfull thing that this Citty could yeeld plentie of provision to serve the Dukes Court, the strangers, and forreine Princes which lay there with their whole trayne. There is also Antwerpe which they commonly call Antwerpen, the French call it Anvers, the Italians Anversa, the Germaines Antorff. Peter Appian thinketh that it is the same with that which Ptolemie and Caesar, doe call Atuacutum. It is supposed that this Cittie was so called from the casting forth of hands. For a certaine Giant called Druo who dwelt in these parts before C. Caesars comming, when any travellers came by, if they did not pay him the halfe of their commodities, he caus'd their right hands to be cut off, and to

be cast into the River: which appeareth by the armes of this Ci^^ and certaine great bones of this Giant Druo, which are kept untill day; some say he was called Antigonus. But these things are fabul^ But it is more likely that the inhabitants called it so from the heap^ rising of Earth neere Scaldis, which the Low countrimen doe (...) Antwerpen; for by making banckes on both sides they straitned (...) River, and made the channell deeper. It is situate by the deepe part of the River, under the 26 degrees of Longitude, and 42 minu^^ And 51 of Latitude and fiftie eight minutes. It is 4 miles distant fro^ the Sea, and as many from Mechlin, 7 miles from Lovaine: to (...) from Gandavum, 15 miles from Bruges, 8 miles from Brussell^ (...) score miles from London: 29 from the Agrippine Colome, (...) from Franckford. It was thrice walled. First with a narrower (...) Anno 1221: afterward with a larger wall Anno 1314, which (...) there was a great famine, and the next a great pestilence. Lastly, (...) suburbs were enlarged toward the North, Anno 1543. The (...) passe of it without the walls is 4 miles, and eight hundred and twe^^ paces. There are eight ditches which are brought into the Cittie (...) of the River, and are able to receive many great shippes. It is a great Cittie for traffique. Guicciardine giveth an estimate, that the (...) trading, in this Cittie doth amount to above twelve thousand Crownes, which was lesse than it came to when the Cittie of Antwerpe flourished. And therefore Iulius Scaliger doth worthily (...) it thus: Oppida quot spectant oculo me torva sinistro,Tot nos invidiae pallida tela petunt.Lagdunum omnigenum est, operosa Lutetia, RomaIngens, res Venetum vasta, Tolosa potens.Omnimodae merces, artes priscaeque novaeque,Quorum insunt alijs singula, cuncta mihi.Looke how many Townes doe lye on our left side,Even by so many Townes we are envide.Leyden and Paris painefull are, Rome great,Venice is rich, Tolouse in power compleate.All wares, and strange inventions that there be,In severall Citties, are all found in me.
There are two and forty religious houses in Antwerp, also Churches, Monasteries, and Hospitalls. The chiefe Cathedrall Church is dedicated to the blessed Virgin Marie. It is a faire and sumptuous worke, and hath a famous Tower steeple, which is all built of free stone curiously carved, and is foure hundred and twenty Antwerp feete, that is, two hundred Florentine Ells in height, so that it is very beautifull to behold, and yeeldeth a faire prospect: for from it you may behold not onely all the Cittie, and the pleasant fieldes and gardens lying round about it, but also you may cleerely discerne some Citties that are afarre off, as Mechlin, Bruxells, Lovaine, Gandavum, and moreover

map of Brabant^HE DVKDOME OF BRABANT.

over you may see to the end of the River, and discover the Sea, and the Zeland Islands. In this Tower there are threescore and eight Bells, some greater some lesser, some of which like musicall Instruments will yeeld an harmonious sound of foure or five parts. The greatest of them, which is of a wonderfull great weight, was named by the Emperour Charles the fifth, which is not rung but upon some extraordinary occasion. There are foure and twenty Cannons bebelonging to that Church, over whom there is a Deane, and a Bishop, who was first instituted in the yeare 1567. This Church is keptvery bravely, and the revenues belonging to it are great, and the Priviledges and immunities belonging to the Priests. Buscoducum or Silva Ducis, which is called in Dutch's Hertogenbosch, and in French Boldue, is so called from the Woods: it is a faire pleasant Cittie, strongly fortified, being seated by the River Disa, being a mile from Mosa, and twelve from Antwerpe. And these are the foure chiefe Citties, the first three whereof together with Nivella, doe make the Marquiship of the sacred Empire. Some reckon Mechlin to be in Brabant, yet indeede it is parted from it, being a faire, and neare Cittie: having an Archbishopricke, and a faire Councell, unto which the last appeale in Belgia, may be made. Moreover there are these Citties in Brabant, Trajectum neere Mosa, commonly called Maestricht, Lira, Vilvorde, Gemblacum, or Gemblours, Ioudoigne, Hannut, Landen, Halen, Lee^wen, Schienen, Herentals, Eindoven, Helmont, Grave. There are also many free Townes unwalled, as Oostenrijc, Oorschot, Turnhont, Duffel, Waelem, Merchtem, Asche, Vveren, Duisburch, Hulpen, Wa^re, Breine, Genape, Gheele, Arendonc, Dormal and Isca. There are also 700 Villages. There are refered to Brabant the Lordship of Revestein, the Dukedome of Limburg, with the Lordship of Dale and Vacklenburg. The Lakes and Rivers are very commodious and profitable to Brabant. The chiefe Rivers are Mosa and Scaldis, and there are also other lesser Rivers. This Country hath many Woods, the chiefe whereofare five, Somensis, Saventerleo, Gro^te^hout, Grootenheist and Meerdal. Heere are many publicke workes both sacred and prophane. The chiefe whereof is the Church at Lovaine, consecrated to Saint Peter, being very faire and sumptuous. The Churches at Bruxells are very sumptuous, being beautified with faire and rich ornaments. Also Antwerpe, hath many Churches, of which S. Maries Church is the fairest and largest. I passe by other Churches, which are innumerable in other places. There are also many prophane workes: as Pallaces, noblemens houses, Castells, Towers, and the like. Moreover the Politicke state of Brabant hath three members: the Clergie, which are the Abbots, Affighemensis, Grimbergensis, Tongerloo, Grunendalensis, of S. Gertrud at Levaine, of Saint Bernard, of Vileer, of Dielegem, Parckensis neere Levanium, Vlierbikensis neere Lovanium. The great Prior of the order of S. Augustine in Leeuwee, the Prior of Gemblours. The Nobles, which are, the Abbot of Gemblacum an Earle, the Duke Arsc^tensis, the Marquesse of Bergen neere the little River Some: The Barons, Diestensis, of Brada, Boxtelensis, Gaesbeeckensis, of Wesemael,,

Petersem, Perweys, Hoochstratensis now an Earle, of Renes: the Lords Aschensis, Merchtensis, Vuerne, Gheel, Lummen, Thurnout, Oosterwijc, S. Oedenroy, Walem, Duffel. The foure principall Citties are Lovaine, Bruxells, Antwerpe, Buscoducum. Concerning the state Ecclesiasticke it is partly under the Leodiensian Bishop, and partly under the Camaracensian Bishop: the Leodiensian keepeth his Ecclesiasticall Court at Lovaine. The Camaracensian at Bruxells: Lovaine hath a famous Academie or Vniuersitie: of which wee will speake more largely in the generall description of the Low Countries. The Babanters, are merry, jesting, and full of comicall conceits, as Lemnius witnesseth. Besides Brabant, there are conteined in this Table, the Dukedome of Iuliacum and Cliveland. The Politicke state whereof we will describe out of Mercator. The politicke state of Iuliacum doth consist likewise of three members, which are the Clergie, as namely the Abbots, the Colledges and Monasteries: the Nobilitie, the Cittizens. There are 24 Lordships in this Countrie Caster, Brugge, Born, Boisseler, Euskirchen, Munstereyfell, Moniou, Eschwiler, Grevenbroich, Wassinberg, Geilenkirchen, Hensbergh, Durem, Thonberg, Berchem, Heimbach, Wilhemstein, Gladbach, Millen, Rangenrayd, Nervenich, the Counties of Nuenar, Iuliacum, and Nideken. In like manner Cliveland doth conteine three orders, the Clergie, the Nobility, and the Citties. But the governour of the Province of Cleveland hath these eight Cittties under him. Cliva the Metropolis, Calcaris, Sonsbeke, where he hath his residence, also Santen, Buric, Vdem, Griet, Griethusen. Here are 14 Lordships, Cranenburg, Duffel, Gennep, Goch, Orsoy, Huessen, neere Arnhem, Lymers, Emmeric, Hetter, Aspel, Ringenburg, Bisselic, Dinslaken, in which are five Citties, Dinstaken, Wesel, Duysburg, Schermbeke, Holte. The Lordship of Ravesteyn is joyned and annexed to the Court of Cliveland.



THE COVNTIE OF HOLLAND.
The Country whence so called.SOme derive the name of Holland from the many Wood and Forrests therein, for we cal a Wood Holt or H^nt, and Hollant signifies a woody Countrie, for they report tha^ heretofore all Holland was full of woods and bus^^ Some suppose it was so called from the hollownesse thereof, as if ^^ were Hol-landt. For the whole Countrie is Moorish, and loose ^^der foote. Some suppose it was called from the Hay made the^ in Hollandia, as it were Hoylandia. But learned Iunius is of anothe^ opinion, that Holland and Zeland, are Colonies of the Gothish, and Danish Nations; and that the Danes and Normanes forsaking the Island of Oland and Zeland, did transmigrate into these places, and (...) them after their owne Country Holland and Zeland, as Virgill repo^teth of Hellenus, the sonne of Priame, who built a little Towne (...) Epire called Troy, with a Castle, and made the resemblance of the gate, Scaea, and called the River Zanthus by a Troyan name: as th^ Europaeans did erect and make a new Spaine and new France in the Indies.The Situation. The Brittish Sea doth encompasse it on the West, on the North the Cimbrian Sea beateth on the shoares thereof, on the East side i^ openeth a large Bay toward Friesland, on the North-East lyeth Trans-Isalana and Velavia, on the South is Trajectum. The compasse of it is nine miles, it is very narrow, so that a man may travell over i^ from one side to another in foure houres space, and in some places i^ is not above a mile over. This Countrie hath fruitefull fields, which doe yeeld excellent good Corne,The fruitfulnesse of the soyle. but in regard the Countrie is very small and populous, therefore it cannot maintaine so great a multitude of inhabitants. But there are very fertile meddowes, in which infinite heards of Oxen doe graze: and very faire milch Kine. It is certaine that in some parts of Holland the Kine in Summer time, do yeeld unto the Paile foure and forty quartes of milke.The variety of living creatures. Also Iohn B^ningus a counseller of the Court of Holland, as Guicciardine reported doth finde by certaine observation and computation, that Assendelp only and foure neighbouring Townes have as much milke from the Kine, as there is Rhenish wine sent out of high Germany to Dordre^^ Out of this great plenty of milke they make butter, which is an e^cellent daintie dish, not onely for barbarous Nations, as Pliny wou^^ have it, but also for Kings and Princes. They make Cheeses al^^ which are not inferiour unto those of Parma and Placentia. The chie^ are the Tessalican, and Gravesandican Cheeses, the next to them a^ the Edammensian, which are best when they are old: It breede^

map of Holland^HE COVNTIE OF HOLLAND.

also excellent horses. On the sandie hills there are an infinite number of Conies. Also great store of Harts, Does, Hares; and in the Hagiensian wood there are heards of Goates, and great store of fowle especially Duckes. Also Geese, and in harvest time Woodcockes which we call Snipes. There are excellent turfes, which being digged out of the earth, and drawne out of the water, and so dryed in the wind and sunne, doe make very good fuell. There were heretofore Kings of Holland,The auncient Government. of which Suetonius maketh mention in Caligula, cap. 44. But in the yeare of Christ 868 Charles the bald, King of France, reduced it into a Countie, and Theodore being descended of the royall stocke, was governour thereof. After Theodore the father there succeeded Theodore, the sonne, and after him Arnold, and after Arnold Theodoricke, and others after him, of whom you may have a Catalogue, in Munster and others.Their ancient valour. They were heretofore very famous for matters of warre, so that the Batavians were joyned in fraternitie and amitie with the Romaine Empire. And heereby they got the goodwill of other Princes. Now wee are to describe the Citties: which are Dordretch, Harlem, Delpth, Leyden, Amsterdam, G^^ds, Naerdenum,The names of the Citties. Muda, Wesopum, Edamam, Monachodamum, Purna^^^da, Almeria, Euchuysa, Horna, etc. Dordretch is the chiefe Cittie of Holland. The figure of it is long like a Gallie, it is very rich and plentifull, and a Granarie or Storehouse for corne and all other provision. It hath outlandish commodities brought up the River unto it, and there layd in ware houses untill they be solde: and are carryed from thence againe in Hoyes. This Priviledge of storing of goods they call a staple. Harlem is a noble Towne, both for the largenesse of the Cittie, the fairenesse of the houses, and the pleasantnesse of the situation. It hath the fairest Church in all Holland, being built on strong Pillars by the market place. The River Sparnus glideth by the Cittie. It is thought it was built by the Frisians, about the yeare 506. In this Cittie the Art of Printing was invented. Another honour of this Cittie was the taking of Pelusium by a new device, which they call Damiata, and in remembrance thereof, they have two sacring bells of brasse, which they call aerae Damiatae. Next followes Delpth which is famous not for Apolloes Tripos or Trevet, but for plenty of wine and corne. For the best beere is brew'd in this Cittie except it be English beere. It is so called from a Ditch, which the Bat^^ians call Delph, which is brought from Mosa even to the Cittie. In the yeere a thousand five hundred 36, on the Nones of May, the beauty of it was much blemished by fire, and the better part of the Cittie was burnt down; but afterward it was built up againe more faire than before. Leyden which Ptolomie calls Lugdunum Batavorum, is a Cittie situate at the middle of the mouth of the River Rhene. It sustain'd and held out in the yere 1574 a grievous seige, but at last it was freed, and the enemies were enforced by the overflowing of the waters to raise their seige. Amsterdam is the noblest Mart Towne in all the world, it is so named from the River Amstela, as the learned Poet Nicolas Cannius hath noted, being a Cittizen of Amsterdam, in these verses.



Haec illa est Batavae non ultima gloria gentis,
Amnis cui nomen, cui cataracta dedit.
Dicta prius Damum, rarisque habitata colonis,
Cum contenta casis rustica vita fuit.
Hinc Amsterdamum jam facta celebrior, atque
Fortunae crevit tempore nomen item.
Vrbs bene nota prope, atque procul distantibus oris,
Dotibus innumeris suspicienda bonis.
Dives agri, dives pretiosae vestis and auri,
Vt pleno cornu copia larga beet.
Quod Tagus atque Hermus vehit and Pactolus, in unum
Vere huc congestum dixeris esse locum.


This Cittie Hollands glory, whose name
From the River, and the falling waters came.
It was called Damum first, and inhabited
With Rurall Cottages, which here were spred.
But growing famous, t'was call'd Amsterdam,
And so increas'd in fortune and in name.
It is a Cittie knowne both farre and neere
And is admir'd for many gifts are here.
Tis rich in soyle, in garments, and in gold,
Plenty doth blesse her with guifts manifold.
What Pagus, Hermus, Pactolus doth beare,
You may truely say, that it is stoard up heere.


It consisted at the first of a few fishermens houses, and was under the jurisdiction of the Lords of Amstelium. After Gilbert Amstelius, about two hundred fourescore yeares since, fortified this Cittie with Bulwarkes, gates and Towers; which being burnt by the envious neighbours, it was walled about in the yeare 2482. And afterward, it was still enlarged, and belonged unto Holland. But now it is a place of refuge not onely for Holland but all the neighbour countries, even to the Sarmatians, and Gothes, and Cimbrians. For there are in this Cittie not onely Italians, Spaniards, Portugalls, Brittaines, Scots, French, Sarmatians, Cimbrians, Suevians, Norwegians, Livonians, and Germains, but also East-Indians, Americans, Moores, and others out of all parts of the world. Gouda is so named from the Cimbricke word G^w, which signifies a Ditch, and a Trench against it: it is situate neere Isela, being a plentifull Cittie, and abounding with all things. There are also some free Townes, the chiefe whereof is the Hage, in which the Councell of the States, and Princes doe sit, and there is Court for deciding of suites, and controversies. Concerning the Politicke state of this Countrie, it doth consist of three orders, the first are the Knights called Ridderheren, the chiefe whereof are the Earles Egmond and Ligne, under whom are these Dominions, Wassenar, Val^enborch, and the Viecountship of the Cittie of Leyden. I finde also these Counties in Holland, Maestant, Texel, Goylandt, Kennemerlant, Steenberge. The Lords and Barons, are Brederode, under whom is

the Lordship of Vianen, and the Barony of Lijfelt. I finde also in the Chronicle of Holland, that these Lordships are reckoned among the Baronies, Lecke, Sevenbergen, Voorn, Isselstein, Stryen, Teylingen, Puttem, Harlem, Leerdam, Asperen, Arckel, Altena, Bottersloet. The second order is the Lords, the chiefe whereof that are wont to appeare at Hage, are these, the Lords of Poelgeest, of Polanen, of Lochorst, of Assendelft, Warmont, Sparwoude, Matnes, Schooten, Noortwisc. Verdoes, or Does, Myne van Amstel, Spangen, Alkemade, Benthuysen, Keneborch, Raaphorst, Sweten, Heemskericke, Ruven, Duyn, and Sprangen. Moreover there are these Lordships in Holland, Htesden, Outhoesden, Papendrecht, Wijngarden, Ghissenborch, Ameyde, Woerden, Waterlant, Schagen, Purmerende, Goude, Naeldwijc, Risswijc, Schoonhoven, Wateringen, Soetermeer, Heemstede, Heuhtwoude, Merwen, Haestrecht, Dalen, Spijc, Hardischsvelt, Bardtwisck, Wijck. The third order are the sixe great Citties, which are called and summoned to appeare at the Hage, for all the rest: as Dordretch; this Cittie hath a Praetor and a Magistrate, whom the Cittizens obey, and a Bayly that governeth the whole Country round about, both in civill and criminall matters. Harlem hath a Praetor and a Magistrate within it selfe: and a Bayly for the Country, who hath jurisdiction in civill and criminall matters. Amsterdam hath also with it selfe a Prator and a magistrate, and a Bayly for the Country to judge of civill and criminall causes. Gouda hath a Praetor and Major for the Cittizens, and a Baytiffe and a Governour of the Castell.



THE COVNTIE OF ZELAND.
ZEland signifies nothing else but a Sea-land, the name thereof being compounded from Sea and Land.The Country whence so called. For it is encompassed on every side with the Sea. Lemnius doth collect out of Tacitus, that it was not unknowne unto the ancients, but not by that name by which it is now called, but the people and inhabitants thereof, did vulgarly call it Maet. For hee nameth them Mattiacans when he saith: Est in eodem obsequio Mattiacorum gens Battavis similis, nisi quod ipso terrae suae solo ac coelo acrius a^imantur: that is; The Nation of the Mattiacans, is also subject unto them, and are like the Battavians, but that their soyle and climate doth make them more couragious and lively. It was called Zeland from the Danes and Normanes, who comming out of the Ci^brian Island in Denmarke, which is called Zeland, to seeke new Countries; being pestered with multitudes of inhabitants, they invaded the Coasts of Brittaine and France, and they called Walachria, and the neighbour Islands Zeland, after the name of their own Island. These Islands are situate betweene the mouthes or outlets of the Rivers Mosa and Scaldis; on the North they have Holland,The Situation. on the East Brabant, on the South Flanders, on the West the Germaine Ocean. Zeland hath somewhat an intemperate ayre,The temper of the ayre. for in some parts it is very cold and sharpe, and not so wholesome as the neighbour Countries, especially in Summer, in regard of the Vapours arising from the ditches and standing Pooles, and also because the Country is not planted with trees. But yet it hath this blessing, that it is not often troubled with plagues or pestilent diseases, but when it hath a plague it is most violent, and it is long before the cessation of it. But it hath a very fat, and fruitefull soyle,The fruitfulnesse of the soyle. and fields which yeeld abundance of wheate, so that no Country hath the like for whitenesse, and waightinesse, and many other fruites: also Coriander feede, and Madder, which is good to dye cloath in graine, and make it hold colour: and also great store of faire Baytrees loaden with Berryes: and also many wholsome hearbes both to eate, and to cure disseases withall. Heere are also excellent Meddow Pastures for fatting of Cattell, not onely inclosed within hedges and ditches, but also upon the very shore by the Sea side, in which many thousand head of Cattell doe graze,The variety of living creatures. to the great gaine and commoditie of the owners, being not onely of an unusuall bignesse, but of a delicate and excellent taste, by reason of the sweetenesse and goodnesse of the soyle and grasse, so that they are much esteemed by forreiners. In the yeere 863,The auncient Government. in the yeere of Charles the Balde; a principality was first erected among the Battavians and Zelanders,

and then they were called Counties, and the first Earle thereof was Theodoricke the sonne of Sigisbert, Prince of Aquitania, who having beene Earle thereof eight and thirty yeares, left his second sonne Theodoricke, successor thereof; after whom these Countries by a long succession of Earles, came and was devolved over to Phillip King of Spaine. The Islands of Zeland are seaven, three beyond the mouth of Scaldis, toward Battavia and the East, which are therefore called the East Islands, as Scaldia, Duvelandia and Tolen. And 4 on this side toward the West, Walachria, Zuythevelandia, Northevelandia, and Wolferdije. The greatest and chiefest Ile of them all beyond Scaldis is Scaldia, the inhabitants doe call it Landt van Schouwen: the compasse whereof is 7 miles, yet heretofore it was greater, and was divided onely by a little straite of the Sea from Northevelandia. The chiefe Citties in it are Zirizaea, and Brouwershavia. Zirizaea is supposed to be the auncientest Cittie in Zeland, being built by one Siringues, about the yeare 869. It was a long time a famous towne of traffique, in regard of the commodiousnesse of the Haven, and the resort of strangers unto it; but when the Haven was filled up with sand, it grew out of esteeme: yet there is hope that if a new Haven were digged, it would be as famous as ever it was. In this Cittie Levinus Lemnius, a learned and famous Phisitian was borne and lived. Fishermen doe inhabite Brouwershavia, who live by the Sea. The second Island to Scaldia is Dwelandia, so called from the great store of Doves, that are therein; and it is foure miles in compasse. There are in it some Townes onely and Villages, but no Cittie. In the yere 1130 it was overflowed with the Sea, to the losse of many people, but afterward the banckes being repaired, and the Sea kept out, that losse was soone recompenced. The third Island is Tollen, which is neere unto Brabant, being onely parted and divided from it by a straite narrow sea, in which is Toletum; which the Low countriemen in regard of the custome and tribute which is payd there, doe call Tolle^, being an auncient little Towne: and not farre from thence is the Martinian bancke, commonly called S. Martines Dijck, being a pleasant place, and planted round about with trees, in which great store of fowle, especially Hernes doe breede. The chiefe Island on this side Scaldis toward the West is Walachria, which the inhabitants call Bewester Schelt, being so called from the first inhabitour, or from the Welch or Frenchmen. This Island lyeth on the East over against Brabant, on the South against Flanders, on the North against Batavia, on the West against Brittaine, This is the chiefe Island of all Zeland, being famous both for the situation thereof, the wealth, populousnesse, and for the beautie of the townes and traffique, being 10. miles in compasse. The Citties in it are Middlebrough, Veria, Flushing, Arnemuda. There are also many townes in it. Middlebrough is so called from the situation thereof, for it is a towne in the middle of the Island. It is a faire Cittie having many private and publicke edifices, being excellently adorned with Bridges, Towers, and Fortresses, both for use and beautie: and it is the chiefe Cittie in all Zeland, being also a famous Towne of traffique. Heere Paul of Middleburrough,

map of ZelandTHE COVNTIE OF ZELAND.

was borne, who was the chiefe Mathematician of his time: And also Nicolas Everhard, who was first Praesident of the Court of Holland, and afterward of Mechlin, in which office he dyed, in the yeere 1532. He had sonnes that were singular learned men, Peter Everhard Doctor of Divinitie, Nicolas Everhard Praesident of the Court of Friesland, and afterward of Mechlin, Adrian, Marius, and Iohn a Poet. Veria or Campoveria, is so called from the passage over which the Zelanders call Veer; It was first walled about in the yeere 1357. Afterward it began to be a Mart towne, for Scotch merchandize. Flushing hath his name and armes, from a Flaggon, which the Countrimen call een Flessche. It is a new Cittie, but powerfull and commandeth the Sea, and it is full of excellent shipmasters, and Pilots. Arnemuda is a free Towne belonging to Middleburrough, and a safe roade for shippes. The second Isle to Wallachria is Zuidbevelandia, which some suppose was so called from the trembling and shaking of it; we suppose that it was so called from the Bavarians, whose arms may be yet seene in the Scutchions of the Island. It extendeth it self in a large and pleasant tract towards the coast of Flanders and Brabant, albeit some few yers ago, a great part of it being lost, it is now lesser by halfe than it was. There is a pretty Citty that stands off the Land, called Romerswalia, that hath no tilled fields round about it, not no garden places, but the sea doth wash it on every side, so it subsisteth onely by trading in salt. In this Cittie the Earles of Zeland take a solemne oath: which when Philip King of Spaine, was to doe according to the usuall custome, in the yeare 1549. Nicolas de Const^lte, in whose house the Prince was entertayned, caused these verses to be written over his gate: Vidimus adsueto privatum lumine Solem:Pallida turbato vidimus astra die.Vidimus undantis horrendos aequoris aestus,Nos miseros Belgas quum obruit Oceanus.Vidimus ast post quam te Gloria nostra Philippe,Caesarea proles, Semideumque decus:Cuncta refutamus transacti tristia saecli,Quod praesens nostrum testificatur opus.Sit licet exiguum, sit pro ratione voluntas,Nil facit ad nostrum parva carina fretum.We have seene when as the suns cleere light did faile,And in the day time seene the starres looke pale.We have seene the fearefull sea tides rising so,Till the Oceans did us Belgians overflow.But Philip when thee, our glory, we espy'd,Of Caesars stocke, and halfe a god beside,We made up all our former rents againe,And this present worke doth testifie the same:Though it be small, yet to accept it please,For no small ship can sayle upon our Seas.
Moreover in the Westerne part of this Island the Cittie Goesa is situated at one of the mouths of Scaldis which they call Schenge. It is a Cittie not very large, but pleasant, and rich, being the onely Cittie in the Island: It hath very civill and curteous Cittizens, and a prudent Senate. The third Island of Zeland on this side Scaldis toward the West is, Northevelandia, in which is the Cittie Cortgreene, and very many Townes; but this Citty was all drowned with water in the yeare 1532, but now it is a little reedified. The fourth Island is Wolferdijc, as if you should say Wolfords ditch, it is very small having onely two Townes in it. There are tenne Citties in Zeland, and more townes, they being about an hundred and more. The inhabitants are wittie, craftie, and provident, and of a middle stature. But the Annalls doe report that Withelme Bonus, Earle of Holland, at the solemnity of the marriage of Charles the faire King of France, did bring a woman of an unusuall great stature, borne in Zeland, in comparison of whom the greatest men did seeme but boyes: for she was so strong that she would carry two hoggsheads full of wine in both hands, and drinke of them, which hogsheads did weigh foure hundred Italian pounds; and she would carry a beame or piece of timber up and downe, which eight men could not lift. They are very skifull in the Art of Navigation:Their Arts. They boyle blacke course salt which is brought out of the Westerne Countries, in great large cauldrons, untill they have made it as white as snow. They powre salt water on the rude Spanish and Armorican salt, and so boyle it, and doe make of a hundred weight of Spanish salt, an hundred and five and forty weight of pure salt. And they sell this salt, in France, England, Denmarke, and other parts of Eurpe.Their Trafique. Besides they reape much profit by their corne and choyse wheate, also by their Madder, Saltfish, and great plenty of cattell, and especially sheepe. They keepe their houses very neate and well furnished: they are provident and very painfull in merchandising, and also bountifull, and liberall to the poore. The politicke state of Zeland was wont to consist of three members, the one whereof was the Prelate, who stood for the whole Clergie, which was the Abbot of S. Nicolas, in Middleburrough: and one noble man, who was the Marquesse Veria: and also of the generalitie of the Citties, the chiefe whereof were those above mentioned, namely Middleburrough, Zirizea, Veria, Flushing, Tela, Martinsdijk, Romerswalia and Goesa. But let so much suffice concerning Zeland.



THE DVKEDOME OF GELDERLAND, Containing the Countie of ZVTPHANIA, and the Lordship of TRANSISILANIA.
The Country whence so called.GElderland was so called from the Castell of Gelrt, which Wichard of Ponthe together with his brother are reported to have built: though many doe suppose that it was so called from the Towne Gelduba, which Tacitus mentioneth. Others doe bring other reasons for this name.The Situation: It hath on the North Friesland, and a Bay of the Germaine Sea commonly called Z^yderzee; on the East the Dukedome of Cleveland, on the South Iuliacans: and on the West Brabant and Holland. The ayre of this Countrie, is pure and wholesome: the soyle fruitefull and fit for tillage, and especially it hath abundance of Corne; it hath fruitefull meddowes which doe breed up all sorts of Cattell; and great droves of Cattell are brought out of the farthest part of Denmarke to be fatted here; for there are many faire and flourishing meddowes, especially about the bankes of Rhene, Vahalis, and Mosa. At the first Gelderland was ruled and governed by Praefects: and afterward by Princes. For Leopold, Nephew to Martin governour of Austria, or Guidus as some report, was governour of these parts. After the time of Charles the Great, the Lords of Ponthe governed it. Afterward Otto Nassovius was Prince thereof in the yeare 1079. if we may credit Labius. After whom followed Gerard, Henry, Otto, Reinald, who was in such great favour with the Emperour, that at Frankfort, in the yeare 1339 on the foureteenth day of Aprill Ludovicke Caesar Augustus, did make him Duke of Gelderland. Edvard after many battailes tooke his brother Reinald, and kept him ten yeares in prison: William succeeded after him, and after him his brother Reinald, and after Reinald William Arculanus, he dyed without issue at Gorichem. His Sister married Iohn Egmundan, and after many changes the matter came to that passe, that in the yeare 1412. Charles the son of Adolphus, being called by the States of Gelderland out of Holland, did make William the sonne of Iohn Duke of Cleveland his heire, who against the will of the Emperour Charles the fifth, was for a time governour of Gelderland, untill

map of GelderlandGELDERLAND.

in the yeare 1543. being put out of a great part of Iuliacum, hee came as a suppliant, and yeelded himselfe to the Emperour, being then in his tent at Venloe; on this condition, that hee should resigne up the possession of all Gelderland, and release his subjects of their oath: yet notwithstanding Caesar did give him backe all the Territorie of Iuliacum, excepting onely two Townes, Hensberg and Sittartum. And thus the Gelderlanders who were free at the first, lived afterward under Princes, yet keeping their owne lawes and ordinances. But now they are governed by the States, and doe valiantly for their liberty against the Spaniards. This Dukedome doth containe two and twenty Citties,The names of the Citties. the chiefe whereof are Noviomagum, Ruremunda, Zutphania, and Arenacum, which they call now Arnheimum. Noviomagum, or Nymegen, is an auncient Cittie, situated on the left hand banke of the River Vahalis, which is very deepe in that place: it seemeth that it was heretofore the Countrie of Batto, having the Castell of Battenburg neere it, and within the Cittie the Mountaine Hessus, which some suppose was so called from Hessus the sonne of Batto. The Cittie is fortified by Art and Nature, bing very rich, and abounding with all things: on that side which looketh toward Cleveland, it is seated on a hills side, with an old Castell, which some suppose was built by Iulian; on which side the Countrie openeth and layeth forth her beautie being full of woods, and springing Fountaines: the lower part of the Cittie lyeth toward the Marishes, and the other part of the soyle is on continued hill. Ruremunda is seated by the mouth of the River Rura, where it dischargeth it selfe into Mosa; it is a pleasant, rich, and potent Cittie, in the old Countrie of the Menapians. Zutphania on the right hand banke of Isala, hath a Countie belonging to it, of which we will speake hereafter. That which Tacitus calls Arenacum, Posterity did call Arnhe^mum, of the Eagles house: it is the chiefe Cittie of Gelderland, where the Counsell is kept, being neate, plentifull, and well fortified* and situated neere the right hand mouth or outlet of the River Rhene. There are also these lesser Citties Hattem, Elburg, Harderuic, Wagen^ga, which Tacitus calleth Vada; Tiela, Bomelium, Bronchorstum, Doesburg, Doetecomium, and many others. Gelderland is watered with three famous Rivers,The Rivers. namely Rhene, Mosa, and Vahalis. And besides the^e, there are some lesser Rivers that glide through it, as Worm, Roer, Sualm, old Isala, Berckel, Niers, Regge, Aa, and Vidrus. On the North it looketh toward a Bay of the Sea, which they call now Z^^derzee: As we call that the Southerne Bay which looketh Southward, where Holland layeth forth her selfe, as having sufficient store to trade with all the world. The ground is plaine and low, and there are few Mountaines, and those are full of Woods and Forrests. Concerning the politicke state of this Dukedome, it hath 3 members, the Baronies of Veluwe, of Beture, of Bomielweert, and Trielweert. Also the Countie of Zutphania, under which are the Counties of Bronshorst, and Herebergensis. Also the higher Gelderland in which are Ruremunda and Gelder. The Nobles are the Earles of Bronchorst and Herenburg. The Lords are of Batenborch, of Groesbeeck, Mountfort,

Wel, Watchtendonck, Grol, Anholt, Keppel, Bredefort. Buren is a Countie by it selfe within Gelderland. There are also foure chiefe Citties, as Neomagum, which is a free Cittie and the Metropolis of the whole Dukedome of Gelderland, which hath under it Batavians, or de Beteuwe, the Lower, and the higher; also Bomnerweert, Tielweert, and Maeswael, being a Territorie betweene Vahalis, and Mosa. Also Ruremunda, which is the chiefe Cittie of higher Gelderland, which hath under it Venlo, Gelder, Vagedie, Strale, Wachtendo^ck, Erckelens, Moutfort, Echt, Nieustat, Kessel, Midler, Grieckenbecke. Also Zutphania, under which are Donsburg, etc. Arnheime, under which are, Wagheninge, Hattem, Harderwijck, Elborch, and all Velavia. At Arnheime there is a Councell kept, and the Praesident of all Gelderland resideth there, before whom all tryalls are brought, of the foure aforesayd Citties, without any further appeale to be made; and to them the tryalls are brought from other townes, and places which are subject unto them. The Ecclesiastick state in this manner: Geldria was subject to foure Bishops, Neomagum, with the Territory belonging thereunto, was subject to the Bishop of Colen; Ruremunda to the Bishop of Leodium, Zutphania and the Territories thereof to the Bishop of Munster, and Arnheimum to the Bishop of Trajectum. The inhabitants were warlike, and wonderfully given to martiall affaires: but now they are more addicted to studdies.Their manners The most part doe busie themselves in Merchandising and trading, the rest doe partly give themselves to Maechanick Arts and trades,Their Trasique. and partly to husbandry, and in regard of the fruitfulnesse of the soyle, they doe reape much profit thereby. This Dukedome doth containe besides many other Counties and Barronies, the Countie of Zutphania.Zutphania. The Etymologie of the name. It was so named, if we many credit Goropius Becanus, from the condition of the soyle, namely from the Marishes which they commonly call Venen. The inhabitants of these Countries as likewise their neighbours doe still retaine their auncestors manners and disposition, for they are valiant and very ready in warre. Moreover many are of opinion, that the Sicambrians did heretofore possesse Gelderland, and the chiefest part of the Countie of Zutphania,Their ancient valour. who were more fierce and desirous of warre, than any other of the Germaines,Their ancient valour. whence it came to passe that they vexed France, with continuall incursions. For which cause when there was peace throughout all the world, yet Octauian Augustus, could not for a long time shut up the gates of Ianus his Temple, which they used to doe in times of peace, because he understood that the Sicambrians did still molest the Frenchmen. But Otho Nassovius, Duke of Gelderland, beside his sonne Gerard,The auncient Government. who succeded him in the Dukedome of Gelderland, had by Sophia Daughter to the Earle of Zutphania, a sonne called Gerlacum, who succeeded him in the Countie of Zutphania. Who dying without issue, the Countie of Zutphania, was annexed to Gelderland, and never afterward disjoyned from it. It hath a Cittie of the same name, which Iunius supposeth to be the Cittie Visepetum, being populous, plentifull, well fortified with water, and seated on the right hand banke of the River Isala. Also the River Berckel floweth by it, and there mingles it selfe

with Isala. Moreover these Citties and Praefectureships following are in the Countie of Zutphania: the Citties are, Dousburg, Docte^mium, Lochemum, Grolla, Bredevorda, Broinkhorst, and the Praefectureships are those which are named from the Citties. And ove^ these there is one chiefe praefect, whom in their owne language they call the Drossart of the County of Zutphania. Here is also the Citty Herebergensis, having a Countie belonging to it.
Trans-Isalania whence so called.It remaineth now that we should adde somewhat concerning Trans-Isalania, being so called in regard it is situate on the other side of Isala. It looketh on the North toward West Friesland, on the South toward Gelderland:The Situation. on the East is Westphalia: on the West it hath a large bay (which is now called Zuyderzee) and the River Isala. It is a plaine low Country, the soyle being very fruitfull, especially for corne,The fruitfulnesse of the soyle. and also it hath pleasant meddowes. The Province of Trans-Isalania for many ages was subject to the bishop of Vltrajectum, untill in the yeare 1528, by the advice of Henry Palatine Bishop of Vltrajectum, it did submit her selfe to Charles the 5. and his successors. In this Province there are 8 walled Cittie, namely Daventria, Campen, Swolla, Steenwijckum, Vollenhova, Hassela, Oetmarsia, Oldese^la, Daventria, or Deventer aboundeth with all things, which is a rich and well fortified Cittie: being seated on the right hand bancke of Isala. I passe by the rest.The Rivers. It hath also beside the River Isala, the Rivelet Vidrum and other lesser Rivers also: And many pleasant woods, although they be small and of no noate. The politicke State of Trans-Isalania doth consist of two orders, the Princes offices, and the Nobilitie, as Alhemo, Ghoer, etc. and that in three parts of the Countrie, Iselland, Twent, and Drent. The chiefe Parliament is in Vollenhove, from whence there is no appeale.



THE COVNTIE OF ZVTPHANIA.
SOme suppose that the Zutphanians were herefore called by the Romanes Vsipetes, which Iunius conjectureth in his Batavia. But Bertius thinketh that the posterity of the Tencterians did possesse that Countery: but Cluverius doth al^ayes joyne these two people, the Tencterians and Vsipetians, as Cae^^r witnesseth: who being driven out of their Countrie by the Catti, ^fter they had wandered three yeares together through many parts (...) Sermanie, afterward passing over the Rhene, received a great overthrough by the Romanes: the remainder of them being by Sigamber, admitted within the confines of the Countrie, they afterward lived there continually, as he delivers, Lib. 3. cap. 10. of his learned commentaries of auncient Germanie. And also Becanus Francicor doth affirme, that the Tencterians did obtaine the seate of the auncient Syg^^^rians. But it is likely that the limits thereof were heretofore farre larger, seeing they write that it reached unto Friesland, and to the sea. But now they do possesse more Towns and Villages, from the Drusian ditch, that is, Yssela, even to the Westphalians. The chiefe Cittie thereof is Zutphanium, whence the Province is named, which seemeth to be so called from the Marishes, as if it were Zuitveen, that is the Southerne Marsh; being situate at the mouth of the River Bere^el, and on the right hand bancke of Yssela. It hath beene a Countie from the yeare of Christ, 1107, at what time the Counties of Gelderland, and Zutphania were united, by the marriage of Otto Nassovius, with S^phia of Zutphania, the daughter of Wichmann. But now Zutphania with the Territorie thereof, is one of the 17 Provinces of the Low Countries; and albeit, as Sandenus saith, they were united together 500. yeares before, yet they used their owne lawes, and rights different and distinct from Gelderland. This Cittie is populous, and plentiful, being seated on a Low ground, and fortified with waters. It was alwayes governed by a learned Senate, skilfull both in the Common law, and their Countrie Law, to which the Iudges of the neighbour Townes, when they doubted of any matter which was brought before them, were wont to referre the hearing, and to desire their opinion of it: which when they had received, they esteemed as (...) Oracle, so that the ordinarie could not reverse or change any thing. There are foure lesser walled townes in this Countrie, which have voyces in the publicke assemblies, Doesburg, Doeticum, Loche^um, Grolla. But the free Territorie is distinguished into foure Praefectureships, and as many Baronies. The Praefectureships are: Her

Drosten Ampt Van Zutphen, het Schotten Ampt Van Z^^p Richter Amp Van Doesborch, Drosten Ampt van Bredefort, Baronies are Bergha (which is also a Countie) Bronckhorst, Bea^ And there is at this day a controversie betweene those of M^^ as Sandenus witnesseth, and the Lords of Anholt, whether Anho^ belong to this Province. But that I may come to a conclusion, Cittie endured much miserie in the last warres; for it was taken sackt by the Spaniards, in the yeare of Christ 1572; and afterwa^^ was taken by Iohn Bapt. Taxius, in the yeare 1583. At ^^ng^ the yeare of Christ 1591. Grave Maurice beseiged it forthe (...) of the Low Countries, and freed it from Spanish servitude, and ^^ it to the united Provinces.



map of Zutphania
^HE COVNTIE OF ZVTPHANIA.





THE BISHOPRICK O^ VLTRAIECTVM
OLd Batavia was governed by Kings of their o^ the royall line being extinct, it was divided in^ The inhabitants of the River Isala, the Bishop trajectum, the Earles of Holland, and the Duke ^derland, did every one challenge a part to the (...) That part which belonged to the Bishop of Vltrajectum, (...) the Bishopricke. The first Archbishop hereof was D. W^^ a Saxon-Brittaine, who came to these coasts about the y^^ Lord 690, being sent into Friesland to convert Ratbod^^ ^^jects to the Christian faith: who stubbornly resisting hi^ ^pious purpose, he returned to Vltrajectum, where he bro^^^ ^^habitants to the Christian religion, and reedified a Church Dagobert King of France. From thence he went to Roma, a^^ created Archbishop of Vltrajectum, by Pope Sergius: a^^ returned to Vltrajectum, he caused a Church to be built (...) S. Martine Archbishop of Turone, and made it an Arch^^ both for himselfe and his posteritie. After him the^ ^^ded in the Archbishopricke Divus Bonifacius, who toge^^ 52 more suffered Martirdome at Doccomum in Friesland. ^^gard of the grievous Norman persecution, the Archbishop translated to the Agrippine Colonie. But afterward it was by King Pipin, and his sonne Charles the Great, who did a^ dignifie the Cittie with the auncient honour of the Bishopri^ gave the Bishop temporary power and meanes to defend (...) against his enemies; which temporary power was so large, th^ almost containe all Batavia. Truely it is manifest that the C^^^ of Trans-Isalana, and Groninga, were subject to this Bishopri^ven untill the yeare 1527, when Henry Bavarus, being much ^^ did commit himselfe to the Protection of the Emperour Charl^ fifth; and that he might recover his Ecclesiasticall state, did pass^ all his temporall power unto him: of which when hee had ce^^ Margaret, who was Governesse of the Low Countries at that t^ it was agreed that the Earle of Hoogstrat should come to Traje^^ on the 15 of November, where the Bishop of Vltrajectum, di^lingly and freely resigne up to the Emperour Charles the fifth Duke of Brabant, and Earle of Holland, and also to his lawfull P^^ritie, all his temporall state and jurisdiction in Vltrajectum a^ Trans-Isalania: which being done, the Bishop did free his su^^ from their oathe of alleagiance which they had taken a little be

map of Ultrajectum^HE BISHOPRICKE (...) VLTRAIECTVM.

but on this condition, that they should take the same oath to be faithfull subjects to the Emperour, and his lawfull heyres being Dukes of Brabant, and Earles of Holland; reserving to himselfe and his successor the Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction, and revennewes onely, with the Bishops Pallace. Afterward the Citties and Countrie of Vltrajectum, were united with the other Provinces, and it was agreed, that the Countrie of Vltrajectum, should be so firmely united to Holland, that they should be afterward ruled by one Governour, and that the States of either Provinces, should be called together; and that it should be in the Praefects power to change yeerely the Magistrates of all the Citties in either Province. And also that those who had beene banished in Holland, should not be received into Vltrajectum. And that all Tenures should runne in these words: That they should hold in Fee of the County of Holland and Vltrajectum. But in the yere 1580. after the decease of Fredericke Bishop of Tantenburg, the States did assume unto themselves the governement of the Cittie of Vltrajectum, and afterward the Vltrajectensians as confederates with the other States of the united Provinces, did acknowledge no other Lord but the States. These things being unfolded, let us come now to the Cittie. This countrie is encompassed on the North, West, and the South almost on every side with the Countie of Holland: on the East it is bounded with the Dukedome of Gelderland. It hath a good fertile soyle. Which as it is higher and dryer, so is it much more fit for tillage. Heere are five walled Citties, namely Vltrajectum, Batavadurum, Rhena, Amersford, and Montfort. Vltrajectum which is the Metropolis of the Province was so named, as Iunius Hadrian witnesseth, from the Romaine armies which lay by Rhene. For in that place where the Cittie now standeth, the five and thirtieth Legion was quartered, which was thus written by abbreviation, V. Trig. Leg. Stat. that is, the station or quarter of the five and thirtieth Legion: but those which were ignorant of the Latine tongue, reading those words together which should have beene divided, did pronounce it Vtricstat; for the middle letters Leg. were left out. Afterward this word Vtricstat was changed into Vtrecht. Neither is it a strange matter, seeing the Cittie Cantstat in Southland, did take his name from these words, Leg. Ant. Stat. that is, the Station of the Antonian Legion. It is thought also that it was called Antonia from Antoninus a Romaine Senator, who having left Rome, in regard of Neroes Tyrannie; came into those coasts and built this Cittie. And afterward the Wiltians did depopulate and waste it, and built there a faire Castell, which they called after their name Wiltenburg, which Castell Dagebert the sonne of Clotarius did take by force of armes, and having fortified it more strongly than it was before, called it Trajectum, because it is a passage for those that travell that way, and there is a certaine Toll payd there: Which appeareth by these verses which are to be seene in S. Martines Church: Circumquaque fluens Hollandia gurgite Rheni,Cingitur, Oceani fluminibusque maris.In qua cum muris urbs Antonina novellisTempore Neronis aedificata fuit.Hanc devastavit fera flammea gens, and ibidemCastrum Wiltorum conditur inde novum.Turribus excelsis quod adhuc plebs Abroditorum,Funditus evertens diruit usque solum.Hinc Trajectense castrum cum moenibus altisConditur a Francis Christicolis: sed idemVulgus Danorum confregit humo tenus, omnesCum Clero cives insimul ense necans.Denique Baldricus Praesul nova moenia struxit,Quae modo subsistunt auxiliante Deo.Sic Hollandensi terrae veraciter omniTrajectum constat urbs capitalis adhuc.Holland is compass'd in on every sideBy the Rhene, and by the Ocean Sea so wide.In which that Cittie which they Antonia callWas built in Neroes time with a new wall;Which a fierce Nation did with fire soone wast,And the Wiltian Castell was built there at lastWith high built Towers; which the AbroditanPeople did raze even to the ground againe.Then the Castell of Trajectum with a wall,The Frenchmen builded, who were Christians all.The Danes did cast it to the ground againe,When they the Clergie and Cittizens had slaine.At last the Bishop Baldricke did command,That new walls should be built, which yet doe stand.So that it seemes, that still Trajectum isHollands chiefe Cittie and Metropolis.
This Bishop Balderick, who (as these verss doe mention) walled this Cittie, was surnamed Clivensis, and Charles the Bald, King of France, and Emperour of Germany, gave him the Citties of Daventria, and Tiela, with all the Territories thereunto adjoyning, both for repairing the Cathedrall Church, and for his government in his Bishopricke. It appeareth that this Cittie was heretofore called Ant^nia, not onely by the aforesayd verses, but also by the testimony of divers writings, and by inscriptions upon coyne and auncient stones, and monuments found heretofore. Yet it is doubtfull whether this name were derived from Antoninus, the Romane Senator: for some do report that it was so called from Marcus Antonius, who was at that time Caesars embassador in France, who afterward together with Octavianus Augustus, and Marcus Lepidus, did assume unto themselves the whole government of the Romane Commonwealth. Lastly, others doe alleage, that it was so called from the Emperour Marcus Antoninus Pius, who did reedifie it when it was decayed. Vltrajectum is situate by the old channell of Rhene, which River before

that it broke into Lecca, did runne that way, and from thence did hasten onward to the Ocean. And now the inhabitants by trenches and ditches have brought the two Rivers, Wo^rda, and Leyda, unto the Cittie, that way which the River Rhene came heretofore. Moreover it is observeable, that this Cittie is so seated, that in one day you may goe on foote to which you please of fiftie Townes which stand round about it, being no farther distant from it than wee sayd before (as appeareth also by the Geographicall Table,) all of which before these troublesome times of warre, did belong to the King of Spaine. Moreover any one that setteth forth in the morning, from Vltrajectum, may walke softly to any of those sixe and twenty Citties aforesayd, and there refresh themselves and make merry, and at evening come home. This is a great Cittie, pleasant, and powerfull, having many stately publicke and private aedifices; it hath a faire strong Castell, built by the Emperour Charles the fifth, and called in their speech Vredenburch. The Churches thereof are very magnificent, and especially these five which belonged heretofore to so many auncient Colledges of Cannons: Namely our Saviours Church, S. Martines Church, S. Peters, S. Iohns, and S. Maries. But the sumptuous and faire Church of Saint Martine, doth exceede all the rest, which is a Bishops seate. The Bishop Adelboldus, caused this Church to be pulled downe, and afterward to be built up againe more fairely; it was reedified in the yeare 1023, and twelve Bishops did consecrate it in the presence of the Emperour Henry the first, as these verses doe declare: Tempore Francorum Dagoberti Regis in istoPraesenti fundo conditur ecce decens.Primitus Ecclesia Sancti Thomae, prope CastrumTrajectum, quam gens Frisica fregit atrox.Sed prior Antistes Dominus Clemens, ob honoremSancti Martini, post renovavit camDesidis Henrici sub tempore Regis: at illamPraesul Adelboldus fregit, ab inde novamEcclesiam fundans, Henrici tempore primiCaesaris electi, quem duodena cohorsPontificum pariter benedixit: denique PraesulHenricus coepit hanc renovare suamEcclesiam, Regis Gulielmi tempore, qvi tumHollandensis erat inlytus ecce Comes.When Dagobert was King of France, they did foundSaint Thomas Church upon this present ground:Even by the Castell of Trajectum placed,But by the Friesland Nation it was raced.Then the reverend Praelate Clemens call'd by name,In honour of S. Martine built it up againe,Even in the time of Henries slothfull raigne.But Adelbolde puld it downe unto the groundAnd afterward a new Church he did foundIn the first Henries time; which with great state,Twelve Bishops solemnely did consecrate.Lastly the Bishop Henery beganFor to reedifie this Church againe,Even when King William this same land did guide,Who was then Earle of Holland too beside.
This Saint Maries Church is very faire and beautifull, and was built by the Emperour Fredericke, as a mulct and charge imposed on him by the Pope of Rome, for wasting the famous Cittie of Mediolanum, and destroying the Churches therein. It was strange that at the laying of the foundation of this Church, there was a quicksand found, on which they could not build, but that it would still sincke; at length they cast Oxe hides into it, which made the ground sollid and firme, so that they built this Church on it, in remembrance whereof these verses are extant in Vltrajectum: Accipe Posteritas quod post tua secula narres;Taurinis Cutibus fundo solidata columna est.



THE CITTIE AND PROVINCE OF MACHLIN.
MAchlin is situated almost in the middle of Brabant, and is as it were enclosed within it, neere the River Dilia, which cutteth through the middle of it, being equally distant from Antwerp, Bruxells, and Lovanium, in a Champion Countrie and fertile soyle, having a light and sandie ground; the Cittie is very faire and conspicuous, both in regard of the pleasantnesse of the situation, the cleanenesse and breadth of the streetes, the largenesse and curiousnesse of the houses: some reckon it as a part of Brabant, but yet truely it is a distinct country from it. There are divers uncertaine conjectures concerning the originall thereof; but this is manifest, that in one of the letters Pattents of Pepin King of France, dated in the yeare 753, there is mention made of it, and that it is there called Mastinas, as it were the line of the Sea, because the Sea doth flow and ebbe before it; which Etymologie pleaseth some better, than to call it Machel from one Michael who possessed these parts, as Ortelius doth deliver in his Itinerarie of the Low Countries. Others doe deduce the name from other derivations. But as we sayd, Machlin, after the yeare 753, had Adon to be Earle thereof, which he held by fealty and service. But who were his Praedecessors, or successors is not yet knowne. Long time afterward there follow'd the Sertoldi, who denyed fealty and homage to Godfrey Barbatus, Duke of Brabant, which occasioned warres betweene them. After the Berltoldi, Machlin had various fortunes, and divers Lords; at length it recovered libertie, and was not subject unto any in the yeare 1336. And afterward it came to the Burgundian family in the yeare 1383. And lastly, unto the Austrian family, in the yeare 1477. And it is now one of the 17 Provinces of the Low countries, where the chiefe Counsell doth sit, whither the last appeale in the Low Countries is made; and instituted by Charles of Burgundie, Prince of the Low Countries, and at length in our time it was made an Archbishopricke, the chiefe Metropolitan seate, whereof is Saint Rumolds Church. Besides, there is an Armorie in it, which in the yeare of Christ, 1546. in the moneth of August, the Gunpowder being set on fire by lightning, was burnt downe, and the Cittie much defaced thereby.
Here Nicasius of Woerden, a most learned Lawyer, although hee

map of MachlinTHE CITTIE AND Province of MACHLIN.

were blinde, was borne; also Christopher Longolius, Rombert Dodonaeus, the Emperours Phisitian, and professor of Phisicke at Leyden: and also Philibert of Bruxells an excellent Lawyer. It doth also produce many excellent artificers and workemen; especiall stone-cutters, and carvers of Images. He that desireth to know more concerning this Cittie, and the antiquitie of this Province, let him have recourse to Iohn Bapt. Gremajus his large description of Machlin, and he shall finde very good satisfaction therein.



THE LORDSHIP OF GRONINGA.
GRoninga is the head Cittie of the Province of Groninga, and the fairest Cittie in Friesland. Some thinke it to bee that which Ptolemie calls Phileum. They derive the name from Grano a certaine Trojan or Friesland Prince, but Vbbo Emmius, rejecting other opinions which are grounded on fabulous reports, supposeth that it was so called from the greene Meddowes, and tufts of trees therein. It is distinguished from the other parts of Friesland, in the middle whereof this Province is seated, by the River Amasus, and the Lavician Bay; and now since the yeare 1536, it is counted one of the seventeene Provinces, at what time the Groningians did put themselves into the protection of Charles the fifth. Heretofore this Lordship did doe homage and fealtie to the Bishop of Vltrajectum, being given him by the Emperour Henry the third, and afterward by the Emperour Maximilian the first, in the yeare 1494. And also he gave the Government of Groninga, and all Friesland, to Albert Duke of Saxo^ie: the Groningians refusing the governement of the Saxons, who having made many treaties of peace but in vaine; they committed themselves in the yeare 1506, into the Protection of Edzard Earle of East Friesland, and afterward dismissing Edzard, because he was not able to resist the Saxon, and the Emperour, they tooke the oath of alleagiance to Charles Duke of Gelderland; so at length George, the sonne of Albert Saxon, did surrender and yeeld up all Groninga and West Friesland to the Emperour G^^les the fifth, as to the chiefe Lord thereof. This occasioned warres betweene the Austrians and the Gelderlanders, whereby it came to passe, that the Groningians being wearied with continuall warres, did yeeld themselves in the yeare 1515 unto Caesar, as Prince of Brabant and Holland. It is a pleasant Countrie and (...) of faire pasture grounds, except toward Druenttum, where it is ^^cotish. The Cittie is strongly fortified with ditches and trenches, being very wide and spacious, adorned with many magnificent publicke and private buildings. The suburbs whereof some ^ew yeares agoe was much enlarged, and the new Cittie was joyned to the old, and so the Cittie was more strongly fortified against the ^^^sion of enemies than before. There are twelve Churches in it, ^^ which there are three Parish Curches, as they call them, five be^^ging to Monasteries, and foure belonging to Guesthouses. The ^^^est and auncientest of all the Parish Churches is S. Martines, having

a high steeple, although the top thereof be somewhat decayed and heretofore it was devoted to heathen superstition. It was made a Bishops seate in the yeare 1569, by Pope Paul the third, which Iohn Carifius of Vltrajectum, was the first and last that possessed it. This Cittie is populous and rich, and it hath a large jurisdiction. Here Rodolphus Agricola the learnedest man in those times was borne, whose bookes are still approved by the learned. He dyed at Heidelberg in the yeare 1485, on whom Hermolaus Barbarus a noble man of Venice bestowed this Epitaph:
Invida clauserunt hoc marmore fata Rudolphum,Agricolam Frisij spemque decusque soli;Scilicet, hoc vivo meruit Germania laudis,Quic quid habet Latium, Graecia quic quid habet.The envious fates heere have shut,Within this Marble Tombe,Rudolphus Agricola, by whose worthFriesland much honour wonne.For while he lived, Germany did inherritAll praise which Greece and Italy could merit
Also this Cittie was the birth place of Wesselus Bassilius, a most excellent Philosopher, who dyed in the yeare 1584; also Reinerus Predinius, Hieron. Verutius, and many others were borne here. There is a great Free Towne in this Province called Damme which is but two miles distant from Groninga, and it hath 145 villages; some whereof are fairer and greater than the rest. Concerning other matters you shall finde them accurately described by Vbbo Emmius.



map of Groninga
THE LORDSHIP OF GRONINGA.





THE LORDSHIP OF TRANS-ISSELANIA.
THe Trans-Issilanians doe inhabite that part which was the Seate of the auncient Frenchmen; which the most learned Hardrian Iunius, doth largely and accurately declare. And the name of Frenchmen signifies as much, for the Low countrey men being wearie of servitude when they increased in wealth, would needs be called Franci, because they had gotten their liberty and enfranchised themselves; who^^ Agathias a Greeke writer, did place about Rhene, in the words: The Frenchmen doe dwell about Rhene, and doe inhabit^^^ the adjacent Countries round about, and they were next unto the Sicambrians; which Claudianus and Sidonius Apollinaris doe expresly shew, as also Gregorie Turonensis, and Venantius Fortunatus. It is now called Trans-Issulana, because it is situate beyond the River Isela^^ was also the seate of the auncient Salians, and also of the Tencterian which are now thought to be the Drentinians, and the Tubantum, which, as Iunius writeth in his Batavia, were the Tuentenians, This Countrey is now divided into three parts, that which is neere to Isala is called Salandia, that which is beyond Vetchta is called Druenta, that which is next to Westphalia, is called Twenta. But Druenta and Twenta were conferred on the Bishop o^ old Trajectum, after the yeare of Christ 1046. Also Amelandia, Gora, Daventria, and also all Trans-Issulana, by the donation and guift of the Emperour, and so it continued for many yeares under his governmen, even untill the yeare 1528; when being wearied with warre they yeelded themselves to the Emperour Charles the fifth, on certaine conditions, as Duke of Brabant, and Earle of Holland, Trans-Issula, hath on the North West Friesland; on the South the Countie^ of Zutphania, on the East Westphalia, and on the West the River Isela. The Countrie is plaine and fruitfull, and full of Corne. It containeth eight walled Citties, which have their owne priviledges and immunities, as Meppela, Geelmuda, Coevordia, Hardenberga, Ow^^ Almeloa, Gora, Diepenhemium, Delda, and Enscheda. The Sta^^ doe consist of two members, the first whereof are the officers a^^ nobles, the latter are the Magistrates of the three capitall Citties Daventria is seated by the River Issela, which is the Metropolis the Country, which is a large Cittie, and beautified with many p^^ like and private buildings, and fortified with walls, Towers, and Bulwarkes: heretofore it was a famous place of studdie, from whe^^ came Gerardus surnamed the Great, whose workes are much este^med by Divines; also Alexander Heggius, who first revived th^ Greeke tongue in Belgia, and may worthily boast of his scholl^^ Erasmus. In this Cittie also there were borne Iames of Daventri^

map of Trans-issalania^HE LORDSHIP OF TRANS-ISSALANIA.

an excellent Geographer, Everard Bronckorst a Lawyer and Professor at Leiden; also Ortuinus Gracius, Ioannes Dorrius, Iohn Sinthemius, and Rodolphus Pythopaeus, and others. It is now the chiefe Cittie of the Ansuarians, whom they commonly call Anse steden. Campi is on the left hand bancke of the River Isela, not farre from the mouth thereof, being foure miles distant from Daventria. This Cittie is also very large, lying lengthwayes, and hath faire houses in it here Albertus Pighius was bone, also Iohn Campensis a Divine, Harmanus Cruserus a Physitian, and Theodore Peter were borne heere. Heretofore it was more famous for merchandising in regard of the depth of the Haven than it is now. Swolla is a pleasant Cittie, and fortified with a double ditch. It hath on one side the River Isela, on the other Vetchta, which are not farre from it. There are also other lesser walled townes: as Volenhovia by the Lake Flevum, Steenvicum by the River Aa, and Hasseletum by the River Vidrum or Vechta. Also Oetmersia and Oldensalia, the last of which is an auncient Towne of the Salians, which Baldericke of Vltrajectum walled about, and did found there a Colledge of Cannons.



THE COVNTIE OF ARTESIA.
ARtesia, containeth a great part of those people which Caesar calleth the Atrebatians, from the chiefe Cittie which he calleth Atrebatum. But Marius Niger doth place here the Ambianians. And Ptolomie also doth place Atrebatium betweene the river Seane, and Phrudium, which is now called la Somme. But the new name of Artesia, is derived from the Metropolis called Arras, as it were Aratesia by the figure Syncope, and it is commonly called Artois. The bounds thereof are on the North Flanders, from which it is parted by the River Lisa, and the New ditch: on the South and West it is bounded with Picardie, on the East with Flanders and Cameracum. The ayre is cleare and sweete, the Countrie fruitfull, and especially of corne, of which it hath not onely sufficient plentie for it self, but also it furnisheth Flanders, Brabant and other Countries. It is the barne and Granarie for Antwerp and Mechlin. It hath no wine, rather by slothfulnesse of the inhabitants than the unfruitfulnesse of the soyle or climate. This Countrie heeretofore belonged to Flanders: for Charles the Bald gave it to Baldwin Arduennatus for a Dowry with his wife Iudith. Afterward Philip Alsasius when he marryed his Nephew Isabella, to Philip son of Ludovicke the seaventh, King of France, he gave her all West Flanders for her dowry, that is, all that tract of ground, which lyeth from the new Ditch even to Picardie. Afterward Philip in the yeare 1195 made it a County, and gave it to his sonne Ludovicke, who was first Earle of Artesia, afterward King of France, and the father of Ludovicke the holy. But in the yeare 1382 Ludovicke Malanus, Earle of Flanders, after the decease of his Mother, was made Earle of Artesia, and so both the Counties were united againe. But after the decease of Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundie, Ludovick the eleventh King of France, did regaine Artesia, which afterward by an agreement and covenant made betweene Charles the eighth King, and Maximilian the Emperour, was passed over Anno 1492, to Philip of Austria the son of Maximilian the father of Charles the fifth. The chiefe Citties are Atrebatum, the Church of S. Audomare, Bethunia, Aria, and Bapalma, the others are lesse. Atrebatum commonly called Arras, or Atrecht, is situated neere the River Scarpa: it is a great Towne well fortified with ditches, and Bulwarkes; it doth resemble two Citties, one of which they call la Cite, which belongeth to the Bishop, and the other la Ville which belongeth to the Prince. The former part is lesser, but very pleasant, and hath a Cathedrall Church dedicated to the Virgin Mary. Heere a certaine kinde of

Manna was religiously kept as a relique which Saint Hierome i^ his Epistles doth report, did raine downe in his time in th^ Country. This part is larger and hath faire houses and streetes, an^ a great Market place: besides, it hath a Library in which are all kin^ of written manuscripts, especially of Divine. Heere Francis Baldvin a famous Lawyer was borne, upon whose Monument at Paris there is this inscription: Cujaci, Balduinus hic jacet. Hoc tecum reputa and vale. Mortuis nobis juris prudentiam gravis corripi and sopor. Franc. Bald, Iurise. ob. anno aet. 54. November 11. a partu Virgiuis 1563. Papirius Massonus Balduini auditor P; that is, Whose monument is this? Baulduine lyeth here. Thinke on that and so farewell: Franc. Bald. a Lawyer, dyed in the yeare of his age 54. on the 11. of November, and after the birth of Christ 1563. Papirius Massonus an hearer o^ Baldvini did place this monument. In this Cittie the most learne^ and eloquent Charles Clusius was borne, who after he had travelled through many Countries, he spent his old yeares in this Athens and Batavia, and there he finished those his famous workes, which deserve immortall fame. The Citty is populous enough, because there are some merchants, and some trades men. The Church of S. Audomare was heretofore called Sithin, as Meyerus witnesseth, afterward it was called S. Omer, from S. Audomar. This Audomar, was bishop of the Morineans about the yeare 1570, and built a Monasterie there neere the River Aa. This Cittie excelleth both for beautie, and populousnesse of the Cittizens. Some thinke it to be Itius Portus, as wee have sayd in the description of Bononia. Three miles hence neere the River Lisa there was also the auncient Metropolis of the Morineans called Teroana, concerning which I have spoken in the same description. Bethunia also is a faire Towne in Atri^^tum, being a Granarie for wheate. It flourisheth with all kinde of commodities, as corne and other things which are necessary to sustaine mans life, and fit to be transported. Aria is seated by the River Lisa, which runneth through the middle of it, it is two miles distant from Teroana, being a faire Towne and well fortified. It hath an auncient Castell, and neate buldings. There is also Hesdinum, which is a strong fortresse against France, which Caesar after he had raced the Towne which was of the same name, builded by occasion of the warre that was betweene the most powerfull Princes o^ Europe. It is conveniently seated on the banke of the River Canch^^ one mile neerer towards France, being foure miles distant fro^ Monstrolium, and 5 from S. Paul. It is watered also with another R^ver, commonly called Blangis, from the place where it springeth So that in regard of the convenient situation thereof, it is accounte^ a strong Fortresse, and in regard of the lawes and Priviledges which auncient Hesdinum did enjoy, it was soone replenished with inhab^tants. Neere to S. Omers there is a Lake, full of fish, in which ther^ are floating Islands, which with a rope tyde to the trees growin^ thereon, or with long poles may be shou'd and drawne up and down like those which Plinie mentioneth to be in Lycia, called the Cal^minae. Neither are there small pieces of Land; for Oxen and other Ca^te^

map of ArtesiaTHE COVNTIE OF ARTESIA.

may feede and graze upon them. Vnder these Islands in the Winter and Summer time great store of fish doe hide themselves, to avoyde both the cold and heate. The chiefe Rivers are Lisa, Scarpa, Aa, Canchia, and Authia, besides other navigable Rivers. There is also not farre from Teroana a great Channell, which they call the new ditch: some thinke it was digd in the time of the Earle Baldwin, either to hinder the enemies excursions, or to distinguish, and set limits betweene the confines of Flanders and Artesia: others thinke it to be a bay of the Sea. Virgill truely doth acknowledge that the Morians were neere unto the Sea, when he calleth them the farthest inhabitants. But now Teroana is eight miles from the Sea. Besides, out of the bottome of the new ditch, there are oftentimes peeces of Anchors drawne up, which is a certaine argument that the Sea was neere unto it. It hath also some woods, especially Westward and Southward. The Politicke state of Artesia doth consist of three orders: the Clergie, the Nobles, and the speciall Citties: the first member is the clergie, in which there are 2 Bishops, the Bishop of Atrebatum and S. Omers; 2 Provosts, Bethunienj^s and Ariensis. 20 Abbots to whom belong these Monasteries: of the order of S. Benedict, 8, namely, Atrebatense, Aquicinctense A^se^n, S. Omers, Blangtacense, Montense, Hamense or Hames, and Ass^acense^ Of the order of S. Augustine 7, as Auriacense, S. Eloy, of Ch^pnes, of Hennin, of Lietard, of Raselli villa, of Mareul, Aque^^tense in Eaucourt. Of the Cistertian order there are the Abbots of the Monasteries of Cherchamp, and Clommeres. Of the Pra^^^^^ densian order, Damartin, Santandreanum, Auguatianum. There are 10 Colledges of Cannons: Atrebatense, Audomarense, Bethumense, Arience, Hesdinense, Lensiense, Sanpaulitanum, Lilleriense, Fal^e ^rgense, Douriense. The second member is the Nobles, among whom there is one Prince of Espinoy: one Marquesse of Rentinium, 7 Earles, S. Pol, Falquenberch, Harliensis, Busq^^etensis, Henniensis, Arquensis, and lastly Blangiacensis. But these two last Earledomes did fall of late to the Abbey of Saint Bertin; and foure chiefe Earles are not called or summoned to this meeting, as Atrebaten^is, Audomarensis, Bapalmensis, and Lensiensis. The families of the Gentrie counting them by an Alphabeticall order are these: Aussi, Averdam, Aubigni, Aix, Annequin, Anvezin, Aneroult, Avion, Allenes, Anvin, Bailleul, Beaufort, Beaumez, Beauraines, Beausart, Bellone, Berles, Billy, Bofles, Boisleux, Bonnieres, Boncourt, Boubert, Bours, Brias, Buissi, Caumont, Conroy, Contes, Coupiguy, Croisilles, Cunchy, Divion, Douvrin, Enne, Erin, Esquerdes, Estree, Fosseux. Frevin, Fleshin, Gomiecount, Gouy, Greboval, Geulesin, Habar^que, Hachicourt, Hamelaincourt, Helfault, Houchin, Houdin, la Viesville, la Plancque, Liguereul, Licques, Longastre, Malanoy, Maisuit, Mammez, Marles, Mes en Contire, Mingoual; Moiry, Nedoncelles, Neufville, Nojelle, Noircarmes, Ococh, Olham, Oignies, Ores^naux, Plancques, Plovicke, Pronville, Querecques, Ranchicourt, Ransart, Recouet, Rebecque, Regnauville, Rely, Rolancourt, Rumenghien, Sains, S. Aldegonde, S. Venant, Sombrein, Sovastre, Tieuloie, Tramerie, Vaulx, Villers, Vrolant,

Wancourt, Warluzelle, Waurans, Willerval. The third member is the especiall Citties: 7 Royall Citties, as Atrebatum, Saint Omers, Bethunia, Aria, Hesdinum, Lens, and Bapalina: private Lordships as S. Pol, Perne, Lillers: and also these Townes which have the praerogative of Citties, and called to the assembly of the States, and there be 28 of them, Arques, Aubigny, Avesnes, Aussi, Benurains, Blangij, en Ternois, Busquoy, Carwin, Caumont, Choques, Dourier, Franquenberghe, Fressin, Fleurbay, Frevene, Frages, Gorgue, Hennin, Lietard, Huchin, Hosdaine, Labroy, Libourg, Oisy, Pas, Richebourg, Tornehem, Ventie, Vitry. The Provinciall Counsell is held at Atrebatum, from whence all appeales are brought to the Parlament at Mechlin. But the Bishop of Atrebatum hath all power in spirituall matters, and is subject to the Bishop of Rhemes.
This Table also containes true Picardie, and the Dukedome of Cambresi, which is a Principallitie of the Empire, and is governed both in temporall and spirituall matters by the Bishop of Cambresi. But yet sometimes in spirituall matters it is subject to the Bishop of Rhemes, and in temporall matters it is under the protection of the King of Spaine. And so much may suffice concerning Artesia: Let us proceede to Hannonia.



THE COVNTIE OF HANNONIA, unto which is joyned the Countie of NAMVRCIVM.
The Country whence so called.HAnnonia was heretofore the seate of the Nervians, th^ chiefe Cittie whereof is now called Tornacum, which Ptolemie, calleth Baganon. This Countrie hath o^^^ changed her name: for at first it was called Pannonia, (...) Lessabaeus witnesseth, from the worship of Pan: afterward Soc^^^ Carbonarius, and afterward Lower Piccardie: and last of all Hann^^^ from the River Hania, which runneth through the middle of the Country, which they call in their owne language Hanauls or He^^gow, from the same River which the Frenchmed call Hanie or Hea^ and the auncient Germaine word Gouw, which signifies a Countrie o^ Village.The Situation. It hath on the North Brabant and Flanders, on the South Campania and Piccardie, on the East Namurcium, and Leodium, with the aforesayd Brabant, on the West Flanders and Artesia. The whole Country is 20 miles long,The temper of the ayre. and 16 broade. The ayre is temperate sweete, and cleere: the soyle is fertile, abounding with all kind of fruites, but especially hath great store of excellent good Corne. It hath many faire meddowes,The fruitfulnesse of the soyle. pastures, and Orchards in it. It hath the best Iron and Lead: besides, Mines of divers kindes of Marble, an^ also of hard flints, which Ovid calls Touch-stone, and Lithanthracon, the Leodians, call it in their speech Houlles. They take fire, and will burne like coales, and they are used to make fires of them with some little wood amongst them. Here also those cleeres sheetes of glass^^ are made, with which they glaze their Churches and houses to keepe out the weather, and these are better than those which are made in other places. Also all kinde of Glasse-ware is made here. This Province hath had many Lords,The auncient Government. and at length it came from the family of the Montensians to the Earles of Flanders, and at last it ca^^ to the Batavian family, afterward to the Bavarian, and from thence to the Burgundian, and last of all to the Austrian familie. The^ are foure and twenty Citties in Hannonia fortified with rampiers a^^ ditches. The chiefe whereof are Montes, and Valencenae Monte^ commonly called Mons, is a Cittie by the little River Tralla, which is yet capable of great ships, being a faire Cittie, well seated and fortified with walls, and Rampiers. There are many fountaines in it and it is wealthy by merchandise, Manufactures, and husbandry. Valencenae, or Valencena, or as some would have it, Valentiniani or Valencienne, from an Emperour of that name, is situate by the River Sca^dis;

map of Hannonia^HE COVNTIE OF HANNONIA.

in a pleasant plaine, and safe from the enemie. There is in (...) Armory well furnished for warre. Two Churches, one consecra^ to the blessed Virgin, of auncient building, the Pillars whereof of marble and Porphyrie: the other consecrated to Saint Iohn, ^^latelier by Pepin, the father of Charles the Great. There are m^^ monasteries, especially the Monasterie of Franciscans, which is in famous than the rest, in which the Earles of Hannonia and Lords Valencena are buried. The Court thereof is large, having a fam^^^ Diall, which was set up by William Bonus, Earle of Hannonia, H^land and Zeland. There are also Condatum or Conde on the rig^^^ hand bancke of Scaldis, being two miles distant from Valencena; (...) a faire Towne: also Landresium or Landresi, by the River Scamb^^ being famous for the seige which Charles the fifth layd against it the yeare 1543, which yet he could not take by force. Also Ave^^ which is a Cittie and Bulwarke on the frontiers of France, by t^^ River Hepra: Chimacum or Chimay is a Cittie by the River blan^^ in the middle of a wood; in the late warres it was often set on fire a^^ rac'd, yet at length it was reedified againe, so that it is now me^ beautifull than before. It hath a Pallace with a garden, and an arti^^ciall and curious Labyrinth therein. Halla is neere unto the c^^fines of Brabant: Bouchaine is a free towne, situate on the bancke the River Scaldis, betweene Cameracum and Valencena, it is fame for traffique and merchandising. Bellus Mons, or Beaumont, is a ^^^tle neate Towne. Philippolis, or Philippe ville, was so named fro^ King Philip, and Mariae-Burg from Mary Queene of Hungarie; th^ are strong places built to suppresse the inroads of the French. Ba^cum in French Bavis, which some suppose to be that which Ptole^^ calls Baganum or Bagacum; some say that Caesar calleth it Belgium his Commentaries, but they are refuted by those, who bring mo^^ stronger arguments, to proove that it was placed in Bellevacum, some part of Picardie. There are also Maubeuge, Bins, R^ux, Se^ga^^ Brain le Conte, Engien, Lessine, Chevre, At, S. Cutllein, and Leu^^ Moreover there are 250 Villages, the most of which are faire, ple^sant and rich. The Countrey is watered every where with Lak^ standing Pooles, Fountaines, and Rivers, with Rivers; as Scal^ Sambra, Tenera, Hania, and others. It hath pleasant woods and F^rests; the chiefe whereof are Morman, and S. Amandi. Moreover t^ Commonwealth of Valence is governed by such wise and go^^ lawes, that the Norimbergians would institute and frame their Comon-wealth according thereunto, and sent some wise and prudent (...) thither for this purpose, which the Romaines also did in framing th^ Common-wealth after Athens. And therefore it is no marvell if in excellent a politicke government, there have beene Cittizens (...) have beene famous through the whole world for vertue; the chi^ whereof were the Emperour Henry the 7. the Duke of Lutzen^^^ Mary the onely Daughter and heyre of Charles the Bold, the Gra^^mother of Charles the fifth; also Iohn Froissard, a famous Histori^ who declareth as much in the beginning of his worke.
The Politicke state of Hannonia doth consist of five member

which are, first the 12 Peeres, namely Longueville, Lens, Filly, Chievre, Auesne, Chimay, Levreux, Barbanson, Baudour, Rebaux, Walecourt. 2. Ecclesiasticall Praelates, namely the Abbot and Earle of S. Waldrut. 26 Abbots, S. Guislaine, Marchennes, Cambron, Hasnon, Marville, Ancin, Haultmot, Liessy, S. Denys, Vicogne, Feullien, Crespin, Bonne Esperance, S. Iean, S. Aldegonde, Geilenghien, Spinleu, Ath, Fontenelle, Beaumont, Denain, Quesnoy, Watiebraine, Lolive, Billiay, Leture; besides the Colledges of Cannons. Thirdly Noble men, and one principality of Chimay; 10 Counties, as Lalain, Beaunant, Ostervant, the chiefe Cittie whereof is Bouchin, also Barbansin, Auesne, Barlaymont, Bossu, Montigni, Reux, Terrache. 22 Baronies, as Enghien, Leuze, Havre, Ligne, Anjoing, Vuerchin, Fontaine, Havaide, Kinrain, Barlaymont, Ville, Gomegnie, S. Aldegonde, Senzelle, Condet, Haurdain, Belleule, Fagneille, Bousie, Roesin, Frusne, Harchies. One Marshall, one Steward, one great Ranger, one Chamberlaine. And foure ordinary Officers.
The Countie of Namurcum remaineth. It is seated betweene Brabant, Hannonia, and the Dioecesse of Leodium: it is a small mountainous Territorie, but pleasant, having a sweete and temperate ayre. The soyle is fruitfull yeelding all things, which are necessary for the sustentation of mans life. It hath also Mines of Iron and Lead,The fruitfulnesse of the soyle. and stone Quarries, out of which divers kinds of stones are cut, and especially blacke Marble, and stones like Iasper. And not long since those stones were digged forth which were good to burne, we may call them Lithantracas, of which we spoke in the aforesayd description. Moreover this Countrie at first was governed by a Marquesse:The auncient Government. and afterward it changed often her Lord. Philip the brother of Balduin, Earle of Flanders, was Marquesse hereof in the yeare 1200. And Theodorus was Earle of it: after whose decease, the whole Country came to Philip Bonus Duke of Burgundie, as we have declared in the description of the Low Countries. There are foure walled Citties in this County, Namurcum, Bovina, Carlomontium, and Valencourcium. And 182 Villages. Namurcum or Namur is the chiefe Cittie; whence the name thereof is derived, is uncertaine: some suppose from Nanus a God of the Heathens, who being used formerly to deliver Oracles, yet at Christs comming grew dombe, and spake no more. And therefore from this dumbe and mute god Nanus, it was called Namurcium: some think it was so called from a new wall which was built there by the Romanes. The Cittie is situate betweene two Mountaines, on the left hand bancke of the River Mosa, where it receiveth Sambra. It is eight miles distant from Lovanium, ^^ from Leodium, and as many from Bruxells. It is rich and hath many faire publicke and private buildings, and it is fortified with a strong Castell. Foure miles from Namurcium is Bouvinae, a small towne, which was often wasted by the warres, and last of all it was for the most part ruinated by Henry the second, King of France, in the yeare 1555. Afterward the Cittizens did reedifie it. Charlemont was built by Charles the fifth in the yeare 1555, against the Frenchmen who then possessed Marienburg. Valencourtium is a town of good

noate, being distant from Namurcium 7 miles. This Country hath many Rivers which are full of fish:The Rivers. the chiefe whereof are Mosa and Sambra:The Woods. it hath also faire fresh springs. It hath also woods for pleasure and hunting, which are full of wilde beasts. There are many Churches in this Country,The publicke workes. and famous Monasteries, which were built heretofore at the costs and charges of the Earles of Namurcium, and endowed with great revennewes. Three miles from Namurcium there is the rich Towne Audennas, in which there is an auncient Nunnerie for noble women, built by Begga daughter of Pepin, from whom they were first called Baggine Vestalls. The politicke state of the County of Namurcium, doth consist of three members, which are the Clergie, the Nobility, and the chiefe Citties. The Clergie are the Abbots of Floref, Granpre, Anden, Bonef, Wassore, Hastitis. The Nobility are the Vicount Done, etc. The chiefe Citties are Nemur, Bovinae, Charlemont, Valencourt, or Walencourt. In the Cittie of Namurcum there is a Royall Counsell, from whence appeales are brought to the Court of Mechlin. There is also a Bishops seate, whose Cathedrall Church is consecrate to S. Albine. The Cittizens are used to armes and martiall discipline, they speake French, but corruptly. There are few merchants and Tradesmen: but a great company of Nobles, but such as be either the Princes Bastards, or comming of a base stocke.



THE COVNTIE OF NAMVRCIVM.
POntus Huterus Lib. 2. cap. 3. concerning Belgia, writeth that the Countie of Namurcium was heretofore inhabited partly by the Advaticans, and partly by the Eburonians. It is situate betweene Brabant, Hannonia, and the Dioecesse of Leodium: being a small mountainous Territory, but very pleasant. It is populous in inhabitants who are very much addicted to warfare: it hath a sweete and temperate ayre, and rivers full of fish, the chiefe whereof are Mosa and Sambra: it hath also cleare Springs, and woods for delight of hunting, which are full of wilde beasts. It hath also Mines of Iron and Lead, and stone Quarries, in which divers kinds of Stones are cut forth, and especially blacke marble, and stones like Iasper: and of late they digged forth those stones which are good to burne, which assoone as they have taken fire doe kindle by degrees, and are quenched with oyle, but water makes them burne more hotter; they are commonly called Leodian coales, the learned doe call them Lithanthracus. It is not manifest, when this Country was made a Countie. We reade of Marquesses and Earles, of Namurcium, from the yeare of Christ 277, but in broken and interrupted succession; but concerning the Princes of this Country, Gramiatus, well best informe us in his history of Namurcium. Namurcium is 10 miles broad, and 12 miles long. There are foure walled Citties in this Countie, and 182 Villages. And many Noblemens Castells. Also many Abbeys. The government of the Common-wealth belongeth to three orders, namely the Clergie, the Nobility; and the Burgesses of Citties. Namurcum, or Namucum, is the chiefe Cittie, but it is not knowne from whence the name thereof is derived; some derive Namurcum from Nanus a Heathen god, famous for delivering of Oracles; others from a new wall which the Nermanes built. Huterus supposeth it to be that which Caesar calleth Nemetoenna. This Citty is situated betweene two Mountaines, on the left hand banke of Mosa, where it receiveth the River Sambra; being fortified both by Art and Nature. It is rich, and hath many faire, publicke, and private aedifices and buildings. In this Citty there is a royall Counsell, from whence appeales are brought to the high Court at Mechlin. It is also a Bishops seate, whose Cathedrall Church is consecrated to S. Albine. The Cittizens speake French, but corruptly: there are a few Merchants and Tradesmen in this Citty, but a great company of Nobles. Three miles from Namurcum

there is the rich towne Audennas, in which there is an auncient N^^nery of Noble women, built by Begga the daughter of Pipin, from whom they were first called Baggine Vestalls. Also between N^murcum and Dinantum on the mountaine Palvagius, there are so^^ ruines of the auncient Cittie Caprimont, which was wasted in (...) Leodiensian warres. Foure miles from Namurcum is Bovina, a lit^^ Towne by the River Mosella, which the Earle Henry walled an^ 1176. In the yeare 1554, in the time of the French warre it was raze^ downe to ground. But afterward the Cittizens did reedifie it. Walcuria, which the Dutchmen call Waelhovan is situated 7 miles from Namurcum, on the banck of the river Aurca, it was first a Castell, and afterward about the yeare 910 it was walled about. Carlomon (...) built by Charles the fifth; Anno 1555 against the Frenchmen, (...) then possessed Marieburg, it hath an impregnable Castell, it is s^^ted on the left hand bancke of the River Mosa, three miles fr^^ Marieburg.



map of Mamurcium
^HE COVNTIE OF MAMVRCIVM.





THE DVKEDOME OF LVTZENBVRG.
The Country whence so called.THe Dukedome of Lutzenburg is so named from the chiefe Cittie, which (as some suppose) was so called from th^ River Elza, which Antoninus calleth Alesontia. From Elza came Elzenburch, and from thence Lutzenburg Peter Dinaeus doth give another opinion concerning Lutzenburg in these words: It is not to be doubted (saith he) b^ that the Leutians did dwell next to the Treverians, Mediomatricians, and Lingonians: their Townes Tullus and Nasium celebrated by Ptolemie, doe keepe the names of Toul and Nancy; in their owne language I beleeve they were called, de Lutzen, and had a large command, so that the name of the famous Towne of Lutzenburg was derived from them,The Situation: as if you should say der Lutzenburg. The Leodian and Namurcians doe bounder this Dutchie on the North, on the East Mosella with the Bishopricke of Trevers; on the West Mosa with the wood Arden. The compasse or circuite of the whole Country is 70 miles. Although this Countrie be mountainous and wooddy, yet it hath a plenteous, and fruitfull soyle. It is divided into two parts, the one wherof is called Famenna, and the other Arduenna, Fa^menna is more fruitfull, and hath greater store of corne and coyne. Arduenna is more rugged,The fruitfulnesse of the soyle. but affordeth good hunting, and is full of diver excellent kindes of wilde beasts. There is Iron Oare not farre from Manderscheid, in the Lordships of Keyla, Cronenberch, and Sled^ neere to a vale called Hellenthal. In this place there are made Anvills, Fornaces and Vices, which are sold through all parts of Germany.The auncient Government. It was but a Countie at the first, and so the Emperour Henry the seaventh was Earle of Lutzenburg, but not Duke. Afterward ^^ was made a Dukedome, at it continueth at this day; which some do^ attribute to Wenceslaus, a King of the Romanes, and others to Charle^ the fourth. Conradus Vercetius doth ascribe it to Henry the seaventh, who was the first Romaine Emperour of that house* Ortelius writeth that he found in auncient Manuscript, that Sigifrid^ was the first Earle of this County: and that he was the sonne of Pacuinus Duke of Mosella. For heretofore Lutzenburg did belong to the Treverians. It hath 20 Citties fortified with walls and Rampiers the names whereof are; Lutzenburg, Arlunum, Rodemachera, Theonis villa,The names of the Citties. Gravemacherum, Vianda, Bastonacum, Mommedium, Novum Castrum, Danvillerium, Marvilla, Roccha, Durbis, S. Vit^urbs, Marza and Sala. There are also some Citties whose Wall^

map of Lutzenburg^HE DVKEDOME OF LVTZENBVRG.

are levelled with the ground: There are also the Castells o^ S. Iohn and Manderscheid, which are as bigge as small Citties, and have Counties belonging to them. The chiefe Cittie is Lutzenburg, some call it Lucemburg, and Luceburg; Ptolomie calls it Augusta Romandiorum. Guicciardine would have it called Lutzenburg as it were Lucisburg, that is, the Castell of the Sunne: as also many other places in this tract may seeme to have beene named from the gods of the Gentiles: as Arlun from the Altar of the Moone, Iuois from Iupiter, Marche from Mars; but whether the name be rightly derived from hence, let another judge. The Cittie is situate most pleasantly, part of it on the side of a Mountaine, and part of it on plaine ground: The River Elza doth water, and divideth the higher and lower mountainous part of the Cittie, from the lower part. There are many faire aedifices and houses in it, which yet the warres have somewhat defac'd: and also a Church consecrate to S. Nicolas: and a Monastery to S. Francis, in which Iohn of Lutzenburg, King of Bohemia, the sonne of the Emperour Henry the seaventh, and father of Charles the fourth, was buryed. This Citty hath beene often defaced by the fury of Mars, who hath no agreement with the Muses, who love peace and tranquility; yet it hath bred many famous learned men. And among many others, Nicolas Navis a man so learned and skilfull in the civill law, that he was Praesident of the Court at Lutzenburg untill he dyed: but he left a sonne of his owne name, who being equall to his father in vertue, was in such favour with the Emperour Charles the fifth, that he made him Vicechancellour of the whole Empire, in which office he continued untill his death. Arlunum which is called in their language, is situate on the top of a hill, being a very neate town, where the Moone was worshipped after the manner of the heathens, and from thence it is supposed to have beene so named. Heere many Monuments of antiquitie are found, which the Earle Peter Ernest caused to be brought home to his owne house, which is in the suburbs of the Cittie of Lutzenburg. Bartholmew Latomus a very learned man, was borne in this country: Which is watered with many rivers,The Rivers. the chiefest of which is Mosella, of which I have spoke in Lotaringia: the others are Chier, Mosa, Be moy, Houl, Lech, Alsatus, Atardus, Sourus, Prumeus, Mineus, Ghomeus, Ort^, Albis, and besides many little Rivuletts. The Country is raised on every side with Mountaines,Mountaines. and interlaced with thicke woods. But all of them are but boughes in respect of the Forrest of Arden in France. The politicke state as inthe other Countries,Woods. doth consist of three members;The Government. first, the Clergie; secondly, the Nobles, in which are the Counts of Vianden, of la Roch en Ardenne, Salme, Durby, Marche, S. Vit. S. Iansberg. There are also many Baronies and Lordships. The third member is the principall Citties, as Lutzenburg, Arlunum, Theonis villa, otherwise called Dietenhove, and Rodemachera: The Court for the whole Province is kept in the Cittie of Lutzenburg, and the pleadings are in French or Dutch, according as the Plantiffes are of severall Countries. For Lutzenburg, Arlunum, Theenis Villa, and Rodemachera, doe speake Dutch, but Ivoys, Mammedy,

Marville, and Danvilliers doe speake French, in regard whereof it is necessary that the Iudges and Advocates and the officers of the Court, should understand both languages. From this Court appeales may be brought to Mechlin, where those things which are written in Dutch are faithfully translated into French.
This Dukedome hath two Marquiships under it, seaven Counties, many Baronies, and Lordships, and great store of Noble men, so that to Province doth produce so many. All of them doe live magnificently, and are curteous, vertuous, constant, and faithfull to their Prince. Their exercise is Armes and hunting. They live civilly and courteously together, visiting one another in mutuall kindnesses. They contract marriages with their neighbours, and in their matches they doe more respect honour and dignity than portion. If any one doe commit an enormity, he loseth his credit, and is not admittted to converse with the Nobles, and is thought to be unworthy of any publicke office, and his oath is not esteemed in publicke trialls. If any controversie doe arise amongst them, they referre it to certaine Arbitrators, who are to compound and end the matter, so that they have no great use of Lawyers and Proctors: yet they are too much given to wine. And the Country people doe complaine very much of their hard usage and servitude, so that if a Country-man intend to put forth his children, he cannot doe it without his Lords leave, which is farre different from the libertie of the Low Countries. Arlunum, which we mentioned before, is situate on the top of a Mountaine, and is foure miles distant from Lutzenburg, and sixe from Mommedy. It was sometime a faire Towne, but somewhat defaced by the violence of warres. Rodemachera is three miles distant from Lutzenburg, which though it be no great towne, yet is very beautifull, and fortified with a strong Castell. Theodonis-villa, which in Dutch is called Dietenh^n^, is very conveniently situated on the left hand bancke of the River Mosella: it is foure miles from Lutzenburg, having a faire bridge; it is a pleasant strong Towne and well fortified against the invasions of enemies. Regino affirmeth that Charles the Great was used to hunt very much neere unto this Cittie. Gravemakerum and Koninck^akerum are small little Townes neere Mosella, being a mile distant one from another, and 5 miles from Lutzenburg. Dieterichum is seated neere the little River Sure, and is five miles distant from Lutzenburg. Viretonum and Echternatum are little small townes, and are both five miles distant from Lutzenburg. Vianda standeth by the side of a little Riuulet, seaven miles from Lutzenburg; it hath a Countie belonging to it, and is subject to the Prince of Orange. Bas^nacum is neere unto the Forrest of Arden, being three miles from the new Castell, and 17 from Lutzenburg. It is a little Towne, but so famous heretofore that it was called Paris en Ardenne, in regard of the markets for Cattell and Corne, which were usually kept there, whither the Countrie round about did bring all sorts of commodities to the great enriching of the Towne. Betweene this Cittie and Arlunum, and S. Huberts Church, there are some Villages in the middle of the wood, in which the women after the Spanish fashion,

when their husbands are carryed forth to be buried and interred, doe runne crying and weeping through the streetes, tearing their hayre and scratching their faces; with their nayles, in a mad and furious manner, which custome doth rather savour of Heatheanisme than Christianity. Mommedium is conveniently situated on a high mountaine, at the foote whereof the River Chirsus glideth along; it is nine miles distant from Lutzenburg, and foure from Danvillieres, being a faire fortified towne. New-Castell is in Ardenne; it is 5 Miles distant from Ivosium, and nine from Lutzenburg; it is now a small Towne, and much decayed. Danvillieres is twelve miles distant from Lutzenburg; and foure from Verdunum, being in Lothariagia. Marville is divided into two parts, the one whereof is subject to the Duke of Lutzenburg, and the other to the Duke of Lotharingia; and therefore it is called the common Towne; it standeth by the River Chirsus, and is 12 miles distant from Lutzenburg. Roch^en Ardenne, or the Rocke in Ardenne, and Durbium are twelve miles distant from Lutzenburg, being both pleasantly seated. S. Vitt. is a very pleasant small towne, and is 12 miles distant from the Metropolis, and belongeth to the Prince of Orange, Salma is a rich and populous Cittie, having a Countie appendant unto it. Marcha is a very auncient Towne, and is 14 miles from Lutzenburg. We will not mention for brevitie sake the Castells and famous Villages, in this Province, but will onely name three unwalled Citties. First Ivosium which is 12 miles from Lutzenburg, and foure from Mommedy, being heretofore a good strong Town, but at last Henry the second, King of France, begirt it round with an Armie in the yeare 1552. and tooke it; but afterward a peace being made, it was restored backe againe to Philip the second, King of Spaine, but the walls were ruinated as at Teroana, and a law was made that it should not be walled in againe. Chinium is 12. miles from Lutzenburg, which is unwalled, but by degrees it is reedified. It hath a County belonging to it, although it be subject to the Archdukes, and hath a large jurisdiction over some townes and Villages, neither is it subject to the Dukedome of Lutzenburg, but is joyned unto it. Twelve miles from Lutzenburg, standeth the Towne la Ferte neere the River Chirsus, being heretofore a pleasant Cittie, and now also it flourisheth although it be unwalled, and a great part of the Castell be fallen downe, but so much concerning these things. Let us passe to Limburg.



THE DVKEDOME OF LIMBVRG, with the Appendances thereunto.
THe Dukedome of Limburg which this Table doth exhibit and present,The Country whence so called. being so called from Limburg the Metropolis thereof, is bounded on the West, with Leodium and Trajectum,The Situation which are two famous Citties by the River Mosa; on the North with the Dukedome of Iuliacum: on the East with the Emperiall Cittie Aquisgranum, and the Monastery of S. Cornelius: on the South with the Countries of Francimont and Aqua Spadana.The temper of the ayre. All this tract as it is pleasant in Summer, so in winter it is unpleasant, in regard it is covered all that time with snow, which is so deepe that it lyeth in many places, a great part of Summer. The soyle is fruitfull, and hath abundant stoare,The fruitfulnesse of the soyle. of all things, except wine. For it beareth excellent Barly and wheate, of which they make very white bread. There are good pastures for feeding of Cattell, and for making of Cheese. And it yeeldeth many wholesome Harbes both for Sallets, and Physicke. There is also great stoare of Sulphure, through the hollow crannyes whereof it is likely that the hot fountaines at Aqua Spadana (so famous for many ages) doe runne. As of late there is found in those parts a Mine of Lead and Tinne; and it is probable that a Veine of gold and silver may be found hereafter in those places. Moreover betweene Walhormus and Montzius, there is a Mine found of that ash colour stone, of which brasse is made, which is also medicinall, which Plinye calls Cadmia, and the brasen stone, being not much unlike the stone Pyritos. The words of Pliny, Lib. 34. cap. 1. are these. Fit and (...) e Lapide aeroso, quem vocant Cadmiam. That is, And there is brasse made of a brasen stone, which they call Cadmia. The Germaines call it Covaltum: and the Shops call it Climia and Cathimia. It seemeth that the like stone was found in the Ile of Cyprus: but on this side the Alpes there is none found but this in Limburg.The auncient Government. The Countrie of Limburg was heretofore a Countie, but it was made a Dukedome in the yere 1172, by the Emperour Frederick surnamed Barbarossa: and the Princes of this Countrie were heretofore also Duks of Lotaringia. At length Henry the last Duke of Limburg dying without issue, Iohn the first of that name Duke of Brabant, did succeede him in the yeare 1293. He albeit he had lawfully before bought this Dukedome, yet he got and purchased it by the sword, and overthrew Raymund Earle of Gelderland who then possessed it: in which battell the Earle of Gelderland, and the Bishop of Gelderland were taken: There were slaine Henry Prince of Luxenburg, and his three brothers who did joyne themselves with the Earle of Gelderland. Duke Iohn having

gotten this Victory, did race and demolish the Castell commonly called Worone, and leveld it with the ground: and so from that tim^ the Dukedome of Limburg came to be governed by the Dukes o^ Brabant. Out of this Dukedome and from the Prince thereof whic^ came of the Lotharingian family, the first King of Portugall was descended, namely Henry Duke of Lotharingia, and Earle of Iamburg a man of a great courage, and ready in matter of armes, as the A^^nall of Spaine, doe more fully and plainely deliver, and we our selves have mentioned it before in the description of Portugall. The Mess^^^^ or mother Cittie of the whole Dukedome is Limburg, being (...) on a high rocke, and fortified with a rugged deepe valley: it is ^^cessible rather by the naturall situation of the place than by hu^^^ industrie: unlesse it be on the South, where the ground rising for what higher, descendeth by degrees from the Cittie, untill it opened into a faire plaine. In the lower part of this Cittie on the North^^^ there is a Castell built of pure Marble being a kind of Common ^^^per, of which this Country yeeldeth great store; both neere th^ Towne of Hevermont and also in other places. It is no wonder (...) the Cittie was seated on so high a rocke, especially if you behold th^ suburbs thereof, which were heretofore twice as bigge as the C^^^ Whereby it came to passe that the Castell was built in the mi^^^ that so it might command the Cittie and the suburbs, But Gasto^^ Spinola, Earle of Bruacum, is now governour of this Dukedome (...) of all the Country beyond Mosa; and to prevent all violent attempt hath made two new Gates in this Citty to represse the violent (...) treacherie of enemies. The Cittie is watered with the (...) which is full of excellent Trouts, that are as bigge as any (...) and great store of Crab-fishes, which the aforesayd River or (...) (for sometimes the Channell is very small) doth feede fat, while (...) live betweene stones and clefts of rockes. Iohn Fleming a Chri^^ (...) Antwerpe, a learned man and a famous Poet, was borne in this (...) and Remaclius Fuschius a great Scholler, who published many both (...) and divers workes, was borne here also. The Townsemen for the (...) part doe follow cloathing, and doe make every yeare great store (...) cloath, and doe transport it into divers parts of the Low C^^^^^ Neere the Cittie there is much Iron made, in a fornace and (...) house ordained for the same purpose, so that 6000 Caroli doe ^^ defray the yearely charge thereof. But the Cittie hath no be (...) buildings in it. For it is but small, and hath onely two Gates, and ascent unto it is very steepe. It hath one Church consecrated to George, which hath a provost. This Cittie was yeelded to Iohn Austria, when he brought his armie thither, a certaine Capt^^ having betrayed the Castell of Hende unto him before. He that governour of the place, desired the States to furnish him with pre^^^sion and munition, assoone as he heard that Iohn of Austria was co^ming with an armie to beseige the Cittie: and promised the Sta^^ that if he were furnished with the aforesayd munition, he would sily suppresse the enemies violence. All things were sent which desired, but he did not performe that which hee boasted hee wo^^^

map of Limburg^HE DVKEDOME OF LIMBVRG.

doe: for at the enemies first approach he came to a parly, and yeelded it up unto him without any resistance. Not farre from Limburg, yet out of the Territorie thereof, Northward the Spaw Fountaines doe breake forth, which are so famous and well knowne. Moreover betweene Walhormus, and Montzius there are certaine hills commonly called Kelmbergen, in regard of the great store of that mettall and stone above mentioned; which is digged out of them in defence whereof, the aforesayd Earle hath built a Castell. But some few yeares since the Batavians burnt it, through the Souldiers negligence. The great wood commonly called Fangne, lyeth neere unto the Cittie of Limburg, in which there is excellent hunting. And so much concerning the Cittie itselfe, and the Dukedome of Limburg: There are three other Citties which have counties belonging to them, which are reckoned as appendances to the Dukedome of Limburg: which are these, Valkenburg, Dalthemium, and Rolducum, of which we will now speake in order. Valkenburg, in French Fauquemont, is a neate Towne, having iurisdiction over a large Territorie, and some Townes, being three long miles from Aquisgrave, and two little miles from Vltrajectum. It is a fruitfull Country, both for corne, and pasturage: not far from which is the Monastery of S. Ge^^ae being a faire auncient building. Moreover the Countie of Valden. was in the possession of Iohn the third of that name Duke of ^^bant; who tooke it by force of armes from Raynout, Lord of ^^^burg: who being a troublesome man, and having injured the Trajectenses at the River Mosa, was overcome and taken prisoner by the aforesayd Duke. Dalthemium is a little Towne, with a small Castell belonging to it. It is three long miles from Aquisgranum, and two from Leodium. It is honoured with the title of a Countie, and hath some Villages and lands beyond Mosa, which are within the jurisdiction thereof. Henry the second, Duke of Brabant, did possesse it, and did joyne it to his owne Territories. The famous Abby of the Valley of God belongs to Dalthemium, the Abbot whereof is the chiefe man of that Countrie, and besides this, there is the Abby of the holy Crosse. Rolducum is an old Towne with an ancient Castell. It is a mile distant from Valkenburg, and it is the fourth Lordship beyond Mosa, and it hath a Tribunall or Court of Iustice, but the Senate of Brabant have the oversight of it. Here I cannot passe by the village commonly called Carpen, betweene Iuliacum and the Colonie, being two long miles from the Rhene. It is as big as a little Towne, and hath a Collegiate Church as they call it, and hath Faires and Markets, whither all sorts of commodities are brought, and a great confluence of people doe resort unto it: it hath also a Castell well fortified. William Nassavius Prince of Orange, passing over the Rhene tooke it in the yeare 1568, and fortified it with a Garrison. All these parts being gathered together doe make a great Lordship, which was used to be governed by a peculiar Lord, but the Dukes of Limburg have now subjected it to themselves, although it have a Prefect beside, who lyeth there with a strong Garrison. This Countrie hath three other Rivulets besides Mosa, which at length become Rivers; namely Beruinum which watereth Dalthemium, Geuda which runneth

by Valckenburg, and Worma which glideth by Rodulcum. Moreover as well the Dukedome of Limburg, as the other States and Lordships aforesayd, doe consist of three members, namely the Clergie, the Nobles, and the Iudges. The Dukedome of Limburg doth containe five members or divisions, which they call Bancas, Hervium, Spremontium, Balenium, Walhornum, and Montzium: the two former whereof are governed by Majors, and the three latter by magistrates called Drossards. And so much concerning the Dukedome of Limburg, and the appendances thereunto, I passe to the rest.





A PROFITABLE instruction concerning the Tables of GERMANIE.
FOrasmuch as the Romaine Empire is in the power of the Germaines, and very politickely divided into parts, I thinke it a matter worth my labour to set before your eyes the order and disposition of those parts, as they are described in a writing called Matricula Imperij: and afterward to shew you in Tables the severall members of this Empire, that the studious Reader may finde in what Country they are situated. But I have gotten two Coppies of this Matricula, the one written; the other printed at Venice in Italian, being both much corrupted. And I know that the Empire is now divided in another manner. Therefore let no man blame me, or be offended, if he finde some parts that are reckoned as belonging to the Empire, doe not belong thereunto, for it is not my intention to speake expressely of all the severall parts of this Empire, neither was it possible for me to do, out of such corrupt Coppies; especially seeing that I know that a great part of the Empire, came into the hands of private Princes, either by Exchange, or Morgage, or gifts, for their good service in defence of the Empire, or for some other causes. Neither is it my part to prosecute those things which belong to Politicians, and not Geographers, but onely I sought that out of this Coppie of Matricula, I might shew the elegant disposition and division of the Empire of Germany, and might declare how the studdies of Geographie, and Policie doe mutually illustrate one another. This is therefore the order of the Empire.

The Emperour is the head of the Empire.
And he hath three States under him, who meete together to consult and conclude of all the affaires of the Empire, namely the seaven Electors, who were first instituted about the yeare of our Lord 1273 by Pope Gregorie the tenth, and were confirmed by the Emperour Charles the fifth, as Onuphrius sheweth in Comitijs Imperatorijs, and Iohn Aventine Lib. 5. of his history of Bavaria. These have power to elect and chuse the Emperour. The second State is the Ecclesiasticall and saecular Princes. The third is the free Citties.



map of Germany
GERMANIE.





The first member therefore of the Empire is the seaven Electors.

THe Archbishop of Moguntinum, Arch-chancellor of the Romaine Empire through Germanie.
The Archbishop of Trevers, Arch-chancellor of the Romaine Empire through France, and the Kingdome of Arelatum.
The Archbishop of Collen, Archchancellor of the Romaine Empire through Italy.
The King of Bohemia chief^ pantler of the Romaine Empire.
The Count Palatine of Rhene, the chiefe cupbearer of the Romaine Empire.
The Duke of Saxonie, chiefe Marshall of the Romaine Empire.
The Marquesse of Brandenburg, chiefe Chamberlaine of the Romaine Empire.



The second member is the Princes and Nobles.
I will set downe the common names of places as they are in the Tables, and the number of the Circles in which they are afterward mentioned, that so they may be more easily found in the Tables.

The Biships of Magdeburg 9
Saltzburg 2
Besancon 5
Bremon 9
Halberstat in the ninth Circle. Ferden 7
Munster 7
Osenbrug 7
Passaw 2
Frisingen 2

Kempse

Gurck or Goritz 3
Seckaw 3
Havandt 5
Basel 5
Sitten or Wallis 5
Regensburg 2
Maissen 8
Naumburg 8
Minden 7
Lubeck 8.9
Vtricht 7
Camin 8
Swerin 9
Gen^^^ 5
Can^^k 7
Verdun 5
Losan 5
Metz 5
Toul 5
Luyck 5
Trent 7
Brixen 3
Merspurg 3
Labach 8
Vienna 3
Brandenburg 8
Ratzenburg 9
Schleswick 9
Havelburg 8


The secular Princes and Nobles are
The Duke of Bavaria 2
The Arch Duke of Austria 3
The Duke of Saxonie 8
The Duke of Burgundie 10
The Palatine of Bavaria 2
The Duke of Cleveland 7
The Marquesse of Brandenburg 8.1
The Duke of Lunenburg 9
The Duke of Pomeren 9
(...) Duke of Mekelenburg 9
(...) Lawenburg 9
(...) Holsten 9
(...) Lotringen. 5
(...) Landgrave of Hessen 5
(...) Wirtenberg 5
(...) Zweibrug 4
^. Sp^nheym 5
The Marquesse of Baden 4. 5. 7
The Landgrave of Lutchtenburg. 2
The Prince of Anhalt 8
The Earle of Hennenberg 1

The Burgrave of Meissen.



The French Princes are.

Duke Meiss or Massa


D. Savoy


D. Chalon



The Clergie are
The Prior and Abbot of Fuld. 5
It. Ab. Hiersfeldt 5
It. Ab. Kemten 4
Ab. ^eichenaw 4
Pr. Prapos. Wissenburg 5
Pr. Ab. S. Galli 4
Pr. Ab. Salfeldt 8

Pr. Prapos. Elwangen

Teutschordens Maister 3
Iohans ordens Maister 5
Ab. Waingarten 4
Ab. Salmanswercher 4
Ab. Krutzlingen. 4
P. Ab. Murpach. 5
Ab. Walkenriedt 8
Ab. Schuttem. 4
Ab Weissenow or Minderaw. 4
Ab. S. Blasi. 4
Ab. Maulprun. 4
It. Ab. Corbey 7
Ab Schussenriedt 4
Ab. Rittershausen 8
Ab. Stein am Reyn 4
Pr. Ab. Scarfhauson. 4
Ab. Kempeseck 2
Ab. Waldsachsen 2
Ab. Finsidoln 4
Ab, Rokenburg* 4
Ab. Ochsenhausen 4
Praepos, Seltz. 6
Ab. S. Gilgen 1

Ab. Nuenburch

Ab. S. Maximinus neere Triers 6

Ab. Heneldshansen


Ab. S. Iohans zu Curtel

Ab. Gengenbach 4
Ab. Koningsbrun 4
Ab. Rodt, otherwise Roden 2
Ab. Markthal 4

Ab. Rockerhausen

Ab. S. Peter in Schworztwald. 4
Praepos. Odenheim 5
Pr. Ab. Stablo. 7
Ab. Disidiense 4

Ab. Berkenhausen

Ab. Elchingen 4

Ab. Hentzlingen


Ab. Vrssevis


Ab. Planckenburg


Ab. Yssin

Ab. Pfessers 4
Ab. S. Iohn in Thurtal. 4
Ab. Peterhausen 4
Ab. Pruim. 5
Praepos. Camberg. 1
Ab. Reishaim 2
Ab. S. Heimeram at Ratisbon 2
Praepos. Berchtolsgadon 2
Ab. S. Gegory at Munster 5
A. Muncherode 4
Ab. S. Cornelis at Munster 7
Ab. Werden. 7
Ab. Aursperg. 4
Ab. Yrse. 4
Ab. Brun. 4
Ab. Echtermaken 7
Ab. Hervorden 7


The Abbatesses.
Of Quedelnburch 8
Essen. 7
Alt Munster to Regensburg 2

Pr. Ober Munster to Regensb^

Kauffingen ^
Lindaw. 4
Pr. Gernrode. 8
Buchaw. 4
Rotenmunster 4
Hippach. 4
Gutenzel 4
Beundt. 4

Baley 

Coblentz. 6
Elsas 4
Osterich 3
In der Etsch. 3




The Earles Barons and Lords.
The Earle of Helfenstein 4
Earle Kirchberg 4
H. Tussen 4
Ea: Wisenstaig 4
E. Lauffen. 4
E. Montfort. 4
E. Furstenberg 4
E. Zimmeren 4
B. Gundelfingen 4
H. Stutgart 4
H. Iustiugen 4

H. Schenstingen

Marckg. Eberstein 4
B. Gerolt Zeck 4
B. Ober Hewen 4
E. Otingen 4
B. Rapoltstain 5
H. Rapoltzkircken 5
B. Stauffen 2.4
H. Hohen Rechperg 5

H. Berletzicke


H. Hohen Konigsperg


H. Hohenfeldt and Tipoltzkirch

E. Sultz. 4
E. Hogen Zollem 4

H. Braides.

B. Sonnenberg. 4
E. Castel 1
E. Vertheim 1
E. Rheineck. 1
E. Hohenloe. 1
H. Reichelsperg 1
H. Limburg. 1
E. Erpach 1
E. Leiningen 5
E. Falckstein 5
E. Hanaw ^
E. Luchtenberg ^
E. Nassaw, Breda, and Dillen 1
E. Wisbaden and Iltzstain ^
E. Sarbrucken. ^
E. Waldipurg. ^
E. Nassaw in W^^tpurg ^
E. Belstein ^
E. Koningstein and Epstein ^
E. Eisenberg the higher ^
E. Eisenberg the lower. ^
E. Mersen ^
E. Budinghen ^
E. Wirnenburg ^
E. Solms ^
B. Vinnenburg or Vanenberg ^
E. Arnsberg. ^
E. Of Rhene ^
H. Falckenstein ^
H. Kunseck. ^
H. Kunseckerberg ^
Count Horne ^
Count Seyn ^
Co. Vintzlingen ^
Co. Reyen. ^
Co. Bitsch. ^
Co. Salm ^
Co. Veldentz. ^
Co. Dengen ^
Co. Rappin ^
Co. Hardech. 3
Co. Hohenstein ^
Co. Wolkenstein 3
Co. Schaumburg and ^lergen. 7. 3
Co. Dierenberg, and Semeraw. 7
Co. Mansfeilt 8
Co. Stolberg 8
Co. Buchlingen 8
Co. Barbey and Mus^ingen 8
Co. Gleichen. 1.8
Co. Schwart^^enburg ^
Co. Suenberg, or schonberg. ^
Co. Iude H. ^^m Ritech. ^
H. Geraw. ^
Co. Ples. 5
Co. Plawen 8
Co. Weda and Ringelberg 7
H. Reichenstein. ^


^. Olnbrug.

^. Lebenstain 4

^. Regenstain


^. Westfrieslandt.

^. Ostfrieslandt 7
^^, Vander Lippe 7
^, Oldenburg 7
^^. Delmenhorst 9
^^. Hoya. 7
^^. Westenburg 5
^. Muntzenburg 5

^^. Lemgow

^o. Waldeck 5

^. Lostenstein.

Co. D^epholt. 7
Co. Steinfort 7
Co. Benthem. 7
Co. Brunchorst 7

Co. Witgenstein


Co. Spagelberg


Co. B^versdorff

H. ^^dberg. 7
Co. Teckelnborg 7

H. L^nge.

Co. Dortmund 7

Co. Winsdorff

Co. Ortenberg. 2

Co. Rippershoden

Co. Hagen 2
Co. Heonfels 2
Co. Lecseneck 8
^^. Bergen. 10
C. Degenburg 2

^. Obersultzberg


E. Somiriss

Co. Manderscheid 7
Co. Reiferscheidt 6
Co. Egmont and Isselstein 10
H. Bergen and Waelhelm 10
E. Haber, alias Havere. 5
E. Wildenfelfs, or Widerfels. 8
E. Tautenberg. 8
Co. Tubingen. 4
Co. Blanckenberg or Blammont 5
Co. Kirchingen, Krehanges 5
H. Senster 3
H. Roggendorff 3

H. Alendorff.


H. Kunigfuckerbeg

H. Morspurg and Befort 5
H. Brandenstein and Rans^ ^

H. Wolfsteine


H. Permont


H. Fronsbek


H. Flackenstein


H. Witten


Ritt. Fridberg


Ritt. Gleichausen.


In this second member, some doe want numbers, because they are not mentioned afterward in the Circles. Pr. signifies Princes, Ghe. Fursten, a Praelate, D. Dukes, Co. Countes. H. Heerschafften, Lords, B. Barons.


The third member of the Empire is of the free Citties.


Rheinische Banck,

Coln 6. 8
Aken 7
Worms 5
Spier 5
Turckheim 5
Hagenaw 5
Weissenberg 5
Straesburg 5
Ober Ebenhaim 5
Roshaim 5
Schletstat 5
Colmar 5
Altach 5
Basel 5
Kaisersberg 5
Mulhausen in Suntgow 5
S. Gregoris Munster 5
Metz 5
Toul 5
Verdun 5
Landaw 5
Kaufmans Sarbruck 5
Besancon 5
Camerick 7
Franckfort 5
Fridberg in Wederaw 5
Gelnhausen 6
Wetzlar. 5
Aleu. 4
Lubeck 9
Hamborg 9
Dortmund 7
Mulhusen in Duringon 9
Northansen. 9
Goster 9
Gottingen 9
Brakel 7
Wartburg 7
Lemgow 7
Duysburg 7
Dantzick 8

Elbinghen

Schwabishche Banck.


Regensburg 2
Nurenberg 1
Rottenburg ander Tauber 1
Weissenburg an Nortgaw 2
Donawerd 4
Washaim 1
Schweinfurt 1
Wimpfen 4
Hailbrun 4
Hal in Schwaben 4
Norlingen 4
Dinkelspuel 4

Vim


Ausptrg


Gengen


Bopfingen


Gemunt in Schwaben


Eslingen


Reutlingen


Weyl


Pfullendorff


Kauffbeurum


Northausen


Vberlingen


Wagen


Ysni


Lewkirch


Memmingen


Kempten


Buchorn


Ravenrsburg


Bibrach


Lindaw

Costintz 4
Rotweil 4
Offenburgk 4
Gengenbach 4
Zel in Hamesbach 4
Schaffhausen 4
S. Gal 4
Buchaw am Federsee 4

Besides these severall members, for the avoyding of schismes i^ the Empire, and for the mutuall defence, and common preservatio^ of peace among the Princes of Germanie, the Province or the Empire are divided into certaine Countries, which they all ^ircuite and in them there are particular Counsells appointed, which belong to severall Circuits. First, 6 were instituted in the yeare 1500 (...) Augusta, and afterward 10 in the yeare 1522 at Norimberg. But (...) very Circuite chuseth out of themselves a secular P^eafect, who either a Prince, a Count, a Baron, or one of the chiefe of the Noble to whom foure Counsellers chosen out of the same body, being honest, and wise men, are joyned as assistants. I will heere onely reckon up the Circuits, but in the Tables I will describe their Prince and their parts.
The first Circle is of Franconia, and it shall be described in the Table of Franconia.
The second is of Bavaria, and it shall be unfolded in the Table thereof.
The third is of Austria, and it shall be declared in the Table o^ Austria.
The fourth is of Suevia, in the table of Wirtenberg.
The fifth is in the Circuite of Rhene, and it shall be unfolded in the Table of the lower Alsatia.
The sixth is of the foure Electors of Rhene, in the Table of the Paletinate.
The seaventh is of Lower Germanie, in the first Table of Westphalia.
The eight is of lower Saxonie, in the same table.
The ninth of lower Saxonie in the same table.
The tenth of Burgundie, in the table of higher Burgundie.


The Emperiall Chamber.
Besides these Councells in the Circuits, for the deciding of more weighty businesse which happen in the Empire, there is an Emperiall chamber instituted at Spires, in which there is a Prince for the Praesident, or at least an Earle, or some secular man that is thought ^^ for this office. He hath also two Barones or Earles to be his assistants, two Lawyers, and two Noble men, which have haereditary Lands, and Mannors in the Empire; so that in all he hath sixe assistants. Moreover he hath one of the Electors, and two out of every Circ^^e, the one halfe whereof is chosen out of the Lawyers, and the other halfe out of the Gentry.



A Catalogue of the Tables in Germanie.

1. Germanie in generall.
2. West Friesland.
3. The County of Embden.
4. The first Table of Westphaelia.
5. The second Table.
6. The Bishopricke of Munster.
7. The third Table of Westphalia.
8. The Archbishopricke of Colen
9. the fourth Table of Westphalia.
10. The Diocaese of Leodium.
11. The Countie of Muers and Cleveland.
12. Waldecke.
13. The Palatinate of Rhene.
14. Wirtenberg.
15. Alsatia the Lower.
16. Alsatia the higher.
17. Saxonie the Lower.
18. Brunswijck.
19. Hassia.
20. Nassovia.
21. Thieringia.
22. Franconia.
23. The Dukedome of Bavaria.
24. The Palatinate of Bavaria, the bounds whereof Northward, See in the Table of Franconia.
25. Saxonie the higher.
26. Brandenburg.
27. Pomerania.
28. The Islands of Rugia.
29. Bohemia.
30. Moravia.
31. Austria.
32. Saltzburg.
33. Polonia and Silesia.
34. Polonia.
35. Hungarie.




GERMANIE.
THus you have seene the description of the Low coutrie both in generall and speciall: now passing over the Rhene high Germanie, which Ptolemie calls great Germanie, offers it selfe, which is the largest Country of Europe, and the glory of the Romaine Empire. This Country I will ^^nne over in the same method as I did the other, describing it first in generall, and then in particular. But that I may begin with the name thereof, divers doe diversly derive the name of Germanie or the Germaines. One saith, that the Germaines were so called as it were Germanie^, that is, stout men, in regard of their Martiall manly strength another supposeth that they were so named, from their mutuall fidelity, and faithfulnesse; neither did he guesse much amisse, who deriveth the Etymologie of their name from their honourable warfare, as if the people were called Geertmans, and so by contraction of the word Germanes. Another thinketh that they were so determinated from the Latine word genuini, that is, genuine or native because no nation doth retaine more of their auncient integritie, and justic^e simplicity: but it seemes that the author of this dreame did speake this to gaine the favour of the people: albeit the Geographer (...) and Livy doe both erroniously suppose that the Roma^^^ people did give this name to this country, because they were Cosen Germaines to the Celtae, both in regard of their manners, and fashions, and also in respect of their great stature, and red haue Iohn G^ropius Becanus doth probably derive the name thereof from their gathering and mustering of souldiours, from Geren, which signifies to gather or muster. Which opinion Tacitus seemes to fortitie and confirme, who professeth in his commentarie of the Germanies manners, that Germany is a new fresh name, because they who first passed over Rhene (that I may use his owne words) having droven on the Frenchmen, were sometime called Tungrians, and sometimes Germanies, which name afterward grew so frequent, that first the Conquerour, and afterward they themselves, did call themselves Germanies. Some doe interpret the word Germaine to signifie a scattered people, collected out of other nations, from the word Geren which signifies to collect or gather together. Some doe suppose their denomination doth intimate that they were a warlike people desirous of warre, from Gerra, or Guerra, which signifies warre. A learned Saxon doth derive the name thereof from the Carmanians a people of Asia, whom Lucan mentioneth, as the Saxons were so called from the Sacians: and in other places he deduces the Etymologie of their namely from an Hebrew word, as it were Ger^mani, which in that language signifies strangers or poore and needy people. But Pencerus delighting in the studious searching out the originall of his Countries name, thinketh that they were called Germaines, as it were Hermenner; that is, military men. The most learned Iunius doth derive the na^e of it

from the great Deluge, which drowned all the world: when Noah parted the world among his three children: at what time (that I may speake nothing of Sem and Cham) Europe fell to Iaphets share. He, as it appeares in Moyses, had a sonne, called Gomer, who had three sonnes, Aschenaz, Rephat, and Thogarma. And they affirme that the Germaines descended from Thogarma: although the Rabines doe hold that the Germaines came from Aschenazin. For the originall of the Germaines name doth cleerely shine forth in the word Thogarma, or Thegerma, by taking the second vowell for the first, as if we should pronounce it in our language by the article the, The Germans: also there is a fit Etymologie answerable to the word and nation, which is from Gara or Gera, which signifies a bone, and metaphorically strength, because it is a stout and strongbon'd Nation. Some also doe call this part of Europe Alemaine, and the inhabitants thereof Alemans, by which name they were first called, when the Empire began to decline. Berosus doth fabulously report, it was so called from Hercules an Alemaine, who was governour over these people. Some suppose that it was called Alemaine, from Mannus who was esteemed as a god in their Country, the sonne of Tuiscon. Asinius Quadrus a faithfull historian, doth affirme that the Almaines, were so called as it were a people collected and gathered from all Nations, which spread themselves all over this Country; who did not, as it seemes, looke exactly into the signification of the word, for he should have called them Almaines because they were all men, and warriours. They that derive Alemanie from the Lake Lemann, would have Germany so called from a Lake without the limits thereof in Saban^^^ unlesse some doe take the Aeronian Lake for the Lake Leman, on either bank whereof the Almaines did inhabit, as Ammianus reporteth Lib. 15. And though some do promiscuously make Germanie and Almany al one, yet it is observed that they were two distinct Countries. Spartianus in the life of Marius saith: Omnis Alemannia, omnisque Germania, cum caeteris quae adjacent gentibus; that is, All Almany, and Germany with the other adjacent countries. Flavius Vopiscus saith in the lif of Probus: Testes sunt Franci, inuijs strati paludibus, testes Germani and Alemanni, longe a Rheni semoti littoribus, that is, The Frenchmen are witnesses, who dwell in the Low grounds, the Germaines are witnesses, and the Almaines who are farre off from the shoares of Rhene. I omit other testimonies, least I should be tedious. Some also doe call it Teutonia, from Teuto a certaine Captaine thereof some thinke that the Teutons, who are called in their owne Countrie speech Teutche, and by the Italians Tedaschi, and by others Teute^s, were so called from Thuista, otherwise Thursco, whom they beleeve was the Sonne of Noah. Tacitus maketh mention heereof: Celebrant carminibus antiquis (quod unum apud illos memoriae and Annalium genus est) Thuistonem deum terra editum and filium Mannum, originem gentis, conditoresque; that is, they celebrate in auncient verses (which kinde of Annalls they doe onely use) That Thuisto an earthy God and his sonne Mannus, were the first founders of this Nation. ^^rabo placeth them in Noricum: some suppose that they were the

Agrippine Colonie, and that the place was therefore called Teutsch. The inhabitants doe now call it Teutschlandt, and strangers Almany. The Sclavonians doe call it Nimiecha: and the Graecians doe now call it Elamags, and the Turkes Alaman. But enough concerning the Etymologie and various appellations of Germanie, now I come to the situation or quantitie thereof. Besides, authors doe not agree in designing and setting downe the limits of Germanie. The auncients doe bounder Germany with the Rhene, Danubius, the Ocean, the River Tanais and the Euxine Sea. The latter writers, as Strab^, Ptolemie, Mela, Plinnie, and many other Greeke and Latine writers, doe bounder it with the River Rhene and Vestula. Tacitus writeth that the mountaines, or a mutuall distrust one of another, doth rather separate the Germaines from the Sarmatians and Dacians, than Vistula. All those Countries which use the Germaine speech or dialect are reckoned now as parts of Germany. And therefore it stretcheth beyond those bounds which Ptolemie gives it, and beyond Danubius, contayning Rhetia, Vindelicia, the higher Pannonia, and beyond Illyra, even to the Tridentine bounds. Also beyond the Rhene, Germatie did containe these Romaine Colonies, and garrisons, Constantia, Augusta Rauracorum, Argentina, Nemetes, Vangiones, Mag^^ciacum, Confluentia, Bonna, the Agrippine Colonie, and other places even unto the Sea. For as Ambrosius witnesseth, 11 Hexamer, Rhene was heretofore the limmit of the Romaine Empire: and that o^the^ French bancke thereof the Romaine Praesidents did alwayes lye in garrison against the Germaines, partly that they might restraine their excursions, and partly that they might make inroads upon them, and partly that they might receive those Germaines that revolted to them. And this is the Reason, that on one of the banckes of Rhene, there are many old Cities, but none on the other: which may also be observed on the bancke of Danubius. Helvetia, also is reckoned now as a part of Germanie: and the Prutenians beyond Vistula: so that the bounds thereof are now much larger than those which Ptolemie attributes to it: for on the West it stretcheth beyond the Rhene, even to Pice^rate and Burgundie, which are parts of France: on the South toward Danubius even to the Alpes: On the East beyond even to Sprasland: the Northerne limit is the Ocean. There are many chiefe parts of Germanie, which shall be here described, with the lesser subject o^ adjacent countries. The Kingdomes are, Bohemia, the Palatinate, and the Kingdome of Poland, though it hath a different language, and is not contained in the Register of the Empire, yet because it is situate within the bounds of auncient Germanie, which is the River Vistula, therefore we place it among the tables of Germanie. Also we joyne the Kingdome of Hungarie to Germanie, which is situate without the limmits of auncient Germanie, and in regard it hath yeelded many famous Emperours, and hath dominion over many Countries situate within the Empire. There are also the Dukedome of Saxonie, the Arch dukedome of Austria. Also the Dukedomes of Holst, of Mechlenburg, Pomeren, Lunenburg, Lawenburg, Brunswijck, Metssen, Schlesen, Moravia, Cleve, Berge, Franconia, or Easterne France, Bavar^a,

Wirtenberg, and the Countie of Suevia: the Palatinate of Bavaria, the Landgraviats of Hessen, Duringen, and of the higher and lower Alsatia. The Marckgraniate Electorship of Brandenburg, and of Baden, the Counties of Embdem, Oldenburg, Benthem, Lip, Diepholt, Huy, Mansfelt, Anholt, Stolberg, Tirol, and Livonia which is reckoned among the Provinces of Germany, but because it lyeth within Sarmatia, it is there described. The situation being declared, the qualitie of the soyle followeth, which ariseth chiefely from the climate and position thereof in respect of the heavens. Germany is under the sixt, seaventh, and eighth climates, betweene the fourtie seaventh and fiftie five degrees of Latitude, and the twentie fourth and forty sixth degrees of Longitude. The longest day in sommer in the Southerne parallel is fifteene houres long and an halfe: in the Northerne Parallel, it is seaventeene houres long and a quarter; and albeit Cornelius Tacitus saith, that Germany is in a cold sharpe climate, and Seneca reporteth that it is alwayes winter in Germanie: yet it hath a temperate ayre, which though it bee somewhat cold, yet it is healthfull and wholesome.
The soyle yeeldeth Barly, Wheate, Rye, Mill, Oates, and other kindes of corne and pulse. The fields and Meddowes are fruitfull, and the soyle is every where very fertile, and yeeldeth great foure of Corne. Germanie also hath rich Mines of Silver, Brasse, Iron, Lead, and other mettals, and in some places of gold: so that for mettalls it is inferiour to no Countrie. There are also many excellent Salt pitts. Plinnie also saith, the Cadmian stones, the Callais, the Crystall, the Onyx, the Topaz, and the Adamant; are found in Germanie. Also the hearbes. Heere are a thousand delightfull gardens, and Villages, and Orchards full of Apples.
What, should I mention the wines? which are of an excellent taste and colour? Truely there are excellent wines every where, but yet in some places better than in others. Heere is also great variety of living creatures, and great stoare of Cattell and wilde beasts, which I will not spend time to reckon up. C. Iulius Caesar writeth, that many kindes of wilde beasts are bred in the Wood Hercynia, which are not seene in any other place; of which (saith hee) those that differ most from the rest, and are most worthy of remembrance are these: there is a kinde of Oxe which is like a Hart, which hath in the middle of his forehead one high horne, and more straite than usuall, from the toppe whereof large Antletts or Tines doe spread forth; the male and femall are of one shape, and have one as bigge hornes as the other. There is also a beast called Alcis, which is like unto a Goate, but it is somewhat bigger, and having no hornes at all, and their legges are without joynts, so that they cannot by any meanes lye downe to their rest, or if they fall downe by chance, they cannot rise up againe; therefore they leane against trees, and so they take their rest: and when the hunters have found by their

footing where they usually haunt, they either stub up all the trees, or else they cut them halfe downe, and so leave them standing: So that when the beasts rest against them according to their usuall manner, they overthrow the trees with their weight, and so fall downe with them. The third kind of beasts are those which are called Vri, which are almost as bigge as Elephants, and like Bulls in shape and colour* they are very strong, and swift, and will prey on men and beasts: these they usually take in trappes, and so kill them. But now I come to the auncient government. The sacred Romaine Empire, which being divided into the West and Easterne part, was much weakned by the excursions of divers Nations, and rent by civill dissentions, was ready to be ruined by its owne weight; having forsooke Italie did seeke defence and strength in no other Countrie but Germanie, and chose Charles the Great King of France to be Emperour, who as they report, was borne at Ingelheimij, which is a village Towre two miles from Moguntiacum, and built there a famous Pallace, whose ruines may be yet seene. The Empire remained in Charles his line an hundred yeares, and above: which afterward failing, it was translated to Conrade Duke of Franconia: after whom followed Henry Fowler: after him the three Ottoes: the last whereof when he understood that the Romaines, Crescentius being consull, did affect and desire the title of the Empire, he raysed an army and tooke Rome, and obtayned of Pope Gregorie, that the Germaines should have ^ight and power to elect the Romaine Emperours. But they obtayned it on this condition, that he which was elected should be called Caesar and King of the Romaines: and afterward having received ^ Crowne from the Pope, he hath the title of Emperour Augustus. There are 7 Electors ordained: of which three are Archbishops, and soule are saecular Princes as they call them: where after the decease of Otto, the first, that was chosen Emperour was Henry surnamed the holy. Afterward in processe of time, there were divers officers constituted and ordained in Germany, for the honour of the Empire concerning which see Mercator. Tacitus who was governour of the Belgians under Vespasian, doth commend the Germaines in this short Elogie thus: Nemo bellum Germanis (inquit) intulit impune. None made warre upon the Germaines but they came by the losse. Which, three of Augustus Legions found, being overcome and beaten by them: Also Carbo, Cassius, Scaurus, Aurelius, Servilius, Coepie, Manlius, all great Commanders, who were slaine and put to flight. And there are these auncient verses: Welcher im Krieg wil ungluck han,Der fang es mit den Deutschen an.
Iosephus calleth them valiant, Dionysius Martiall, Arrianus war-like. The Germane is couragious, fierce at an onser, and desirous of warres, as Seneca witnesseth in his booke de Ira. Moreover the Country of Germany is now so pleasant, and so adorned with faire Citties, Castells, and Villages, that it is not inferior to Italie France

and Spaine. There are 84 free Citties in it, as Colonia Agrippina, Wirtemberg, Lubek, Luneburg, Franckfort, Breme, Lipsick, Spires, Argentine, Friburg, Augusta Vindelicorum, Tubinga, Heidelburg, Ratisbone, Vienna, Prague, Buda, etc. of which hereafter. Germany also is watered with so many great Rivers, beside Lakes and Marishes of which it hath great stoare, that in this respect, also it may compare with the chiefest Countries. Seneca in his third booke of naturall questions sheweth the cause why it hath so many Rivers: At contra, ait, constat Germaniam Galliamque, and proxime ab his Italiam abundare Rivis, and fluminibus; quia coelo humido utuntur, and ne aestate quidem, imbribus carent: That is, But on the contrary (saith he) it is manifest that Germany and France, and Italy which is next unto them, have great stoare of Rivers, because they have a moystaye, and have often raine in Summer. But these Rivers of Germany are more famous, as Danubius, Rhene, Amasis, Moenus, Necarus, Albis, Suevus, Visurgis, and Vistula. That which Ptolomie and others doe call Danubius, Plinny and Strabo doe call Ister; the one saith that it changeth his name neere the Cataracts thereof; the other, where it washeth Illyrium. Ptolemie saith, that it changeth his name ^eere the Cittie Axipolis: Appian neere the confluence and meeting of the River Savus: so that the higher part is called Danubius, and the lower part Ister. Stephanus heretofore called it Matoas: also Danu^is and Danusis: Festus calleth it Addubanus. Ancient coynes doe ^^me it Daunvius: it is now called Done and Donaw, from the noyse and sound of the waters, as Althamerus saith. Salust writeth that this is the greatest River next to Nile which floweth into the Mediterranian Sea; and Arrianus, lib. 1. of the acts of Alexander, calleth it the greatest River. It riseth in the wood Hercynia, in the village Den Eschingen, where it springeth out of the bowells of the Earth. The auncients doe call the Mountaine out of which it riseth Abnoba, although as Munster an eye-witnesse writeth, there is no mountaine nere it: but it falleth with a continual running streame, from a little hill which is scarse 15 or 16 foote high. He addeth that Tiberius had a desire to see the spring head thereof. Herodotus beleeved that it rose out of the Pyrenaean Mountaines, whose opinion Aristotle also followed, 2. Meteorologicor. Maginus placeth those Pyrenaean hills in Germany, thereby to excuse the errour of grave writers. As soone as it glideth from the fountaine, it runneth abroad through Moarish places, and afterward it gathers it selfe into a Channell, and so being encreased by receiving other Rivers, it runneth through many countries, as Sucuia, Pannonia, Dacia, Bulgaria, untill at last having received 6 navigable Rivers, it rowleth into the Sea with five streames or mouthes, as Dionysius, Strabo, and Herodotus doe mention: Plinny saith with sixe, and Amianus, and Solinus with seaven: and with such violence, so that it runneth with fresh water 40 miles into the sea. And as Amian saith: Et constat ab ultimis nostri finibus maris, agmina ^m pariendi gratia petere Pisces, ut aquarum suavitate salubrius faetum educant, nec intercipiantur, That is, it is manifest that the fish from the farthest part of our seas doe come hither in shoales, that

they may spawne here in safety. Tajanus Nerva built a curious bridge over this River in Moesia, which afterward Adrian did demolish, as Dio Cassius relateth. Concerning Danubius, George Fabritius in a certaine Itinerarie of his writeth thus:
--Ister,Qui centum populos and magnas alluit urbes,Euxinum irrumpit bis terno flumine Pontum.Ister that doth through an hundred Countries glide,And watereth them, with Citties too beside,Both faire and great, with sixe streames last of all,Into the Euxine Sea at length doth fall.
For at length all the most famous Rivers in the world do^ runne into the Sea, as Ovid also Lib. 8. Metamorph. does mention in this verse:
In quo desinimus, sacri, in quo currimus amnes.We sacred Rivers to the Sea doe come,And into it we all of us doe runne.
The next is the Rhene, which Caesar and other doe commend ^^is now called Rhijn. Caesar would have it rise out of Leopa^^^, and Strabo and Ptolomie, affirme that it ariseth out of the Mountaine Ad^la, which is commonly called Etzel, which is an arme of the Alpes, and Claudian saith, that it riseth out of Rhetia. But Strabo and (...) doe thinke that Rhene beginneth on the Eastside of the Alpes where they are joyned to the Mountaine Adula, and where the Lepo^tans doe inhabit, and so springeth out of two fountaines, which are at least a dayes journey distant one from another. The one being more to the Northwest which is commonly called the foremost Rhene the other lying more Southeast, which the inhabitants cal the latter Rhene. These two at length meete together, and so doe make the River Rhene, which neere unto the head doe make two Lakes, the A^^^nian and Constantian, from the Cittie Constantia which is situated by it; concerning which we will entreate in the description of Helvena: the other is called Venetum, and now the Cellensian Lake, from the little Towne Cella, which Lake hath abundance of all sorts of fish. From hence turning Westward it watereth Rhinfelden, and follows the same tract even to Basilea. And there it runneth Northward, untill it come to Argentoratum: and so watereth many Countries, and having viewed many Citties, and having received many great and small Rivers, it groweth very deepe, and commeth swelling even to Sp^res, Wormes, and Moguntiam. Hence turning Westward it watereth Bragium. And from thence winding toward Caecia, having left behind it Bonna and Colonia, at last neere the edge of Batavia (which is now under the jurisdiction of Cleveland, and is graced with the auncient Castell Lobecum) it doth divide it selfe, and with a double streame runneth divers wayes. Which division Mamertinus elegantly calleth

the Divorce, and Frontinus the turning of the River. Neere therefore to Lobecum it doth divide his course, so that the one part thereof called Rhene doth run straite forward to Arenacum a chiefe Cittie of Gelderland. And from thence with many winding Maeanders, it glideth towards Vada; and so bendeth from thence to Rhena, which Tantus calleth Rinnes: from thence it runneth to Bavodurum, Afterward the Rhene changeth his name, and begins to be called Lecca, being heretofore a little Rivulet, but now it is become a River. Having glided by Culenburg and Viana, and having viewed Schoonhovia, it powreth it selfe into the River Merova, before it is called Mosa. The other part of Rhene doth bend toward the left hand, and floweth by the auncient Cittie Neomagum, and runneth by the walls of the Cittie, it is now called Vahalis: not long afterward it goeth toward Tiela: and from thence with a winding course it leaveth Bomelius on the left hand: afterward not farre from Woricomium it receiveth the River Mosa, and by and by neere Goricomium, being encreased with the slow smooth running River Linga, and it is called Merova, from the Castell of the Merovaeans; by which having passed it glideth by Dordretch a Noble Island out of the Cittie; afterward having received the Rivers Lecca and Isela which are armes of the Eheu, and gliding by Iselmonda, it beginneth to be called Mosa neere to Potterdam, where it leaveth on the right side Sciedamum and Vla^^ga, and from thence it glideth by the Towne Gerviletum, and the Brill on the left hand, and there it mingleth it selfe, with the Ocean. That which Ptolemie calls Amasius, Strabo Amasias, Tacitus Amasia, Plinny and Pomponius Amisius, and now Ems. The head of this River is a little beneath Paderbona a Cittie of Westphalia, and so bending towards Caecia it glideth by Varendorp, Greva, Rhena, and Lingha: and from thence it goeth forward unto Meppenum and Nebu^sum: and from thence discharging it selfe into the Northerne Ocean, neere to Embda Market Towne, whence it borroweth his name and is called Eems. The fourth River is that which Plinny calls Manus, and Pomponius Maenis, and Ammianus Menus: now it is called Meyn. Regino the historian and the writers of that time doe call it Mogonum. Velleius Patercules calleth it the River Iulia. Vnlesse in ^eed of Iulia, it should be Lupia, as some learned men doe suppose. It ariseth out of a Mountaine which is called der Fichtelberg, and so gliding by Franckford, which from thence is called upon Maene, and Wet^^mia, Herbipolis, and Papeberg; it mingleth it selfe with the Rhene neere to Moguntiacum, and doth part the Low Countries from Germany. The letters thereof doe make by the Greeke computation 565, equall to the number of dayes which are in a yeare. The fifth River is Necarus, whence come the best Necarian wines, it was anciently called Nicer, as Rhenumus witnesseth, the spring head therethereof is two houres journey distant from Danubius, and so having glided through the fields of Wirtemberg, it runneth into the Rhene a s^le above Heidelburg. Albis followes which is a faire River of Germanie, and divideth the Swevians from the Cherusians. Velletus witnesseth that it doth flow by the confines of the Semnonians and Hermundurians.

Tacitus writeth that the famous River Albis doth arise among the Hermundurians, but Conradus Celtes saith that it doth arise out of Hercinia in Bohemia, And so having glided by many faire Citties, at length it empties it selfe into the Ocean betweene the Chaucians, and the Cimbrians. The auncient Latine writers doe call it Albia, and the Germaines Elbe. And the Bohemians from whence it taketh his originall, doe call it Labe. Fabritius in his booke of the Misnian affaires saith, that it received that name from 11, Fountaines, or as the Saxons say, from so many flowing River. For it arises as he deliuers, in the Hercynian wood, which from the Giants is commonly called Risenberg, from 11 Fountaines, whose streames meeting together doe make the River Albis: for Elve and Elbe doe signifie in the Germaine language, eleven. The seaventh River is Suevus, which some doe call Viadrum, and corruptly it is called Oder^, the spring head whereof is in the Mountaine Oderberg, and so being encreased by the addition of many Rivers, it glideth by Frankford, a famous Vniversity, and from thence it runneth by Stetinum the seate of the Sidinonians, which is a Sea towne of Traffiques, and from thence it windeth to the Episcopall Citties of Carminum, and there making a great Lake it emptieth it selfe into the Germaine Ocean. For they are in an error who suppose that Sprea (or de Spr^e) is the River Suevus, although the aforesaid Sprea is accounted a famous River, which flowing by Brandenburg doth runne into Alb^ neere to Haneloburg: of which opinion is Bilibaldus, who writeth that the River Sprea, runneth into the Ocean neere to the Cittie Sund^. The River Visurgis followeth, commonly called de Weser, D^onysius Lib. 55. calls it Ousiourgos. Ovid calls it Iturgum in that verse, Decolor infesta testis Iturgus aqua.
Ptolemie calls it Visurigis, and Strabo Bisurgis, and Ad^^^ in his Ecclesiasticall history Visuris, and Sidonius Vesatis. It ariseth out of Hassia, and having watered the Citties, Werdensis, M^n^^sis, Gotingensis, and Bremensis, it rowleth it selfe into the Ocean, and is there called Vesera. The last river is Vistula, or Istula, which Bal^baldus calleth Vandalum. This River bounders Germany, because Ptolemie doth place the European Sarmatia beyond it. Iornandes calls it Scyth^s, which running by the Sarmatian rockes, doth water Cracovia which is the Metropolis of the Kingdome of Poland, and being growne greater by the receipt of Rivers, it doth discharge it selfe into the Sea with three inletts or mouthes: from hence it floweth by Dantzu^ and afterward by Elbinga, an Vniversity of the Borussians: and thirdly by the Towne Loctetum, and so doth poure it selfe into the Venedician Bay. There are also many other famous Rivers, which do either runne into the Sea or into some greater River, which I pass^ over least I should be tedious. Now I come to the Germaine Sea For seeing we purpose to describe al Germanie, we must add somthing concerning the Sea, which washeth the shore thereof: But in regar^ we have entreated otherwhere more largely concerning the Sea, an^

especially in the generall description of Belgia: we will speake first concerning the tide of the Sea, and afterward we will reckon up the properties of the Germaine Sea. It is manifest that the Moone is the cause of the tides of the Ocean. But as the Moone hath divers changes in her motion, so the tides doe also change. For they following the Moone, doe flow twice betweene the rising thereof, and doe ebbe twice in foure and twentie houres: so that the Seas doe flow twice, and ebbe twice every day: they flow when the Moone ascendeth above the Easterne Horizon, and do ebb when it declineth from the Meridian westward; and it floweth againe when the Moone goeth downe under the earth, and commeth to the contrary part of the Meridian, and so likewise it ebbeth untill it rise againe. But as the Moone does not alwayes rise at one time, and in one place, but every day riseth in another place than it did before: so the tides doe not flow at certaine houres, but at that time when the Moone passeth through the Poles of the heavens. Moreover it is to bee noted, that the full Moone doth move the Sea in another manner than the halfe Moone. For this Luminarie hath greater force when it is at the full, than when it is weake, and in the waine. We use to call those tides which are a^ the full of the Moone Sprinckuloedt, that is, a Spring-tide. Which Agel Lib. 14. concerning the Ocean, doth elegantly call the Moones companion, seeing it followeth the age and increase thereof; and also he noteth some aspects, and configurations: As for example sake, if the Moone have a fit aspect unto Venus, and doe run through moist houses, it doth wonderfully increase the tides of the sea: but if it be aspected with Mars, or dry Planets, it doth lessen the tides. Here also the ascention of the signes is to be noted. But if the Moon be in signes of a right ascension, it maketh the tides longer than if it were in signes of oblique ascension: for it is observed that the tides are never equall to the ebbes in continuance of time; but when the Moone is in the Equinoctiall signes and hath no Latitude. Besides, some parts of the water doe finde a greater influence proceeding from the beames of the bodie of the Moone, either in regard of the rectitude and straightnesse of the beames, or some other hidden qualitie. But the Moone hath a different influence when it is Northward, and another when it is Southward; for when it is heere it encreases the tides on the Southerne shoares, and when it is there, on the Northerne shoa^es. Moreover the Tides of the Sea are greater in some places, and in other places very small or none at all. For as concerning this our Germaine Sea, it is certaine that there are scarce any tides which can be perceived, but as the Sea is carried with the windes, it soweth now here and now there: for when it is an East wind, the Sea goeth very high, and driveth backe Rivers, neither doth it flow onely ^^ the Sea side, but it overflowes the Land. And whereas the Spa^^^h and Atlanticke Ocean is of an unsearchable deapth, so that a line of three hundred or foure hundred fathom cannot sound the bottome of it, yet the Germaine Sea, in the most parts is but 60. Cubits deepe and never above an hundred Cubits, except on some shoares of Nor^^, which are thought to be of an insearchable depth. Moreover it

is worthy to be mentioned, that whereas all other Seas are bitter and salt, our Sea hath sweete waters and not unpleasant to drinke, and that in regard that many great fresh Rivers doe runne into it out of the Sarmatian Mountaines, and because the Sunne is too weake in those places to exhale and draw up the lighter and thinner parts of the water, which some make to bee the chiefe cause of the saltnesse of the Sea. Which reason if it were good and probable, then the Amalchian Sea also, and the Chronian Sea should not be salt, which is otherwise. Wherefore it is rather to be held that the melted snow, and the aforesayd Rivers flowing downe out of the Sarmatian Mountaines, doe make this Sea cleere and sweete. Whereby it comes to passe, that other Seas doe more easily carry vessells of great burden, than this. And the reason is because the water of the salt Sea is of a thicker substance, while the thinner waters doe yeeld to the least waight. It is easier also to swim in this Sea than in others. Yet it maketh Sea men more sicke, in regard the waves got very high, so that sometimes they seeme to touch the Clouds, and then fall againe and breake into deepe valleyes. This Sea in divers places, hath divers appellations, or names; For sometimes it is called the Germaine Ocean, from Germanie which is neere unto it, and it reacheth from the French, and Brittish Sea, which lyeth Westward, even to Sarmatia in the East. It is also called the Northerne Sea, the Cimbrian Sea, the Balthick, the Codanian, the Suevian Sea, etc. And so much concerning the Sea. There are diverse Mountaines in Germany, the chiefe whereof are, Rolberg, Mons Isidis, Melibocus, Pinifer, Hessus, Ostbergus, Senus, Suevus, Pavonis, Rheticus, Sprulius, Vicetius, and Vosagus. There are also many other Woods, but the greatest of all is Hercynia. The best Latine and Greeke Authors doe mention the Wood Hercynia, as Pomponius Mela, Strabo lib. 7. and Plinny in many places: which although it be very large and wide, yet all the West and Southerne parts of it lyeth within Germany. And therefore Glareanus saith, that he never accounted the Wood Ardenna to be a part thereof, which some in our time have rashly done Caesar Lib. 6. Com. de bel. Gal. writeth that it is 60 dayes journy long, and nine dayes journey broad. It hath now gotten divers names: for in some places it is called the blacke Wood, from the great stoare of Pines in it, or Der Schwarts Wald, and otherwhere Ottoes Wood from the Emperor Ottoes frequent hunting in that part of the Wood: Sometimes it borroweth his name from the people unto which it reacheth, whence it is called the Thuringian and Bohemian Wood. But among the Cheruscians, it doth still retaine the auncient name o^ the Hercynian Wood, so famous by auncient Greeke and Latine writers; in Dutch Der Hartz Wald. For the French and the Germaine doe call Resina Hartz. Also Pandulphus Collenutins Pisaurienstis i^ his description of Germany, doth make mention of this wood in thes^ words: the Wood Hyrcinia assuming divers names, runneth out t^ the Dacians and ^etes, untill at length it commeth to the Tartarians where it is called the darke Wood, and is impassable, both in regar^ of the unknowne wayes and wilde beasts, and the monstrous Fawne^

But of these things enough, I passe to other matters: The publicke and priuate workes doe follow, among which (to passe by others) is the Church at Argentoratum, famous for the neate structure and building, having a very high Tower. So that it is the eighth miracle of the world. This Church was founded in the yeare of Christ 1015. But in the yere of our Lord 1277, in the time of the Bishop Conrade of Liechtenberg, Erkuinus of Steinbach an Architect began to build the Tower, being a famous worke; so that there is not the like, either in Germanie, Italy, or France; it was built up to the toppe in seaven and twentie yeeres. It is built even from the foundation to the toppe, of free square stone; it hath many open places to receive the ayre and the winde, and the ascent and going up unto it is by foure staires; but when the bredth of it begins to lessen, and grow sharpe towards the toppe, there are eight staires. The very top of it which below doth scarsely seeme as bigge as a Bushell, is so great, that five or sixe men might stand upon it. The height of it is 574 Geometricall feete; there is also a curious and artificiall Clocke. And as concerning the Ecclesiasticke state of Germanie, there are 7 Archbishops in the Empire of Germanie. These are, the Archbishop of Mentz, under whom are 12 Suffragan Bishops, as the Bishop of Chur, the Bishop of Cost^^tz, of Strasburg, of Spires, of Wormes, of Wurtzburg, of Ausburg, of Arstett, of Hildeshaim, of Paderborn, of Halbert statt, of Ferden. The Archbishop of ^olen, who hath 5 Suffragan Bishops the Bishop of Munster, the Bishop of Vtretcht, of Leodium, of Minden, and of Osenburg. Also the Archbishop of Triers, under whom are 3 Suffragan bishops; the Bishop of Metz, of Toul in Lotharingia, and the Bishop of Verdun. Also the Archbishop of Meydmurg Primate of Germanie, under whom are foure Bishops; the Bishop of Morsburg, the Bishop of Naumburg, of Brandeburg, and Havelburg. The Archbishop of Saltzburg, hath 9 Suffragan Bishops under him; as the Bishop of ^rent, Brixiensis, of Passaw, Frisingensis, of Vienna, of Seckaw; of Cur^x, of Lavenmund, and of Chiemse. The Archbishop of Bremes, under whom there are sixe Suffragan Bishops, as the Bishop of Lu^^ke, Suerinensis, of Lebus, of Schleswicke, of Ratzenburg, and of Hamburg, heretofore an Archbishopricke. The Archbishop of Riga, hath sixe Suffragan Bishops under him, as the Bishop of Revel, Curiens^s, the Bishop of Oesel, of Derpt. The free Bishops are, M^snensis, the Bishops of Bamberg, and Ratispon. Mercator reckoneth up these Vniversities: The Vniversity of Basil, of Colen, of Dillingensis, of Mogantinum, of Marpurg, of Lipswicke, of Ingo^stade, of Heidelburg, of Gripswald, of Friburg, of Frankford neere Odera, of Erpherd, of Prague, of Rostoch, of Coningsberg, of Trevers, of Tubingium, of Vienna, of Brestavia, of Wirtemberg, and Wurtzburg; ou^ of which as out of many Trojan horses, an innumerable sort of learned men have issued. Which many, furnished with all kindes of Arts, doe witnesse* heere are very skilfull in the Latine, Greeke, and Hebrew tongues; here are eloquent Orators, subtile disputants, absolute Arithmeticians, and exact Astronomers: and no Country of Europe ^^th better Geometricians. I omit their accurate skill in Physicke.

Now I come to their manners. All Authors doe report that the Germaines are strong, and of a great stature. Tacitus saith they are gray eyde, red haird, large bodyed, and very strong. Hegesippus and Plinny doe call them great men: Sidonius calleth them cruell and fierce, Pausanias and C^ssiodorus calleth them proud: Appianus, ungentle, Caesar calleth them barbarous, treacherous, and dissemblers: Paterculus saith that they are very crafty, and are naturally given to lye. But Tacitus who lived amongst them saith, that the souldiers are very couragious, and that it is a warlike Nation, but are neither cunning nor crafty, but doe discover their owne mindes and secrets, and very faithfull in keeping secrets committed to them. Also the Emperour Iulianus in his Misopogne saith, that hee knoweth by experience that this Nation cannot flatter, but that they deale freely and plainely with all men. Ptolemy, 11. Quadrip. saith, that they must needes be of a quiet and peaceable disposition, in regard of the qualitie of the Countrie which they inhabit. Concerning their religion, whereby the mindes of men are held and bound together by the tye and feare of some Deity, the Germaines (as Caesar writeth) doe use no sacrifices, they account them onely to be gods whom they see, and from whom they receive some benefit: as the Sunne, and Vulcan, and the Moone. But afterward, as it appeareth in Tacitus, who lived under the reigne of the Emperour Nerva; they had many other gods: as Mercury, Hercules, Mars, Isis, and Berecinthia: also a certaine god called Alcis. The same Tacitus doth report also that Velleda and Aurinia were accounted as Gods. And the aforesaid Tacitus maketh mention of the Temple of Tanfana, who saith that the Suevians doe reverence the mother Earth, which they call (as L^psius saith) Aertha. But Plutarch and Clemens Alexandrinus doe affirme that they had no Images in their Temples, but certaine holy women, which Tacitus calleth Soothsayers, and Agathias, and Polyoenus doe call them Prophetesses, who did foretell future events, by the sound, and courses of Rivers. Amilianus doth note, that they doe foretell things to come, by the flight of birds, by the inspection of entralls, and all other signes. But they did chiefely reverence Mercury or Teutates, and offered humaine sacrifices thereunto, as Tacitus witnesseth. In the time of peace there was no common Magistrate, but in the time of warre they did chuse Governours. They spent all their life time in military affaires: and to rob was accounted no disgrace, as we may reade in Caesar. Seneca saith, that their chiefe delight was the warres in which they were both borne and bread. If (as Tacitus witnesseth) they have peace any long time together at home in their owne Country, then they goe to the warres in other Nations. They cary about with them their mothers, wives, and children, who doe carry their knapsackes, and provision: neither are they afraide of plagues. They joyne battell with songs and warlike sounds. They count it a great disgrace to lose their buckler in the field, so that many after the battle for griefe thereof have hang'd themselves. Dion and Herodotus do report; that they will march over Rivers in regard they are lightly armed, and of an high stature. We reade in Appian that

^hey doe contemne death, being perswaded that they shall live againe hereafter. They observe the rites of matrimony, and are con^ent with their owne wives; so that few adulteries are committed; for which they have this present punishment: the woman that is taken in adulterie hath her haire cut off, and then her husband thrusts her out of doores before her kindred, and beates her along the Towne. Thus Tacitus reporteth. The Mothers doe nurse their owne childen, and doe not put them forth to Nurses. Caesar saith, that they account it unlawfull to wrong a stranger, which commeth unto them upon any occasion, so that they are ready to protect them from all injuries: their houses stand open, and they eate one with another. And here good manners prevaile more, than good lawes in other places. The greatest part of their food, as Caesar mentioneth, doth consist in milke, cheese, and flesh. Plinny witnesseth that they live by no other graine but Oates; and Mela addeth that in times of want they will eate raw flesh. At dinners as Athenaeus witnesseth, they have peeces of meate roasted, and they drinke milke and wine. Their fare is homely, as the flesh of wilde beasts, Crabbes, or sowre milke: their drinke is made of Barley and wheate, neither is there any Nation more magnificent in entertainment or in feasting. But as to man or Nation is without some vice, so they count it no shame to drinke night and day. Concerning their habit, Tacitus saith that they all weare a kinde of Cloake button'd before, which loosely hangeth over their shoulders: the same Tacitus saith, that the Germaines did not weare a loose garment but a straite bodyed garment, such as Sidonius saith the French did use. The women doe goe in apparell like the men. Heretofore the Germaines were strong of body, but rude, and ignorant of Arts. But now they doe make all kinde of excellent manufactures and workes, and most especially they are skilfull in casting of brasse, and in the knowledge of mettalls. In this Countrie brasse Ordinance and Printing were first invented, and the making of Clockes was found out: and lastly, Germany is such a Nursery of all Arts, that it doth perfect some, and findeth out other Inventions. Also it transporteth into Countries both neere and remote, the best Wines, Gold, Silver, Coppresse, Tinne, Lead, Quicksilver, Alume, and divers painting colours, also Corne, and divers other commodities.



WEST-FRIESLAND.
SOme doe write that Frisia or Friesland was so called fr^^ Phrygia; other doe derive the name thereof from the extreame coldnesse of the Country. Abbas Spanheim^^ the authoritie of Hunibald, a great corrupter of Hist^^^call truth, doth fabulously report, that it was so named from (...) the sonne of Clodio the hairy, King of France. Hadrian Iunius t^keth that it was so called from the freedome and libertie, which (...) people alwayes desired. Moreover Friesland is an auncient Co^^ of Germanie, well knowne to the Romanes for their warlike (...) and Valour, which never changed its name. Tacitus maketh the^^ twofold, namely the greater and lesser Frieslanders. The (...) (saith he) and lesser Frieslanders are so called in regard o^ th^ strength. The greater; Tacitus properly calleth Oostfrieslander (...) those Embdames who doe now usurpe that name, for those are ^ lesser Chaucians; but the Staverians, Succians, Franicians, (...) Townes of Harling and Leovardia. Also the West-Frieslanders which being in the farthest part of Holland are called Northollanders, (...) they doe confine on the Caninifatians, as Plinny describeth the^^ for these two Countries of Friesland doe stretch from the Rhene (...) to the Ocean. Now the River Amisis divides it into West and Ea^^ Friesland. West-Friesland which is now so called from the fir^^ (...) whose description we doe heere exhibit and set forth to view is most properly and anciently called Friesland, and was alwayes accounted the better part. On the West, and the North the Sea doth compasse it: on the South it hath a large Bay commonly calle Zuyder-Zee, and the Province of Trans-Isalana: on the East it is encompassed with the River Amisis, which divideth it from the Busactorians, and Westphalia. The aire is every where wholesome, except where it is infected with the foggie exhalations of the Marshes, which are purified againe by the windes. The Country of West-Friesland is no^ for the most part Moorish, being low, and overflowed in many places with water, which lye upon it not onely in the Spring, but also ^^ Sommer time: and in regard heereof, it hath little stoare of corp^ For these yeerely inundations which come betimes and goe away slowly, doe either kill the seede, or drive it up and downe. Yet heere are excellent pastures for fatting of Cattell, of which the Frieslanders may boast, for they reape commodity and profit by them: so that the inhabitants doe every yeere make an incredible gaine of Butter, and Cheese, which they transport abroad, besides that which they dayly spend at home, for it hath great heards of Oxen, and breedeth also excellent horses. It hath some woods, but those so thinne of

map of West FrieslandWEST-FRIESLAND.

trees, that they doe not yeeld wood enough to make a good great fire, such as Martial and Horace doe desire.
Dissolve frigus, lignum super focum large reponens.
But provident nature hath given the Frieslanders, and Hollanders insteed of wood, a certaine kind of turffe, which being digged out of the earth, and dryed in the winde and Sunne, doth burne very well, which is a better fuell than that which the Scythians used, who wanting wood did burne bones, and kept fire with them. And there is so great plenty of this turffe, as that it doth not onely serve the inhabitants, but also other neighbour Countries. There are diverse kindes of it, which doe differ in colour, lightnesse, and the whitenesse of their ashes. There is one bad, light, and spongie kinde of turffe, of a Mosse colour, which is of no esteeme for use: which in burning maketh those that stand by, as pale as Lead, and to looke like Ghosts, the smell whereof doth cause many to swound; but a little salt sprinkled on it taketh it away. The other is thicker, and fuller of seggs, and waightier, and serveth for divers uses. The third kinde is as hard as a bricke, and whereas the other swim in the water this sinketh; it is hard to take fire, but being once kindled it keepeth fire a long time; it is of an ash colour, and is digged on a Moorish ground. In Zeland also there is a kinde of turffe made of Moorish earth, which they call Daria. Also the Countrie people of Friesland, have a certaine kinde of turffe made of mud, tempered and mingled with straw, reedes, and hay, and afterward dryed in the Sunne; but the smoake thereof is very troublesome for the eyes. This Country of Friesland was heretofore a Kingdome, even to the time of Charles the Great, after whose decease it was troubled, although before it was subject to the government of Denmarke and Norway. But at length it enjoyed some Halcyon dayes of quiet, under the reigne of the Emperour Charles the fifth, who was a peaceable prince. There are 12 Citties in Friesland. Leuwarden is the Metropolis of all Friesland, and a rich Cittie, which as it is adorned and beautified with many private houses, so it is strongly fortified with a Castle and rampires against the assaults of enemies. The Court of Iudgement, and the Chancery for all Friesland is kept heere, from whence there is no appeale. Neere unto it is Zuichemum, in the Country of Vichlijm^ Doccum is 2 mile distant, having a fertile soile and faire Meddowes. It is distant from the Bay of the sea, 1 mile, and was heretofore subject to Gelderland, Sneca, in the Country of Westergoyum, is situated three miles from Leovardia in a low waterish soyle, so that it beares no corne, but hath faire Meddowes. It was a Cittie about 200 yeeres agoe, but in processe of time it grew so great, so that it is now equall to any Cittie in Friesland. It hath produced many good wittes: Ioachim Hopper was borne and bred in it, who was not onely a light and Ornament to this Cittie, but also to all Friesland, and the Low Countries. Also Peter of Fritema a Lawyer, and Albertus Hero, a Philosopher and Divine were borne here, and many other learned men. Staveren is situate on the

shoare of the South Sea: The Country neere unto it is plaine; being full of ditches and Marshes. This Cittie hath no magnificent building in it, but a strong Castell which standeth over the haven, which was founded by George Schencke, Governour of Friesland, in Charles the fifth's name, in the yeere 1522, that so the Burgundians, might conveniently send thither souldies, and provision for the warre, out of the neighbour Citties of Holland. Plinny Lib. 4. cap. 15. calleth the inhabitants Sturians. Harlinga is situated by the jawes of the South Sea, a mile distant from Franicum, it hath a fertile soyle, and a Castle well fortified against the invasions of Enemies, and a convenient Haven: for it affordeth a fit and necessary habitation for those which come out of North Friesland and East Germanie: whereupon great stoare of people did flocke thither, being allured with the convenience of the place, so that by this confluence of people the Cittie was much enlarged. Franicum is denominated from the Frenchmen, heere Iohn Vlpius was borne, who was most skilfull in the three languages. It hath a publicke Vniversitie. There are also these Citties, Damna, B^lswardum, Ilsta, Sloten, Worchum, and Hindelopen. There are many Islands in Friesland, the chiefe whereof is Schellingana, which is famous for the taking of Dogfish with Netts. Groening is usually joyned with West-Friesland, which maketh a province together with the Territorie belonging to it, called, Ommelanden. Here Rodolphus Agricola, the most learned man of his time was borne. Also Wesselus or Basilius, and Reinerus Perdinius, famous Divines and Philosophers were borne here. Friesland hath abundance of Lakes and Marshes, as we sayd before, and it is watered with the Rivers Laubacum, (which some call Lavica, and Labola, now Lauwers) and Amisis. It hath on the South a very large Bay, which is now called Zuyderzee, as it were the Southerne straite. The Politicke state of Friseland doth consist of three principall parts, which are: The County of Oestergow, the Metropolis whereof is Leovardia, and is divided into these Praefectureships, Lewarderadeel, in which is Leovardia; Tietz ericksterdeel in which is Tiettzarcke; Ydardacel, in which is Ydaert; Rauwerdeahem, in which is Rauwart: Ferwerderadeel, in which is Ferwert: Dongerdeel in which is Wetzens; Dantummedeel, in which is Dantumna Wolt: Acht Kerspelen in which is Suyrhusum: Colmerlandt, in which is Collum: Vesterlant, in which is Beetz: Smalingerlandt, in which was Smalingerlee an Abby of the order of Saint Benedict. The Countie of Westergow, in which are Grieteneyen; Wonseradeel, in which is Witmarssum; Franickeradeel, in which is Franiker: Banadeel in which is Mimersgae: Meynaldummadeel, in which is Mizaldum: Baerderadeel in which is Baerdt: Hennarderadeel, in which is Hennaert: Weynbritzeradeel, in which is Gawe: Gheesterlandt, in which is Wickel. The Countie of Sevenwolden, in which are Grieteneyen; Donyewerstal, in which is Donigae: Leemster Vijsgae, in which is Lemmer: Aenghevaert, in which is Cathrybandt: Schottorelandt, in which are Nye and Olde Schotten; Wittingerdeel, in which is Oldehorn: Hasscher Vijfgae, in which is Hasscherhorn. But all Friesland and Groeningland is subject to the Bishop of Trajectum.



THE COVNTIE OF EMBDANVM AND OLDENBVRG.
The Country whence so called.HItherto we have described Germanie in generall, our Method now requireth that we should entreate of the severall parts. This Table containeth two Counties, the Countie of Embden and Oldenburg; the Countie of Embdane is so called from the chiefe Cittie thereof; and now it is called East Friesland because it confineth on Friseland. For the Frieslanders did not heretofore possesse it, but the Ch^^^s, of which Plinny and Ptolomie make two sorts, the greater and the lesser. The greater are those that doe inhabit the Bishopricke of Bremes: the lesser are the Embdanians and Oldenburgians. Forasmuch as Ptolomie seateth them betweene the River Amisis, and Visurgie his words are these: They saw also in the North, the Nation of the Chaucians, who are called the greater, and the lesser, where the Sea floweth up every day and night, so that it is doubtfull whether it be Land or Sea. Where the miserable people do get upon high hils, and their cottages do flote when the Sea commeth in, and doe seeme like shipwrackes, when it ebbeth backe againe. They have no Cattell nor milke as their neighbours have, nor can they kill any wildebeasts because there is no shrubbes, nor harbour for them. They make thred of Bulrushes and reedes, to weave fishing Netts, and so making a fire with a little dryed mud, they boyle their meate, and warme themselves. Their drinke is raine water which they keepe in trenches before their houses. In this manner the Chaucians lived heretofore. But now they are much changed, for now the Countrie doth afford foode not onely for the inhabitants, but also for the neighbour Countries. But heretofore it was a rude unhabited place, so that Plinnie never mentioneth that Corne or any other fruites did grow heere; but now where is there greater plentie?The fruitfulnesse of the soyle. It had heretofore no fruittrees, but now it beareth all kindes of trees. They had heretofore no Cattell nor Milke, but where is greater plenty now? For nature hath given them a champion Country, full of faire Meddowes, being of a fat soyle, and having many pleasant pastures, which are well replenished and stoared with innumerable flockes, and heards of Cattell. Which appeareth by that wonderfull great plenty of excellent good Butter and Cheese, which is made here, which to the great gaine and benefit of the inhabitants

is transported to divers Countries, and through all Germanie. Also the fertilitie of this Countrie appeareth by the fat and great Oxen, which many thousands doe graze within the Meddowes, and doe grow so fat, that forraine Nations doe much esteeme of them. Besides heere is excellent hunting. So that this Countrie is now of so rich a soyle, that it needeth no supply from neighbour Countries; for it hath such stoare of horses, Oxen, Cattell, Hogges, Wooll, Better, Cheese, Barly, Oates, Wheate, Beanes, Pease, and Salt, so that it doth yeerely transport great plentie thereof to the Countries round about it, and those which are more remote. Moreover the Emperour Fredericke the third, Anno 1465, when this province was governed by divers Praefects, did make it a Countie, and gave it to one Vdalrich. Afterward it had Earles continually even untill our time. There are two walled Citties in that Countie, Embda and Arichum. Embda or Embdena, commonly called Embden, is the chiefe Cittie of this Countrie, and a famous Mart Towne, seated by the mouth of the River Amisis, having a convenient Haven, the Channell whereof is so deepe, that great ships may come in under sayle: so that for wealth, for the publicke and private building, and for the multitude of Cittizens, it is known not onely in Germanie but also in all parts of Europe One of the chiefest Ornaments is the Earles sumptuous pallace, the great Church, and the Praetors house. Heere is wonderfull plenty of all things, both for necessity and pleasure, which the Haven, and the conveniencie of importation of goods, and also the naturall fertilitie of Friesland doth yeeld. The Cittie is so called from the River Ems, which Tacitus calleth Amisia. The other Cittie is Aurichum, which is a pleasant retiring place for the Nobilitie, in regard of Woods and Forrests, in which they doe freely recreate themselves, with Hawking and hunting. The Cittizens are rich, and doe give themselves either to merchandise or some mechanicke trade. There are an infinite many of Castells and Townes in this Countie. And such a number of Villages, that one doth even joyne upon another. The most whereof both for faire houses, large streets, and populousnesse, may compare with some Citties of Germanie. Neither doe rusticke people or husbandmen onely live in them, but also Merchants, and divers kinds of artificers and some of the Nobility: There are also two other Counties which are subject to the Earle of Embda, Esensis, and Ieverensis, so called from their chiefe townes: the Cou^trie Ieverensis is situated beyond the River Iada Westward, and doth containe eighteene Villages. On the North, where the River Visurgis doth discharge it selfe into the Sea, these two Islands doe lye against it, Wangeroga, and Sp^keroga, which are for the most part unhabited. The Countie Esensis lyeth neere the Sea shoare, and doth confine on Ieveria: on the West it is bounded with Berumna and Auriacum: on the North with the Sea. The Lord thereof Hajo ab Husecke, in the yeare 1380, when he had vexed his neighbours, and tooke the ships of the Bremensians in the River Visurgis, and had filled the Sea with Pirates, and the Land with theeves and robbers, at length after

some light skirmishes with the Bremensians, in which hee had the worst, he fled to Elsena, and being there taken by the Bremensians he was delivered to Edo Wimmcke Captaine of Ieveria; who (...) rackt him, and afterward cut him in peeces, because he had with out any just cause repudiated his Sister, whom he had marryed before. There is also in this table the Countie of Delmenhorst, and the Lordships Ezes, Norden, Auricke, Iever, Vredeburg, Ouelgunne and Rheyde. The Rivers here are Amisis, Visurgis, Iada, and others. The inhabitants of this Countrie doe speake the Germaine Language: but in secret matters they use a peculiar speech of their owne which strangers doe not understand. They either give themselves to trades, or husbandry, or merchandise: their apparell is very decent, so that the Countrymen goe habited like Cittizens. The women have a farre different habit from others. For they put all the haire into a Call or Huicke, which being full of silver buttons an^ knots, they let it hang downe upon their backes. In Sommer time they weare their haire in a red silke Call or Net, which is adorned and wrought with silver. And in winter they put on a hood of greene cloath, which covereth all their head, so that you can see nothing but their eyes: and they call this kind of vestment (...) Their gowne or outward garment, is gathered and quilted in (...) foldes, even from the head to the Anckles, and is so stiffened ^^siver, and gold plates, that when it is put off it will stand an end. It sometimes made of red Cloth, and sometimes of greene.

The Countie of Oldenburg.
SO much concerning the Countie of Embda: the Countle of Oldenburg followeth, which was so called from the chiefe Cittie Oldenburg. This Tract heretofore the lesser Caucians did inhabit, as also the County Embda, as we said before. But the county of Oldenburg which this Table here presents unto your view, from the East to the bank of the River Visurgis, contains the Provinces of Stegingia which is subject to the Castle of Delmenhorst, and Stadland, which is divided into five Parishes, and Butidia into seaven, and Ieveria which is subject to it, being a part of Friesland, which hath foure and twentie parishes: on the West it hath Amerlangia, which stretcheth toward the River Amisis, in the middle of the Morineans. On the North it is bounded with Friesland and the Ocean: on the South with the Diocese of Munster. Albertus Crantzius, Lib. 3. cap. 15. writeth, that this is the auncientest Country of them all. For he reokneth Lib. 2. cap. 30. Windekindus Duke of Saxonie (who lived in the time of Charles the Great) among the Earles of this Country. Ierenicus delivers that the Cittie of Oldenburg, was reedified by Charles the Great, and that the Bishop Agalgargus, did there dedicate and consecrate a Church to Saint Iohn Baptist. But I thinke in this matte^ Ortelius and he are both in one errour, because he reckoneth thi^ Cittie to be in Wandalia, and doth place it neere the Sea. For this is not the same Cittie, with that which is in the Countrie of Holsatia.

map of Embdanum and OldenburgTHE COVNTIE OF EMBDANVM and OLDENBVRG.

The Wandalians call it Stargard, the Danes Brannesia, as the same Crantzius doth witnesse. Laurentius Michaelis doth thinke that the Ambronians had their originall from hence, who as Plutarch reporteth, did heretofore goe into Italy with the Cymbrians, and were slaine by Catus Marius; whose name doth yet continue in that Nation which they call Amerlander. And hee is of the same opinion, concerning the Alanian Saxones, who (he supposeth) did inhabite neere the Lake Alanum in this tract, and on either side of the River Alania even to the Castell Ororia, and that they are now called Lengener, that is, the Alamans, and Avergenlar, that is to say, the Vltralanians. The Castle of Delmenhorst was built by the River Delme in the yeare 1247, which belonged 65 yeares to the bishop of Munster; and Antonius Earle of Oldenburg, on Palme Sunday in the yeare 1547. early in the morning scaled the walls with a band of men, and so tooke it, and Hermann of Oer the governour of the Castell, was kept in custodie. Concerning the Earles of this Countrie Andreas Hoppenrodius, doth relate something; but David Chitreus, more excellently in his history of Saxonie. But now by way of conclusion we will adde something concerning the manners of the Chancians. Tacitus a grave writer doth write thus of them: There is a Noble people among the Germaines, who are very just, not covetous but quiet and secret, and not apt to stirre uproares, neither doe they live by rapine or Robbery. And this is a chiefe argument of then vertue, that the great men doe not injure their inferiors; yet they are expert in armes, so that armes of footemen and horsemen is presently raised, before there be any rumor or report of it.




THE FIRST TABLE OF WESTPHALIA.
WEstphalia followes in our method, concerning the name whereof there are divers opinions. Some suppose it was so called from the goddesse Vesta, as it were Vestalia, because heretofore she was reverenced here:The Country whence so called. and so they would have the Westphalians to bee so called as it were Vestalians, for they say that those which dwell Eastward beyond the River Visurgis are called Oostvalian Saxones, from Oost the Eastwinde, and Vadem which in the Saxon Language signifies a Coult, which they bore in their military ensignes, and Colours. But now that name is worne out, and it is generally called Saxonie. So the Westphalians, that dwell Eastward on this side Visurgis, are so called from the Westerne winde. Lastly, others suppose that the Westphalians were so denominated from Veldt that is a field, rather this from Valen. It hath on the East Visurgis, on the South the Mountaines of Hassia, which Ptolemie calls the Abnobij:The Situation on the West the River Rhene: on the North it looketh toward Friesland, Holland, Trajectum, and Trans-Isalana. The ayre is cold and sharpe,The temper of the ayre. but wholesome. The Country is fruitfull, but hath more pasturage than come. It hath divers kindes of fruites, as Apples, Nutts, and Akornes,The fruitfulnesse of the soyle. with which Hogges are fatted. It is more fruitfull about Susatum and Hammonia: and most fertile neere Paderborne and Lippia, but it is barren and desert ground in some places about Amisis. The Dioecese of Munster confineth on it, and that tract of land which lyeth neere the River Visurgis. It is wooddy through all Surland, and the Countie Bergensis: it hath store of Mettall in the Countrie of Colen, and and the Countie of March: and in some parts there are many Salt ^as. It breedeth an innumerable sort of Cattell, and especially,The variety of living creatures. abundance of Hogges flesh, which is esteemed a great dainty, and is served up to Princes Tables. There are also many wilde beasts in the Wood. Charles the Great did first conquer the Westphalians, and converted them to the Christian religion. He instituted these Bishoprickes, the Bishopricke of Munster, of Osnaburg, of Paderborne,The auncient Government. and Minden. But it is not found in the Annalls, how Westphalia was governed after Charles the great, or whether it was subject to the Pope. Truely in East Saxonie there were secular Lords, who did governe the Countrie: at the first, Kings that were descended from Charles the great, under whom the Dukes of Saxonie did grow up by degrees ^^en until Henry the first, King of the Romains, after whom there were three Ottoes, who were afterward Marquesses of Saxonie, being sons ^^ Henry Duke of Bavaria, brother to the first Otto. But we doe not ^^ede what Princes, Westphalia which is West Saxonie, had at that

time joyned in governement with the Bishops. But afterward Duke Leo, and his grandfather before him, Luder Duke of Saxonie, and afterward Emperour, did governe Westphalia. For after the aforesayd Henry was displac'd by the decree of the Emperour Fredericke the first, the Dukedome of Westphalia did assume the title of the Archbishoprick of Colen; and the Dukes of lower Saxonie, being descended from the Earles of Anholt, did hold and possesse it. And now the aforesayd Bishop doth hold a great part of this Countrey, and especially Angria: and the Westphalians are subject unto him, and his Nobles, being as it were slaves unto them. Here formerly the Teutonians, the Busasterians, the Chamavians, the Angrivarians, the Longobardians, the Dulhumnijans, the Angilians, the Chaucians, and Cheruscians were seated. Those whom Mela and other call the Teutonians, Ptolomie calls Teutones: they comming from the Balthicke shoare, where Ptolomie placeth their auncient seate, did give that appellation to Teutoburg, which Tacitus placeth in Westphalia. Those whom Ptolomie calls the lesser and the greater Bufacterians; Tacitus calleth them Bructerians, Willichius writeth that they did inhabite Munster. Those whom Tacitus calleth Ch^mavians, Ptolomie doth name Camanians, as Villenovanus thinketh. From whom David Chitreus supposeth that the Towne Chamen in the Countie of March doth derive his name. The Angr^narians were seated Eastward neere Visurgis: The Longobarians or rather the Langobardians, Ptolomie placeth on the Frontires of this Province, on the farthest part whereof was Bardewick: so also those whom Ptolomie calleth the Dulguminians, Tacitus nameth the Dulgibinians, from whom the Towne Dulmen in the Dioecese of Munster was denominated; heere are also the Angilians, who about the yeare 444 went over into Brittaine, and gave their owne name to England, as it appeareth by many histories, as also by Saint Bede an^ English writer. But the Chaucians, whom Ptolomie calleth the Cauchians, and Suetonius, Lampridius, and Strabo the Cauciam, Deo the Chaucians, and Claudian the Chaycians, as Tacitus writeth, doe spread themselves from Friesland, even to the Catti. The same Tacitus doth place the Cheruscians hard by them: whence the Situation of their Country may be easily gathered: for Dion the historian doth witnesse that they dwelt beyond Visurgis, which may be also collected out of Tacitus. But this first Table or Chart of Westphalia, doth containe the Counties of Oldenburg, Hoya, Diepholt, and the neighbouring Lordships. The Politicke state of Westphalia does consist o^ three orders, 1. The Clergie, 2. the Nobles, 3. the free Cittie In the first order are the Bishops of Paderborne, Leodium, Vltrajctum, Munster, Cameracum, Osnaburg, Ferdensis, and Mindensis. Th^ Abbots Werdensis, Strablonensis, S. Cornelius, Munster, Echternakensis, Corbei, and Hervordensis; and the Abbatesse Essensis. In the second order are the Princes, Earles, and Barons: as the Duke of Cle^land and the Countie of March, the Duke of Iulia and Bergen. Th^ Marquesse of Baden, the Earle of East Friesland or Em^i^ the Earle of Sein: the Earle of Dillenburg^ the Earle of Ver^^derg

map of WestphaliaTHE FIRST TABLE OF VVESTPHALIA.

the Earle of Manderscheid: the Earle of Weida and Ringelberg: the Earle Meursensis: the Lord of Brunchorst: the Earles of Steinford, Benthem, Dortmund, Oldenburg, the Lord of Ridburg: the Earles of Hoya and Diepholt, and Scaumburg: the Lords of Spregelberg, and Vanenberg: the Earles of Arenberg, of Lip, and the Lord of Somerauss. In the third order which is of the free Citties, there are Colen, Aquisgranum, under Wesel, Durun, Cameracum, Dortmund, Susatum, Duysburg, Hervord, Brukel, Wartburg, Lemgow, and Werden. But so much of this, now our order requires that we should unfold the Cities and townes of Westphalia. But seeing we are to speake of the Dioecese of Bremes, we will leave off for a while the description of Westphalia, and returne to it againe in the following Table, and so will passe to the Bishopricke of Bremes.



THE BISHOPRICK OF BREMES.
THe Bishopricke of Rhemes, commonly called Stift Bremen, so called from the Cittie,The Country whence so called. hath the shape and figure of a triangled Isosceles, whose almost equall sides are the Rivers Visurgis and Albis, which doe meete at the hightest corner, nere the Peninsula, which is named after a Tower built there for the defence of ships that passe that way. The Base of it is a line drawne from the river Esta, through the bordes of the Country of Luneburg, and Verdensis, a little beneath the (...) of the River Allera, which doth there discharge it selfe into V^sargis. For the River Esta is the limmit of the Countrie of Bremes and Hamburg, which the River Sevena, (which is small at first, but afterward emptyeth it selfe into Albis with three Channells,) doth divide from the Dukedome of Luneburg. This Countrie is not every where of one soyle. For the two farthest parts of the Dioecese of Iremes, neere the bankes of the River Albis and Visurgis, are very fat and fruitfull. But the middle tract betweene Stada and Bremes, over which the Merchants doe usually travell, is full of barren sands, Marthes, and Bryars. So that the Dioecese of Bremes is commonly co^pared to a Cloak or Mantle, the two former parts whereof begin from the confluence and meeting of the River Albis and Visurgis, and so falling downe to the banckes of both those Rivers, are embrode^ed ^s it were with fruitfull fields and Meddowes: but the other part is woven of a courser threed. Heere the auncient Chaucians ^ere formerly seated, who held all that tract of ground from Visurga even to Albis, and Hamburg. The Metropolis is Brema,The Citties. which Ptolomie, Plinnie, Appianus, Peucerus, and Irenicus, doe call Phabira^^^, it is commonly called Bremen. It is a Hanse Cittie neere the River Visugis, well fortified both by Art and naturall situation, having firestreetes, and being full of Cittizens, and rich by merchandising and traffique. It hath a faire Market place, where there are markets kept weekely for all kinde of provision. On one side of the Market place the Cathedrall Church standeth, and on the other side the Senate house, which hath a publike Wine Cellar under it, in which the Senate doth keepe their wine, and sell it for a reasonable price. Which is a common custome in many Citties of Wandalia, and Westphalia, that the Senate maketh that which is got by wine charges, defray publicke charges. Brema was at first a poore Towne, but as the Christian religion did encrease, so it did increase also; for which it is

beholding to the Bishops thereof, who made it a Metropolitan Cittie, and graced it with the title of the mother Church of al the North, and walled it about. See the Catalogue of Bishops in M. Adams his ecclesiasticall history. There is the Citty Stada or Stadum, which is i^ the Archbishoprick of Breams, being situate nere Zu^nga, on the Southerne banck of the River Albis, and it is the greatest Cittie is Saxome* There is also the Towne Buxtchuda. This Country is watered with these Rivers, Visurge, Albi, Esta, which are full of fish, as Ecles, Lampryes, and Salmons, which those of Breames doe salt up and dry in the smoake, so that the Cittizens doe fell them for rarities, and make a greate gaine of them. The Bremensians are by nature warlike, industrious; and somewhat inclined to sedition. They love learning and liberall Artes, especially when they have gotten them abroad by studying in forraine Countries: but otherwise they are more addicted to merchandising than learning, for they get their wealth by traffique and trading, and by making long voyages. So that almost all the Cittizens are either skilfull Merchants, or Tradesmen, or Shipwrights.



THE SECOND TABLE OF WESTPHALIA.
IN our description of Westphalia, the Citties are, among which the first is Munster the Metropolis,The Citties. or Mother Cittie, of all Westphalia. Ptolemie calls it Mediolanum, as Pyrchaimerus thinketh, it is commonly called Munster. It is a very faire strong Cittie, in which both learning and the Romaine Language did flourish 60 yeare since. The Cittie of Munster nameth the whole Bishopricke, which was so called of a fat^^s monastery built there. See Munster Lib. 3. of his Cosmographa. Heere began the faction of the Anabaptists, in the yeere of our Lord 1533, so that all of that sect did repaire hither, where they chose one Iohn Buckholdus a Cobler to bee the head and ringleader of this sedition, a Vulgar fellow, fit, for any attempt, and farre excelling all the rest, both for wit, boldnesse, eloquence, and cunning. Hee did not feare to stile himselfe King of Munster. Whereupon the Bishoppe thought it meete to suppresse this sect, and so being ayded and helped by the Archbishop of Colen and also the Duke of Cleveland, after foureteene m^^eths seige hee obtained his Cittie. And then hee commanded that the King should have some of his flesh pull'd off with hot Pincers, and then he should be hung out of the Tower in Iron chaines.
Susatum or Soest is the richest and fairest Cittie next to Munster, having tenne great Parishes. They report themselves, that it whas but a Castell at the first, but afterward by degrees it became a very great Cittie. And from thence it was there called Susatum, because in regard of the convenient situation, houses were built by the Castell, so that from the dayly increase thereof it was called Sutatum, as it were ein Zusatz. It hath also many neighbouring Villages which are subject to it, which they commonly call Die Burden. This Cittie is now under the Duke of Clevelands protection, but before it was subject to the Bishop of Colen. Wesel is a faire rich Cittie, famous for traffique and Merchandising. It is called the lower Wesell to difference and distinguish it from the higher, which is situate also on the left side of the Rhene. The River Lppia bringeth up many Commodities unto it, which running by the left side thereof, doth straightway

associate and joyne it selfe with the Rhene. There is at Wesell a memorable Altar of mercy, which the auncestors of the most illustrious Lord Henry Oliserius, surnamed Baers, Lord Chancellor of Cleueland, etc. did place heere and consecrate: being an hospitall for aged people; where they have all things necessary provided for them, and the sonne following his fathers example, hath enlarged the yeerely revennewes of it. Osnaburg, or Ossenburg is a famous Cittie built by the Earles of Engerne, as Hermanus testifieth. Others doe suppose that this Cittie was begun by Iulius Caesar, as the Saxons Annalls doe mention. They report that it was so named from the Oxehides, with which this Cittie was encompassed. It is situated in a pleasant Valley, and it is watered with the River Hasa; they brew good fat drinke in it, which they call Buse. Charles the Great when after 30 yeares warres hee had conquered the Saxons; and had tooke the Castell of Widekind which was neere unto this Cittie, and had put a strong garrison in it, hee instituted twelve Bishoprickes in Saxonie, and made the Bishopricke of Osnaburg the chiefest. For hee esteemed this Cittie above all the rest, and granted them the priviledge of a free Schoole, for the teaching of the Greeke and Latine tongues; as Munster, Hamelmann, and the Chronicles of Argentine doe also mention. Minda commonly called Minden, is a pleasant strong Cittie, and the River Visurgis yeeldeth it great store of fish, and bringeth up many commodities unto it: it breweth good drinke, which is much esteemed, and venteth great store of commodities by way of traffique. Concerning the beginning hereof Munster writeth thus: When Wildekindus, the first Duke of Saxonie, was converted to the Christian faith; hee gave the Emperour Charles his Castell neere the River Wesera, on condition that the Bishoppe should have part of it, for it was able to receive them both, so that the Bishop might say, This Castle shall bee mine and thine for both of us have right unto it; and from hence it was so called in the Saxon Language Myndyn. But in the processe of time the letty y was changed into an e, and now that same Cittie is called Mynden.
Arnspergum commonly called Arnsperg, is the Metropolis of the Countie of the same name. It is situated neere the River Rura, and hath a Castell adjoyning to it seated on a high Mountaine, where the Bishops of Colen have their residence, being a pleasant seate both for hunting, and for plentie of fish which the River Rura doth yeeld. Warburg is a faire Towne in Westphalia, being built on an unequall foundation, by the Dimula; it had heretofore a Countie belonging to it as Hamelmann reporteth, who commendeth it for excellent good drinke, and cheape. Tremonia, or Dortmont is in the middle of the Countie of Tremonium, it is an Imperiall Cittie. The Cittie Trotmania, which was heretofore so called from the Trotmans a people of Suevia, the same was afterward called Tremonia, and now Dortmundt. Auncient Chronicles and Monuments doe declare that in that place, where the Cittie Tremonia

map of Westphalia^HE SECOND TABLE OF VVESTPHALIA.

was afterward builded, there were heretofore two Villages; namely the old and new. But when Charles the Great had subdued all these Provinces of Saxonie, it became a free Towne. For he having considered the fruitfulnesse of the soyle, and the excellencie of the Situation, brought his Colonies hither, and kept his Court here. Whereupon all those fertile grounds which lye round about it were called Conings-Hofts-Landt, and all those faire Villages which are neere unto it are called Reichshofen, and are bound to bring in rent-corne yeerely to serve the Kings Court. There are also Dusseldorp, and Hervordia. And the lesser Townes of Widenbrug and Coesvelt. There are also in this Table the Counties of Lemgow, Benthem, Lingen, Tecklenboreh, Diepholt, Schouwenberg, Ravensberg, in which are 5 Praefectures, Sporenberg, Ravensberg, Vlothem, Lymberg, and Lippe. Also the Bishopricke of Munster, in which are these Praefectures, Walbecke, Sassenburg, and Stromberg. And these Burgraviates, Werne, Bocholt, Ahus, Horstmar, Bevegern, Rheine, Meppen, Nienhuys, Cloppenburg, Wilhusen, Vecht: and these Counties, Steenverdt, Gemen and Erfmarschalck, Nortkereken, Osnaburgensis, Mindensis, and Paderbornensis. But of these things enough, we passe to the rest. Westphalia is watered with many Lakes, Marshes, and Rivers: The Rivers are Visurgis, Amasis, Glea, Neth, Hasia, Honta, Sala, Lippia, Stevera, Aa, Vidrus: to Amasis, these tributarie streames belong, Dewera, Dextra, Galaa, and Berckel, whose spring heads are in this Countrie. There are also many hills and Mountaines in Westphalia, as Baemberg, and others. And there are many Woods among which are: dat Hensterholt, and de Avert and Holt-marckt, and the Forrest of Teuteburg, neere the head of the River Lippia. I come to the publicke workes. Charles the Great builded up many Churches in Westphalia, but the first was the Cathedrall Church in honour of Saint Peter, Crispine and Crispianus. There is at Susatum, a wonderfull great Church, with a very high Steeple, consecrate to Saint Patroclus, which is the tutelary god of this Cittie. I passe by the other Churches, Monasteries, Hospitalls for the sicke, and the guest-houses which are in Munster and in other Citties. Charles the Great, as we sayd before, did enforce the Westphalians to receive the Christian Religion. But seeing that after they had beene many times subdued, they were yet stubborne and refractory, and did violate the oath which they had taken, he thought it meete to chastise their insolencie, by punishing some, to the feare and terror of others. Therefore he constituted certaine Iudges, and gave them power to examine and punish perjur'd persons or rash swea^es, or those that were guilty of any fact, without hearing them, or admitting any plea in their owne defence. This sharpe severitie made the Westphalians both fruitfull and obedient, when they saw that Noblemen, and men of great estates, were hang'd up in the Woods by Martiall law, without any triall. Aeneas Pius writeth, that this kinde of Iudgement did continew even untill his time, and that the secret rites, were observed, by which they judge delinquents, and offenders, and doe punish the guilty wheresoever they are found,

before they know that they are condemned, and the Iudges are called Scabini: but so much hitherto. Iohn Lewenclavius a learned man and skilfull in the Latine and Greeke tongues, was borne in Westphalia, who most happily translated all Xenophon, all Nazianzenus workes, and some Greeke historians, and other Greeke bookes, to his everlasting fame and renowne. The people of this Country are comely and handsome, of a large stature, strong limmed,Their manners and very hardy and couragious. It hath plentie of Souldiers, so that they can presently raise an armie. The Inhabitants also are witty, and it is a proverbe, that there are more craftie knaves in Westphalia than fooles. They punish adulterie with much severitie,Their Dyet. Their food is blacke bread and cheese: their flesh meate is Porke, hung Beefe, and Bacon, of which they have great store: Especially the Gammons which the inhabitants doe eate raw. Their drinke is a kinde of Beere: the rich drinke Renish wine, although it be very deere.Their Arts. But seeing the Country in most places is unfit for tillage, therefore the inhabitants doe give themselves to Mechanick Arts and merchandising.Their Traffique. Their commodities, are free stone for carving, and building, and also Milstones and Whetstones; and especially they have delicate gammons which are accounted great dainties even at Princes tables. Concerning this country are these verses in Meeter: 
Hospitum vile,Cranckbroot, dunbier, langhe mile,Sunt in Westphalia:Qui non vult credere, loop da.



THE BISHOPRICK OF MVNSTER.
THe Bishopricke of Munster is situated in a fertile soyle abounding with all kindes of fruites: on the North it hath the Countie Benthemium: on the East the Bishopricke o^ Padelbrum; on the South the Counties of Zutphan and Marcan. Charles the Great, Emperour of Rome, and King of France which conquered lower Saxonie, which is now called Westphalia, d^^ institute this Bishopricke, and called it Mimingerodensis, or Mimingardevorensis. Afterward hee called it Munster from a Monaster which he built there, in the honour of the blessed Virgin Mary Hermannus was the first Bishop thereof. The Cittie is strongly fortified both by nature and Art, especially since the faction of the Anabaptists ceased: it is situated on a plaine having five faire Canonicall Colledges, and a schoole famous for learning and Arts. The inhabitants are laborious and industrious, and doe transport their commodities into forraine Countries. But after that the Spaniards had warres with the Low Countries, they were prohibited and forbidden to trade and traffique with the united Provinces. And after the reigne of Ferdinand the first, all that were not of the Romaine religion were enforced to leave the Cittie, to their great losse and dammage. It was governed formerly and now also by Bishops, their Catalogue followeth. The first Bishop was Ludgerus Frisius, brother to Hildegrine Bishop of Halberstadt, who dyed in the yeere of Christ 809. after whom there followed Godfry, Alfrid, Lubbertus, and Bertoldus, in the reigne of the Emperour Arnulph: and in the yeare 895, and afterward, William Richard, Reinolds, Hildebald, Dodo, Suederus, Theodore, Sigefride, and Hermann the first, who built a Monastery beyond the water, whence the Towne was called Munster, in the yeare 1025, whose successors were called the Bishops of Munster: namely Robert, Fredericke, the brother of the Marquesse of M^snia, Erpo, Theodoricke of Wintzenhurg, Henry, Egbert, Wernerus, Henry, Ludovicke, Godescal, a Saxon, who dyed in the yeare 1200. Hermann the second, Count of Catznelbogen, Otto Count of Benthem, Theodoricke, Ludolphus Count of Holte, Otto the second Count of Lippe, William the second Baron of Holte; Gerard Court of Marca; Everhard Count of Deest, Otto the third Count of Retberge; Conradus, Ludovicke Count of Hassia, Adolphus Co^^t of Marca, in the yeere 1365. Iohn Count of Virnenburch, translated to Vltrajectum; Florentius Count of Vevelichoven, Paro Bohemus,

map of MunsterTHE BISHOPRICKE OF MVNSTER.

Henry Wulf, Otto the fourth Count of Hoya, Henry Count of Mursium, Walramus brother to Henry, Iohn Bavarus, Henry Bishop of Bremes, Conrade Count of Retberg, Eric elected Duke of Saxonie in the yeare 1508. Fredericke Count of Weda; Eric Count of Grubenhager, Franciscus Count of Waldeck, in whose reigne, the Anabaptists, did make a great tumult or faction, having one Iohn of Leiden for their Captaine, who would needes bee called King of Israel. After Waldeck there were William Ketler, Bernard Raefvelt, and Iohn Comes of Hoya, who dyed in the yeare 1574. Iohn William Duke of Cleveland, who resigned to Ernest Duke of Bavaria and Bishop of Colen, after whose decease his Nephew Ferdinand succeeded.



THE THIRD TABLE OF WESTPHALIA
THe third Table of Westphalia as the Title sheweth, doth lively delineate and describe three parts. The Dukdome of Bergen, the Countie of March, and the Dioecese of Colen.The Dukedome of Bergen whence so called. The Situation Which we will runne over in the same order as they are propounded. The first is the Dukedome Berges, which is so called from the Towne Bergen, it beginneth at low Wesel, and so runneth up a great way toward Rhene. But concerning the originall of this Dukedome, Munster writeth thus.The Government. In the time of Henry Auceps King of the Romaines, namely in the yeare 724, there were two brothers, unto whom for their former service, King Henry gave a certaine part of Westphalia, in which the elder, namely Adolphus, built a Castell neere the Countie of Arnsperg, and called it V^lvesheg; and afterward he brought all the Countrie to Civilitie, and adorned it with many Townes and Villages. The other brother called Eberhard, did also build a Castle, and called it Aldenburg. But these brothers encreasing both in power and wealth, the King made Adolphus a Count, and the Countrie a Countie, which was called the Countie of Altenna. Also he made Eberhards land the Countie of Bergen. A little after Eberhard being made a Monke, passed over his territories to his brother, and builded a monastery ^eere the River Dune, and was made Abbot thereof. After Adolphus and his posteritie, there succeeded these Counts, Engelbert, Adolphus, Engelprechtus, and Adolphus. But Adolphus dying without issue, the Countie of Bergen came to his Sisters sonne, namely Gerard Earle of Iuliacum. After whom his sonne Wilhelmus governed both Countries, and after him succeded his sonne Wilhelmus, the first Duke of Iuliacum, and Duke of Bergen and Gelderland. After him, there succeeded in these Dukedomes, his brother Rainold, who dyed in the yeare of Christ 1433. some say, that the Countie Montensis was errected and established at that time, when Henry the proud was deposed by Fredericke the first. But yet in the yeare of Christ 1336. Charles the fourth made this Countie a Marquiship, and made his sonne Wentceslaus Duke thereof. Here is the Imperiall Towne Essendia, in which Alfrid the fourth Bishop Hildesheymen builded a Nunnery, for 52 Virgins, and an Abbatesse, and likewise a Colledge for twentie Cannonists and a Deane. The Countrie yeeldeth

great stoare of wheate and corne, so that the white bread Essendia is much estemed. The Townesmen are Merchants, or W^vers or Smiths, so that there is much armour made here. It hath ma^wels and a blacke kinde of stone coales, which the Countrie nee^ unto it yeeldeth, but chiefely by Steltium a Towne by the Riv^^ Rura. There is also Dusseldorp, the Metropolis of this Dukdome, so ^^^med from the river Dussela, which runneth through the middle of ^^
The Countie of Marck.The Countie of Marck followes. It seemeth that the Vbians d^ heretofore inhabit this Country, and the Dukedome of Bergen. B the Counts of Altena were formerly contented with this title,The auncient Government. untill Count Frederickes sonne, having gotten Marck, writ himself Earle of Marck and Altena,The Townes. and boare the armes of it, about the year 1004. in the time of Wichman the thirteenth Earle of Cleveland Marck is a large Countie of Westphalia, having many flourishing Townes on the bancke of the River Lippia, as Hammon, Vnna, (...) Tremonia, Werdena and others. We have formerly spoke ^^^cerning Susatum and Tremonia. Werdena in the entrance to W^^lia, is a Towne neere the River Rura, it was built by William ^denburg, the 42 Abbot of the Monastery built by S. Lutgerus, in (...) yeare 1317, and Engelbert Earle of Marck did give it many pri^^ledges, which it still enjoyes. The Townesmen live for the most (...) by feeding and grazing of cattell. They have pleasant fields and p^stures, and very high wooddy Mountaines, in which there are gre^^ stoare of hogges, and little Rivulets with a murmuring sound to ru^ downe the mountaines. Besides, the river Rura, yeeldeth them (...) commodities, besides great stoare of fish, and fat Eeles: there is a (...) bridge over the River Rura, for passengers to goe over. There is a so the Towne Chamen which David Chytraeus supposeth that it (...) so called from the Chamavians, who came hither in Trajans time.
The Dioecese of Colen.The next Countie in this Chart is the Dioecese of Colen, commonly called Stift Coln, so called from the chiefe Cittie thereof The Vbians did heretofore inhabit it, who were first seated beyon^ the River Rhene, in the Countie of Marck, and which belonged to the Prince of Cleueland, so that it is a wonder that Volateranus was no ashamed to place the Vbians in Marchia Badensis, which is neere Helvetia. Tacitus Lib. 4. Hist. doth call them Agrippinnians. Iuniu saith that it is likely, that the Vbians derived their name from a Tow^^ commonly called Tuysch, and heretofore Te vbisch, and by contraction Tubisch, and from thence Tuysch, where there is a faire auncient Monasterie built. Neither is it unlikely that the great Alta^ which Tacitus often mentioneth was built here, neere which Segmund (whom Strabo corruptly calleth Semiguntus) the sonne of S^gest Prince of the Sicambrians was created Priest, who afterward a^ the revolt and defection of Germanie fled to the rebells, and brok^ his fillets which were the ensignes of his Priesthood. Puceru^^ t^ thinke that the Vbians were the inhabitants of Eij faliae, which a^^ farther off, and some do rather think that they were those Tarbellia^ which Caesar mentioneth. The Metropolis is Agrippina, which Tacitus calleth Colonia, or COL. CLAVD. AVG. And Agrippinensi^^^

map of Westphalia^HE THIRD TABLE OF VVESTPHALIA.

in an auncient writing: and in Claudius coyne it is called Col. Agrippin^ Vbior. In Vitellius coyn it is called the 19 legion: and Ptolomy cals it the Agrippin legion: Plinny and Suetonius, do name it the Agrippine Colonie The inhabitants do now call it Colln, and the Frenchmen Coloigne. Som^ do fabulouslly suppose that it was called Colonia from Colonus a Trojan: and some would have it so called because it was a Romaine Colonie: Cornelius Tacitus writeth thus concerning it: But Agrippina that she might shew her power to the neighbour Nations, commanded that the old Souldiers and the Colonie called by her name, should be brought into the Towne of the Vbians, in which she was borne. And by chance it came to passe, that her Vncle Agrippa received those people into his protection, after they had passed ove^ the Rhene. So that this Cittie had both those names of Agrippin^ and Colonia from Agrippina: and from that time it was called the Agrippine Colonie, and the Cittizens were called Agrippinensians. But afterward when the Romaine Empire began to decay: the Frenchmen under the conduct of their King Childericke in the yeare of our Lord 452, did drive them all forth, and by force got the possession of the Colonie, and did governe ^t untill the time of Otto the first. But in the yeere 749 Otto the Romaine Emperour tooke this Colonie from the Frenchmen, and restord it to the Romaine Empire. Since which time it hath alwayes beene a free Imperiall Cittie. It is situate on the left hand bancke of the River Rhene, being great in compasse. I^ was at first foure square, but now the forme of it is like an halfe Moone, having many faire houses, and streetes, pleasant Gardens and Orchards, being well fortified with a strong wall and a double ditch; besides, it is populous, and rich: it is famous for Mechanicke Arts, and for the Vniversity, and for wealth it excelleth the most Citties of Germanie. In this Cittie about the yeare of Christ 1340 Taulerus a famous Doctor of the Church did preach.
Bonna is seated on a pleasant plaine, where the Mountaines of Rhene doe descend and become levell ground. There is also Sontina a faire Towne, and the Village Brula. Also on the Coasts of the Vbians there was Tolbiacum,The publicke workes. as Tacitus reporteth, Lib. 5. Histor. I cannot omit the publicke workes. Heere is the great Church of Colonia, built with free stone curiously wrought and carved, which is consecrated to Saint Peter; which if it had beene finished, it would have exceeded all the Churches in Germanie, for building and largenesse; and it might worthily have beene counted one of the wonders of Europe. What, should I mention the faire Church of the Machabees? Or what should I speake of the other Churches and Monasteries? What should I mention the Guesthouses, the Hospitalls for the sicke, the Hospitalls for the poore,The Government. and for Orphans? Besides, the Praetors house doth much beautifie this Cittie. I passe by other things.
Moreover the Politicke government of this Cittie doth represent the flourishing government of the Romaine Commonwealth.

For if you consider the dignitie of the Consuls, Proconsuls, Censors, Tribunes, Quaestors, and the Praefects of the Corne, or the inflexible staffe of Iustice, which is carried insteed of the knitch or bundle of roddes: or if you observe the order of the companies, or the civill authority of the Senators, you shall see that this Commonwealth of Agrippina is as 'twere the Effigies, and lively Picture of Rome, so that it deserveth to bee called the Romaine Colonie. But so much hitherto let us passe to other matters.



THE ARCHBISHOPRICK OF COLEN by RHENE.
THe Vbians in Caesars time were seated on that bank of t^^ river Rhene which is toward Germany, and had a flou^^shing Citie; but they being vexed by the Suevians w^ were the most potent people of Germanie, sent Emba^sadors unto Caesar and made a league with him, leav^ pledges and desiring ayde of him against their enemies; who bei^^ then suppressed, yet afterward the Suevians assailed them agai^ Whereupon that they might live in more security hereafter, M Agri^pa son in law to the Emperour Augustus, brought them over the (...) to a place which they now call Vpen. And also Agrippina, (...) to Agrippa, N. Claudius, afterward Emperour, the sonne of Ger^^nicus; brought thither in the reigne of Tiberius, a Colonie beca^ she was borne there, and so as Tacitus saith, it was called after (...) name: so that afterward they would not bee called Vbians b^ Agrippinians. This Cittie grew so bigge, that Z^st^ calleth it the greatest Cittie, and Ammianus calleth it well fortified Cittie: and it is manifest that it was the head Cittie and Metropolis of Germanie, and a Dukes seate, so that Vitellius, a^ Suetonius witnesseth, sent the Dagger hither, with which Otto stab^ himselfe: and in the same Cittie Trajan received the ensignes o^ the Empire, being sent unto him from Nerva. It continued faithfull unto the Romaines, untill in the yeare 462, their strength bei^^ weakned and spent, the Frenchmen under the conduct of Ki^^ Childericke, by force got possession of it, and held it untill Ottoes time For he having tooke it from the Frenchmen, restored it to the Romaine Empire, and set it at liberty. But before Fredericke the seconds time, about the yeare of Christ 1201, it was associated and joyned to Hansa. It is now fortified with 38 Towers, and with ^ double ditch and a wall, on both sides whereof there are rowes o^ trees. It hath in many things some affinitie with Rome; in the Magistracie there are Consuls, Proconsuls, Praetors, Censors, Tribune Questors, and Aediles: As for sacred buildings, it hath man faire Churches, and for civill buildings, it hath a Court, a Marke place, a Porch or an Exchange. The Court hath a high Tower o^ curious workemanship, of free square stone, which is every were adorned with curious artificiall statues. The River Rhene glideth b^ the Cittie, on the opposite bancke whereof the Divitensian Caste^ was built with a bridge by Constantine the sonne of Constantius, wh^ placed a garrison therein for defence of the Frenchmen, which together

map of Colen by Rhene^^E ARCHBISHOPRICKE of COLEN by RHENE.COLONIENSIS Archicpiscopatus Milka^^ G^^manica communica

with the bridge was destroyed by the Bishop Bruno, who bui^^ an Abby with the stones thereof, which in the yeare 1124. was governed by Rubert a famous divine. There were 78 Bishops of Cole^ from Beatus Maternus Saint Peters Scholler, as some would have i^ even to Ferdinand Bavarus. Their territory is very large, and the^ have many Townes subject unto them, the chiefe whereof are Bo^na, Nussia, and Ardernacum neere the Rhene. It is a fruitfull Country abounding with corne and wine. Their sacred jurisdiction is extended farre and neere; and in saecular matters they are Poten^ Princes, and they have the second place among the Electors of th^ Romaine Empire.



THE ^OVRTH TABLE OF WESTPHALIA.
NOw we doe adde this fourth Table of Westphalia, that so we may have the better knowledge of this large wide Country: it containeth that part of the Country which is bounded on the North, with the River Rura, and it hath ^he East the Bishopricke of Padleborn, and the Countie of Walde^^ on the South Hassia, on the West it is joyned with the Countie (...) Marcan. It is full of Mountaines and Hills, especially toward the (...) where it joyneth to Padleborne, and Waldecia, in which tract (...) are many Townes, as upon the banck of the River Mommius: (...), Osbern, Hullinehoven, Arensberg, Nienhus, Gunne, Stoc^^, F^^^in^k, Berchem, Molhem: and many others as Bergen, ^le^ede, Langstraten, Mensel, Hemerde, Heddingchasen, Overs^^n, which are watered with other little Rivulets. But the Ri^^^ Mommius ariseth out of the aforesayd Mountaines, and hath al^ besides the aforenamed, these Townes, Hilbrichusen, Brilon, and ^^en, which are knowne through the neigbouring Valleys, for the ^ommodities which that River yeeldeth. The River Hime is also no ^sse famous, which riseth in the middle of this Province, out of a ^^all Fountaine neere Fredericke Burg, and watereth the little Townes, Meiler, Eiselpe, Helmerinchuse, and Meschede, where it neereth with another little Rivulet. The River Winne beginneth at ^^ede or a little above, and glideth by Berentrup, Passert, Dorler, ^q^^ck, and beyond Grevenstein after many windings and turnings, it c^meth to Freinhol, and so runneth among the Mountaines, and at length mingleth it selfe with Mommius neere to Neijm. The River (...), beginneth in the Mountaines neere Nodarem, and commeth ^word Overkirchen on the South, and Smalenborg on the North, and from thence it runneth by Meygen, Grevenburge, Habbeke, and so ^aving received another Rivulet neere Plettenberch, it goeth for^ard to Ebrichusen, and Werdecke, and at length about Limburg, it ^^th cast it selfe into the River Mommius. Moreover the River Ru^, runneth and riseth from hence, which glideth by Oldenda; and so neere the River Sunderen receiveth Borchou, and so being much en^arged, it runneth into the Rhene. The Countrie towards Hassia is Mountanous, and therefore unfruitefull. The inhabitants are of a ^reat stature, and strong, but very rude, and eate course fare, as Ba^^n, Beefe, Beanes, Pease, and Lettice. The great labour which is bestowed in tilling the earth, and the small profit which arises from ^^ence, maketh them lesse diligent. For in winter time they Banket,

and drinke great store of a thicke kinde of drinke; and they ta^^ care but of their Cattell, which they keepe with their owne ^^ling houses. The Rivers doe afford them fish, but not (...) tasted as those which are taken in the Rhene. They are not v^pert or ready in matters of warre, and therefore they shun^ doubtfull chance of warre, as much as they can: and albeit th^ ^ons were accounted heretofore a warlike Nation, yet now th^ despised and contemned of their neighbours, and now for wa^ use they are not esteemed for matters of warre.



map of Westphalia
^^E FOVRTH TABLE OF WESTPHALIA.





THE DIOECESE OF LEDEN.
THe Dioecese of Leden is so called from the chiefe C^^tie Leden Hubert. Thomas of Leden doth affirme th^ was called Leden,The Country whence so called. from a Romaine Legion that ^ slaine in that Valley, and the inhabitants doe (...) Liege, as it were a Legion. Some thinke it was fo^med from a little small River called Legia, which rising (...) miles from the Cittie, doth within the Cittie mingle it selfe (...) the River Mosa.The Situation It is commonly called l' Euesche de Liege. O^ North West it hath Brabant, on the East partly Mosa, and (...) the Dukedome of Limburg. On the South the Countie of N^^cium. The length of it is 31 Leden Miles, and the breadth (...) hath a cleare,The temper of the ayre. The fruitfulnesse of the soyle. temperate, and wholesome ayre: the soyle is plea^^^ and fruitfull, especially Northward where it confineth on Br^^^^ where it yeeldeth great store of Corne, and other fruites, a^^ some places wine. But towards the South where it joyneth to ^zenburg and France, it is somewhat barren, and Mountanous. (...) Woody; for heere is some part of the Forrest of Arden, which the greatest, as Caesar witnesseth, in all France. This is the (...) face of the soyle: but within it hath Mines of Iron and Lead, a^^ also some of Gold. There are also Quarries, out of which to m^^ great mens Tombes, white Marble which the Graecians call (...) blaster, is digged. There are also a kind of pit-coale digged ou^ them, which are gotten with great paines, and with hazard of li^ and some times they are digged out under the Channel of Mosa, and (...) brought into our Country by shippes, and there is yeerely raised (...) of them, an hundred thousand Duckers. This stone they commo^ly call Leden coale, or Charbon de Liege: which assoone as it h^^ tooke fire, it kindleth by degrees, it is quenched with oyle, and ^^ter makes it burne: The heate of it is very vehement,: whenc^ comes to passe that Leden doth boast of three thrings above o^ Nations: Bread better than bread: Iron harder than Iron: and (...) hotter than fire. They report that a certaine stranger in the y^^ 1198 did first finde out the use of this stone, who shewed it t^^^ smith. Moreover this Countrie aboundeth with all kinde of Ca^^ and it hath Woods which affoord great store of Game for hawk^ and hunting. They report that Saint Maternus Patavinus, the (...) Bishop of the Tungrians, about the yeare of our Lord 101, did c^vert this Countrie to the Christian faith. For the Bishops (...)

map of Leden^HE DIOECESE OF LEDEN.

which is now at Leden, was then at Tunguris, and it continewed t^ the yeare 488, at what time Trajectum was translated by S. Servatius to Mosa, when the Hunnians under the conduct of Attila, the broke into Germanie, and did wast that Cittie together with othe^ townes and it continewed there even to Bishop Huberts time who i^ the yeare 713, did translate it to Leodium, where it now remaineth* Moreover from Hubert the first Bishop of Leiden, even untill ou^ times, Guicciardine reckoneth 62 Bishops. Neither is this Praelat^ a Bishop onely but also a Prince of the Empire, Duke of Bouillion^ Marquesse of Francimont, Count of Loten and Hasbania. The auncient inhabitants of this Bishopricke were the Eburonians, the Tungrians, Centronians, and Ceraesians. Now it taketh up a great part of th^ auncient Lotharingta for the Dioecese of Leden containeth the Dukedome of Bouillion: the Marquiship of Francimont, the Countie o^ Hasbania or Haspengaw, and Loten, and many Baronies. And ther^ are in this tract besides Trajectura, the middle part whereof is subjec^ to the Duke of Brabant, 24 walled Citties, and a thousand 700 Villages, with spire Steepled Churches, and many Abbyes and Lordships. The names of the Citties are these: Leden, Bolonium, Francimontium, Loots, Borchworm, Tungri, Hojum, Hasselt, Dinantum, Masacum, Stochum, Bilsenum, Saint Trudonis, Vtsetum, Tumum, Varem, Beringum, Herck, Bree, Pera, Harmontium, Sine^um, Fossa, and Covinum, as Guicciardine reckoneth them. The Metropolis of them all is Leden, which some call, Augusta Eburonum, the inhabitants doe call it Liege, and the Teutonians, Luyck and Luttich. It is an auncient Cittie, and Hubert Thomas, a Ledener doth referre the originall thereof to Ambioriges a couragious King of the Eburonians, unde^ whose conduct the inhabitants by an Ambushment, slew Cotta, and Sabinus, having cut off one Romaine Legion, with 5 Cohorts, as C^ Caesar, Lib. 5. of his Commentaries concerning the French warre doth relate. Others suppose that it is a new Cittie, which was buil^ by Hubert of Aquitaine, but their opinion is manifestly proved to be erroneous, by some auncient Monuments, and buildings. There doe flow into the Cittie some other Rivers besides Mosa and Legia, as Vtes, Veses, and Ambluarus, which arise out of the Wood Arden. There are also very many cleare fountaines, so that many private houses, have two or three. The Cittie is wide built, and doth containe some Mountaines and Vallyes, the compasse of it is foure Italian miles. There are faire Aedifices and buildings, and the Bishops Pallace for statelinesse, and magnificence exceedeth all the rest, which was built by cardinall Erard of Leiden. But for faire Churches, whether you consider their number, or their curious building, or their richnesse; it doth farre exceede all the Citties not onely of France, but of both Germanies. There are eight Collegiate Churches in it, in which there are very rich Cannons, but the chiefe and fairest is Saint Lamberts Church. It is a Cathedrall Church: and the Bishop thereof is Prince of the whole Dioecese, and Country; but none are chosen to bee Cannons, unlesse he bee descended of a Noble stocke, or else a Doctor or Licentiate: and it is lawfull

^^^ any Cannon (unlesse he be chosen into the number of the Priests) ^o resigne his benefice, to marry a wife, and to take upon him another calling. In this Church there are very many pretious vessells, and ^any ornaments of Gold and Silver: among the rest, there is Saint ^^^ges statue of pure Gold, which Charles Duke of Burgundie, con^^^ed. There are also foure very rich Abbyes, adorned with well ^^^ed Libraries. There are 32 Parishes within the Citty, and as many Churches. Whereby it appeareth, that that which Petrarck writ was ^ot undeserved, Vidi Leodium, insignem Clero locum, that is, I saw Leden famous for the Clergie men. The Bishop hath the right and ^^de of a Prince: yet the Citty hath so many priviledges and liberties, that it may be counted a free Cittie. For it hath Consuls: it was heretofore a great place of studdy, so that it is observed, that at one time ^ Kings sonnes, foure and twentie Dukes sonnes, and 29 Earles sonnes, were students at Leden: Besides many Barones sonnes, and great mens children, who were all for the most part Cannons of S. Lamberts Church. Bolonium, or Bouillon, is a Castle foure mile from (...) and sixteene from Leden, being built with rare workemanship, ^^ the toppe of a Mountaine: it is the seate of the Dukes of Bouillon. (...) Duke of Lotharingia, was borne here, who in the yeare 1016, at the generall councell held at Claremont in Avernia, together with his brothers, Eustatius and Balduine went to warre against the Infidels, to recover the holy Land. At what time this Noble Heroe, to furnish himself for this warre, sold this Dukedome to Spertus Bishop of Leden, which was a greater glory to the seller than the buyer. By his valour the Christians tooke Ierusalem in the yeare 1020: When the Army offered him for his brave atchievements the Kingdome of Ierusalem, and a golden Crowne, this Noble Christian Prince refused them, saying that he would not be made a King, nor weare a golden Crowne, there where his Saviour had worne a Crowne of taxes. Francimontium was heretofore a walled Towne, but now the walls are fallen downe: Cardinall Erard whom I formerly mentioned built a Fort heere. It is 4 Miles from Leden, and it is honoured with the title of a Marquiship. At Tuini (which is a Village Towne neere Francimont) there is the best Lead, and in the Mountaines neere unto it, there are Marble Quarries. The Tungrians are three miles from Mosa, and as many from Leden: their Cittie is now called Tongeren, being situated neere the River Iecher; it was so called from the Tungrians a people of Germany, who leaving their Country passed over the Rhene, and seated themselves heere. It is the Auncientest Cittie in all Brabant. It is two hundred miles from this Cittie to Paris, and all the way was once paved with stones, as it is yet manifest by some part thereof. Hercules his Church within the Cittie, sheweth the antiquitie of it, whose statue doth yet stand over the gate. Hojum or Hoy, is so called from a little swift running Rivulet which here casts it selfe headlong into Mosa, it is five miles distant from Leden. Foure miles from Leden neere the little Towne Dener is Eilsen, and beyond that the Village Munster hilsten; three miles from the Tungrians, is the Cittie of Saint Truden, which as some suppose,

was the seate of the Centronians, whom Iulius Caesar doth ofte^ mention. A mile from Leden, is the Village Ebure, which as it is supposed, also was the seate of the Eburonians. Placencius writeth (that I may adde this by the way) that a part of Trajectum, joyne^ to this Dioecese by the donation or gift of Porus, Count of Lovania. We omit the other Townes for brevitie sake. This Countrie i^ every where watered with Rivers, the most of which doe runne in to Mosa:The Rivers as Legia, or Legio, Vtes, Veses, Ambluarus, Ieckel, Hoy, Vesera, Vl, Voer, Vrt; the others runne into Demera, and so to Scaldis as Ratheck, Stimmer, Herck, and Hespe, which are all faire cleare Rivers, abounding with all kindes of fish. Heere was a Fountaine concerning which learned men doe not agree. Some doe affirme that it is yet within the Cittie, Guicciardine and others doe contend that it was out of the Cittie, halfe a mile from Limburg, 5 mile from Leden, 8 miles from the Tungrians, neere the Towne Spa, in a pleasant and delightfull Wood, being a part of the Wood Arden This Fountaine hath a great vertue in curing desperate diseases, as the Gout, Dropsie, Fevers, and the like. And heere the Country beginneth to be full of Mountaines,Mountaines. Woods. in which there are rich Mines. I^ hath also many shadie Woods, which are parts of the Forrest of Arden, which is so celebrated by Iulius Caesar. One small part of it which is neere unto the Countie of Namurcium, is called the Forrest Marlignia. And so much concerning the Dioecese of Leden: now we proceeed to the rest.



THE COVNTIE OF MVERS, with the adjacent Countries.
IN this Table, in which the Countie of Muers is lively described and delineated, together with the Countries, Citties, and Rivers which doe encompasse this Countie: we will onely describe those Countries which we have not described otherwheres: namely these. First be Countie of Muers, afterward the Dukedome of Cleveland,The Countie of Muers. and ^^ly the Dukedome of Iuliacum. The Countie of Muers commonly called Graefschaft Muers, was so called from a Towne of the f^re Name. On the East it hath the Dukedome of Bergen, and the Countie of Marck: on the West Gelderland:The Situation on the South the Dio^cese of Colen and the Dukedome of Iuliacum: on the North Cleve^^land. The Country yeeldeth great store of corne, and hath many pleasant Meddowes. The chiefe Towne is Muers, which doth name, the Countrie, it standeth over against Duisburg,The chiefe Towne. not farre from the left banck of the Rhene. And so much concerning the Countie of Muers. I come to the Dukedome of Cleveland,The Dukedome whence so called. which was ^^alled from the Cliffes: and there is a small Towne of that ^^^e, neere the bancke of the Rhene, which is built of three Cliffy (...). It is boundered on the East with the Dukedome of Bergen,The Situation the Countie of Marck and Westphalia; on the North with the Countie of Zutphania, Trans-Isalania, and Batavia; on the West with Gellerland, and Leden; on the East with Colen and Aquisgranum.The temper of the ayre. The fruitfulnesse of the soyle. The variety of living creatures. The auncient Government. The Countrie hath a good and wholesome ayre, it yeeldeth great store of Corne, and pleasant Meddowes. Here are divers kindes of living creatures: and in some parts divers wilde beasts, as oares, Foxes, Hares, Connies, Harts, wilde ^ats, and wilde horses: they have ^^at store of Partridges, Thrushes, and Stares. An innumerable sort of Duckes, and great plentie of all kindes of provision. They report also that Pipin, and Charles Martell, did give Aelius Gracilis when he flourished in wealth and power, that part of Batavia, which is now called Cleueland. There succeeded after him Theodoricke, Rheinhold, Rudolphus, Iohn, Robert, Balduine, and others even to Iohn who was the 27 from Aelius, and here the line was extinct. Yet Adolphus was adopted by the Emperour and the provinces into this familie, and in the Councell at Constantia, the Emperour Sigismund, created him Duke of Cleveland. This Dukedome hath these

Townes on the confines of France:The Townes. Xantum, or Santen, a Towne on the left bancke of the Rhene, which Pighius heretofore called Trajana Colonia, and Pyranius, and many others Vetera: it seemeth to be very auncient and of great antiquitie, by those stones which are called Duynsteen, of which great stoare are gathered out of the ruines. Burichum, or Burich is a small Towne, situate over against Wesel, hahaving pleasant fields and Meddowes round about it. Clivia, or Cleve is the head Towne of the Province, not farre from the bancke of Rhene, not far from that place where it spreadeth forth his armes, and beginneth to Inile Batavia. It was heretofore a very great Cittie, as we may collect by the ruines thereof. It was called Cleve because it is situate on three cliffie rockes, neere the Rhene. On the highest part of the three hills, there is seated a high, broade, foure-square Towre, with a faire Castle, which they report was builded by Caius Iulius Caesar, in his French warres, as a Fort of defence against the Germaines: which may be seene in these words written in the great Court of the Pallace by the Princes commandement. Anno ab. vrbe. DCXCIIX.C. Iulius. Dictator. His. Partibus. Subactis Arcem. Clivensem fundavit. That is, in the yeare from the building of the Cittie DCXCIIX.C. Iulius, the Dictator, in these parts, having subdued Arcem, founded Cleve. Now it is memorable because it is the seate of the most illustrious Dukes of Iuliacum, Cleveland, and also for the Collegiate Church, and the curtesie of the inhabitants. It is very conveniently situated, and hath a faire prospect into a faire plaine, which is cloathed with greene grasse and herbage: but especially from a high Tower, which from the weather cocke is called the Swanne Tower. Calcaria is a Towne in the Island of Rhene, which was built first by the Earles of Cleveland, as a Fort and Tower of Garrison to prevent the incursions and inroades of these of Colen and Gelria, with whom they had often warres. It was so named from the auncient Castell Calcer, from whence there was passage from this Island to the farther bancke of the Rhene; it grew rich and powerfull by cloathing, and brewing of drincke, which was transported from thence to other places. Above Calcaria in that place which is called Aufden Baern, it is thought that Caesar Germanieu did build a bridge over the Rhene, when he marched from his old tents unto the Martians, who are now called Twentanians, but yet the little Towne Otmaersen retaineth its auncient name. Griet is situate on the left bancke of the River Rhene, and below it on the same side is Griethusium on the confines of Batavia, neere the auncient Castell Lobecum, which signifies the corner of the course, for Loop signifies a course, and Eck a corner: for Rhene divideth his course and runneth divers wayes. On the bancke towards Germanie, there are Vesalia, of which we have spoken in the descripion of Westphalia; also Duisburg, or Teutoburg, a Towne of auncient Germanie, situated heretofore on the bancke of the River Rhene, betweene the Rivers Rura and Angra. Both histories, and the faire buildings doe declare and demonstrate that it was alwayes a famous Towne. And the writers concerning the affaires of Flanders doe shew, that it was frequented

map of MuersTHE COVNTIE OF MVERS.

by Merchants for trading and famous Marts which were kept there. Embrica is a very neate Towne, well peopled, having faire streetes, and a well governed schoole; the Commentators on Tacitus doe call it Asciburg, but it is commonly called Emmericke. And so much concerning Cleveland: the Dukedome of Iuliacum remaineth, commonly called Iuliers or Gulick. It was so named from the Towne Iuliacum. It is situated betweene the River Rhene and Mosa, in the same manner as Cleveland is, but that the latter lyeth Northward, and the other Southward. For otherwise they have the same Countries confining on them.The temper of the ayre. It hath a good wholsome ayre: and the soyle yeeldeth abundance of Corne, which is very waightie. It bringeth forth also good Woad, which is very gainefull to the inhabitants: and it hath many flourishing Meddowes,The variety of living creatures. The auncient Government. but no Wine. Heere are varietie of living creatures, and especially excellent horses. The Princes of Iuliacum are thought to be descend from Eustathius brother to Godfrey Bilioneus. But the Country of Iuliacum, was heretofore a Countie, and the Emperour Ludovicke, made it a Marquiship in the yeare 1329, and 30 yeares afterward the Emperour Charles the fourth, made it a Dukedome. But William the fourth was the Marquesse and Duke thereof. His sonne William succeded after him in the Dukedome of Iuliacum and Gelria: he dying without issue, left Raynold his brother to succeede him. And he dying without an heyre, his wife maryed his kinsman Adolphus of Bergen, who was created Duke of Iuliacum, and Bergen. They dying without issue, William was made Duke of Iuliacum and Bergen, and had a sonne named Gerard, who succeded his father: William was sonne to Gerald, who marryed his onely daughter to the onely sonne of Iohn Duke of Cleveland: and so the three Dukedomes of Bergen, Iuliacum, and Cleveland, were made one Country. But this Iohn had a sonne named William, who joyned the fourth Dukedome, namely of Gelria, to the three Dukedomes of Cleveland, Iuliacum, and Bergen; but in the yeare 1543, he was conquered and subdued by Charles the fifth, and spoyled of his Country, and afterward upon new conditions hee received it againe, with all Gelria, by marrying the daughter of Ferdinand King of the Romaines. The chiefe Cittie which nameth the Dukedome is Iuliacum commonly called Gulich,The Citties and Townes. which Antoninus mentioneth in his Itinerary; it is situated neere the River Rura. The other Townes besides Iuliacum are Marcodurum, commonly called Duren, a Towne famous for holding out against that fiery seige, which Charles the fifth layd against it. The Monastery of Eyphalia is a pleasant towne: lying in a vale betweene two Mountaines, not farre from the fountaines of the River Ervatis: also Euskirchia, Birchemum, commonly called Caster from the magnificent Castle wherewith it is fortified; also Grevenbroeck, Sladbach, Dalen, and Wassenberch. It hath many Castles belonging to Noble families as Palant, Meroden, Rensschenberg, Nesselroden, and Wachtendoncke. There is also the Baronie of Wickraden having a strong Castell, which was sometime the seate of the Quadians. In this tract the Cittie Aquisgranum is situated, which Ptolomie calls Vetera, in which the thirtieth Legion was billited.

Lhuithprandus calleth it the Palatine Granum, and Rheginus T^ermas Grani, and Aquis Palatium. And the writers of those times doe often call Aquae Aken, the Germaines call it Ach, and the French, Aix. It is a faire Cittie and hath an wholesome ayre, and a pleasant soyle, although the buildings are not so beautifull as they have beene formerly. It hath many hot bathes both within the walls, and without, which are soveraigne to cure many diseases. This Cittie is famous, in regard Charles the great made his residence here, who both dyed and was buried here. These Countries have besides the Rhene the River Rura, or Rora which neere a little Towne of the Vbians, called Roeroort, which signifies the end of Rora, is mingled with the Rhene, where we may see a great difference betweene the two confluent Rivers, the one whereof is greene, the other white. Moreover Rora hath many winding turnings, and yet it runneth with so violent a streame, that sometimes it breaketh into the Meddowes, so that in a short time it will overflow three or foure Acres of ground, and sometimes it filleth the ground full of shelles: here are also Nersa, Lupia, Angria, Duselium, Erfatt, Nirsi, Vorni^^ and others. It hath also woods, one of which is that which Tacitu^ calleth Saltus Teutoburgensis, which is a very large Wood neere to D^isburg, in which there are an innumerable sort of wilde beasts. It hath many cleere Rivulets. The Mountaines are steepe and cloathed every where with high trees. But enough of these things.



THE COVNTIE OF WALDECK.
Iodocus Moers of Corbach, who first describe and set forth this Table, doth reckon two degre^ of Nobles under the Earle of Waldeck, one fr^^ who alwayes resideth in the Countie, the (...) holding of the Countie; therefore seeing I have nothing else to insert, I will here reckon up (...) orders, and what houses are contained in (...) Table.
The stocke of the free Nobility within the County, are Virmundt, Meissenburg, Gogrebe^^ Zertzen, Tolmerichausen, Dalwig, Eppe, Rodehausen, Reen, Sconstat, Hertzinghausen, Twist Hanxtelden, Greismar, Roman, Dorfelt.
The stocke of those that hold of the County, as well without as within the County: are Witstein Reiteel, Spiegal, Calenberg, Westfal, Canstein, Ma^spurg, Lebenstein, Mengersen, Mescheden, Be^nenhurg, Papenheim, Wulfft, Volckenbergb, Vrf.



map of Waldeck
^HE COVNTIE OF VVALDECK.


The Countie whence so called.I Returne to Mercator in whom the Countie of Walde^ followeth, commonly called De Graffe hast Waldeche. ^ is so called from the Cittie Waldeck: and it is a great pa^^ of Hassia. It hath on the East Hassia: on the North t^^ Bishopricke of Paderborne:The Situation on the West the Dioecese ^ Colen. The length and bredth of this Country is sixe miles. It ha^^ a fertile soyle,The fruitfulnesse of the soyle. faire spreading Hills, and pleasant Rives. It bringe forth great store of Corne and Wine: it produceth divers kindes ^ mettalls, as Gold, Silver, Brasse, Iron, Lead: Quicksilver, Al^^ and Salt, which are all digged forth of the bowels of the Earth, nee^ the Cittie Wildunga, and the Castle Eisenburg. There are also Coal^ stones digged forth, as in the Bishopricke of Leden: which the Ge^manes call Steicolen, which they burne in steed of coales. It prod^ceth divers kindes of living creatures, and great store of wilde beast which the inhabitants doe often hunt.The variety of living creatures. The Countie of Waldeck originally derived from Widichindus Earle of S^alenburg, who Charles the Great made governour of Paderborne, which right o^ Widichindus Earle of Waldeck being to goe with Fredericke Bar^rossa into Asia, did passe over to the Colledge, in consideration three hundred Markes of silver payd unto him.The auncient Government. Neither is there a continewed catalogue of the former Earles. Therfore we must reck^ from Henry Ferreus, who first added Corbachia to the Earledome. He^ry Ferreus, who built the castle of Laudoria, did bring Corbachis und^^ his obedience in the yere 1366, on the 11 day of March. This Henry the yere 1400 slew Frederick Duke of Brunswicke, being chosen E^perour, neere to Frissaria, his wife was Elizabeth of Bergen. Welr^ yeeldeth himselfe into the protection of the Bishop of Meguntu^ Philip the second was his sonne, whose wife was Ann^ the daughter of Iohn Duke of Cleveland. Wolradus Pius the second was a learned man: and Praesident of the Colledge of Ratisb^rn, in the yeare 1556, he dyed in the yeare 1478. Iosias was borne in the yeare 1578 and dyed in the yeare 1558. Christian and Wolrad were the sonnes of the Earle Iosias. But as concerning the Imperiall offices, th^s Countie is the chiefe, among the foure, namely Wal^^^ke, Hart^ Fulchen, Arnsperg, and Rabnaw. The chiefe Cittie is Waldecia, co^monly called Waldeck, which nameth the Countrey, having a Cas^^ which the River Eidera watereth. There are also the Townes As^^chausa, and Dudinschausa: and the Cittie Landavia with a Castle a^joyning threunto: also the Cittie Mengerhusa with a Castle, whe^ the Earles keepe their residence, being two miles distant from W^decia: Rodenum is an auncient Cittie with a Castle, in the Territor^ whereof there is good hunting. The Castle of Wetterberg hath pleasant seate and prospect, being situated betweene the Rivers T^^sta and Ahra: there is also the City Wildunga: neere to which the are Mettall Mines, from whence great store of gold, Brasse, and Iro^ is dayly digged forth. Here are also certaine fountaines, unto whic^ the sicke persons did heretofore come out of divers Countries. A^^ here the best drinke is brewed: There are also the Towns of Friag^^

Saxenhusen, Saxenberga, and Furstenberga: also the Castle of Isenburg, neere unto which there are Mines of Gold and Iron, as neere Wildunga: Eilhusia a well seated Castle, and divided from the Cittie by a River: Corbachia, is a fortified Cittie: Albertus Magnus maketh mention of gold Mines which were found neere unto it, and he affirmeth that there is lesse waste of that gold in refining and purifying of it, than of that in Bohemia or any other. Neither are the veines thereof yet altogether exhausted, for not farre from Cor^^chia, there is gold found among the sands. Newburg is a Towne with a Castle. There are also the Castle Ither, and the Monastery Werba. This Country is watered with many Rivers, the chiefe whereof is Edera, which may compare with Tagus of Spaine, Hebrus, of Thrace, and Pactolus of Asia; and it hath golden sands, being very full of fish, and it cutteth through the middle of the Province of Waldecke, and it floweth out of the Mountaines of Nassaw, through the Countie of Witgenstein to Francoburg, and watereth the Castle of Waldecke, which is built on an high rocke; standing in a low valley, environed on every side with Mountaines, and so gliding by Frislara, a Towne of Hassia, and having received the River Sualma, it dischargeth it selfe into Fulda, a little above Cassella, and afterward into Visurgis. The other River are Dimila, Twista, Vrba, Abra and ^^ber. There are also divers Mountaines, as Grunebeckerbeg, Winterberg, and Den Astenberg, and others which are described in Mercatus Table. There are also many woods in this tract, as Aldewaldt, W^terholt, Geppenhage, Plat. I omit the rest which are every where dispensed through this Countie. And so much concerning the Countie of Waldecke, I passe to the Palatinate of Rhene.



THE PALATINATE OF RHENE.
The Countie whence so called.AFter Waldecia there followeth in my method the Palat^nate of Rhene, commonly called die Pfal^Z. Some suppose that this Noble part of Germanie was so called fro^ the Pallace of Rhene; some would have it so named from Charles the Great, and others from the Pallace of Tr^vers. Beatus Rhenanus endeavoureth to prove out of Ammiaum M^^cellinus; that the Palatinate was so denominated from the Country Pa^las. For Ammianus writeth in this manner. A Bridge being built neer^ Moguntiacum, the legions passed over the Rhene, and pitched the^ Tents in the Country of Capel^atium, which was so called from Pa^las. And in another place, When they came to the Country whi^^ is called Cappellatium or Palas, they pitched their Tents ther^ where the bounder stone doth distinguish the confines of the Romans Burgundians. Moreover Rhenanus addeth: Heere we may obser^ that the Prince Palatine was not so called from the Pallace of Caesar, ^ from that little aedifice or building which is neere the Rhene, but tha^ he receiveth that appellation from the Country. But seeing there a^^ many Count Palatines of other places mentioned in Histories, fo^^ doe reject this opinion concerning the Etymologie of a Palatine. B^ most doe thinke that the title of Count Palatine is derived from a Palace; which was and is a title of great dignitie in the Romaine Empir^* So that those who did serve the Prince in the Countie of the Palla^^ were called Palatines.The Situation This Country hath on the West the Dukedom^ of Zweibruck, on the East Franconia, and the Dukedome of Wirtemberg on the North it is bounded partly with the River Moenu^, and part^^ with the Wood, which they call Ottonia: on the South it hath Alsati^* All this tract is not inferior to any part of Germany, both for pleasantnesse, fruitfulnesse, and plentie of all things. The Mountaines for t^^ most part doe beare Vines,The fruitfulnesse of the soyle. which doe yeelde most excellent Wi^^ which other Coun^ries doe fetch from thence: and these Mountain^ on the Northside are full of Chesnuts. The fields doe yeeld abundan^^ of Corne, as Wheate, Pulse, and Barley. There are also many fai^^ Gardens, and Orchards, which are planted with all kinde of tree^ which beare great store of apples.
There are excellent Vines between Wormacia, Heydelberg Ne^stadi^^ Crucenacum, and Oppenheimum: and especially at Pfettershemiu^ which may compare for goodnesse with the Setian, Falernian, an^ Caecubian Vines. There are also Woods and Mountaines full ^ wilde beasts, especially Harts. And also the inhabitants doe bri^^

map of Palatine of RhineTHE PALATINATE OF RHENE.

up many Goates and Kiddes in these woods, in regard that they delight more in wooddy Forrests than in Meddowes. For Caprae or Goates are so called a Carpendo, that is, from cropping of trees, and therefore it was wont to be a clause of exception in letting of ground, that no Farmer should keepe Goates in his ground. Neere Heydelburg there is great storne of Hearnes, which breed there in the Woods: there is also a kinde of water Fowle, which liveth in the water, and yet cannot endure any raine or tempests, which she avoydeth by flying high in the ayre, according to that of Virgill:
Atque altam supra volat Ardea nubem,And the long-wing'd Herne doth flyAbove the clouds that are so hie.
It is called also Ardea, quod ardua suo volatu petat, that is, because it flyeth high. She buildeth her nest in the highest trees, and doth naturally hate the Hawke, as likewise the Hawke seeketh continually her destruction. But when they fight in the ayre, they both strive which should get uppermost; if the Hawke be above her, he comes downe upon her with great violence, and kills her. But to the matter. There were alwayes Praefects of the Pallace, especially in the Emperours Court, which the Frenchmen did heretofore call the Majors, of the house or Pallace. But at what time the Countie Palatine of Rhene was instituted, and where the Palatines of Rhene did keepe their residence foure hundred or five hundred yeares agoe, I cannot determine, seeing there are divers different conjectures. Some say the first Palatines, were onely Noble men untill the time of Otto the third, at what time they were made Princes Electors: for they had more dignity. The first Elector Palatine was Henry, who with the other Electors in the yeare 1003 did chuse the Emperour Henry. But Munster saith that he doth not finde it mentioned in any writings, either where he kept his Court, or what Country he governed, or what people were subject unto him; but some doe suppose, but without any certaine ground, that the Princes Palatine did heretofore keepe their residence at Wormacia, and had great power in that Citie. It is manifest, that Conradus Duke of Franconiae in the yeere 742 did reside at Wormes, but not the Prince Palatine. This was the seate heretofore of the Intuergians, the Nemetians, and the Vangionians, as some doe suppose. The Intrergians were a people of Germanie, which Peucerus doth place in the Palatinate neere to Heydelberg, which Country was also called Capellatium and Pallas as we sayd before. Those whom Ptolomie and others call the Nemetians, were a people in Germanie neere the Rhene, confining on the Metensians, Argentimentians, and Wormacensians; Rhenanus calleth it now the Episcopall Cittie of Spires, and Aethicus calleth it Augusta Nemetum. Also those whom Ptolomie calleth Vangiones, are a people of Germanie, neere the Rhene: Rhenanus and Lichtenavius doe call them Wormbser-Bisthumbs. But Pirchaymerus on the contrary affirmeth that the Vangionians are those of Spires, and the Nemetians

those of Wormes; and Irenicus addeth this reason, namely because Ptolemie, who in description of Rhene, did usually proceede from the South Northward, doth first mention the Vangians, and afterward the Numetians. But Sig. Gemblacensis, who writ about five hundred yeares agoe, calleth Wormes the Cittie of the Vangionians. Also Iohn Herald doth gather, out of an inscription, that the Cittie Wormes, was heretofore called the Watch Tower of the Vangionians. There are 48 Citties in the Palatinate, the chiefe whereof is Heidelberg, where the Prince Palatine keepeth his residence. It was so called either from the people, whom the Germaines call Heyden; or from the Mirtle-tree, which they call Heydelbeer, and heereupon the most learned Melissus doth call this Citty Myrtilletum. That which Pyramius calleth Durlacum, others more rightly doe call Durlach. Iohn Herald doth call it Capellatium, others doe call Capellatium the Palatinate, as we sayd before. Munster calleth it Bergstras, which standeth in the way from Franckford to Heydelburg. Some doe suppose that the Cittie which Ptolemie calls Beudoris, was seated here, but this is but conjecturall. For Ptolemie placed Beudoris; in the 51 degres of Latitude; when as Heidelberg, is in the 49 degree, and 35 minutes of Latitude. Some suppose that it should be read and written Edelberg, which signifies the noble Mountaine: and others Eidleberg, which signifies the neere Mountaine. It is situate by the River Nicrus or Neicarus, in the entrance of the Mountaines, it hath beene a famous Vniversity for learning and Arts from the yeare 1356, being then instituted by Rupert the elder, Prince Palatine, who sent for one Marsilus from Paris to be governour thereof. And from that time it was well replenished with learned men, and students. The most famous Doctors were Rodolphus Agricola, Iohn Dalburgius, Iohn Virdungus, William Xilander, Thomas Erastus, Zach^ry Vrsin, and many others. Moreover, the whole Palatinate is divided into foure Praefectureships, as Heydlebergensian, the Alzaeens^^, the Neostadiensian, and the Mosbachensian, which are so called from the Citties of Hedelberg, Alzea, Neostadium, and Mosbacum. There is also Bretta, which is a small Towne neere the River Salza, in which Phillip Melanchton was borne, who writ much concerning the liberall Arts: also Ladeburg, so called from the Romaine Tents, halfe of which was pawned to Duke Rupert the elder, the other part came to the Bishop of Wormes. Sifrid of Stralnberg sold unto the aforesayd Prince in the yeare 1357, the Towne Schriessen, and the Castle of Stralnberg. And in the yeare 1344, the Towne Weinheim, was given to the Prince by awardment of Arbitrators, which heretofore the Bishop of Moguntinum did possesse. There are also the Townes Cauba, Gelhusen, Sintzon, Luden by the River Tuberus, Oppenheim, Caesarea Latra, Ingelheim, Lowenstein: and in Brureinia there is Bruxells and others, as may be seene in the Table, and also many Castles and Villages. The chiefe Rivers are Rhene and Neccarus. The latter doth water and cut through the middle of the Palatinate, and doth discharge it selfe into the Rhene, neere Ladeburg; the auncients did call it Nicer, it hath great store of Mullets, which are commonly called Barbells. Also there continually commeth downe this River great pieces of timber,

from the wood Otto, which the River Necarus bringeth into the Rhene. The lesser Rivers, are Tuberus, Lutherus, Iaxtus, and others. The Country is both Mountainous and field ground. It hath high Mountaines, which doe beare excellent Vines, of which the Rhenish Wine is made. And there are Woods which yeeld stoare of game for hunting. The chiefest whereof is the Wood Otto, which is a part of the Hercynian Wood: the breadth thereof is from the River Necarus even to Moenus, and the length from the Mountainous way called Bergstras, even to the River Tuberus. But so much hitherto. There were many Churches, in the Palatinate, and many Monasteries; as the Monastery of Lorsch, which was built by Charles the Great, or as some suppose by Pepin. Concerning the Library, thereof Munster writeth thus: There is not a place in all Germanie, where there is a more ancient Library than in this Monasterie. I saw there a Manuscript written with Virgills owne hand: and in it Ammianus Marcellinus his last booke was found, which is now published, being written before in great capitall letters. Iohn Dalberg Bishop of Wormes a learned man, did take the best bookes from thence, and put them in the Librarie at Ladenburg. There are foure Electors in Germanie; the Palatine of Rhene, the Archbishops of Mentz, of Triers, and Colen. The free Citties are Mentz, Colen, Trier, and Gelenhausen. The Princes and Lords are the Count Palatine: Count Nassaw: and Beilstaine: H. Reifferscherdt, and Rheineck: Teutsch Ordens Hern in Coblentz: the Abby of S. Maximinus neere Triers, the Provost Seltz H. Nider Eisenburg. But so much hitherto, I come to the Dukedome of Wirtemberg.



THE DVKEDOME OF VVIRTEMBERG.
THe Dukedome of Wirtemberg, commonly called Wurtembergerlant,The Country whence so called was so called from the auncient Castle Wirtemberg, which standeth in the middle thereof, on a high hill not farre from the Emperiall Cittie Essing. This Country of Wirtemberg, doth lye by the River Nicrus. It hath on the East the Swevians, Vindelicians, and Noricians: on the West the Palatinate, and the Marquiship of Baden;The Situation on the South it hath the Mountaines of Arbon, and the Swevian Alpes, for so the Inhabitants doe call the higher Mountaines of this Countrie: on the North ^^^umia, and not farre off the wood Otto.The Climate* The ayre of this Country is very wholsome and temperate both in Winter and Summer. It is as fruitfull also as any part of Germanie: both for Wheate, Pulse, Wine, and other fruites. But yet all the Country is not of one soyle,The fertility. for that part where the River Neccarus ariseth, and confineth on Her^^s, and that which lyeth by the Swevian Alpes, betweene Danubius and Ni^rus, is rugged, and unfit for tillage or planting of Vines. On the A^pes it is a stony soyle, but very fruitefull, and also by the blacke Wood, it hath a sandy red coloured earth, which yeeldeth great store of Corne. But there where the River Neccarus floweth through the C^^^pion ground, it is very fertile and fruitfull: for it hath every where hills crowned with Vines, greene Meddowes, fruitefull fields, (...) great store of Wine, Corne, and Apples. This Dukedome also hath Mines of Silver, not farre from Wiltberg, and it is sayd that the Towne ^^lachium is built on Mines of Brasse: it hath also Iron and Brasse. ^^ere are divers coloured stones found, which for the most part are ^ameld and streakt with blew. So that it seemes that Nature did endeavor to enrich this place with pretious stones. There are divers kindes of living Creatures, and in the Woods there are an inumerable sort to bee seene. It was made a Dukedome in the yeere 1495, by the Emperour Maximilian, in a meeting or Parliament held ^ Wormes, and he made Eberhard Earle of Wirtemberg a Duke. Duke Eberhard the second continued but two yeares in his Dukedome, but having melted his gold and silver plate, he fled first to Vlma, and afterward to the Prince Palatine, and dyed without issue. After that the Emperour Maximilian created Eberhard the Nephew of Eberhard, Duke of Wirtemberg But hee was droven out of his Country in the yeare 1519, by the Swedlanders. Christopher succeeded his father Vl^icke: and Ludovicke his sonne succeeded after Christopher. And Ludovicke was succeeded by Fredericke, the sonne of George Earle of Mount ^ellicard. The Inteurgians were formerly seated heere, but Rhenanus

called them the Vuithungians. This Dukedome is as it were circular a round,The Citties. and doth containe many Citties and Townes. The chiefe Citt^^ are Tubinga and Stutgardia. Tubinga is commonly called Tubingen, whi^^ is situate neere the River Neccarus, being a very neate Cittie, havi^^ store of bread and Wine, which is transported to Swethland; and hath a stone Bridge over the River Neccarus. It hath also a Castle, a^ a hill planted with Vines, a Colledge of Cannons, and an Vniversit^ In this Cittie, besides Iohn Stoffler, and others, Leonard Fuchsius (...) professe Physicke. And the most famous and learned Martin Crusi^ was the Rhetoricke professor, in the same Academy. It was institut^ by Eberhard Earle of Wirtemberg, whom Maximilian, (as we sayd b^fore) created a Duke, in the yeere 1477. Iohn H^rold in his booke the Germaine antiquities, sheweth by an inscription engraven the that Augustus had a Mansion house at Tubinga. Which Peter Applia^ in his booke of auncient inscriptions doth set downe thus.
MAX. IN AVG. EM. GER. MAX. DAC. MAX. ARM. MAX. TRIB. P. COS. ET.
But Heroldus setteth downe the whole inscription, as the Empero^ was usually enstiled at Rome. Imp. Caes. Divi. L. Sept. Sever. Pert. (...) Parth. Tarah. Adiab. F. M. Aurel. Antonin. Aug. Sarmat. Max. G^ Max. Dac. Max. Armen. Max. Britan. Max. Arab. Max. Alema^ Max. Parth. Max. P. E. Pont. Max. Trib. Pote vi. Cos. Procos. Perp^ Leg. 8. Ant. Aug. P. E. Ejus. Num. Devot. Prin. Opt. Fortis.
Stutgardia, which is the Metropolis, and Dukes seate, is situate nee^ the River Neccarus. The Countie of Stutgard was named from th^ Cittie: which was built by the Vandalls, and afterward reedified (...) the Elector Iohn Marquesse of Brandenburg, and Otto the third. (...) in the yeare 1290, Albert the fourth, Marquesse of Brandenburg, a^ Prince of Anholt, the sonne of Otto the fourth, gave it as a Dowrie wi^^ his Daughter Beatrice, who marryed Henry Leon Wandalus. This Cittie is enuironed with a fruitfull soyle. And great store of Wine is ma^ every yeare in this Towne. Iohn Rheulius was borne heere, a learn man, skilfull in the Law, a great Linguist, and one that taught Hebr^ There is also Reutlinga, being seated neere the River Neccarus wh^ was made a Cittie in the yeare 1240 by the Emperour Fredericke, (...) second. This Cittie is famous for paper Mills. The other Town^ are very pleasant, and most of them fortified with strong Castells, namely Vrachum, by the River Amerus, also Nirtingum, Kircheda, Ho^bronna, Lauffena, Pinigtheim. The Castle of Asperga, Greininga, Mar^chum, Canstadium, Waiblinga, Schorendorffum, Geppinga, Fiesen, fo^merly called Aludtacum, Heidenheim, and Wilipergium, where the m^ diligent Cosmographer Daniel Cellarius was borne, being situate ne^^ the River Nagolta; also the Townes Herrenberg, Rotenberg, and Hech^gum, Belingum, and diverse others that you may behold in the Ta^^

map of WurttembergTHE COVNTIE OF WIRTEMBERG.

or Mappe. This Dukedome is a chiefe part of the Emperiall circle of Swethland, which because George Gardnerus, and David Seltxlis have described it alone more accurately than the rest, I will here set downe the whole circle of Swethland. The circle of Swethland doth containe three orders, the first is the Clergie, the second the Princes: the third the free Citties. In the first order are the Bishops of Chur, Costentz, and Auspurg. The Abbots of Kempten, of Reichienow, of S. Gal. in Helvetia, of Salmanswerler, of We^garten, of Weissenow, of S. Blasius, S. Peter, of Maulborn, of Chaffhausen, Stain^am Rhein, Kreutzlingen, Petershusen, which lyeth by the Rhene Northward, also the Bishop of Einsideln, Pfeffers, Pfefficon, of S. Ioan in Thurthal, of Schussenriedt, of Sockenburg, of Ochsenhausen of Cunigsbron, of Marchial, of Elchingen, of Ysue, of Munchrod of Aurspurg, of Yrsee, of Gengenbach, of Schuttern, of Disidisen. The Abbatesses of Lindaw, of Rottenmunster, of Bucchaw, of Guttenzell, of Beund, of Heppach, of Teutsch, of und Burgund. In the second order which is of the Princes; there is the Duke of Wirtemberg, the Marquesse of Baden. The Earles of Helfenstein, Wetsenstag, Oringen, Lauffen, Mountfort, Furstenberg, and the Marquesse of Eberstain. Also the Earles of Tollern, Bultz, Laebenstain, Tubingen, Kirchberg, Tengen alas Dongen, Gundelfingen. The Lords of Stutgart, of Tussen, of Waldeburg, of Sonneburg, of Valckenslain, of Kunseck, o^ Kunseczerperg: also the Barons of Geroltzek, and Ober Helwen. I^ the third rancke there are the Citties of Ausburg, of Kauffheurn, o^ Vlm, of Memmingen, Kempton, of Bibrach, of Leukirch, of Ysne, of Wangen, of Lindow, of Ravenspurg, also Bucborn, Vberlingen, Costentz, Pfullendorff, S. Gal, Schafhausen, Reutlingen, Estingen; Gmind, Weil, Heilbron, Wimpfu. Hal in Schawben, Dinckelspuel, Bopsingen, Gengen, Alen, Nordlingen, Donawerd, Buchaw, Offenburg, Gengenbach, Zelin^ Hamesparch, Rotweil. I returne to the Dukedome. This Countrie is watered with many pleasant Lakes, and Rivers very full of fish, the chiefe whereof is the River Brentius, which is never frozen in the coldest and hardest time of all winter. The River Nicer runneth through the middle of it, and having received many Rivers, of which the chiefe are Nagolta, Entius, Remisus, Kocherus, Iagusta, Filizius, but Brentius mingleth it selfe with Danubius. The Alpine Mountaines are in this Dukedome, which are called Alpes ab albedine from their whitenesse, for the white stones thereof are seene a farre off, and they have many severall names, as Schera, Albuchus, Hanecamphus, and Hertfeldius. Also part of the Wood Hercynia and Martiana, doth spread into this Country, which have severall names, as the Wood Albuchius, the Wood Stubenthal, the blacke Wood commonly called Schwartzwalt, the Wood Odenwelt, etc. The people of this Dukedome, are valiant, courteous, constant and religious.



THE LOWER ALSATIA.
ALsatia commonly called Elsasz,The Countrie whence so called. was so called as some suppose, as it were Edelsalz, that is, a Noble and famous seate: others thinke it was so named from the River Illa by changing a into i, as it were a seate by the River Illa; whence ^ome doe affirme that it was called the Country of Illesass, and not (...). It is as fruitfull a Country as any that lyeth by the side of the (...); on the East it hath Helvetia, which parteth it from Rhene; on (...) West Lotharingia, where the Mountaine Vosagus is the bordering his betweene Lotharingia and Germanie: on the South it hath part of (...) and Burgundie: on the North it is boundred with the Dukedom ^^umberg. It is nine Germaine miles long, and from Rhene to the ^^^^aines it is three Germaine miles broad, but towards Haganoa it ^^eth broader, betweene the Mountaines. But this Country is so fruitfull and there is such great plenty of all things, especially of Wine (...) Corne, in this little tract of Land: that it doth not onely serve the ^^^iants, but other people also of Germanie, both farre and neere. Therefore Iames Wimphelingus in his Epitomy of Germany, doth call (...) the Score house and Nurse of Germanie. For, excellent Wines are ^^tinually brought out of this Country in Carts, and sometimes are (...) ayd by shipping into Helvetia, Swethland, Bavaria, Lotharingia, and the Low Countries, and sometimes into England. In Sungoja ^^e is great store of corne, and all over the plaine ground of Alsatia (...) to Argentina, there is every where great store of corne, so that the ^^tants of the Mountaines of Lotharingia, the Burgundians, and a and part of Helvetia, are sustained by it. It hath Mountaines which ^^ld excellent good Wines, and in the plaine ground, it hath Corne, a^d divers kindes of fruite trees. It hath also on the Mountaines Woods of Chesnuts; and Mines of Silver, Brasse, and Lead, especially in the vale Leberthal It hath also faire pastures both upon the Mountaines and valleyes, as appeareth by those excellent fat cheeses which (...) made in Munsterthall, so that there are great store of Kine and ^^e bred in this Country. And it hath in some parts many wilde ^^^ses, also Leopards, Beares, Martines, and Harts, and innumera^^ other wilde beasts. Alsatia was heretofore under the Dominion the Kings of France, as also a part of the Kingdome of Austria. Al^^ was held to be the chiefest Dukedome, which Hildericke King of France, did honour with that title, and gave it to his Cosen Etico in the ^^^re 684. After Etico there succeeded his sonne Adelprechtus, who being slaine with an arrow, left two sonnes, Linfrid and Eberhard who ^^^e governours of Alsatia. Afterward their familie was expelled

forth of Alsatia by Charles Martell, Palatine and Master of the C^^^ in the Kingdome of France. But in the time of Otto the first, the Ea^^ of Ryburg, who where allyed by consanguinitie to the Emperour governe Alsatia. Some say that they were made Landgrave Alsatia, others say that Otto the third did divide it into Landgr^^ships, and that the higher Landgraveship which contayneth the To^^ Einsheim, and the adjacent Townes did fall to the Earles of Habsb^^ The other to the Earles of Ottingen to whom it descended from (...) Landgrave of Lower Alsatia, who dying without issue, did sell it to Bishop of Argentine. But this small Country is so fruitfull and i^sant, that it hath 46 Citties and Townes in it, which are walled an^ Fiftie Castels which are situated on Mountaines and Plaines, (...) innumerable sort of Villages. Alsatia is two fold, the Lower wh^^ described in this present Chart, and the higher which is painted (...) in the Table following: the Tribocians did possesse them both. (...) chiefe Cittie is called by moderne writers, Argentina. Sextu^ A^^ and Ptolomie doe call it Argentoratum, Reginus nameth it S^^burg, who writ five hundred yeeres before and more; Rob. Cust^^^ supposeth it to be the same with that which Aurelius Victor, and ^^nus, doe call Angentaria. It is commonly called Strasburg fro^ number and capacity of the streetes. This Cittie is situated in a soyle, and hath great store of Wine and Corne. And Munster ^^^teth that there are in this Cittie above an hundred Gardiners, make a great gaine out of Turnips, Onions, Radishes, Cabigge (...) the like. An arme of the River Rhene and three other Rivers d^ through this Cittie, and the severall Channells doe glide throug^ streetes as at Venice. It is well governed, and it hath a famous sch^^^ and a Church. On the West there are the Tabernae celebrated by ^^toninus: Simler calleth them Zabern: Frodoard nameth it Za^rentelius calleth them tres Tabernae, Concerning which Antoniu^ thus:
--Riguasque perenniFonte Tabernas--
But the Tabernae were a Fortresse of the Romanes, placed the restraine the incursions and inroades of the Almaines, into France, (...) now the Bishop of Argentoratum hath a Pallace. This Fortresse w^zed by the Alemanes, but Ammianus writeth that Iulius Caesar did re^^ it. This place aboundeth with Wine, Corne, and al other things ^^^^sary for mans use. Not farre from the Tabernae, there is the (...) Maursmunster, with a monastery adjoyning to it; there is also an^ Monastery a little distant from Brocomagum, which is called St^^^^ Campus, or Stephens field, and corruptly Stetchfeldt. Hence N^ward is Hagenoa. This Cittie was walled about in the yeare 116 Fredericke Barbarossa. The soyle round about the walls is sandy the fields that lye somewhat farther from the Cittie are very (...) and fruitefull. The next is Wissenburgum, commonly called W^^burg, as it were the white Castell, being a very faire towne, at the

map of lower AlsatiaTHE LOWER ALSATIA.

of the Mountaine Vogesus, being pleasantly seated, and environed o^^ every side with little hils, and on the West it hath Woods, and diver^ kinds of trees: the soyle is very fruitfull, and the Towne is fortifie^ both by Nature and Art. The River Lutra, whose Fountaines do rise i^ the Mountaines somewhat more than seaven Miles from the Town^ doth runne through the middle of it, and so having glided by the wal^ of the Towne, it runneth in a narrow Channell, and with a hast^ streame two miles, and so dischargeth it selfe into the Rhene. It is (...) so great antiquity, that the originall cannot be found out. There is a^^ so the Towne Hasla neere the River Bruschus: which Dagobert Kin^^ of France, gave unto Florentius a Scot, with the adjacent field^ in which place Florentius built a Monastery. There are many River^ which water this Country, besides Rhene, and many other R^vulets (...) Kintsgus, Illa, Brusschus, Sorn, Mater, and Lauter. But the chiefe River of Alsatia is Illa, which runneth through all Alsatia, which rise^^ in Sungovia, above the Towne Altkirck, and so fl^wing by t^^ Townes, Mulnhausen, Einsheim, Colmar, Selestadium, and B^nfelde it runneth straite forward to Argentina, where it entreth into (...) Rhene, having first received all the Rivulets which doe flow (...) of the Mountaine Vosagus, and it is very full of Salmons a^^ other fish.
The Country is partly Mountainous, and partly plaine, a^d is every where adorned with Woods and Forrests, some (...) which are full of Chesnuts, Almonds, and Nutts. The Cou^try people lives very miserably; for they spend their provisi^^ every yeare, and doe keepe nothing for the future time, so t^^ in times of warre, or when unseasonable weather does kill (...) fruites of the earth, they live very penuriously. Yet the poore (...) releeved out of publicke granaries.
This Countrie hath not many natiue inhabitants, for the great part consists of strangers, as Swethlanders, Bavarians, Burgundia^ Sabaudians and Lotharingians, who having once entred into a Cou^try, doe not soone remove from thence. The Swethlanders (...) chiefely reside in it. Moreover the fifth circle of the Empire that of the Rhene. It consists of three orders, first the Clergie, secon^ly the Princes, and thirdly the free Citties. In the first there (...) the Bishop of Wormes, of Spier, Straesburg, Basel, and Besancon; (...) the Countie of Burgundie, in the Province of Wallis, whose Met^^polis is Selton; there are the Bishops of Geneve, Losanna, Metz, T^^ and Verdun. The Abbots of Hiersfeid, Morbach, S. Gregoris Munst^^^^ In the second order are Princes, Earles, and secular Lords, as (...) Dukes of Lotharingia, and Saveye, the Count of Span^ein: the M^^quesse of Baden, the Duke of Sweibru^ke, the Count of VeldentZ, (...) Landgrave of Hessen, the Prince of Calim, the Count of Nass^^ in Sarbrucke, the Earles of Rhene; the Lords of Rapoltzkirc^^ neere Rapoltslain, the Earles of Bitsch, Salm, Hanaw, Lichtenbe^^ Lemingen, and Falkenslain, the Lords of Morspurg, and B^se^ of Rapolslain, of Hoen, Rechpurg, Blakenberg, and Blammont in Lotringia: the Earles of Wetbaden, and I^stain, and Cuningstaine, t^

Lord Van Eppenstam: the Earles of Isenburg in higher Alsatia, of Solms, of Nassaw in Weilburg, of Sienvigen, of Havare, the Lord of Munt^^burg: the Earles of Westenburg, of Witgenstam, of Waldeck, of Pl^sse. The third order is of the free Citties, which are Mulhusen in S^^dtgow of higher Alfatia, also Basel, Colmar, Kaisersperg, Turckke^, Saint Gregoris Munster, Ober Ebenhaim, Straesburg, Rosenhaim, Schletstat, Hagenaw, Weissenburg, Landow, Spier, Wormes, Francfort, Fridberg in Wederaw, Wetzlar, Metz, Toul, Verdtn, Kaufmans Sarbrack, the Castle Besano, Fridberg, and the Castle Gleichhause^.



THE LANTGRAVIATE of the higher ALSATIA, vvith SVNTGOVIA and GRISGOIA.
IN this Table or Chart, Alsatia the higher with Suntgo^ and Brisgoia are delineated.The Country The higher Alsatia co^monly called Ober Elsaz is first placed, the Metropo^^ whereof is Einshemum.The Townes The chiefe Senate is held the whither they appeale from the Lower Courts of Su^goia, Brisgoia, and the foure Townes neere the Rhene a little above ^^sill, which are subject to the Archduke of Austria. It came in (...) yeere 1000, to belong to the Territories of Albert Earle of Harsp^ Father of King Rudolphus. Rubeacum or Ruffatum commonly ca^^ Ruffach, is an auncient Towne in Alsatia, which was built by the ^^manes, and was so named from a Rivulet, which in regard of her (...) water was called Rotbatch, now the inhabitants call it Ombach, w^^ riseth in a Valley not farre from Lutsmach, and sliding through (...) fieldes and Vineyards, with a red colour'd Channell, doth serve (...) Citty for many uses. This Citty had at first many magnificent b^^dings, and a double Suburbs, the Romane Nobilitie did a long ti^^ keepe their residence here, in regard of the fruitfulnesse thereof, a^^ plenty of all things necessary for mans use: here were excellent law made against theeves, which were so severely executed, that it is Proverb in Germanie: Der alt Galghen Zu Rufach, hatt gut Eichen ^^lt that is, The old Gibbet of Rubeacum was made of strong Oake Woo^ Colmar was built out of the ruines of Argentuaria, it is a neate Imper^all Cittie situated on a fertile Plaine, being an houres journey dista^^ from the Mountaines; it standeth in the middle of Als^tia, and it watered with many Rivers, especially these, Louc^e, Duro, Fetchto, I^^ and others of lesse note, some whereof doe runne by the field, so^ of which doe runne by the houses, and doe fertilize the soyle a^ make it fruitfull. Selestadium is walled about as Colmar, in the yeare Christ 1216, or about that time, in the reigne of Fredericke the s^cond. But before that, namely about the yeare 1404, in the reigne (...) Henry the fourth, Hildegard Dutchesse of Suevia, built a Temple the according to the figure and forme of the Temple of Ierusalem, whi^^ not long after her sonne Otto Bishop of Argentine, did dedicate (...) the blessed Virgin, and made it a Monasterie, which in short ti^^ grew so rich, that of a Monastery it became a Provostship, concerni^^ which see Rhenanus who was borne at Selestade. Selestadium is firme situated, having on the one side namely towards the Rhene unpassab^ Moores: and on the other side toward the West, even to the Mou^taines

map of higher AlsatiaTHE HIGHER ALSATIA.

of Lotharingia, it hath a fruitfull soyle, there are Vines and Chesnuts growing on these Mountaines; and great store of Corne is reaped on the plaine. Gebwiler is a Towne situated in the jawes of the Mountaines, it is thought that it was founded in the yeere 1124. It hath abundance of Vines round about it, and is subject to the Abbot o^ Murbacum, who keepeth his residence there. There is also another Towne called Watveil situated neere the Mountaines, which is governed by the aforesayd Abbot. Mercator reckoneth these Countries in higher Alsatia, of Horburg, which is a pleasant Country belonging to the Earle of Wirtemberg, under whose Dominion is the Towne Reyche^wyer, where excellent Wines are made: there is also the County of Egisheim, and de Sultz: the Lordships of Bolwiller, of Londsperg, o^ Hohen, of Hatstat, of Hobenack, of Rapdstain, under whose dominio^ are Rapoltzwil, Gemer, the Towne and Castle of Cellenberg. And th^ Imperiall Citties, of the fift circle. Also Munster, in the S. Greg^rin Vale, called Gregoris Munster, also Durkheim, Colmar, Milbauye^ famous for good Wine, and Keisersperg. Sungovia or Sunggoja, commonly called Sungow, on the North cleaveth to Alsatia: on the Ea^^ it hath the Rhene, on the West the borders of France: on the Sou^^ it confineth on Helvetia. It hath Vines in many places, and eve^ where great store of Corne, which is transported into Neighbouri^^ Countries, namely into Helvetia, the blacke Wood, Lotharingi^ and sometimes into more remote Countries. Sungoja doth conta^^ the Countie of Psirten, the last Earle whereof Vlrick, dyed at Basill (...) the yeare of Christ 1024; leaving two Daughters behind him, the o^ whereof called Ioane, Albert Duke of Austria marryed, and gave (...) Vrsula his wives sister, for her Portion eight thousand markes of silve^* The Lordships are Befort, and Mospurg. These places also belong (...) the Countie, Altkirch, Dattenriet, Befort, Rosenfels, Mas^munst^ Thanu, and Senheim: which now the Princes of Austria have divid^ into Praefectureships. In Befort there is a Collegiate Church whi^^ the Earles of Psirt founded, together with the Nunnery Velapacht^ where thirty Earles, and as many Countesses have beene interred. (...) Maszmunster there is a famous Nunnery of Vestall Virgins, and Canons, which was founded by Mason Duke of Alemaine, from who that Vale was called Vallis Masonis, otherwise called Wast. Thann^ is a neate towne, and is joyned to the County of Pfirt. There is Castell that hangeth over the Towne which is called Engelberg, a^ neere unto it is the Mountaine called Rang, in which there growe^ excellent good wine, which is called Rang-wine, well knowne at ^^fill. Here the River Thuris glideth by out of the Mountaines, and ^^parateth Sungovia from Alsatia Morsmunster, which is a Monaster^ in the Countie of Pfirt, being founded by the Earles of Pfirt. T^ Church of Amarinus, and the Castle of Fridberg, are one mile dista^^ from Thannus, and are subject to the Abbot of Murbacum: not fa^ from thence the River Mosella riseth. There is also Mulnhausen Segovia which is an imperiall Cittie, and it was under the protecti^^ of the Bishop of Argentine; as also the Townes Colmar, a^^ Keisersperg, in the yeare 1261, but a little after Rudolph the E^^

Habsburg, when he he had tooke Colmar he got the Towne Muln^^sen, and razed the Castle thereof, and those that were in it he tooke ^^isoners. But Rudolphus was elected King of the Romans, and those Townes returned againe to the Romaine Empire. The Townesmen (...) chiefely give themselves to planting of Vines and sowing of C^^e: so that there is very good wine made heere. The Towne ^^n^rson hath a Nunnery, which was built in Henry the fourths ^^re, by Rudolph Earle of Habspurg. His brother Wernher was Bi^^op of Argentine, who dyed at Constantinople. On the West ^^e County of Mount Belegard joyneth to Sungoja. ^t hath the fa^ous Cittie of Montis-Beligard, with a faire Castle. Besides, this Country hath many other Towns and Castles: as the Town Grans and the Castle; the Town and Castle of Clarwang, the Town Passewangum with a Castle, all which belong to the Duke of Wirtemberg: the inhabitants doe speake the Burgundian Language. The Towne Bruntant neere to the County of Mont Beligard, where the Bishop of Ba^ hath a royall Pallace. And so much concerning Sungovia.
I^sgo^a remaines,The Countrie whence so called. which is to bee unfolded and described in this able: Brisgovja or Brisgoja, is commonly called Brisgow, which ^a^es in the Germaine Language a faire Towne. And truly this Country doth deserve that title in regard of the fertility and fruitful^se thereof, in which it is not inferiour to Alsatia, which we have (...) now described. But if we have recourse to auncient writers, ye shall finde that this Country was so named from the Metropolis ^^^sacum, of which we shall speake by and by. Brisgoja is ten miles ^^ng, and eleven broade: for it beginneth at Nortnaw,The Situation and runneth out almost to Basil.The fruitfulnesse of the soyl. It is a fruitefull Country both for tillage and Vines. And here is great store and plenty of Corne and Wine, and of all things necessary for the sustenance of mans life. The Archdukes of Austria, and the Marquesses of Baden, doe joyntly go^^^e this Country. The Metropolis of Brisgoja was heretofore ^^suum, whence the Country is denominated, and Antonius mentineth it in his Itinerarie of the Mountaine Brisacum, when as he ma^eh mention of no other Citties beyond the Rhene, but those Pro^^ciall Citties which are seated by the Rhene: Luitprandus Ti^^esis, who lived in the time of Otto the first, doth make the Mountaine Brisacum to be in Alsatia, and sheweth that it was an ^^^d of Rhene. This Cittie is situated on a round Mountaine like a Castle, and it hath the Rhene on the West. It is a neate Towne, well fortified and populous, but in processe of time it exceeded Friburg ^^elfe, for magnificence and riches. This Cittie increased presently, and grew famous in regard of the Minerall Mines, which are ^^^e unto it. In Brisacum there is an auncient Castle, which hath ^^ng beene ruinate, yet now at length it hath beene reedified. It hath ^ strong well fortified Tower, which Bertholdus Ziringensis the third built, as appeareth by these following verses, graven on the stone ^alls: 
Hanc Dux Bertholdus portam struxisse notaturA quo pro fraude Burgundia gens populatur.The Duke Bertholdus builded up this gate,Which the Burgundians did ruinate.
This Cittie hath but one fountaine, over which there is a Condu^^ built, in which there is a wheele, in which they goe and draw up water a great depth, and the Cittizens do yerely pay for the drawing u^ of the water. For it hath on every side a great steepe descent to th^ Rhene and the plaine, from whence it is very hard to drew up wate^ into the Mountaine. Halfe a mile beneath Friburg, there is a ruina^^ Castle situated on a high Mountaine, which is called Z^ringhen, from which the Dukes of Zaringa had their title. Fr^burg is a famous Towne in Brisgoja, and now the Metropolis thereo^ it was built by Duke Berthold the fourth, the sonne of Conradus th^ first, in the reigne of the Emperour Henry the fifth, being former^^ but a Village. It is a Cittie pleasantly seated among the Mou^taines; being adorned with many magnificent houses, Churche^ and Monasteries. There was an Vniversity erected there in th^ yeere 1459, wherein Vdalrick Zasius, a famour Lawyer did tea^^ and reade publickly. It had heretofore a rich Veine of silver, ami^^ distant from the Cittie. There also is in Brisgoja Zer^ng, heeretofo^^ a Dukedome) the County of Friburg, the Marquiship of Ho^berg, and the Lordships of Badenwille, Staussen, and Bur^en.



THE LOWER SAXONIE.
SAxonie was so called from the Saxons.The Countie whence so called. Their originall as also of other Nations, not only the Monkes ignorant in Antiquities, but moderne judicious writers, have wrapped up in fabulous inventions: some suppose that they were so called from Saxo the sonne of Negno, and the brother of Vandalus; others a Saxea natura from their stony nature, others from the remainder of the Macedonian Army, some from their skeines or short swords, it appeareth by these verses in Engelhusius:
Quippe brevis gladius apud illos Saxa vocatur,Vnde sibi Saxo nomen traxisse putatur.A cuttell or a short-sword they Saxon call,Whence the name of Saxon takes originall.
But the learned Capino doth derive it from the Phrygians: Let every one take which of these coniectures hee pleaseth, for I doe not purpose to refute their opinions. But I embrace their opinion, who suppose that the Saxons did descend from the Sacians, a people of Germany, and that they were so called as it were Sacasones; that is, the sonnes of the S^curians; and that comming out of Scythia or Sarmatia, together with Getes, Sueuians, Dacians, and others, they spread themselves by degrees over Europe, which opinion is probable, which bringeth the Saxons out of Asia. For Strabo writeth that these Sacians, as the C^mmerians before, did make many invasions, and called part of ^^^^ia after their owne name Saracena; and Ptolomie also placeth the ^^^aians, the Suevians, the Massagetians, and the Dasians, in that part of Scythia; and Cisnerus observeth, that these Nations did still keepe the same vicinitie, which was betweene them. Moreover albeit Saxonie is the greatest Countrie in all Germanie, yet it is not now so large as it was heretofore. For auncient Saxonie was extended betweene the Rivers Albis and Rhene, the Germaine Sea, and the River E^dera, even to Hassia and the confines of Turingia, and Brunswick was the Center of it: and so also Westphalia, Marchia Vetus, Misnia, Lusa^a, Mansfield, and many other Countries were called Saxonie. Now it is not bounded with such naturall limits, as Rivers and Mountaines, ^^at with the consining dominion of others Principalities. The ayre of this Country is dry, pure, and wholesome, except the marshes doe moysten it too much. Saxonie hath abundance of all things, except Wine. It hath great store of Barly and Wheate of which they make ^ery white Bread, and very browne drinke. It hath divers kindes of mettalls, especially in the Mountaine Melibocus, which reacheth from

the Catti to the Saxones. There is found also in the same Mounta^^ a blacke kinde of stone, which hath much pitch and brasse in it, an^ shineth with Veines of Gold and Copresse. They digge out great st^ of this Oare, which they melt and refine into mettall. In this st^^^ there are divers lineaments and proportions of living creatures, (...) especially of these that doe live in the neighbouring Lake, as Eel^ Carpes, Frogs, and sometimes also cockes, who have strange th^ double Combes. Also Goslaria hath Mines of brasse, gold, and ^ver, and rich Fountaines of salt, like those at Halla and La^^^ And in other places the Mountaines doe yeeld plenty of Marble. I sayd that Otto the first found Mines of silver, neere Goslaria, w^ yeelded him a great revennew. But the Cittizens abusing it, (...) suffered the pit to fall downe, which killed an hundred men that w^ working in it. And since that time, there was never found any (...) or gold, but blacke Lead. First they make a kinde of shooemakers (...) or blacking, and afterward they boyle Lead and silver out of it. But (...) report that the mettall in Goslaria was thus found out. A certaine No man tyed his horse, called Ramelus, to a bough of a tree, on the ^^taine; who beating and striking the ground with his hoofes that shod with iron, did at last beate and weare away the earth, so that veines of blacke Lead did appeare; like the winged Pegasus, wh^ Poets faine, with a stroake of his hoofe, on the Mountaine, did o^ the spring of Helicon on Parnassus. And as the fountain was from the named Hippocrene, that is, the horse-fountaine; so the Saxons do the mountaine Ramelus, which doth now yeeld great store of (...) The chiefe Cittie of this Country is Halla, which is derived fro^ Greek word. But Goropius would have it derived not from the Gree^ but from the great store of salt which commeth from thence; as if in Suevia and in other Citties. For as the River Halis in Arme^ (as Strabo saith) was so named from the Greeke word, because i^ salt. So Halla seated by the River Sala, a faire River in Saxons, ^^ so called from the great store of salt that came from thence. Wh^ salt Fountaines were first found out by the Wendians before Chri^^ birth, whom wee may call Hermandurians; and when the neigbouring nations did perceive what benefit might arise by them, th^ began to labour about them as if they had beene gold Mines. N^ the Marquesse of Brandeburg, resideth at Halla. There belongeth a^ to Lower Saxonie the Dukedomes of Lanwenburg, Luneburg, Bruwick, and the Dukedome of Meckelburg. In the Dukedom of Lune^ there is the famous Cittie of Luneburg, which was so called, from Idoll of the Moone, which was heretofore set up upon the Mounta^^ Calcis: or else from the River gliding by it, which is now called El^na, or die Almenow, as it were Elven Ow, from the eleven Rivers wh^ doe flow into it, and heretofore it was called Luno, or Lunow, by (...) as they faine, who travailed this way to her kinsman Granbrivius. (...) is a Cittie well fortified with Trenches and Rampires, being al^ foure-square: It hath a rich Fountaine of salt. For salt is the ch^ commoditie of these Citties, which they transport by Land and S^^ into farre remote Countries; yet the Merchants of Hamburg doe (...)

map of lower SaxonyTHE LOWER SAXONIE.

up the most part of it, and doe get much by it. It hath sixe Churches for confession: and also an Hospitall for the sicke. The Inhabitants of this Cittie are divided after the Romane manner, into Cittizens, Patricians or Senators, and Plebeians. It flourisheth for Politicke government, learning, justice, peace, and concord betweene the Clergie, and the Governours of the commonwealth, amongst whom the Patricians have the chiefest power. I passe by the other Townes for brevitie sake, because I intend to speake something concerning the Dukedome of Meckelburg.
The Dukedome of Meckelburg, was heretofore a part of a Province belonging to the King of Vandalia, lying neere unto the Baltick Sea, but now it is one of the chiefe Dukedomes of Germanie and a member of the Empire: it hath on the East Pomerania: on the West the River commonly called de Elve: on the South it hath the auncient Marca: on the North, the Balticke Sea. It is a very fruitfull Country, abounding with Wheate, Apples, Wood, and Fish. There are also divers sorts of living creatures, and great store of Oxen and Cattell, and wilde beasts. Moreover Aritbert being descended of the royall stocke, and having lived some while in Charles the Greats Court, marryed the Emperours sister, by whom he had Billingus, a man powerfull yet milde and mercifull, whom the Sarmatians and Vandalls, even from Vistula to Visurgis, and from Odera to Holsatia did obey; he had his Pallace at Meckelburg. But his two sonnes Mizilaus and Mislevus degenerating from their fathers piety and goodnesse, began to persecute the Christians. But concerning these and other Princes of Meckelburg you may reade Munster. The first inhabitants of this Country, Authors doe call Herulians or Obotritians, and by a generall word Vandalians. It is a Country well replenished with citties, townes, castles, and villages. In this Dukedome there is the auncient cittie Surinum, which was built before Lubecke, Sundius, and Wismaria. The figure thereof is fouresquare, and so as if it were foure citties, it hath foure names. The first is called Senerinus, the second Neapolis, the third is named from the Cataract, the fourth from the Marshes. The Village Fichela which standeth by the Lake Suerinus, is but 5 miles distant from the Balticke Sea: the vicinitie whereof made them bestow much labour in vaine to make a ditch out of the Lake into the Balticke se^, as in like manner there was an attempt made, to cut through the Pelopennesian Isthmus. Rostochium commonly called Rostocke, and heretofore Lacinium, and corruptly Rhodopholis and Laciburg, is a sea cittie: it was first a castle, after, Godscall the sonne of Endo did change it into a cittie; and afterward it was enlarged by Prim^slaus the second the sonne of Nicolottus. It hath now a flourishing Vniversitie, which the Princes of Meckelburg did erect and constitute in the yeere 1415. The ayre here is wholesome, and there is great plenty of provision for food, and very cheape. There is also Wismaria, which some imagine was so called from Wismarus King of the Vandalls, in the flourishing reigne of Constantine the Great: some doe affirme, that a Colonie of the Gothes was brought thither out of Visbina, the Metropolis of Gothland. But Crantzius Antiquities, and Charters of the commonwealth, dated

^^ter the yeare 1250, doe shew that it was built before the yeare ^^40, out of the ruines of the great auncient Cittie Mecklenburg, which gave the name to the whole Countrie, by Gunzelinus, Earle of Suerinus. But in a short time, this Cittie did wonderfully encrease by the traffike and trading of other Nations, having a convenient Haven on the Balticke shore, to receive shippes of great bur^^a, where they may lye safely without letting fall any anchors: whence it is likely that the Cittie was named, from the safety and conve^ance of the Haven. It is compassed round about with small ^^nes; who doe bring plentie of provision thither, and doe furnish themselves againe from thence: Moreover this ninth circle of ^^e Empire called Nider Saxon, doth consist of three orders, the (...) whereof is the Clergie, the second are the Princes and Secular Lords, the third are the free Citties. In the first there are the Archbishops of Bremes and Magdeburg: the Bishops of Hildesheim, of Lubeck, of Suerinus, of Ratzenburg, and Schleswick: the second containeth the Princes and saecular Lords: as the Dukes of Lauwenburg, of Brunswicke, of Luneburg, of Mecklenburg, and of Holstein: the ^^les of Roffain, and Delmenhorst. In the third there are the free Citties: as Lubeck, Hamburg, Mulhausen in Duringen, and North^^sen, Goslaria and Gottinga.



THE DVKEDOME OF BRVNSWICK.
The Countrie whence so called.THe Dukedome of Brunswick was so called from the chief^ Cittie Brunswick. And the Cittie it selfe was denominated from Bruno the Sonne of Ludolphus Duke of Saxonie For he left his name to the Towne which he had begun and so from him it was called Brunons Towne, which in the Saxo^ Language they call Wyc; but now it is called Brunsvicum, or Brunsweich. The Country of Brunswicke is very large, for it reaches from the boarders of the Dioeceses of Magdeburg^ and Halberstad,The Situation an^ from the wood Hercynia even to the River Albis.The auncient Government. But about th^ yeare of Christ 1230, the Emperour Frederick did change the Earl^ dome of Brunswick into a Dukedome, and made Otte Duke o^ Brunswicke and Luneburg, who succeeded Henry Leon, wh^ was Lord of all Saxonie. Frederick the second made Otto Nephew to Leon, Duke of Brunswick, and Luneburg, and gave him those Armes which his Vncle had brought out of England, namely two Lions Or for the Country of Brunswick, and another Lion Azure, with Ermines for the Countie of Luneburg; which armes did heretofore be long to Duke Herman, and his posteritie, with the Dukedome o^ Saxonie. Concerning the other Dukes, see Munster Lib. 3. of his Cosmographie. Brunswick is now not onely the Metropolis and mother Cittie of this Dukedome, but also of all Saxonie, which heeretofore from the builder thereof was called Brunopolis. Ptolomie calls it Tubisurgium according to the opinion of Francis Irenicus. It is a large Cittie being foure square, and adorned with many faire and beautifull buildings; very populous and well fortified with double rampires and ditches, by which there are divers sorts of trees planted: it hath fiue Praetorian Halls, and as many Magistrates. It was built by two brothers Bruno and Theodore, otherwise called Theomar, the sonnes of Ludolphus Duke of Saxonie, in the yeare 961, as Hermann their owne Historian doth witnesse. The River Onacra glideth by this cittie, which rising in the Hartonican wood, doth divide the Cittie into two parts, and carrieth away all the filth of the Cittie with it, having many bridges built over it, and at last it joyneth with Visurgis. This Cittie hath no good water to drinke, and therefore they have a kind of made drinke, but they have little or no wine. This Cittie rising from small beginnings, yet in processe of time encreased very much, both in strength and wealth, so that the Princes thereof were stiled Dukes of Brunswick. I will heere briefely make mention of those words which are praefixt and written upon the Court of this Cittie, in regard of the frequent suites in law which are commenc'd in this contentious age. In controversijs causarum, capitales inimicitiae oriuntur: fit amissio expensarum: corpus

map of BrunswickTHE DVKEDOME OF BRVNSWICKE.

quotidie defatigatur, labor animi exercetur: Multa inhonesta crimina consequuntur: Bona and utilia opera postponuntur: and qui saepe credunt obtinere, frequenter succumbunt. Et si obtinent, computatis laboribus and expensis, nihil acquirunt. That is, sutes in Law are the occasion of much enmitie, they put men to much charges: they weary the body, and trouble the minde: they learne craft by following them, they neglect their owne callings and more profitable employments, and those who are confident that they shall have the better, are oftentimes overthrowne by oppression. And if they get the better, yet labour and charges being reckoned, they get nothing. Among other Citties of this Dukedome, Goslaria is not the last, being an Emperiall Cittie, which Henry the first, the father of Otto the great, did build and found in the yeare 1051, and the Emperour Henry the third did wonderfully adorne this Cittie, which the aforesaid Henrie did build, and augment, untill of a Keepers lodge it became a great Cittie as it is now at this day, in which the Emperour builded a royall and magnificent Pallace. The Towne Helmstad is in the middle way betweene Branswicke and Magdeburg: which William Duke of Brunswicke, redeemed from the Abbot of Werden, with a certaine summe of money, payd unto the said Abbot, and so reduc'd it into his owne power. Halberstad is an Episcopall Cittie, by which glideth the River Oltemia. In the middle of this Cittie there is a hill, which is two furlongs in length, and on the top of it there is a large plaine, at the two farthest Corners whereof, there are two Churches. In the middle there is a Market place which is encompassed round with Religious houses: but that part which is situate on the Mountaine is called the Cittie, and that part which lyeth at the foote of the hill, is called the Suburbs. The soyle round about this Cittie is very good, having standing Corne, which is higher than a man on horsebacke. Quedelimberg is an auncient Cittie and not farre distant from Magdeburg, which was built by the Emperour Henry Auceps. There is also the Towne Hannovera by the bancke of the River Leine, over against an ancient Castell belonging to the Earles of Lauwenrod, but now in the time of Henry Leon, about the yeare of Christ 1056, it was subject to this Castell, which because it stood on the other side of the River, the Courtiers called it Hannover. It is now a flourishing Cittie in Saxonie. For it is well fortified with ditches, and very populous. Hildesheimum, or Hildesium, which Ptolomie and Irenicus call Ascalingium, is an auncient Cittie, being at first divided into two parts, but afterward it was united. It hath a very faire Church, and the steeple is gilded. It is a pleasant Cittie, and Ludolphus of Colen an excellent Mathematician was borne heere, being a Bishops seate, Irenicus doth reckon up the bishops thereof, which Crantzius also doth in his Metropolis, and Antonius Monchiacinus more accurately, Lib 2. of the first beginning of Christian religion. But the Bishopricke of Hildesheim was first founded and instituted in Saxonie by Charles the Great, King of France, and Empeperour of Germanie. Northausen is an Emperiall Cittie. There are also contained in this Table the Dukedome of Grubenhagen, which is a member of the Empire, and also the Principalitie of Anhalt: also

Mansfielde an auncient Countie of auncient Saxonie, by the river Sala; so that Hegenus, who lived in the time of King Arthur of Brittaine, was Earle of Mansfeld in the yeare 542; it was so called from Mannus the sonne of Thuiscon. The chiefe Citties are Mansfeld, neere the River Wiperus, also Eislebia and Wypra. Eislebia is the Metropolis, betweene the Rivers Sala and Wiperus: which was so called from Isis, who (as Tacitus reporteth) did wander after her husbands death through the coasts of Suevia. Neere unto it there are mettall Mines in the Mountaines Melliboci. It is supposed that the Tubantians did inhabit these parts. This Countie hath under it these foure Counties, ^ippra, Arnstein, Wetin, and Quernfurt. Also the Counties of Barby, Stelberg, Hohenstein, Regenstein, and Plesse. There are also these Ecclesiasticall principalities: Meydburg, the Archbishoprick of Germanie, and primate of Germanie; the Bishoprick of Hildesheim, and Halberstat: Also the Bishopricke of Quedelborg, and Gernroade, and Stiften, which are in the eight circle of the Empire.
There remaineth in this Table the Bishopricke of Magdeburg. The Bishopricke of Magdeburg commonly called Meydburg, is so called from the cheefe Cittie. Charles the Great, having reformed all Saxonie, ^^institute twelve Bishoprickes in it, the chiefe whereof was the Bishopricke of Magdeburg, whose seate was at the first in Styde, afterward it was translated to Valersleve, and thirdly to Vrese. And afterward in the yeere 1130 Otto did translate it to Magdeburg, who made it the primate of Germanie, as it appeareth by a great booke of Chronicles which hath no Authors name set to it. Albeit the Archbishop of Saltzburg, and other Archbishops that are Electors, doe not yeeld priority or supremacy to the Bishop of Magdeburg, as Crantzius delivers in his Metropolis. But Otto the first did make the Burggrave of Magdeburg, that he, might sit in publike judgement, in the Emperours steede, both in this Country and Bishopricke, and in the adjacent Countries. Ger^ Marquesse of Lusatia was the first that bore this office by the ordination and appointment of Otto; whose memory is preserved by a Monument which is in the Friary of Geroden. After him they reckon some others who followed successively in this order, Hermann Duke of Saxonie, Lotharius Earle of Waldeck, Fredericke the sonne of Lothari^^, Conradus his Nephew, Manfred halfe brother by the mother side to Conradus. He being slaine in the warres, Dittericus Earle of Plocensian, had his honors, whose Daughter Vdo Marquesse of Brandenburg having married, and thereby got the Burgaviate, he left his sonne Henry his successor. After whose decease Lotharius did leave the same office to Burchard of the house of the Lords of Quetfort, from whom the Earles of Mansfeld are originally descended. After whom there were the Lords of Schrapela, after whom the Emperour did translate it to the Dukes of Saxonie Electors for the Empire. The chiefe Cittie is Magdeburg, heeretofore called Parthenopolis, from Venus Parthenia who was worshipped there, situated by the River Albis; Iohn Capnio calleth it Domadum Pyrgum. Aeneas Silvius calleth it Magdeburg, and writeth that Virginopolis, was a famous Metropolitan Cittie in Saxonie, memorable both for wealth and strength; Ligurinus calleth it the

Virgin Cittie, and the habitation of Virgins: and Ptolomie calls it Mesovion. Otto builded this Cittie as Lupoldus writeth: Otto Frisingensis did enlarge it and was buried there. This is a famous Emperiall Cittie, it is divided into three parts, and fortified with walls and Bulwarkes, having strong Towers and Rampiers, also faire houses, large beautifull streetes, and magnificent Churches, especially the great Church of Saint Maurice, being built by the Ottoes of square free stone. The Magistrate doth keepe the civill law of the Romanes written in the Saxon language, which was confirmed and established by Charles the Great, so that the neighbour Nations doe thereby decide controversies, and this law is much reverenced and esteemed. And let so much suffice concerning the Bishopricke of Magdeburg. And now to conclude this description, let us set downe the Rivers which are in the Countries contained in this Table: which are: Albis, Onacra, Oltemia, Sala, Wiperus, Inderst, Struma, Roide, Ruma, Vker, Fues, and others. It hath also the Mountaines, der Ramelberg, Meliborus, and others: and also divers woods, as Auffdem Hartzwaldt, Solingerwaldt, and others which you may behold in the Table or Chart.



HASSIA or the Landgraviate of HESSEN.
Hassia hath great store of Nobilitie and Noble places, which it ^ould be convenient to know; but J could discover nothing hitherto of them, nor of the state of the government. I have onely found out that there are two Counties, Solms, 30. 15. 50. 35. and Witg^^stein. 30. 17. 50. 50.
The Meridians are distant according to the proportion of the 510 Parallel to the great circle.
AFter the Dukedome of Brunswicke, our method layeth open Hassia: It is doubtfull whence the name thereof is derived. Some from the Mountaine Hessus, but this Mountaine is neither found in Hassia, nor no where else, unlesse it be that which is at Noviomagum, which is somewhat likely. For some doe relate that one Bato the sonne of the King of the C^ttians (who both enlarged, reedified, and walled Noviomag^^) had a sonne called Hesus, who for the love of his native Country, called it after his owne name. Whence also the Mountaine Hesus, was so called. Others would have it so named from the Cattians, who (as they report) did inhabit this Country, by changing the Letters, whence it is yet called Catzen Elbogen, which sheweth the antiquitie of this Nation. Beatus Rhenanus, Li. 1. of the Germaine affaires saith, that the Hessians comming out of high Gremanie, and having expeld the Ca^ti did possesse these parts, and did call them after their owne name. This Country hath Turingin on the East, on the South Franconia, on the West Westphalia: and on the North it hath the Dukedome of Brunswicke, the Bishopricke of Minden, and other Principalities. The ayre of this Countrie is wholesome, having great plentie of wheate, p^^^e, and fruite: But hath no Wine, except it be by the Rhene. There are also faire Meddowes for fatting of cattell, in which there are great heards of Oxen and young beasts. The woods also are full of wilde beasts, and especially of Harts, which doe afford the Nobility good sport in hunting. It hath also in some places Mettalls, as Brasse, and blacke Lead. It hath no salt pits, but salt Fountaines. All the writers of our age are perswaded that the Catti did formerly inhabite this Countrey, which was then a County, but now it is a Landgraviate, although Crantzius be against them, who in stead of the Catti, maketh them to be the Saxones: Ptolomie calls them Chatta; who afterward,

as Tacitus mentioneth did passe into the Island of Batavia, where so^ memory of their name doth still remaine in two Townes of one nam^ the one by the Sea, and the other by the Rhene. Concerning th^ Etymologie the most learned Iunius writeth thus: The Catti, who both ours and the former age did call Hessians, were so named fro^ Catts, in regard of fiercenesse in assailing their enemies. For w^ knoweth not the violent fiercenesse of that beast, which though it b^ domesticke; yet will flye in his throate, that persues him closely: ^ else from their sudden stratagems and ambushments by which the suddainely came upon their enemies as Catts doe leape upon t^^ Mice. For such the nature and disposition of the warlike and fierc^ Nation of the Catti seemeth to be. Hither also may be referred th^ word Hessius, which among the Huesdenians doth signifie a ^at^ Truely the vertue, and excellencie of this Nation doth no where a^peare more, than in Tacitus, who for militarie discipline doth prefer^ them before the other Germaines, etc. So that this name did most (...) expresse the nature and disposition of those people. But Hessia wa^ heretofore onely a County, and subject to the Lordship of T^ringi^ which appeareth in the booke of Turnaments, in which we reade tha^ in the yeare of Christ 1042 Ludovicke Earle of Hassia was at a Tourneament at Hallis. You may reade the Genealogie of the Landg^ (...) Hassia. There are moreover in Hassia besides other smaller To^ two chiefe Citties, Marpurgum, and Cassula. Marpurgum which ^mie calls Amasia, and Amisia Lib. 8. Geogr. is commonly ca^^ Martpurg: some would have it so called from Marcomirus Prince France. Histories doe report that this Cittie was heretofore a Village the famous River Lona floweth by it. The Cittie is famous fo^ ^^^ Princes seate, and a free schoole, built in the yeere of Christ 15^ (...) Ludovick Bishop of Munster. Iohn Oldendorp, the most famous Lawye^ of Germanie: also Iohn Draco, and Andrew Hiperius, famous Divin^ lived heere. Cassula is one of the chiefe Citties of Hassia, so called ^ it were Castellum or a Castell, Ptolomie calleth it Stereontium: they report that it was heretofore onely a Castell. The Cittie is watered with the Rivers Fulda, Ana, and Trusula, and hath a fruitfull soyle, and pastures for feeding and breeding of Cattell. So that the chiefe trading and trafficke of this Cittie consists in wooll. Not farre from Marpurg is Franckenberg, which is a neate Towne, both for situation and building, and also venerable for antiquitie, being seated by the Rive^ Edera: it was so called from the Frenchmen who there pitched thei^ Tents against the Saxones. King Theodoricke began to build it in th^ yeare of Christ 520. and afterward it was enlarged by Charles th^ great, 804. There are also other Townes: as Eschwega seated on a hi^ it hath a very fertile soyle round about it, and is watered with the ^ver Werra, so that the hearbe Isatis, which Plinnie calls Glastum, and ^ kinde of dye made of it, which groweth also plentifully in Thuring^^ a mile from this Towne, is first put in boates, and so carried to Mind^ and from thence by the River Visurgis which receiveth Werra, it is carried by boate to Brema, and through all Ostland. Histories doe ma^ no mention concerning the first originall of Eschwega, in regard it wa^

map of landgrave of HesseHASSIA or the Landgraviate of HESSEN.

three times wasted with fire in the time of the Hungarian warres. But the Chronicle of Franciburg sheweth that Charles the Great, about the yeare 796, did institute divers Bishoprickes, and founded many Monasteries and Churches in divers Townes; and doth mention also that Cauffinga not farre from Cassela, and also that Eschowega was built by him. Also the Emperour Henry the second was a great benefactor to this Towne, who reedified it when it was ruinated and wasted by the Hungarian inroades and incursions, and did enlarge it with new edifices and buildings. It was grievously aflicted againe in the yeare 1377 in the warres betweene Adolph Archbishop of Moguntinum, and the Landgrave of Hassia, at what time it came under the government of Hassia. Frislaria also is a famous Towne of Hassia, commonly called Fritzlar, it is pleasantly seated by the River Egra: and walled round about; but it is not levell, nor the Country it selfe which is here and there mountainous; yet it hath a fruitefull soyle round about it, both for wheate, pulse, and fruites, and some wine. And albeit Frislaria be in Hassia, yet it belongeth to the Archbishop of Moguntinum, so that it hath often tryed the doubtfull chance of warre, but the Duke of Hassia did often infest it, and the Saxons tooke it, and afterward burnt it. I passe by many other Townes of this Landgraviate* Divers Rivers doe water, and glide through this Country, the chiefe whereof are the Rhene which runneth South West: Visurgis or Wees^r^^ whose spring Wetra riseth in the Toringian wood: also Lupi^ which runneth into Westphalia: There is also the River which Tacitus calleth Adriana, and Historians Aderna; Althamerus calleth it Aedera, and Ritheimerus Rhoer: Iunius in his Nomenclator nameth it Eder, and doth adde that it is a River of the Catti, and that it falls into the River Ada^ But in his Batavia he writeth that it runneth into Fulda, and this appeareth to be true by the Tables. The lesser Rivers are Lanus or Lena which riseth in the County of Witgenstein, and so glideth by the Castle of Widekind sometime Prince of England, it watereth Lasphe a Town in the same County: there is also the River Fulda, and others. The Country is every where Mountainous, but the most noted are Melibocus, and Abnobus. The other Mountaines have divers names, as Kesseiperg, and Geyne etc. There are many woods which are peeces of the wood Hyrcinia. But let so much suffice concerning Halsia we will onely adde for conclusion that which Aelius Eobanus Hessus, in his verses gratulatory for the victory of the Landgrave Philip, delivers concerning the nature and situation of the Country, and the manners of the inhabitants.


Qualis Hyperboreum prospectans Thrasa Booten,
Gradivi domus ad Rhodopen, Hemumque nivalem
Circumfusa jacet, gelidis assueta pruinis,
Gignit in arma viros duratos frigore, quique
Aut Hebrum Neslum que bibunt, aut Strymonis undas:
Talis and ipsa situ, talis regione locorum
Et fluviis, Silvisque frequens, and montibus altis
Hassia: Natura similes creat alma locorum
Ceu natos in bella viros, quibus omnis in armis
Vita placet: non ulla juvat sine Marte, nec ullam
Esse putant vitam, quae non assueverit armis.
Quod si tranquillae vertantur ad ocia pacis,
Ocia nulla terunt sine magno vana labore,
Aut duro patrios exercent vomere colles,
Aequatosque solo campos rimantur aratris,
(Namque and planities segetum foecunda patentes
Explicat innumeras, and plena messe colonos
Ditat, and ipsa sibi satis est) aut ardua Sylvae
Lustra petunt, Canibusque feras sectantur odoris.
Venatu genus assuctum, Genus acre virorum:
Aut leges aut Iura ferunt, aut opida condunt--Fortia, etc.


As warlike Thrace looking upon the North
By Rhodope, and Hemus stretcheth forth
It selfe, and is inur'd to snow and cold,
Breeding such men as hardy are and bold;
Who of Hebrus, or of Neslus water drinke,
Or of the River Strimon, yet ne're shrinke.
Such for Situation, and Mountaines hie
For many woods, and Rivers gliding by
Is Hassia: for the men by nature are
Like those, and even borne unto the warre,
Who in the warres alone doe take delight
And all their life time are enur'd to fight:
And if sometime they live in quiet peace,
From toilesome labour they doe never cease.
For either they the levell fields doe till,
Or with the Plough they teare up the hard Hill
(For this same land hath many fruitfull Plaines
Which plenteous harvests doe bring in much gaines
Vnto the husbandman) or else repaire
To the woods to hunt such wilde beasts as there are
With Hounds, for these same people don't contemne
Hunting, but are a violent kinde of men.
For either they make lawes, or Townes doe build
Which doe not onely strong defence them yeeld,
In times of Warre; but in the times of peace
They yeeld delight when as the warres doe cease.
What should I here the Sacred springs commend?
The Greenes and valleys which doe even contend
With the Aemonian vales, which doe excell
For fruitfulnesse? or what should I declare
Those sweete and shady places which even are
Fit to be the Muses seates, and may right well
Become the Goddesses therein to dwell?
O yee Fountaines of my Countrie cleare, and cold!
And O ye Rivers that were knowne of old:
O the vales! and pleasant Caves which still did use
To be most acceptable to my Muse.





THE COVNTIE OF NASSAW, or NASSAVIA.
NAssavia is called as it were Nass-gavia, which word sign^fies a moist and slimie Country: for the Towne which nameth the Country, is encompassed on every side wit^ moist and moorish grounds: and in the Germaine speec^ Aw, and Gaw doe signifie a Country; so Thurgaw signifies a dry Country, Rhyn-gaw a Country by the Rhene, Otten-gaw, a Country abounding with corne, and so also Oster-gaw, Wester-gaw, and Brisgaw. But this Countie hath others annexed to it, as Weilburg Idesteinen, Wiesbaden, Dietzen, Cattimelibocen, Beilstein. It is boun^dered on the South with the Countie of Wiesbaden, and Ideste^^^ on the East with Isenburg, Solms, and Hassia: on the North it ^^ bounded with Westphalia and the Countie of Witgenstein: on th^ West with the Dukedome of Bergen, and the Counties Weidan, an^ Seynen. It hath many Praefectureships. As Frudebergen, Sigene^^ Nephens, Hegerana, Ebersbacen, Dillenburg, Hilligenbacke, Dring^steinen, Lonbergen, Herbornen, Dridorf, Beilsteinen, Marenberge^ Honstetten, Ellerana, Cambergen, Altenberg, Kidorff, Naffavia, and many others. It is one of the freest Counties of the Empire, th^ Lords whereof are subject to none but the Emperour, and doe enjoy all the royall priviledges, and praerogatives of the Empire a^well as other Noble men. They have power also to coyne gold or silver or brasse money, as appeareth by some peeces of gold which are yet currant. The Landgrave of Hassia and the Earle of Nassavi^ are Coe-Lords, and by a joynt Title, doe receive the revennewe^ of the Countie of Cattimeliboc, by a covenant made in the yeere 1557 betweene Phillip Prince of Hassia, and the Earle of Nassavia. The Countrie in some places is plaine ground, and in other places it riseth and swelleth into hills; here it hath flourishing Vines, as in the Countie of Dietzen, and by the bancke of the River Lanus; and other where it hath pleasant meddowes and pastures, or else fruiteful cornefields. It hath also mettall Mines. For in the Territorie of Sigen, a certaine kind of Iron Mettall, is melted out of stone, out o^ which they cast Fornaces, Iron Potts, Kettles, Stithies or Anvills Bulletts, and doe make all kind of Iron worke. At Frendeberg ther^ is excellent steele made. There are also the like Mines, in the Countrie of Dillenburg, Hegeran, and Burback, out of which Lead and Copresse are digged as in Ebersback, where there is also a Glassehouse. The chiefe wood is Westerwalt, which is a peece of Hercynia the lesser woods which are also part of Hercinia are Kalt-Eych, Heygerstruth,

map of NassawTHE COVNTIE OF NASSAW or NASSAVIA.

Schelderwaldt, die Horre, der Calemberg, in which there is great store of wilde beasts for hunting. The chiefe Rivers are Lanus, Siega, and Dille; neere Siega is Sigena, neere Dilla is Heigera, Dillenburg, and Herborn: neere Lana are Dietz, Nassovium, Lhonsteinium, where Lane mingleth the river Rhene. The Baths at Emsana do belong both to the Earles of Nassavia, and the Landgrave of Hassia, unto which they come farre and neere in regard of the soveraigne vertue of the water, which they finde to bee very wholesome for many diseases. There are also Fountaines at Codinga and Camberga, the water whereof being drunke will expell the winde Cholicke. Mernla and Bertius among others have drawne the Pedegree of the Earles of Nassavia.



THVRINGIA, or the Landgraviate of DVRINGEN.

The Nobilitie and state of this Countrie are yet unknowne unto (...) J have onely found out the Countie of Gleichen, 32, 50, 50, 58, etc. and I thinke Kranichfelt, 34, 17, 15, 26, Also the Bishoprick of Mersburg, 34, 17, 51, 26.
The Meridians are mutually distant one from another according to the Proportion of the Parallel 510 to the Aequinoctiall.

THuringia followes after Hassia, commonly called Duringen, being situated between the two Rivers Sala and Werra,The Situation the latter on the West-side: the first on the East-side: on the North it hath the wood Hercynia which they call Hartz: and on the South the Forrest called Duringer waldt. The length is equall to the bredth, being 12 miles over. This Countrie hath aboundance of all kindes of fruites and pulse, and hath more store of Corne than any other part of Germanie.The fruitfulnesse of the soyle. So that George Agricola calleth it the fatte of Germanie. Heere is great stoare of that hearbe, which Plinnie calleth Glastum, is now called Guadum and Pastillum, and commonly Weedt Pastell; which maketh a blew colour, which to the great benefit of the inhabitants is transported into other Countries: i^ that a famous Poet writeth thus: Herba Thuringorum celeberrima crescit in agris,Hanc Isatim Graecus sermo vocare solet.Ponder is haec magni est, and multo venditur aere:Hac etenim tingi lana parata solet.A famous hearbe doth in Thuringia grow,In Greeke call'd Isatis, and named so.It is weighty, and much gaine is made thereby,For with it they their wooll doe use to die.
Concerning which Plinnie Lib. 21. cap. 1 Simile plantagini Glastum in Gollia vocatur: quo Britannorum conjuges nurusque toto corpore oblitae, qui^^sdam in sacris nudae incedunt, Aethiopum colorem imitantes. That is, in France there is an hearbe called Glastum which is like a Plantaine, wherewith the wives in Brittaine doe paint their bodies, and in some

sacrifices doe goe naked, coloured like Ethiopians or Indians. Ther^ is also great store of provision and fruites, except wine, which (...) brought thither from other places. There are also Mines of gold an^ Silver and rich salt-pits. It was heretofore a Kingdome, but now it i^ a Land graviate. Thuringia and Hassia were united together, and governed by the Kings of France 366 yeares,The auncient Government: untill the time of Charl^ the Great, and Henry Auceps. At length the Emperour Charles th^ Grosse made Ludovicke Duke of Thuringia; his Nephew Burchardi^ was slaine in Hungarie, and dyed without issue. So that the Emperour Henry Aueeps tooke possession of Thuringia, and it is now subject to his successors, being Princes of Saxonie. For albeit after William the sonne of the Emperour Otto the first, who being Archbishop o^ Moguntiunm, did possesse Thuringia by his fathers permission, his successors the Archbishops of Moguntum, did challenge and arrogate t^ themselves the government of all Thuringia, and of the Cittie Erford which they doe yet hold; whose substitute or Vice-gerent was sometime Ludovicke Barbatus in the reigne of the Emperour Conradus Salicus: yet afterward the Barbatians did yeeld up Thuringie with the title of Landgrave to the right heyres. Vntill at length about the yeare of Christ 1250, it came into the hands of the most illustrious Henry the sonne of Theodoricke, and Nephew to Hermania Landgrave of Tha^^gia, and Marquesse of Misnia, being descended from the posteritie (...) Widekind the Saxon. After whom succeeded his base sonne Albert, (...) his sonnes after him Fredericke, Admorsus, and Theodoricke, who (...) made heires by their Vncle Theodoricke Marquesse of Misnia. The report that the Sorahlans did heretofore inhabit this tract of (...) whom Eginhart and Ammoinius doe mention. Peucerus doth not (...) the remainder of them Sorbec and Sernestein, betweene the Rivers ^^bis and Sala. Reyneckius, in his booke of the originall of the Mis^^^^^ supposeth that these Tyringetians are as it were the Tyring^tians, and from thence they imagine that the Cittie was called Getha. Ortelin writeth that it was reported unto him by Hugo Brinckhorst an Englishman, and a Cittizen of the Cittie of Erford, that there are in this Countrie though it be small, twelve Counties, and as many Abbies, which they call Gefurstete Abtien, 144 Citties, and as many small Townes, commonly called Merckt steken: 2000 Villages, and an 150 Castles. Erdfurdia or Erdford, called aunciently Erphesfurdia, and Erdfesfurt, is a chiefe Cittie of Thuringia, which was so called from Erft the first founder thereof. For he being a miller placed his mill by the River Gera, and so afterward the Cittie began to be builded, about the beginning of the reigne of Arcadius and Honorius: afterward it was much enlarged and beautified by Clodoveus King of France, in the yeare of Christ 438: and in the yeare 1066, it was encompassed with such large walls, so that now it is held to be one of the greatest Citties of Germanie, and the Thuringians doe call it Nicht cine Stadt, or Sondern ein Gant^^^ Land. The River Gera doth water it and keepe it sweete and cleane. It was heretofore a Bishops seate, but afterward it was translated to Moguntiacum. It hath a flourishing Schoole, which Pope Boniface the ninth did adorne with priviledges, in the yeare 1392. The soyle

map of landgrave of DuringenTHVRINGIA or the Landgraviate of DVRINGEN.

round about this Cittie is very fruitefull, having pleasant Meddowes, and great store of the hearbe Isatis. Henry the fourth did much impoverish this Cittie by laying a taxation of Tenthes upon it, having alwaies enjoyed a freedome and immunitie from such impositions. So that when the Saxon warre began, they chose rather to defend their auncient libertie with the sword, than to submit unto the Vniversall taxation of Tenthes; and that with so great courage, that they brought Augustus to a great straite. This Cittie as if fortune an enemie to greatnesse, meant to triumph over it, was oftentimes burnt, so that no other great Cittie in Germany, was ever burnt so often as this: the last time that it was burnt, which was in the yeare 1472, it sustained much losse, especially in the Churches of the Virgin Marie and Severus, so that a third part almost of the Cittie was burned downe. This was a terrible fire, which began by some that were hired to set it on fire, of whom the chiefe was a Dominican. Two Collegiate Churches, as they call them, together with the Bridge, and a great part of the Cittie were all burnt downe. In the yeare of our Lord 1509 there arose a greivous sedition betweene the Senate and the Cittizens of Erford, occasioned by those unusuall impositions which the Senate laid upon the Common people. For the Commons gathering together, would needes know how much the Cittie was indebted. The Senate giving way to the tumultuous furie of the people, endeavoured to appease them with faire and gentle words, telling them, that in convenient time they would bring in an account of their receipts and expenses; which words quieted the Cittizens for a while. But when the day appointed came, they assembled themselves together, and desired the Senate to bring in their account. But then one more insolent than the rest, spoke sharpely unto those whom the Cittizens had sent to the Senate, which did much provoke and exasperate the Cittizens. And when the Cittizens saw that they prevailed nothing, but were put off with delayes: they put downe the Senate and chose a new. In briefe, from hence there arose a grievous sedition, contention and warre. But the Bishop of Herbipolis, and the Emperour Maximilian endeavoured to appease this sedition, and to bring them to concord and agreement. Weimara is a faire Towne, having formerly a Countie belonging unto it, but now the Dukes of Saxonie keepe their Court in it, having a faire Pallace there, neately built of square freestone, and an Orchard curiously planted with all kind of trees, and watered with the River Ilma, which doth runne at length into Sala. There is also the Cittie Iena, so called from Ianus: but hee was not worshipped in Germanie. And therefore Stigellius singeth more probably.


Hinc placet Hebraeo nobis hanc nomine dici,
Vt vetus a Iajin nomen Iena tenet.
Cur ita crediderim, nisi mentem vocula fallit,
Certa hujus ratio nominis esse potest.
Quippe vocat Iajin Solimae pius incolaterrae,
Hoc quod nos Latio dicimus ore merum.
Quae caput in medijs urbs fertilis erigit vuis
Hanc quisquam a vino nomen habere negat?


Hence from an Hebrew word at first it came,
As we old Iena doe from Iajin name;
And unlesse we be deceived in the word,
We may some reason for this name afford.
For the holy inhabitant of Palestine
Calleth that Iajin which we doe call wine.
So this Cittie standing in the midst of Vines,
May well be named from the fragrant Wines.
Thus much Stigellius.


It hath a publicke Schoole which was erected in the yeare 1558. G^l^ was so called from the Gothes. And hence Rithaimerus in his description of the world, writeth, that the Turingians were originally desended from the Goathes, because the Gothes builded a Cittie in this Countrie, which they called Gotha, about the yeare 723. It had a wonderfull strong Castell called Grimmenstein, which is now levell with ^^e ground. And this was the cause that it fell to ruine: William Grun^^^, a nobleman rather by descent than vertue, in regard of his many ^^^mous attempts, whereby he endeavoured to depose the Emperour, and to introduce a new forme of Empire, was declared and pronounced to be guilty of conspiracie with all his associates, and was condemned and banished, both by the Emperour Ferdinand, and the Emperour Maximilian his son: and the Emperour and the other States of the Empire, with one consent did commit the execution of this sentence, to the most illustrious Prince Elector of Saxonie. Which banishment he contemned, trusting to himselfe, and his Protector Iohn Fredericke the second, Duke of Saxonie. Who after many admonitions from the Prince, did still persist in defending the rebells, so that the most illustrious Duke of Saxonie and Prince Elector, enforced by necessitie, beseiged the Cittie, and tooke it by surrender. And then Grunbachius, with foure more of the conspirators, for their treason against Caesar were put to death, the Castle was razed to the ground, and Duke Iohn Fredericke, was brought prisoner to Vienna. This Countrie is watered with many Rivers: as Sala or Salza, Werra, Vnstrut, Ilma, Gero, Or, Apfelstet, Helbe, and Cling. And Her testifieth that the Mountaines have mines, which have rich Veines of gold and silver, which are found not far from Braitenborn, and Schwartzenburg. This Countrie also is here and there cloathed with woods, which are part of the wood Hercynia: also the Thuringian wood is well knowne, commonly called Thuringer Waldt, Caesar calleth it Baceins, it is a wood in Germanie which divideth the Cheruscians from the Suevians; there are also Hainich, Hainsette, and Finne with divers others, where there is good hunting of divers kindes of wilde beasts. There are also in this Countrie many Churches, and Monasteries, among which is the Church of the blessed Virgin Marie at Erford, which was built by Boniface Bishop of Moguntium. This Church hath a great Bell, which is famous through all Germanie. The people are fierce, hardy, couragious against their enemies; the men are large of stature, strong, and well-set.



THE DVKEDOME OF FRANCONIA.
The Countrie whence so called.THuringia a Countrie of high Germanie being thus described, there followeth next Franconia or East France Which was so called from the Frenchmen. Some say that the originall of this name came from Francu^^^ whom others call Francio, fabulously supposed to bee the sonne of Hector, and the first founder of this Nation. And Peter Ronsard the Poet writeth, that the auncients did call him Astyanct^ Francum, as it were Hastigerum, that is, the speare-bearer. Others, (...) Gaguinus and Aeneus Pius, doe affirme that the Emperour Valentine gave that name to Franconia, because the Frenchmen in the Northern Language where called fierce; or from the remission of tribute, and their freedome, they were called Franci, that is, Free-men. Albeit doe more approve of a latter Etymologie, that they were calle^ Franci, as it were Frioncy, because they were free from taxes and impositions which cy signifies; or else they were so called, as it were fryansi Fransi; for Ansi being a word proper to the Gothish speech, doth signifie those who excell others in fortune and riches. And are next to Heroes or Semigods, that are above the condition of mortalls: whence they corruptly call Great Noble men Ansos, and with an aspiration Hansos. But to the matter; the Frenchmen after they grew wealthy, and weary of the Romane yoke of subjection, encouraged by the desire of rule, got their liberty, and thereby gained the name of Franci, insteed of the old name of Germaines. Fronconia on the South is neere to Suevia and Bavaria, on the West to the Rhene, on the East it hath Bohemia; on the North it hath Hassia and Thuringia. The ayre of this Countrie is pure and wholesome. The Country it selfe, except it be that part which is called Norica and is neere unto the Rivers, is not very sandy, as Aeneas Silvius writeth, nor yet very stony. But it is generally very fruitefull, and doth yeeld a great increase of Barly, Wheate and all kinde of graine and pulse which is sowed there. There are no where greater and better Turnips and Onions than heere in this Countrie. And in many places there are hills planted with Vines, of which excellent wine is made, and transported to other Countries. The Country of Babenberg, doth yeeld such great store of Liquerize, that whole Cart loades of them are carried through Germanie. This Country also hath many faire Orchards and pleasant meddowes; it hath great store of tame Cattle and wilde beasts. The Princes doe cherish the wilde beasts, who have many Dens in the Woods, where they live in the winter time, and doe house themselves as it were from the stormie
map of FranconiaTHE DVKEDOME OF FRANCONIA.

weather. It is not lawfull for any private man to take them, or hunt them. It is manifest that the Germanes were originally and aunciently called Germanes as appeares by others writings, as also out of Procopius Caesariensis, who was a sharpe sighted and judicious writer. The first Prince of Franconia was Genebaldus, who was governour thereof thirtie yeares. After him there succeeded Marcomirus, Dagobert, Ludovicke the first, Marcomirus the second, Waramund alias Pharamund, who being made King of France left his Dukedome to his brother Marcomer: also Prunmesser, Genebald the second, Suno, Luitemarus, Hugbaldus, Helmericus, Gotefrid, Genebald the third, Ludovick the third, after whom there followed Erebart, Ludovicke the fourth, Gospert the second, and Hetacus the last Duke, who dying without an heyre, he left the Dukedome to Wituninus King of France, who was also called Pepin, which afterward his sonne Charles the Great, gave to Burchard the first Bishop of Viceburg, and to his successors after him, and so bestowed it on the Church, in the yeare 752. It is now a Dukedome which tittle the Bishop of Herbipolis assumeth to himselfe. Yet all Franconia is not subject unto him. For Kitzinga and Bristadium are subject to the Marquesse of Brandenburg, and Gralingiacum to the Bishop of Babenberg. Also Chronacum, Forchimium, Staphelsteinium, Hochstadium are under the bishop of Herbipolis. Koningspergum, Oxenfordia, Carolastadium, Hasfordia, and Bischofsheim, Alderburg, Middleburg, and some other townes are subject to the Bishop of Moguntinum. Colburg belongeth to the Duke of Saxonie. Wirceburg; which Conradus Corta calleth Erebipolis, Ligurinus Herbipolis, Spanhemius Marcopolis, Ptolemaeus, Artaunum, and the inhabitants Wirtzburg, from a sweete kinde of wort or drinke, which the Countrie of Herbipolis doth yeeld: is the Metropolis and Mother Cittie of East France, in which Boniface Archbishop of Moguntinum in the yeare of Christ 751 erected a Bishopricke. It is situated on a plaine, being encompassed on every side with faire hills, pleasant gardens, and fruitefull Meddowes, and also well fortified with ditches, rampires, walls, Towers, and Bulwarkes. It is full of Cittizens, and hath many faire buildings. On the West Moenus runneth by it, which is a navigable River, and it hath a stone bridge standing over it, which is built on strong piles. Neere the River Moenus there is a Castell seated on the Mountaine, which hath held out many seiges, and therefore seemes to be impregnable. At the foote of the Mountaine there is a Monasterie, which was built by Burchard, at the cost and charges of Cumbert King of France, in honour of the great confessor. But it would not bee much from our present purpose, to know the forme and order of the inauguration and consecration of the Bishops and Dukes of Wirceburg. After the decease of the former Bishop, the Bishop that is designed entreth into the Cittie with a great troupe of horse. Being come into the Cittie he alighteth from his horse, and having put off his richest roabe, foure Earles doe bring him into our Saviours Church, or house, bare headed, and barefooted, in a poore weede or habit, girt about with a little cord. The officiall Earles are the Lords of Hennenbergh, Castel, Werthein, and Reineck. Then the Deane together with the Clergie goeth forth to meete him, and asketh him what he seekes? or what hee

desireth? And then he answereth very submissively, That though unworthy he is now ready to take upon him that office, unto which he was chosen, and to discharge it faithfully. Then the Deane saith; In the name of the Chapter I doe here commit unto thy charge the house of the Saviour of the world, and the Dukedome annexed to it, in the Name of the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost. Afterward he followeth the Clergie into our Saviours house, and having put on the Pontificall roabe, he first heares Masse, and afterward hath a banket, but first the body of the Bishop deceased is emboweld and set downe in the Chappell of the Castle: and his heart being tooke out is put in a glasse vessell. The next day he is brought out of the Castle into Saint Iames his Monasterie, holding in his right hand a Crozier, and in his left a sword; the third day they goe againe to our Saviours house, where after Dirges and prayer, he is at last buried with a Crozier and a sword. The other Citties are that which Ptolemie calls Bamberg; Peter Appianus calleth it Granionatium, and Granionarion in a Greeke booke: it was at first called Balemberg, that is, the Mountaine of Baba, from Baba the daughter of Otto Duke of Saxonie, and wife to Albert Earle of Babemberg: others doe call this Cittie Pfawenberg; it is a very pleasant Cittie, situated by the River Regnuz. It hath many Mountaines, Hills, and Gardens, and a very fruitfull soyle, where great store of Musmillians and Liquerize doe grow. It is an Episcopall Seate; and as it hath bread many happy wits, so it glorieth chiefely in Ioachim Camerarius a man famous for all kind of learning, as appeareth by his workes set out by him, which are read with much admiration. There is also Francefort, or Francoford, by the River Moene, which is commonly called Franck Furtam Mayn, to distinguish it from the other Franckofort which is situated by Odera. Munster writeth that it was heretofore called Helenopolis, but he doth not shew when or from whence it was so called. Henry Stephanus calleth it in his Emconion of this Cittie, the Academie of the Muses, the Athens of Franckford, the Muses Mercuriall Faires, and the Compendium or Epitome of all the Marts of the world. This Cittie is divided into two parts by the River Moenus, and joyned together againe with a stone Bridge. It is now an Emperiall Cittie, and famous through the whole world for two Marts or Faires. Heere the Electors doe chuse the Romaine Emperours, and if there be competitors that stand for the Empire, they doe here fight for it, and try it by battell. There is also Moguntia commonly called Mentz, some call it Moguntiacum. Ptolomie Lib. 2. cap. 8. tab. 3. calls it Neomagum. Moguntia is so called from the River Moenus, which some doe call Moganus and others Mogus. It is an Episcopall and Metropolitan Cittie. It hath a fruitefull soyle on either side of the River Rhene, which yeeldeth great store of wine. It is large and well fortified, and very populous on that side which is toward Rhene: but on the other side it hath few inhabitants; it is very long but narrow There are faire houses built after the Romane fashion, and magnificent Collegiate Churches, with the Bishops Castle. Here was an Vniversity erected by Bishop Theodoricke, and

it is thought that the Art of Printing was invented here. It is subject to the Archbishop who is elector, and Chanceller of the Empire. There is also Mons Regius commonly called Conigsperg, where Iohn de Monte Regio, a great Mathematician was borne, whose Commentaries upon Ptolomies Almagest are yet extant. Schweinfordia is situated by the River Moene in the middle almost of Franconia. There are also Kitzinga, and Fridberg an Imperiall Cittie, and others. Moreover the first Circle of the Empire is in Franconia, in which these are called to Councell, first the Clergie, as the Bishops of Bamberg, of Herbipolis, of Wirtzburg Duke of Franconia; of Eichstett; der Teutsch Ordens Master: the Provost of Camberg, the Abbot of Saint Galgen: Secondly the secular Princes, as the Marquesse of Brandenburg, Burger vom Nurenberg: the Countes of Hennonberg, of Castel, of Wertheim, of Rheinecke, of Hohenloe: the Lords of Reichelsperg, and Limpurg; and the Countes of Horpach and Schwartzenburg: Thirdly the free Citties, as Norunberg, Rottenburg, Winshaim, and Schweinfurt. Many Rivers which be full of fish doe water this Country, the chiefe whereof are Moenus, and Sala accompanied with eight lesser Rivers: also Sinna, Rhadiantia, Aestus, Tubera, and some other. It hath these woods, Speshart, Ottoes wood, and other parts of Hercinia, which doe enclose it as it were round about with a growing wall. It is a warlike Nation, Noble, witty, and laborious. Men and women doe both plant Vines, so that none are suffered to be idle.



THE DVKEDOME OF BAVARIA. The second Circle of the Empire.
WE come now to Bavaria, which were so called by the addition of one letter from the Avarians the remainder of the Hunnes,The Country whence so called. who having droven out the Noricians seated themselves in that Countrie; and also Bojaria from the Bojans a people of Gallia Cisalpina, who sometime dwelt heere: it is commonly called Beyeren. It hath on the East Austria, on the West Suevia: on the South the Rhetian Alpes:The Situation and to the North Franconia. The length is 29 Germane miles. The breadth five and twentie. The ayre is very wholesome,The temper of the ayre. and the Countrie very pleasant: and generally very fruitefull, but yet it hath no great store of Wine nor Corne: but in some places it hath a Ende of sharpe hedge Wine.The fruitfulnesse of the soyle. The richer Wines are brought thither out of Alsatia, Franconia, and Austria. There is great store of Corne about Ratispon and Landshut. Moreover, it hath abundance of Salt, fruite, Iron, Cattle, Fowle, wilde beasts, and all things necessarie to life. It doth breede great store of Swine, which feede on Acornes and crabbes,The variety of living creatures. so that as Hungarie furnisheth other Countries with Oxen, so this Countrie furnisheth most parts of Europe with Swine. And besides Beares, Boares, and other kindes of wilde beasts, it hath great heards of Deere, which they cannot hunt without the Princes leave. In the yeare 1567, on the 22 day of August, there was a Hart taken in Bavaria, of so large a body, that it weighed 625 pound. The Nariscians, Vindelicians, and Noritians were formerly seated here. The Nariscians, whom Aventinus calleth N^rtgow, and Melanchton Narcaw, are divided from the rest by the River Danubius. The Vindelicians according to the auncients Description, are situated betweene the Rhaetians and Noricians. Rhaetia is two fold, the one is larger containing the Vindelicians, the Noricians, and the Rhaetians, the other is lesser. The River Lycus doth separate the Vindelicians from the Rhaetians, if we beleeve Ptolomie; but if we follow Strabo they are separated by the Rhene, and the Brigantine Lake, which we have shewed in our description of Helvetia. Danubius doth part them from Germanie, and the Alpes from Italie. Marcus Velserus hath rightly observed out of Ricardus the name of the Vindelicians.



Respicit and late fluvios Vindamque Lycumque
Miscentes undas, and nomina littoris, unde
Antiquam gentem, populumque urbemque vocarunt
Vindelicam--


It sees the Rivers Vinda and Lycus flow
Mingling their names and waters as they goe;
Whence the Countrie, and the people it containd,
And Cittie too were Vindelicians nam'd.


It may be gathered out of Plinnie and Ptolomie, that there were ce^taine Countries, and Citties belonging to the Vindelicians. August^^ sent to conquer them Tiberius Claudius Nero, and Nero Claudius Dr^sus, who were both the Emperours sonnes in Law, who having quic^ly dispersed and dissipated the Barbarians forces, did easily overco^^ them, and reduc'd them to subjection. See Paterculus Lib. 2. Di^ Lib. 53. and Horace Lib. 5. Odar. The Noricians do begin from the Riv^^ Oenus; and so bend South East even to Hungarie and Italie. They we^^ alwayes great souldiers, and being accustomed to warre, they did ofte^ invade the bordering Romanes. As appeareth by the Norician swor^ which Horace celebrateth. And also by an inscription which is found t^ this side Danubius to this effect, and in these words:
DIS MANIBVS ET MEMORIAE LEGIONVM. ET MEMORIAE MISERRIMORVM, VINDELICIS PRAEFECTIS MOCENIANIS ET VICTORI ET AVRELIO FILIIS VINDELICIS SVRINVS INFELIX PATER F. C.
The auncient Government.Bavaria was heretofore governed by a King of its owne, even t^ the time of the Emperour Arnulp: and as the Parthians called the^ King Arsaces, the Aegyptians Ptolomie, so they called their King Caca^nus. Afterward it had Dukes as it hath now. Bavaria is divided int^ the higher and lower. The higher lyeth Southward by the Alpes. (...) is full of Moores, violent Rivers, and darke thicke woods. It is onely fit for pasturage, and feeding of Cattle. The Lower Bavaria is mor^ fertile, and fruitfull, and more inhabited, having Vines all along th^ sides of the Rivers Danubius, Isara, and Lavarus. And thus Bavari^ is divided naturally. It is divided Politically into the Countie of Bavaria,The Citties. and the Palatinate. The Countie is described in this Table and the Palatinate in the Table following. The Citties of the highe^ Bavaria are Monachum commonly called Munchen, being situated o^ the bancke of the River Isara, and built by Henry Duke of Bavaria in the yeare 772, in the time of the Emperour Otho the first. It is th^ pleasantest Cittie of all Germanie: being seated betweene the River Oenus and Lycus, betweene the Citties Wassenburg, Augusta and Frisi^ga, and betweene the fishie Lakes, among which the Duke hath a fair^ Garden, full of curious knotts, hearbes, and flowers: there is an artificiall fountaine and a Summer house adorned with Pictures and Statues, and about twy-light (which is very wonderfull) a great heard o^ Deere doth come and graze, every day under the windowes. In th^ Cittie there are Churches, Towers, Libraries, a Court, and an exchange full of tradesmen and Merchants, and all things necessarie no^

map of BavariaTHE DVKEDOME OF BAVARIA.

onely for use, but also for Ornament, and delight. Ingolstadium commonly called Ingolstatt, is situated by Danubius, which was aunciently called Ingelstat, or Angelostadium, from the Suevian Angeli, who first began to build this Cittie with others. It was at first a Towne, but the Emperour Ludovick Bavarus made it a Cittie. There was an Vniversitie instituted for all Arts and sciences in the yeere 1410, and afterward Ludovicke Duke of Bavaria, and Pope Pius the second, did adorne it and endow it with great revennewes and many Priviledges. Frisinga heretofore Fruxinum, as Rhenanus and Munster doe testifie, is thought to have beene built at that time when the Romanes by their Praefects and Lievtenants of Provinces, did possesse and governe that part of Bavaria, which runneth out from the bancke of Danubius to the Alpes. The River Mosa doth glide by it. There are also 22 Townes in it. In the Lower Bavaria there are Ratisbona commonly called Regensperg, situated by the River Danubius, it was built by the third Emperour Claudius Tiberius Nero about the time of our Saviours passion, who called it Tiberina or Augusta Tiberij. Onuphrius writeth that Tiberius is mentioned in an old stone. And Goltzius produces some of Tiberius coyne, with this inscription. Col. Aug. Tib. Simlerus thinketh that this Regensburg is that which Antoninus calleth Regium, and in the register booke it is called Castra Regina; Althamerus reckoneth up many other names which the Barbarians did give unto it, as Reginoburg, Rhaetobonna, Rhaetopolis, Hyaspolis, Imbripolis, Regnipolis, Tetrapolis, Quadrata and Germanisheim. The name of Ratisbone is derived from Navigation. It was formerly the Metropolis of Bavaria, and the seate of the Kings and Dukes of that Country; It hath a stone bridge which was built in the yeare 1115 by the Emperour Henry, over Danubius on twelve Arches, being foure hundered paces long, and 70 broad. There is also Patavium or Patavia, which is called in their owne language Passaw: Velserus thinketh that it is called in the Register bookes Batavas. That which Ptolomie calls Bojodurum, Auentinus, Pyramius, and Lazius doe thinke to be a Cittie of Vindelicia. It is a faire neare Cittie in the lowest part of the lower Bavaria, at the beginning of Austria, in the confines or Frontiers of both Provinces, betweene the meeting, and confluence of Danubius and Oenus, being commodiously, and pleasantly seated in the manner of a Peninsula. It is famous for the Bishops sea, and for traffique and commerce. For it is seated so conveniently by the River both for commerce and trading, that as Lions in France, and Gandauum in Flanders doe flourish for merchandising, in regard of the concourse and meeting of Rivers neere unto them: so Patavia in this part of Germanie, doth in this respect excell other Citties. Landshuten, commonly called Landshut, is a famous Cittie, and of chiefe note: being situate by the River Isara, which glideth by this Cittie, to the great advantage and commodity of the Inhabitants. Irenicus out of the fifth table of Ptolomies Europe, supposeth it to be Inutrium, which hath not the same situation. And therefore Ptolomie doth better place it, and maketh Inutrium to be the same with Mittenwaldt a Towne of Bavaria on this side the Alpes. It was built in the yeare 1207 by Ludovicke Duke of Bavaria, having a

fruitfull soyle round about it, both for corne Cattle Wine and all kind of fruites. The Cittie hath many faire neate buildings, the chiefe whereof is the great Church, which is curiously built of freestone, wi^h a very high steeple. There is also in the lower part of the Cittie the magnificent Pallace of the most illustrious Duke Albert, which was heretofore called the New building. There are many Rivers which doe water and enrich Bavaria,The Rivers. as Danubius the greatest River in all Europe, celebrated by Greeke and Latine writers; also Lavarus, and the River Isara, being pleasant, full of fish, and running violently: also ^icetus, Oenus, Lycus, Alemannus, or Alimula, Nabus, Regus, Ambra, Zoysa, Vilsas, Wolfada, Gyssea, and many others. And besides these R^vers it hath many great spacious Lakes; which have severall formes and shapes, and severall sorts of fish in them: as the Lakes Ammersee, Asee, Wirmsee, and Rorsee. It hath divers high Mountaines, which I cannot reckon in particular, but the chiefe are the Paenine Alpes, and the Mountaine Caravancas. There are so many woods which lye scattering about, so that it seemeth to be one wood: For without doubt they are parts of the wood Hercinia, which heretofore did almost cover over all this tract of ground. But these parts of the wood Hercinia have divers names: as Heynerdoch, Schwardtzwalt, Greinwaldt, Zellerwaldt, etc. The people are more addicted to tillage, and breeding of Cattle, than to warfare, neither are they much given to merchandising, but rather to drinking and getting of children, and they doe seldome goe out of their native Countrie. Moreover the Bavarian circle of the Empire doth consist of three orders. In the first are the Bishops: as the Archbishop of Saltzburg; the Bishops of Passaw, of Freifingen, and the Bishop of Ratisbone: the Abbatesses of Alt Munster, and Ober Munster at Ratisbon. In the second there are the Duke of Bavaria, the Count Palatine of Bavaria, the Landgrave of Luohtenberg: Counte Hage, B. in Stauffen, or Stuaffnegk: the Lord of Rinfelt or Rhinfelden, B. Degenberg, Obesultzperg. In the third are Freistet, and Regensperg.



THE PALATINATE of the Lower BAVARIA.

Jn which is the Landgraviate of Lutchtenberg. 33. 27. 49. 3^. It is in the second Circle of the Empire. We doe not yet know the other Nobilitie.
The Meridians are distant according to the proportion of the Parallels 49, and 51, to the greatest Circle.

BAvaria besides the aforesayd divisions, is divided into ^^varia on this side Danubius; and Bavaria beyond Da^^^ is the Countrie of Nariscians, of which we have sp^^^ before. It is now called Nortgovia, and commonly ^^^gow, and this is the Palatinate of the Lower Bavaria, which, see^ ^^e have hitherto spoken of Bavaria in generall, and of that part which is called the Countie, we will not describe. But Nortgovia, that we may begin with the Etymologie, was so named because it is a Northerne Countrie. For Nort in the Germanie language signifies North, and Gow signifies a Land or Countrie. Moreover this Countrie is called the higher Palatinate to distinguish it, from the Palatinate of Rhine, which is called the Lower. This Bavaria was heretofore called Noricum, which Ptolomie bounders with the River Aenus, and part of Danubius, which runneth from Aenus to the Mountaine Cetius; also with the Mountaine Cetius, and with part of Pannonia, and the Mountaine Catrancas. But after that the Bojans having driven out the Romanes, did transmigrate and remoove into that part of Vindelitia, which lyeth betweene Aenus and Lycus, this tract also began to bee called Noricum, Bojaria, or Bavaria. For so the third Deacon of Lumberdie, as M. Velserus intimateth in his letters to Ortelius, doth describe it in these words. Noricum which is a Province of the Bojans, hath on the East Pannonia, on the West Swethland, on the South Italie, on the North the River Danubius. Sextus Ruffus doth reckon two Provinces of the Noricians, and the Register bookes doe mention the Mediterranean Noricum and the Ripensian. But this Bavaria hath on the North Voitlandium, on the East Bohemia, on the South the River Danubius, which separateth it from the other part of Bavaria; on the West it

map of Palatine of lower BavariaTHE PALATINATE of the Lower BAVARIA.

is boundered with Hanecamp,The Fertility. and a part of Suevia, and Franconia. The ayre of this Countrie is pleasant, and wholesome: but the soyle is harde and rugged, although in some places it bringeth forth good store of Corne; and it hath pleasant pastures fit for feeding of Cattell. Neere to Kelheime there are many Vines growing on the bancke of Danubius. But they yeeld a kind of hard sharpe Wine, so that it is a common saying that Vinegar growes on those Mountaines. In other places also it produces divers kindes of mettalls, especially great store of Iron, of which the Nortgovians doe yearely make a great gaine and commoditie. There is also an excellent kinde of blew colour, which they call Lazurus. Moreover Noricum, which is now the Palatinate of Bavaria, was heretofore a Kingdome, and had Kings of its owne, when the Romanes had reduc'd the other part of Bavaria into a Province even till the yeare of our Lord 500: whence Iulius Caesar in his Commentaries, mentioneth that Arivov^stus King of Germanie, married the King of Noricums Sister. But what Princes the Noricians had afterward doth not appeare, untill they became Christians. But in the yeare 511, by the labour and industrie of Theoden the second, Bavaria was reduc'd into one Kingdome, who made a great slaughter on the Romanes and drove them out of Bavaria; afterward it was divided into three Dukedomes by his three sonnes: Theedon the third who was seated at Ratisbon, Otto et Otingis, and Theobald at Tyrolis. It would be too long to reckon up the other Princes. But at length the Emperour Ludovicke Duke of Bavaria, in the yeare of Christ 1439, did divide it in this manner, that the whole Norican Bavaria should belong to the Prince Palatines, except some Emperiall Citties, and whatsoever formerly appertained to the Empire. The Metropolis of Bavaria is commonly called Nurenberg, which is pleasantly seated by the River Pegnitius, which watereth the Cittie, it is very large and beautifull, and hath many faire Churches, curious buildings, great streetes, being fortified with strong walls, Towers, and Bulwarkes; and full of Cittizens, rich in Merchandise and famous through the whole world for Mechanick Arts: it is situated not only on the Navel as it were or middle of Germanie, but also of Europe; it is 500 miles di^tant from Ierusalem. Though the Cittie be of no great antiquitie, yet the Castle which is situate on a high hill, which was heretofore called Castrum Nuricum, is very auncient being built by the Emperour Claudius Tiberius, whence it was called Neroes Castell. Heretofore it was subject to Albert Duke of Franconia, after whose decease it came to the Empire in the reigne of the Emperour Ludovicke the third, and afterward it increased and began to grow very populous. In the time of Charles the fourth it was walled about: and againe in the yeare 1538. Now it is the fairest and largest Cittie in all Germanie, so that it hath 128 streetes* 11 stone Bridges, which doe conjoyne and unite the two parts of the Cittie. The River Flavius passing through the C^ttie doth drive 68 water-mills. There are also in this Cittie 116 wells, and 12 Conduites, 6 great gates, and 13 common bathes.
In the yeare 1575, the Noribergians did institute an Academie or Vniversitie at Altorsium, and drew thither with great stipends and

pensions, Professors of the tongues, also of the Arts, Philosophie and other faculties: As appeares by an inscription at Altorsium: Inventuti, Religionis Christianae Doctrina, Linguis Latina and Graeca, Optimis denique artibus ac disciplinis informandae, Georgio Volkanfro, Philippo Geudero, Hieronymo Baumgartnero Oppido Praefecto, Senatus Nortbergensis Scholam hanc nobilem and Patriciam aperiri and solemniter introduci voluit. 3. Cal. Iul. Qui dies Petro and Paulo Apostolis Sacra est. Anno a nato Christo Salvatore 1575. That is, George Volkanfrus, Phillip Geuderus, Hierom Baumgartner, being learned Praefects, and Balthazr Baumgartner being Praefect of the Towne, the Senate of Norinberg hath solemnely instituted and ordained this Noble free Schoole, for the instructing of youth in the doctrine of Christian religion, as also in the Latine and Greeke tongues, and lastly in all good Arts, and Sciences on the third of the Kall. Iul. which day is sacred to the Apostles Peter and Paul: and in the yeare from the birth of our Saviour Christ 1575. This tract of Land hath many other Townes besides this Metropolis, as also divers monasteries and Villages, one of the chiefest Townes is Amberg, which was walled about in the yeare of Christ 1030, also Auwerback, Sultback, and the Monasterie of Castel, where the Princes of Nortgow did formerly keepe their Court: also the Townes Eger, Beierut, Eistet, Napurg, Newenstadt, Ruwenkelm, Kemnat, Krusen, Grewenwerdt, and the Castell Gainum which is so called from wayling or Lamenting. For heere Danubius passeth by dangerous fearefull places, which make the Marriners cry out when they passe by it; in the Germane Language it is called Die Strudel from the noyse and violence of the waters: there are also the Townes, Eschenback, Weiden, Parnaw, Pleistein, Herspruck, Rurbaock, Neumarkt, Tursentur, Elbagen, Cham, Scho^see, Kunsperg, Stauff, and some others, which for the most part belong to the Prince Palatines. This Country also of Nortgow doth include one of the foure Landgraviates, which were heretofore instituted by the Emperours, namely Lutchtenberg, in the second Circle of the Empire, which was so denominated from the Castle Luthtenberg, albeit the Princes of that Territorie doe keepe their Court at Pfriembdt and sometime at Grunsfeld. This Landgraviate did not grow so powerfull as the other three, which in processe of time were much enlarged both in territorie and power: but especially the Landgraviate of Hassia, as Munster writeth. This Country is watered and enriched by these Rivers, namely Egar, Nubus, Vilsus, Regus, Pennitius, Schwartzach, Sultza, Altimulus, and Lautra, and some others. Historians doe relate concerning the River Regnitius, or Regus, that Charles the Great being at Ratisbon, was perswaded; that a navigable passage might be made out of Rhene into Danubius, if a ditch were made betweene the Rivers Regnitius and Altimulus, which might be capable to receive and carry boates and vessells: because the one of those Rivers doe runne into Danubius and the other into Rhene. The King straightway chuseth out a convenient place for this work, and having got great store of Labourers, he spent all the Autumne quarter about it. So that a ditch was made

betweene the aforesoyd Rivers, which was two miles long, and three hundered foote broade. But this worke came to nothing, for by reason of the raine, and that the soyle was a Moorish kind of earth, the worke could not stand, for the earth fell downe in the night, and filled up as much as they had digged in the day time. Neere the Towne Weiseberg, there are some tokens yet remaining of this vaine attempt. It is to bee noted that all the Rivers of Nortgow have Iron mills and other mettall mills, so that they doe blow the bellowes, and drive the two hammers with their streames, so that the Smith neede but put the Iron under the Hammers on the Anvill, and the water will make the Hammers forge it. There is in this Countrie the Mount Pinifer, commonly called Fitchtelbergk, being sixe miles about: out of which there doe flow foure famous Rivers, Moenus, Nabus, Sala, and Egra, which winding in the figure of a crosse; doe runne toward the foure severall corners of the world. This Mountaine doth produce divers kind of mettalls, and the best blew colour, which is called Lazurus. There is Lead also found on the top of the Mountaine, and many pits, out of which mettalls were formerly digged. This Country also is, very where cloathed with some pieces of the wood Hercinia, as Weisenburwalt, Behemerwalt, and others, which are represented in this Table. Moreover when Bavaria had received the Christian faith, there were lawes made, enacted for the government of the Land, namely concerning the libertie of the Church, concerning Church-burners, and Incendiaries, concerning those that tooke Sanctuarie, concerning strikers of the Clergie, concerning Tithes, seditious persons; also Martiall Lawes, Lawes for the tenure of Lands, for Brokage; for titles of inhaeritances, for buying and selling, etc. These lawes the Bavarians obeyed for many yeares, and some of them they doe still obey. And here I cannot chuse but adde some of the Bavarian Lawes. It was enacted that the Iudge, to the end hee might judge rightly, should have the Booke of the Statutes, and that thereby he should determine and end all sutes and controversies. Neither should the Iudges respect persons or gifts, but when he had Iudged rightly he should have the ninth part of the composition money. But if wrongfully, he should pay twice as much, as he had tooke away by his unjust judgement: and moreover should be fined fortie shillings. He that sold any thing for a certaine price, should set downe the bargaine in writing, and have witnesses thereunto. No bargaine or sale unlesse it were free and voluntarie, should be firme and currant. I omit the rest, least I should seeme to over burden this description, with the repetition of those lawes, which Iohn Boeme Aubanus doth describe at large.



THE DVKEDOME of the higher SAXONIE, with MISNA and LVSATIA.
The eighth Circle of the Empire.
WEE come to the higher Saxonie, which is the eighth Circle of the Empire. For, Saxonie is divided into the higher and the lower: The higher which this Table doth exhibite to your view, we will here describe. Concerning the Lower we have spoken, in the foureteenth Table of Germanie; and therefore we will not repeate that which we have delivered before concerning Saxonie, least it might seeme tedious to the Reader. The higher Saxonie, commonly called Ober Saxen, the Duke whereof is one of the Electors, hath on the East old Marchia, on the West Hassia: on the South Thuringia, and Misnia;The Cittie of Wittenberg. on the North the Dukedome of Brunswick. The chiefe Cittie is Wittenberg, situated by the River Albis. It was built by Windechind the first, some say by Windechind his sonne, and that it was called Wittenberg, from Windechind the father or the sonne. Duke Fredericke erected there a Vniversitie, in the yeare 1502, which another Fredericke did so adorne and beautifie, that being at the first of small account, as Erasmus witnesseth, yet at last it grew famous. Peter Mosellanus saith, that Fredericke did so adorne and furnish Wittenberg, with Professors of all Arts, and especially of the three tongues, so that it seem'd to be the patterne of a well founded Vniversitie. In which Henningus and Oldendorpius two Lawyers, did flourish and were famous for their workes through all Germanie. Albertus Crantzius in his Wallia, Lib. 8. cap. 30. hath a memorable story concerning the tryall by hot Iron which is used in this Cittie. It chanced that one was wrongfully accused in this Cittie for setting houses on fire by stealth: but hee for swearing it, desired that he might be tryed by the tryall of hot Iron, which the Lay-Iudges, did either not know, or else contemn'd, as being interdicted by the law. Whereupon he tooke up an hot Iron, and carryed it a great way, and then cast it out of his hands, and was neither burnt, nor had any harme by it. A yeare afterward, a Pavier paving the same streete, thrusting his hand into the gravell

found this Iron, which being yet hot burnt his hand. Thos^ which stood by wondered at it, and told it to the governour of tha^ Ward. Who straight began to suspect that this man was guiltie (...) that fact, of which the other was wrongfully accus'd: so he commanded him to be brought before him, whereupon examination, h^^ confest the fact, and was broken on the wheele, and afterward pu^ to death for this crime. There is also a story concerning this tria^ by hot Iron, which Genildis wife to Henry the third did undergoe who being accused of adultery, did cleare her selfe by this tryall o^ hot Iron. I finde also in George Cedrenus, that they did use the lik^ kind of tryall, for those who were suspected to be deflourers o^ Virgins, and for those who were thought to be no maids. Some als^ doe place Torga in higher Saxonie, which others doe place in Misnia Misnia and Lusatia are described with Saxonie as parts thereof, o^ which seeing they are delineated in this present Table, we wil^ speake briefely.

Misnia.
Misnia or Meyssen, is a Country of higher Saxonie, lying between the River Sala and Albis, which was so called either from th^ Lake Misia, neere which the inhabitants hereof did dwell; or from the Cittie Misna, to which opinion Rithamerus in his description o^ the world doth agree. But it seemeth that this Country was lately (...) named, seeing we may gather out of Tacitus, that the Hermundu^ia^ were formerly seated here, for he mentioneth that the River Alb^ did rise among the Hermundurians. It is bounded on the North wit^ the Marquiship of Brandenburg and the higher Saxonie, on the Ea^ with Lusatia and Silesia: on the South it looketh toward the Kingdome of Bohemia and the Sudetian Mountaines: on the West it hath Turingia. They say the ayre was heretofore very bad and insuffer able, in regard of moyst exhalations arising from the Mountaines an^ the Woods, but now the Woods being cut downe the foggy cloud are vanished, so that the ayre is now more wholesome. This Country aboundeth with all kinde of fruites, so that it furnishes othe^ Countries. It hath every where great store of Corne, and also grea^ plentie of wine, honey, and cattell: except in the Valley of Ioachim^ where the soyle is harder, and lesse fruitfull. But the rich Mines o^ Silver doth recompence the barrennesse of the superficies or surface of the earth. The Mountaines also have divers kinds of mettalls, a^ Silver, Brasse, Steele, Iron, Lead, and in some places Gold. In th^ time of Otto the Great, this Countrie together with that higher Saxonie, was called the Marquiship of Saxonie, before the higher Saxonie was made a Dukedome. Afterward in processe of time, these Countries were divided into more Lordships, and afterward the^ were reduc'd into one Dominion, and had one denomination o^ name; which happened in the yeare 1241, when the Landgrave o^ Turingia, dying without issue, his Territories came to the Lords o^ Misnia, who from that time got both titles, and were called Marquesses

map of higher SaxonyTHE DVKEDOME of the higher SAXONIE.

of Misnia, and Landgraves of Thuringia. And in the yeare of our Lord 1423, the Prince Elector of Saxonie having no issue male, the Emperour Sigismund did give the Dukedome of Saxonie, to the Princes of Misnia, which they doe still possesse; and after that, as Munster writeth, they usurped a triple or threefold title. There are many Citties in Misnia: the chiefe Cittie is Misena, on the left hand bancke of the River Albis, which was built by Otto the first. The next is Dresdena, very pleasantly seated and well fortified. Heere the Duke of Saxonie hath an armorie, and a magnificent Pallace, and a curious stone bridge. Lipsia is a famous Mart Towne, situated by the River Pleissena which excelleth all the other Citties of Misnia for wealth; and beautie: heere is a Noble Schoole for learning and wisedome, which i^ those troublesome times at Prague, was translated thither in the yeare 1408. In the same tract there are Itenburg, Antiquae cellae, Lautenberg^ and other Townes. This Countrie is watered with these Rivers, Albis, Sala, Mulda, and others; and it hath many woods, as Gabreta and others, which are parts of Hercynia. The inhabitants are strong, valiant, and well proportioned in body; they are also merry and pleasant, friendly, modest, and peaceable, and are not like the auncient Germanes for rudenesse of behaviour.


Lusatia.
LVsatia also as Rithamerus doth witnesse, is a great part of Saxonie which lyeth betweene the Rivers, Albis and Odera, and the Mountaines of Bohemia. But the name of Lusatia is derived from the Elysians or Lygians, who, as Ioachim Carens saith, were seated here. Thi^ Country hath good store of Corne, and is very fruitfull. It was some time joyned with Misnia: at length the Bohemians, who strived to enlarge their Kingdome, tooke it to themselves. Lusatia is twofold, th^ Lower, and the Higher. In the latter there are these Citties, Sprenberg, Prybus,The Citties. and Cotbus: in the former Gorlits, and Zitaw. Gorlitum commonly called Gorlitz, is the chiefest and Noblest Cittie in the higher Lusatia: having many faire houses, and being well fortified with walls and ditches, and by the mountainous situation thereof, and also by the Vicinitie of the River, which is very profitable and commodious, to Millers, Brewers, Dyers, and other Cittizens. There is a ston^ Bridge to passe over it, which is covered over head. But of all the publicke and private costly aedifices, S. Peters Church, and the Pallace at^ the chiefe. This Cittie was first founded and built in the yeare 1030 as the Annalls thereof doe witnesse. But in the yeare 1301, it was burn^ downe to the ground, so that there was not one house left standing But like a Phoenix that riseth out of her owne ashes, so eight yeare^ afterward out of these ruines, it was built fairer and more curiously than before. It is subject to the Kingdome of Bohemia, as also Lusatia* And Iohn Dubravius Lib. 21. concerning the affaires of Bohemia, doth shew how it came to the Crowne of Bohemia. The River Nissa doth water Lusatia and doth much enrich it. But so much concerning Lusatia. Now let us returne to Saxonie, and speake briefely of it. Thes^

Noble Rivers doe water Saxonie, Albis, Sala, Visurgis, also Lusimicius, Multauia, Misa, Sala, Fulda, Leyna, Allenius, Odera, Ola, Nisa,The Rivers of Saxonie. and others. It hath also many woods, as Lunenbergerheid, Spondawerheid,The Woods. Rottenawerheid, Galberheid, Pomerischeid, which are parts of Hercynia. The Saxones were heretofore distinguished into foure ranckes, or orders, the Nobles, Gentry, Freemen, and Servants. And there was a Law made that every one should marry, in their owne rancke or tribe. So that a Noble man should marry a Noble woman, a Gentleman should marry a Gentlewoman, a Freeman should marry a Freewoman, and a Servant should marry a Servant, and it was death to breake or infringe this statute. They had also excellent lawes for punishing male factors. Moreover,Their Lawes. Ober Saxon which is the eight Circle of the Empire, doth consist of three orders, the first are the bishops of Misnia, of Merspurg, of Naumburg, of Brandenburg, of Havelburg, of Lubuke, of Caminum. The Abbots of Salveldt, of Rottershausen, and Falc^^reiten. Also the Abbetesses of Quedelnburg, and of Genrode: the second are the Princes and saecular Lords, as the Duke Elector of Saxonie, the Marquesse of Brandenburg Elector, the Dukes of Pomerania: the Princes of Anhalt: the Earles of Schwartzenburg: Count Mansfelt: Counte Stolberg: Counte Hohenstein: Count Buchlingen: Count Rapp^^: Count Mullingen: Count Gleiche: Count Leisneck: Count Widersfelt: the Lords of Bernaw: B. de Tautenberg: Count Regenstein, Rosse de Plaw. D. de GratZ, D, de Schonberg. The third are the free C^ties, as Dantiscum, and Elbingen.




THE MARQVISHIP and Electorship of BRANDENBVRG.
THe Marquiship of Brandenburg, which is represented in this Table, was heretofore inhabited by the Vandals, who spread themselves from the River Albis Eastward, through the Countries of Mechelburg, Brandenburg, Pomerania, Bohemia, and Polonia. It was so called from the Metropolis, which at first was called Brenneburg: as George Sabine saith: 
Italiam quando digressus ab urbe petebam,A Duce quae Brenno condita nomen habet.Going to Italie, that Cittie I did leaveWhich from Duke Brennus doth her name receive.
Charles the Great did beseige them a long time, and Henry Aucep^ overthrew them neere Brenna, and put a Garrison in the Cittie, with a Colonie of Saxons. This Marquiship is 60 Germaine miles long. On the West it is boundered with Saxonie, Misnia, and the Megalopensians Country; on the North it hath the Stetinians, Pomeranians, and Cassubians; and on the East it hath Polonia, and Silesia: and on the South Bohemia, Lusatia, and Moravia. The Countrie is very fruitefull, especially for corne: it hath also Vineyards, out of which they make great store of wine. Moreover this Country doth produce Corall, and many pretious stones. Moreover the Marquesse of Brandenburg is one of the Electors of the Empire, and is counted one of the richest, and most potent Princes of Germanie. Who besides his Marquiship, hath also many Citties, in the Countie of Lusatia and in Silesia. There was a divers and various succession of Princes, for the line of the Marquesses being extinct, Ludovicke Bavarus in the yeare 1119, gave this Principalitie to his sonne Ludovicke: the Bavarians in the yeare 1363, solde it to the Emperour Charles King of Bohemia: and so from Iohn the sonne of Charles, the Marquiship passed to the Princes of Moravia, Iudocus, and Procopius: Iudocus being much endebted did morgage it to William Marquesse of Misnia: at length in the yeare 1417, in the Councel at Constantia, King Sigismund gave it to Fredericke Burgrave of Noriburg. The whole Marquiship is divided into three parts, namely into the Old, the Middle, and the New. The Old Marquiship beginneth a the Desart or Forrest of Luneburg, and stretcheth even to the Rive^ Albis. It confineth also on the Dioecesses of Magdeburg, Halberstadt

map of Brandenburg^HE MARQVISHIP and Electorship of BRANDENBVRG

and Megalopolis. The inhabitants hereof were formerly the Senonians and Suevians, and also the Angrivarians, and Teutons. In this tract there are seaven great Citties, namely Tangeramond neere the River Albis, and situated there where Angra or Tonagra doth emptie it selfe into it; it was heretofore the seate of the Emperour Charles the fourth. Also Stendalium, which is the chiefe Cittie of this Marquiship. There is also Soltwedelum which is divided into two Citties, the Old and the New: also Gardelen with the Castell Eischnippia. Also Osterburg, Werbum, Senohousum, which was so called from the Senons. The lesser Townes are Arnburg situate by the River Albis, with a Castell adjoyning to it. Also Bisemarchum, Bostera, and Bucka, not farre from Albis; also Kalba, and Mestinga, which they call Letzolinga. And moreover here are 465 Villages. The middle Marquiship doth begin at another part of Albis, and doth reach to the Rivers Odera, and Suevum commonly called Spre. It was formerly inhabited by the Suevians. The Metropolis of this Marquiship is Brandenburg, which is a famous Cittie situated by the River Havila, which some thinke, was builded and named by Duke Brennus: some suppose that it was built by Brandon Prince of France, sonne to Marcomir, who about the yeare of Christ 140 did subdue this Countrie. Here was the Vandals Pantheon, whose gods were Zarnebocke, and SwandewitZ, besides others, as it is related in the Chronicles of M^rsburg. Here the high Court is kept for all the Countrie. This Cittie hath many priviledges and immunities, which were heretofore granted by Emperours, Kings, and Princes: which appeareth by a statue which standeth in the New part of the Cittie, holding in his right hand a drawne sword, which they call Roland. The next to Brandenburg is Rathenavium seated by the River Suevus: and also the two Townes Colonia and Berlinum, which are separated by the River Suevius. There is also Franckford a chiefe Cittie, very pleasantly seated by the River Viadrus (which they call Odera) which hath great store of fish: this River runneth on the Eastside; the other parts of the Citty are encompassed with pleasant hills, and choise Vineyards, out of which they make wine, which they carry downe the River unto Pomerania, Denmarke, Borussia, and other places. This Cittie was first built in the yeare 1253 by Gedine of Hertsperg, by the command of Iohn the first Marquesse of Brandenburg. It is a famous Mart Towne, and hath three Faires kept there every yeare. It hath an Academie for Arts, Languages, and Sciences, which was built in the yeare 1506, by Marquesse Ioachim, and endowed with revenewes. In which there have beene from the first institution thereof most excellent professors of Arts and Sciences, some of which Sebastian Munster reckoneth. There are also other Townes as Breitza, surnamed Fida: also Belitza, Bernavium, Cellinum, Mittemwaldum, Monachobergum, Bisenthalum, Blumoberga, Botzavium: also Fryenwaldum and Oderobergum. Here Marquesse Albert the second built a Castell by the River, which commanded those that sayled by it to pay custome. There are also Frisachum, Gereswaldum, Grimmitzum, Grunchyda, Grunewaldum, and Koppenicum. Also the little Towne Lichenum, and Parstaici^mum with a Castell: also the little Towne Mulrosa; Bornavicum,

^d the little Towne Lossa, with a Castell, also the small Townes Wru^^^, and Selowium, and many other Townes and Villages. The ^^ Marquiship is disjoyned from the middle Marquiship by the Ri^er Odera, where the River Warta doth discharge it selfe into Odera were Costrinum. The chiefe Cittie in this Marquiship is Gostrinum, which was reedified by Marquesse Iohn the sonne of Ioachim the first, ^ well fortified, and chosen to be the Princes seate. There are o^er Citties as Lansberg by the River Warta, also Regiomons, Bernwal^, and the little Towne Berstcinum with a Castell, also Bernawicum ^^ Berlinicum, or the Towne new Berlins Moreover there is the ^^ie Arnswaldum, the little Towne Thamum, and Soldinum, which (...) heretofore the prime Cittie of this Marquiship. There is also the ^^e Towne Furstenfeld: and Bramburg, Driesenum, and the Cittie ^^b^rg with a Castell, which is situated on the confines of Pomera^ia. Also Kartaw, Lepena, Morinum Schiffelbenum, Osemundum, Sc^ns^^, W^ldenberg, Zeden, Zandocum. Some divide the whole Marqui^^p into seaven or eight Provinces, which are these, Alde Marck, or ^ Merchia; Meddel Marck, or the middle Marquiship, new Marck, ^ the new Marquiship, the Dukedomes of Vber Marck, Pregnitz, and C^sen; the Lordships of Sterneberg and Cotbus, and also a part of I^s^^is. There are also lesser Countries in these Provinces, as Rapin, a^d Vierraden, and Kustren, which are Marquiships. The whole Marquiship of Brandenburg, with the territories belonging thereunto doth containe 55 great Citties, 64 Townes, 16 little Townes, which ^y commonly call Marctflecken, 38 Castells, or noblemens houses, ^^d 17 Monasteries. It is watered with the Rivers Odera; or Viadrus, ^ueus, Albis, Havela, Warta, and others. Neere the Monasterie of Carthesians at Franckford, there is a little Rivulet, which riseth out of a ^^ll of Vines, which as it hath beene proved, doth harden every thing that is cast into it, and turnes it into a stone. And so much concerning ^^e Marquiship of Brandenburg; it remaineth that wee speake something concerning Pomerania which is contayned in this Table.
Pomerania was called by the first inhabitants in the Vandall speech ^^^tzi, now it is a Dukedome which lyeth by the Balthick sea,The Country whence so called. and is stretched in a long tract of ground, from the borders of Holsatia, ^^ the confines of Livonia. The Countrie is every where very fruitfull, having pleasant Medowes, and greene pastures.The fruitfulnesse of the soyle. It hath such abundance of Corne, Butter, Honey, Wax, Flax, Hempe, and other such (...) commodities, that the inhabitants make a great benefit of them by transporting them to other Countries. The inhabitants also doe gather up Amber by the Sea side, but in lesser quantitie than the Bo^^ssians. There are divers kindes of tame cattell,The varietie of living creaturese and heards of wilde beasts, which runne up and downe in the woods. This Countrie had always Lords, and inhabitants of its owne, which were never con^^ered, nor driven out of their Countrie. Heere are many faire Citties. The chiefe is Stetimum, by the river Viadrus, which was heretofore a long fisher Towne, seated on the bancke of the River, and after it had received the Christian faith, the Mart being translated thither it began to encrease, so that it is now the Metropolis of Pomerania.
Place this lease after the quire lii of two-sheetes in the quire, and after folio 564.

Gripswaldan is a famous towne, for learning and good Arts, there w^ an Vniversitie built there in the yeare 1546. Iulinum accounted her^tofore the greatest towne in all Europe, was a Mart towne of the V^dalls. Stralsundia is a faire Towne on the shore of the Balthick sea, h^ving heretofore a Duke thereof. Wineta is a very rich sea-faring Tow^ but it was ruinated by Conradus King of Denmarke. There are also ^ther Citties, as Neugardia, Lemburga, Stargardia, Bergradum, Ca^nez, Publina, Grifenburga: and by the shoare side there are Colberg^ Caminum, Collinum, Sunda, Pucka, Revecol, Lovensburg, and Hecb^* And so much briefely concerning Pomerania. Also Mecklenburg ^ the Dukedome of Magnopolis is contained in this Table. There a^ also in the same Table these Ecclesiastickes; the Bishop of Magdeb^^ Primate of Germanie, under whom are the Bishops of Brandenburg, the Marquiship of Brandenburg, and the Bishop of Havelburg in Me^lenburg; also the Bishop of Swerinium under the Bishop of Bremes; ^ Pomerania there is the Bishop of Camin.



THE DVKEDOME OF POMERANIA.
POMERANIA is now a Dukedome, it lyeth by the Balthick Sea, and reacheth from the confines of Holsatia even to Livonia. This Country was called by the first Inhabitants in the Vandals Language, Pamorzi, and it had alwayes a peculiar people, who were never conquered and as Bertius witnesseth, unto whom wee are beholden for this discription, they were beaten or expulsed out of their owne Country. The Country is plaine, and hath few Hills, but euery where fruitfull, and watered with Riuers and Springs, having pleasant Meddowes and greene Pastures, shadie Woods, in which there are ^^ers kinde of wilde Beasts. It hath abundance of Cattell, as also great store of Corne, Butter, Honey, Waxe, Cotten, Hempe, and other Commodities, so that the Inhabitants doe gaine much by transporting them. There are many faire Citties in Pomerania. The chiefe Citty is Stettinum which is situate by the River Viadrus, which is now called Odera: it was heretofore a long Fisher Towne by the bancke of the River, but now it is the chiefe Metrapolis, and Mother Citty of Pomerania. Gripswaldum is a Towne famous for learning and humane Arts: an University was built here in the yeere of Christ, 1556. Here is also the Towne Iulinum, which was heretofore the most famous Towne of all Europe, and a Mart Towne of the Vandals, ^^to which the Russians, the Danes, the Sorabians, the Saxones, the Sar^^^ns, and the Suevians did bring their Commodities, and Merchandise. The Inhabitants when they perceived that the Christian Religion began to flourish and encrease, would not suffer any stranger ^ mention the new Religion, and this was the cause that they received the Christian faith so lately. But at last by compulsion they received this Religion about the yeere of Christ 1000. but they reuolting often from their faith, and having made a great massacre and slaughter of the Christians in the yeere 1066. did returne to Paganisme, untill Otto Bishop of Bamberg began againe to preach the Gospell of Salvation in Pomerania, with such good successe, that three Brothers who were Princes, namely Ratisborus, Bugislaus, and Suantepolcus, were baptized, and received the Christian Religion. The first Bishop of Iuli^^ was Adelbert, but in regard the Citty was still infested by the D^^s, hee thought good thirty yeeres afterward to translate his seate to Caminum, and so the other Citty fell to the ground. Stral^^dia is a faire Towne on the shore of the Balthick Sea, which had heretofore a Duke of its owne, but now it is subject to the Duke of Pomerania, it is supposed to have beene built by the Frenchmen,

and reedified by Waldemar King of Denmarke about the yeere of Chr^ 1209. but now it is a strong Towne, and is a defence to Denma^ and Swethland. Wineta is the richest of all the Sea Citties, being ^tuate betweene the River Suenus, and the Iland Rugia, and it w^ ruinated by Conrado King of Denmarke, in the yeere 1030. The are also other Citties, as Neugardia, Stargardia, Camenez, Grifenburg and by the shore, Colberga, Caminum, Collinum, Sunda, Lovensburg, a^ many other.



map of Pomerania
THE DVKEDOME OF POMERANIA.





RVGIA.
The SituationRVGIA is an Iland in that part of the Easterne or S^vian Sea, which is properly call'd the Balthick Sea. ^ the North it hath Denmarke, and the Chaulkie Ila^ Mona. On the West and South it hath the Citties ^merania, Bardus, Stralesundius, Gryphiswaldus, and Walga^* This Iland was heretofore farre larger then it is ^^ insomuch that the Iland Ruden was so conjoyned with it, that it (...) nothing but a small Ditch which a man might leap over with a sta^ to part it. But in the yeere 1309. all that part of it which lyeth ^^tweene Rugia and Ruden, was swallowed up and washed away, by violent tempest, which did blow downe and overthrow Tow^ and Houses, so that there is now a Channell of halfe a mile bread^ which will beare Ships of great burthen, and it is now called t^ new passage. Das Neure Sief oder Shiffart. For heretofore great Shi^ were wont to fall downe to Sea by another way or passage, not Ea^^ward, but Westward, which they call Dan Bellen. This Iland is e^compassed round about with the Sea, and is seven Germane m^^ both in length and breadth. The circumference whereof if it we^ round, according to the rules of the Mathematicks, should bee a miles. But now the circumference of it is not onely distinguish with many Ilands, and Peninsulaes some greater and some lesser, b^ also hee that shall diligently note the windings of the Sea into t^ middle parts of the Iland, also the Ilands, Isthmusses, Peninsula^es, ^ Bayes, turnings and windings of the shore, shall finde that the c^cumference of this Iland is not much lesse then 70. miles. And b^sides it is observable that there is no place in all this Iland, that ^ above halfe a mile or three quarters of a mile distant from the (...) The Shores also are so well fortified, so that the raging waves of t^ Sea cannot endammage it.The fertility. Moreover this Iland hath great store (...) Corne, and is as it were the Granary of the Citty Stralesand, as Sici^ was the Granary of Rome, as Strabo witnesseth. Here are pretty sto^ of Horses, Oxen, and Sheepe: but great store of great Geese. Th^ Iland hath no Wolfes,The variety of living Creatures. nor Rats, albeit in the Peninsula of Wittov^ there were some seene, which came either from some Ships whi^ rode there at Anchor, or were Shipwrackt against the shore. T^ Inhabitants hereof were called heretofore the fierce Ranians or ^thenians, who could not be tamed or subdued by the power of neig^bour Kings and Princes, and they were so strongly addicted to Id^latry, that they were the last of all the Inhabitants neere the Sweth^ Sea, who did receive the Christian faith. For the Princes of t^ Iland being heretofore very potent, did not onely possesse many C^ties and Countries out of this Iland, as Birdus, Grimma, and Tribbe^^ but also they had continually warres with the King of Denmarke, a^ the neighbouring Princes of Pomerania, and wearied the Lubecens^

map of RugiaRVGIA.

with continuall warres, and so begun to bee feared of their neighbours for their power and fiercenesse. They used formerly the Slavonian or Vandalian language, which the Pomeranians used also. There is nothing recorded concerning their atchievements,The ancient government. in regard they desired rather to excell in martiall matters, then in learning, and there were but few learned men at that time especially in those parts. The first Prince of Rugia was Crito, who lived in the time of Swanlibarus Duke of Pomerania, and married his Daughter Slavina, about the yeere of Christ 1100. They report also that this Crito was Prince of Holsatia and Dithmarsia, and did found Lubeck, who after hee had made himselfe drunke at a Banquet, as he stooped and put forth his head to goe forth at a low Gate, a Dane that stood in a secret place cut of his head. After whose death his Father Retz^ surviving after him was Prince of Rugia in the yeere 1106. whose Posterity did successively possesse the Principality of Rugia, even to Wartiflaus, in whom in the yeere 1352. the Royall Line of the Princes of Rugia was extinct, and the Dukedome of Rugia came to the Princes of Pomerania, and that by a certaine mutuall covenant and agreement, whereby it was agreed, that if they did not leave Sonnes to succeed them in their owne Dukedomes, the Dukedome for want of a Prince, should descend and come to the other Duke. There were three Churches at Charantina, and many Idols in them: of the chiefe whereof is Rugae-viti: which had seven faces on one head, and seven swords buckled to it, holding in its right hand a naked sword. It was a long thicke, and terrible Idoll, which they called Mars, or the God of warre. The other had five faces on one head, and without a sword which they called the God of peace. The third had foure faces on one head, and one in his breast, holding his forehead with his left hand, and laying his right hand on his knee which they called Porcuitum and the God of their Empire. It would bee tedious to speake of their other monstrous gods. Areona was heretofore the strongest Citty of Rugia, being situate on the highest Promontory of the Peninsula Wittoviae Northward, on the North, and East it is encompassed with the Sea, on the other side with a low Valley, there are some ruines of this Citty yet remaining. The Valley was so deepe, so that an Arrow shot upright out of a strong Bow could not reach to the top. This Citty was besieged on Ascention day, and it was taken on Saint Vitus day, by Gods providence, who punished their Idolatries even on Saint Vitus day, which did first spring and arise from S. Vitus. The Citizens of Arcona trusting at first to their Citty and Castle, did valiantly resist the Enemy, but at length on Saint Vitus day being wearied and tyred, they were enforced to accept of conditions of Peace, and to receive the Christian Religion, and to yeeld unto the Conquerers the revenewes of the Swantovian Church and Idoll to maintaine Christian Ministers: also to burne the Idoll Swanto with the Temple, and to set the Christian Captaines at liberty without any ransome, and to pay tribute every yeere to the King of Denmarke. The strong Citty being taken, the Citty Charentina did yeeld it selfe upon the same conditions. Among all the three Princes of Rugia, Tetzlaus,

^^oustans, and Iaromarus, Stouslaus did first leave his Principality to his Brother Geromarus, unto whom being a Christian Prince of Rugia, ^^ldomarus King of Denmarke marryed his Brother Canutus his daugh^er. And thus Arcona and Charentina being wearied with continuall warres, were not yet quite extinguished or rased. But yet not long after the Princes of Pomerania did rase it to the ground, because the King of Denmarke had not requited the Pomeranians for that ayde which they lent them in subduing of Rugia. But this Iland which had heretofore strong populous Citties and Castles, hath now none at all, but onely some few Townes, the chiefe whereof is Berga, in which there are not above 400. Citizens: The other Townes, as Sagart, (...), Bingst, and many others, are lesser. But yet this Iland is well replenished with Inhabitants, so that it can raise 7000. armed men on a sudden. In the furthest part of the Peninsula Iasmunda Eastward, there is a very high Promontory, which being hollow underneath, was formerly a safe harbour for Pirates and Robbers at Sea, which they call De Stubben kamer. Not farre from thence on a wooddy Mountaine, nere were some ruines of a strong Castell. Neere unto this Castell, is the deepe blacke Lake, which albeit it hath great store of fish,The Lakes yet they superstitiously beleeve, that it will not beare any Fisher-boats, or suffer any Nets to bee drawne through it: for some Fishermen having put a Boat into it, the day before, and the next day afterward going to fish the Lake with Nets, they could not finde their Boat, whereupon being much amazed, and looking every where about for it, straightway one of them espyed the Boat lying on the top of an high Beech tree: whereupon hee cryed out in their owne language: what Devill hath layd the Boat on the top of the Tree? and by and by hee heard these words, though he could see no body: The Devils have not done this, but onely I, and my Brother Nicheli. Here is great scarcity of Wood for building of Ships and Houses,The Woods. but many places, and especially the Iland Iasmund, in which there is a thicke Wood called De Stubhenitza, that is, a heape of Stubs of Trees, doe yeeld firewood enough for the whole Iland: The Clergie here have both Meddowes, and Fields of their owne, and have also tythe Cattell, and tythe Corne.The Nobility. There are great store of Nobility in this Country, who are discended from ancient Families, of which some are more hospitalious, and bountifull, and some more sparing, some doe addict themselves to the warres, and some to study, and most of them doe travell to forraine Princes, and Kings Courts, and doe goe to Universities, and to the Warres. And so are chosen to be Governours, both in forraine Countries and Provinces, and also in their owne Country, in times of warre and peace, not onely in Politick, but also in Ecclesiastick affaires. The Country people also doe live well in this Principality, who doe onely pay the Magistrates a certaine summe of money, and doe certaine services, and some of them doe none at all. And let so much suffice concerning the Iland and Principality of Rugia.



THE KINGDOME AND ELECTORSHIP OF BOHEMIA.
The Country whence so called.BOHEMIA, Boemia, or Bojemia, as some would have it, was so called from the Wood Hercynia. For in the Germane language Baum, and in Dutch Boom signifies a tree: the Graecians call it Baemia, and Ptolomy calls the Inhabitants Bami: and Strabo Lib. 7. calleth them Kolduli. Some would have it so named from the Bojans, who fled and transmigrated thither, which seeme to bee so called from Bois, that is, from Wood. Ptol. lib. 2. cap. 11. in his description of Germany, doth place the Bamians under the Wood Harcynia, being a great Nation spreading even to Danubius: Strabo calleth it Bubiemium: for so Rhenanus, Aventine, and others doe read it:The Situation. but yet in the Graecian printed Copies it is called Boviasmon, but Rhenanus thinketh this to be a corrupt reading of it: and Causabon noteth that in ancient Bookes it is called Bovialmon. Tacitus calleth it Bojemum. On the East it hath the Marcomannians and Quadians: on the West the Noricians: on the South the higher Pamonia, now called Austria, and on the North it is bounded with Saxonie, and Misnia. The Wood Hercynia doth encompasse it round about, and encloseth it in manner of a Romane Amphitheater. So that the length and breadth is all one, being above two hundred mile broad,The temper of the ayre. and as many long. The ayre, in regard the Country standeth Northward, is cold and sharpe, but yet wholesome. But the soyle yeeldeth such great store of Barly and Wheate, so that it furnishes, and supplies other Countries. But it hath but little Wine, and that which growes there is very tart, and sharpe. It hath excellent Saffron both for colour and sent.The quality of the soyle. This Country also yeeldeth very rich Drugs: yet it hath no Oyle, nor any other parts of Germany. It hath many rich mines, the chiefe whereof are in the Countries of Cromelaw, Budeveisz, and Kuttenberg. Also neere the Towne Beraun there are Iron Mines. And in other parts it hath Tinne, Leade, and Brasse. And moreover it hath Carbuncles, and Amethists which are taken out of the Oare. Moreover there are great store of wilde Beasts for hunting, as Foxes, Beares, Harts, and wilde Oxen, which they call in their language Lomi. And they report that this wilde Beast Lomi, when hee is hunted, filleth a Bladder, which hee hath beneath his necke, with hot water, and therewithall hee sprinckles the Dogs that follow him, which burneth whatsoever it toucheth like scalding water, so that it will make the hayre and skin come of. This Country was governed at first by a Duke.The ancient government. The first Duke was Zechus, who comming out of Crotia, did first establish this Country of Bohemia. After him succeeded Crocus, and his Daughter Labussa with her Husband Primislaus, after him Nimislaus and his Nephew Mnato, and Vrislaus the Sonne of Mnato, also Necla, Noctericus, and Borsinous. In whose time Bohemia received the Christian faith in the yeere 900. in the time of

map of BohemiaTHE KINGDOME AND ELECTORSHIP OF BOHEMIA.

the Emperour Arnulph, but in the yeere of our Lord 1086. Bohemia^ was made a Kingdome, and in the Counsell at Moguntine, Vratisslaus the first was created King by the Emperour Henry the fourth, and Gilbert Bishop of Trevers was sent to Prague, to annoynt the King in the presence of the people, and to invest him with the Royall ornaments, his wife also Swatana was crowned Queene. But afterward it fell to bee a Dukedome againe, when it came to Vratislaus the fourth, who for his service in the Mediolanian expedition was created by the Emperour Frederick, King of Bohemia, and an associate in the Empire: and had given him for his armes a red Lyon with a forked tayle in a white Field, from whom some Emperours discended, after that Bisetislau^ had carried away Iutha the Daughter of the Emperour Otho the II. whence they began to bee a kinne to the Emperours. The King of Bohemia is one of the seven Electors. Bohemia hath some Citties, which are subject to the King, and some to the Lords and Nobles. The chiefe Citty is Prague, which was walled about by Primislaus the third Duke of Bohemia, and his wife Libusla. It hath the Castle Visegradum, or Herschin, which is seated on a Mountaine. The whole Citty is divided into three Citties, the Higher, the New and the Lesse. The River Muldavia doth seperate old Prague from the new, in which there is a Castle, and the Cathedrall Church of Saint Vitus: and these two parts of the Citty are joyned together with a stone Bridge of 24. Arches, which was built by King Vladislaus. The Emperour Charles the IV. and the King of Bohemia, did much adorne and enlarge this Citty. The Castle standeth on a very steepe Hill. In the Church of the Castle, there is an Alablaster Monument wrought with curious workmanship, in which divers Princes, and Emperours have beene buryed. Ptolomy would have it call'd Casurges: Aventinus, Marobudum: and Strabo, Bubienum. In the yeere 1370. King Charles erected here an Academy or Vniversity, which continued untill the yeere 1308. And afterward by reason of a faction which arose it was translated to Lipsia.
The Citty Egra is situated in the first entrance into Bohemia, which was so named from the River Egra by which it was seated. It was heretofore subject to the Romane Empire, but now to the Kingdome of Bohemia. It is faire and beautifull: within it hath faire houses, and civill, courteous, and magnificent Citizens. And without it hath pleasant Orchards, and fruitfull Fields, and a River full of Fish. This Citty is famous for a kinde of drinke called Mede, which is made of Honey. The chiefe Townes of Bohemia, towards Moravia, are Mutha, Chrudima, Hradecium, Pardubitium, Litomossium, and from thence toward Noricia, there are Glatovia, Dornazlicium, Misa, and Tacovia. On the South side the chiefe Townes are, Budvicium, Crumlovia, Trebonia, Hadrecium Henrici: and on that side which is toward Misnia, it hath these Townes, Pons, Cadana, Chomutavia, and Austio. And these Townes are neere the confines of Slacia, Hiaromirium, Glacium, Curia, and some others. The Inland Townes are Cuthna, Colen, Pelsina, Verona, Zatecium, Launa, Slana, Lytomericum, Taborium. The chiefe Rivers are Albis, which they call Labe, it breaketh forth of the Mountaines

neere the Citty Aust, and hath great store of Salmons. There is ^lso Multavia, which Ptolemy calleth Cassurgis, and the Germanes Molea, ^^^d the Inhabitants Vltauva, there are also the Rivers Egra, Sassava, ^^sera, Misa, and others, some whereof have fine sands of gold, and ^^^e of them have shells, out of which they get Pearles. The Mountaines Sudetae doe encompasse Bohemia on the South, and West. The Mountaine Pinifer, which is so called from the abundance of Pines growing there, which riseth in the Mountaines of the Marquiship of ^udenburg betweene Franconia, Voitlandia, and Bohemia, in the compase of two miles, doth send forth foure famous Rivers, towards the ^^^e parts of the World, namely, Moenus in Francia, Sala in Turingia, Iohn^ in Bavaria, and Egra in Bohemia. This Mountaine also hath Gold, Silver, Quick-silver, Iron, and Brimstone. It hath also Mines (...) Precious-stones. The whole Country is as it were walled about with Woods, of which that part which lyeth betweene the West and the North, Strabo calleth the Wood Gabreta, and Ptolemy Galrita. But the part which stretcheth from the South to Danubius, Ptolemy called the Moones Wood, but now it is called Passavica Silva, or Der Pass^er^aldt: on the West, where it joyneth to Moravia it is called Der^^^. The Emperour Charles in the yeere 1361. did devide the Kingdome of Bohemia into 12. Countries, which are governed by Captaines and Barons, who doe first decide small controversies; and secondly, if there bee any theeves, they may call the Nobility to ayde the^ in suppressing of those Robbers: and at last in time of warres, ^very one repaireth to his owne Captaine. I finde that the Bur^^i^e of Carlstein is in this Kingdome, where the Crowne of the Kingdome is kept. There are these Countries Lob^^^es, Hassenstain, Litzkaw, Camethaw, Passau, Melnic, Rosenberg, Halretz, Dominia, Hasenburg, Leip, Perstain, Dobitschaw, Walstain, (...), Dachaw, Totsnick, Wartenberg, Schellenberg, Kost, Schmirits, Lissaw, (...), Dessaw, Schonpeck, Slawa, Grossen Bora, Liebenstain, Ioppendorff, ^al^e, and Colourat, some of which are Counties: also the Baronies of Tr^chenberg, and Millusch. Prague was made an Archbishops seate by Charles King of Bohemia, and Emperour of Germany, and the Bishop ^^ Litomisliens was made his Suffragan. I come unto their manners: concerning which Iohn Dubravius writeth thus. The Bohemians in their manners and habit, doe shew a kinde of Lion-like courage, under which signe Bohemia lyeth, whether you consider the great sta^ute of the Bohemians, or their strong broad breasts, or neckes coverd with stiffe yellow hayre: or their great voice, or glistering eyes, (...) their courage and strength. Moreover the Lion is wont to swell i^ contempt of other beasts, and cannot be disarmed especially if you (...) upon him by force. Neither doth the Bohemian degenerate from ^^em in this also, for he contemneth others both in word and deed, and sheweth much pride and arrogancy both in his gate and gesture. And ^^ is most fierce, when he is roughly entreated: Moreover he is as h^ld as a Lion in any enterprise, and stout and hardy in the Execution: (...) yet he is ambitious and vaine-glorious. And besides he is as hungry and sharpe as a Lion, and immoderate in his Diet.



THE MARQVISHIP OF MORAVIA.
MORAVIA, commonly called Marnhern, doth confine on Polonia Westward. It is so called from the River Moravia which runneth thorow this Country.The Country whence so called. The Ancients did call it Marcomannia, because (...) did border Germany on that part, where Danubius glideth towards Pannonia. For in the Germane language Marck signifies a limmit or bound, and thos^ which dwelt there were called Marcomanni, the Inhabitants of th^ Frontiers or Marches: as Dubravius thinketh. But Arrianus saith thus* The last (saith he) of these Nations, are the Quadians and Marcomannia^ after them the Iazyges, or Sarmatians, then the Getes, and lastly, a grea^ part of the Sarmatians. And it appeareth manifestly that this Moravia was the Seate of the Marcomannians, because neere the Rive^ Hana, the Husbandmen as they were ploughing did often finde ce^taine coynes of the ancient Romane Emperours, as of M. Amonin^^ who as Histories doe witnesse did conquer and subdue this Nation* There was also mony taken from the enemy as a booty, with this In^scription: De Marcomannis. There are some doe conjecture by the Etymologie of the word, that the Marcomannians did possesse that Province of Germany, which is commonly called Die Marck, or the Marquiship of Brandenburg, beyond Albis toward the Ocean, for the Inhabitants thereof are called Die Marcker, that is, Marcomannians, a^^ it were Marcmenner: some say the Marcomannians were so name^ from Horses, as we call Mareschalcus a Praefect of the Horse, and Marstaller a Master of the Horse: for Marrha and Merrhen doe signifie i^ the Germane language a Horse and a Mare: whence they translat^ Merrhenlandt, the Country of Mares. But the former reason is mor^ probable. Moravia as it is now, is bounded on three parts of it wit^ Mountaines, Woods, Forrests, or Rivers; on the East from Hungari^^ on the West from Bohemia, on the North from Silesia. For on th^ South towards Austria it is plaine ground, and in some places it is parted from it by the River Thaysa, and in other places by a small Rive^* The ayre of this Country is gentle and warme,The Climate. and so more subjec^ to corruption. And as this Country is populous, so it yeeldeth grea^ store of Corne and Wine,The fruitfulnesse of the soyle. and all things necessary for mans use. (...) hath also great store of Saffron. The inward part of the Country ^ Champion ground, the Fields are of a fat and fruitfull soyle, an^ therefore good for tillage, there are Hills crowned with Vineyard^ and in regard it hath a better soyle for Vines than Bohemia, therefore

map of MoraviaTHE MARQVISHIP OF MORAVIA.

it excelleth it for goodnesse and plenty of Wine. It is all tille^ so that there is no part left for feeding of Flocks and Cattell, unle^^ it bee in the Woods and Desarts. The Mountaines Sudetae neere t^^ Citty Igla are thought to bee full of Mines. Moreover, it is wonde^full, that there is Frankincense and Myrrh in Moravia, which do^ not distill out of a sweating Tree, as in other parts, but is digged o^ of the ground, especially in one place called Gradisco, in whi^^ there is both male and female Frankincense. But of late Veceslaus a Nobleman, as he was laying the foundation of the head (...) a Fish-pond in his owne grounds at Sterenberg, found the whole bod^ of a man, which was nothing but Myrrhe. This Country was her^tofore adorned with the title of a Kingdome, and it had former Kings, who governed all Bohemia, and Poleland, and it was a very larg^ and potent Kingdome. About the yeere of Christ 700. Zuantocop^ did possesse Moravia, Bohemia, Silesia, and Poleland, and the Dukes the^^ of were subject unto him. But hee being proud of his large Terr^tories, did deny to pay the Emperour that tribute, which hee ha^ sometime paid to Lodovick King of Germany. So that the King ma^ warres upon him, but hee drew up great forces to defend himselfe. The Hungarians were as it were a bolt or barre, which the Kin^ of Moravia had placed, to shut up the passage that way. The Emp^rour who purposed not to depart from Moravia without victory, pe^ceiving where they were ayded, opened a passage to Hungaria, an^ let in the Turkes amongst them, who did grievously afflict this Province. And so the Emperour using the Turkes Forces, did suppres^ the King of Moravia, and having made a great slaughter, and take many prisoners, he put him to flight. Who by this meanes escaping betooke himselfe to a thicke Wood, and having cast away his roya^ Robes and apparell, hee went to a Hermit, with whom hee liv'd ^ solitary Hermits life untill his death, and then hee discovered wh^ hee was, and so slept in Christ. After that the Princes of Bohemia Poleland, and Silesia, had every one Dukes of their owne, yet they pay^ some tribute to the Emperour. At the same time, when Michael wa^ Emperour of Greece, there came Cirillus Doctor and Apostle of al^ S^lavonia, together with Merodius, who layd the foundation of the Christian faith in Moravia; and erected an Episcopall Church it the Towne Vielagrad. So that being called and summoned by the Pope to answer why they read Masse in the Sclavonian tongue, they answered, because it is writtten. Omnes Spiritus laudet Dominum. Le^ every spirit praise the Lord. But afterward Moravia was governed by Dukes, and Marquisses, and it is now devided, so that the better part of it, and almost all of it is subject to the Kings of Bohemia: the other part is subject to Barons and Lords. The chiefe head-Citty o^ this Marquiship is Brunna, which the Germanes call Brin, and the Bohemians Brino, and some doe call it Olmuzium, and Olomontium, it is a Bishops Seate, and heretofore it was called Volograd. It hath also many other faire walled Citties, as Zwoyma, Radisch, Iglavia, Nova Civitas, Niclosburg, Mons Nicolai, Weiskirchen, Cremser, Boserlitz, heretofore a Marquiship, and many others, which may be found in the Table o^

Card. The chiefe Rivers in Moravia, are Morava, or Maravaha, Ptolomy call it Ciabrus: it is commonly called die Marche, which floweth by ^^e chiefe Citty Olomuzium, and so running into Pannoniae, it falleth at last into Danubius. It is thought that this River named the Coun^ry, but it is more likely that the Country named the River. The o^^er chiefe Rivers are Theya, or Deins, which Dubravius calls Tharsa, and some Thysia. It floweth by Zuoyna, which is memorable in regard that the Emperour Sigismund dyed here, and it doth border Mo^^^ia and Austria. The River Igla, whence the Citty Iglavia is so called, doth devide the Maravanians from the Bohemians, and doth ^^^er also into Maravania. But the River Odera, which riseth not ^^re from Olomuzium, doth keepe his owne name untill hee falleth ^^to the Ocean: Some suppose that Ptolomy doth call it Viadrum. They called Odera by a word borrowed from Fowlers, who set down ^ering Glasses to catch and allure Birds to their Nets, which they ^ll O^^i, and the Fowlers doe now set downe such Glasses in Mora^^ by the Fountaine of Odera. Neither can wee passe by Hama, although it bee a small streame, yet it watereth those Fields, which ^^e the fruitfullest in all Moravia, so that the Husbandmen in regard of their great plenty of Corne which they yeeld, doe call them the ^^ght or eye of Moravia. And also Gold and Silver coynes of M. An^^^, and Commodus, and some other of the Emperours, are very (...) found in these parts, which are manifest tokens of the warres which the Romanes had against the Marcomannians in Moravia. There is also the River Nigra, commonly called Suarta and Suittaw, which doth glide by the Citty Brunna, and is next in esteeme to Olo^^i^^. These Rivers have great store of divers kindes of Fish. This Country is not so Mountainous as Bohemia, neither is altogether plaine. Ptolemy placeth here the Wood Orcynium, and the Wood Ga^^a. The Inhabitants are very rude, and doe use a mixt kinde of speech. But they speake just the Bohemian language, for the Germane speech is onely used in Citties, and that among the Nobles and chiefe men. In other matters Dubravius saith that they are like the Bohemians in their rites and manners. In the Villages of this Country there doe dwell divers Anabaptists, who professe that there ought to be a community of all things. Mercator placeth these Counties in Moravia, Huckenwaldt, Schonberg; and these Signiories or Lordships, Lomnicz, Dubrantiz, Gemnicz, Walstain, Picenix, Neuhauss, Telesch, Boekowitz, Trebitsch, Dernowitz, and Ragetz.



THE ARCHDVKEDOME OF AVSTRIA.
The third Circle of the Empire is AUSTRIA, in which there are two Orders.
THe next that followeth in our method is Austria, call heretofore Pannonia the higher. The name of Aus^ as Wolfgangus Lazius witnesseth, is but of late time, bein^ called so either from the South wind, which is f^^quent in that Country, or from the Germane wo^^ Oostreich, for so the Frenchmen called the Easter^ bounds of their Kingdome, as they call'd the Westerne bounds W^reich. But that which the Frenchmen called Oostreich was situated the Rhene, and called afterward Austrasia, which name having ^^ they call'd it Pannonia, as Lazi^s testifieth. Lib. 1. Cap. 11. Common ^^ Anst. Moreover the Austrians are descended from the Frenchm^^ and Saxones, who by the sword got this Country from the Hung^rians. Austria hath on the East Hungaria: on the South the Mo^^taines of Styria, which doe runne out with one continued Bri^^ from the Alpes into Hungary, and other Countries beyond it; it ha^ on the East Bavaria, and on the North the Rivers Tejus and Moran^ It hath a milde pleasant ayre, and wholesome in regard that the E^^ winde doth purifie it. The soyle is very fruitfull, and not chari^able in tilling. For the Husbandman, in that part which is call^^ Campus Transdanubianus, or the Fields beyond Danubius, will ploug^ the ground with one poore leane Horse. The Austrians doe a^ know what Marle is, with which the barren leane Fields in B^^^ are manured. All the Country hath excellent Wine, which i^ pure then the Germane wine, and weaker then the Spanish wine, which i^ doth transport to Moravia, Bohemia, Silasia, and Bavaria. Besides it hat^ excellent good Saffron. It hath also abundance of Silver, but no Gol^ it hath Salt also which is partly made at home, and partly imported a^^ brought in from other parts. The Earles of R^benberg did sometime governe Austria, the first was Lupold, whom the Emperour Ot^ the second created Marquesse of Austria; whose Line being extinct, Rudolphus of Habspurg, who was elected Emperour in the yeer^ 1280. did governe it, and made it a Dukedome. And Frederick th^ second made it a Kingdome. The armes of this Country were heretofore five golden Larkes painted in a Sky-colour Field: but th^ Marquesse Lupold the V. hath new Armes given him by the Empir^ which were set forth in white and red colours, because his Buckle^ was so bloody in the Battaile against Ptolomies, that it was all bloody even to the bend which went crosse the Scutchion. Moreove^

map of AustriaTHE ARCHDVKEDOME OF AVSTRIA.

Austria is devided into the higher and the lower, the latter whereo^ is situate beyond Danubius, and the former on this side. It hath also the Dukedome of Styria, which lyeth betweene the Rivers Danubius Muer, and Mietz, the Inhabitants whereof doe partly use the Germane speech, and partly the Sclavonian. It hath also the Dukedome of Carinthia, which is situate betweene the Rivers Muer an^ Draicus: and also Carmina Southward. The chiefe Citty of Austria i^ Vienna, which the Sarmatians and Windians did inhabit, before th^ birth of our Saviour Christ, after whom there succeeded the Boijans Senonians, and others, whom Tiberius Nero did reduce into a Province: Antoninus calleth it in his Itinerarie Vindebona, and Ptolemy call it Iuliobona, and both of them doe place the tenth Germane Legion there, for many ancient Monuments, both within and without the Citty doe witnesse that it was seated in that place. To this Legio^ from the Colour or Ensigne belonging to it, the name of ^ Larke was given: whence it seemes that the Marquesse of Austria had their Armes at the first, which are five Larkes. And Otto of Frisingen Lib. 1. Histor. Frid. cap. 32. calleth it Faviana. For he saith, Dux tunc demum terga hosti dare compellitur, and periculis belli exemptus in Vicinum opidum Viennis, quod olim a Romanis inhabitatum Fabiana Dicebatur, declinavit. Tha^ is, The Duke was put to flight by the enemy, and was faine to retire to the Towne Vienna, which when the Romanes did heretofore inhabit it was called Fabiana. You may read the like in the History o^ Severinus Bishop of Vienna. Lazius saith that Strabo calleth it Vendum Iornandes calleth it the Citty Pannonia: and in the Sclavonian language it is called Wien Wydme. Ortelius writeth that hee learned out of D. Carolus Rimius, who was sometime Orator to Zelimus the great Turke, that the Turkes doe call this Citty Betz. Leunclavius calleth it Wetsch, and Beetz: It is a faire Citty situate by the River Danubius, and encompassed with a strong wall, so that Vienna is a well fortified and a strong Bulwarke against the Turkes. The Suburbs are great, and large. The Citizens have faire magnificent Houses, which are adorned with Pictures, and strongly built. There are many great faire Churches built of Free-stone, and arched with divers Pillars. Their Wine-cellers are so deepe and large, that they have as much building under the ground as they have above ground. Their streets are paved with hard stone, so, that Cart-wheeles cannot weare them. It hath great store of Corne and Wine, so that in the time of Vintage for 40. dayes together they doe use 1200. Horses to carry Corne and Wine in Carts. It received the Christian Religion in the yeere 466. by the preaching and instruction of Severinus, who built two Churches there. The History of this Citty may be found in Lazius, and Otto of Friburg. Frederick the second did adorne, and enlarge this Citty, as also all the other following Dukes of Austria. The Emperour Frederick did erect there an University for all Arts and Sciences, which was afterward renewed by Albert Archduke of Austria, in the yeere 1356. But afterward through sedition it was ruinated. These were famous men in Vienna, namely Wolfgangus, Lazius, Medius, an Historian to the Emperour Ferdinand: also Iulius Alexandrinus, Mathias

Parinat^r, also Iohn Haselbach was Professor of Divinity in the University of Vienna, who was so large in the explanation of that which hee propounded to his audience, that he preached twenty yeeres out of the Prophet Esaiah, and yet hee was not come to the end of the first Chapter. This Citty is famous for the Citizens valiant holding out against the Turkes siege, in the yeere 1529. in which 80000. Turkes were slaine. There is also in higher Austria Gmunda, which is no great Towne, but yet very neat and pleasant, situated by a Lake which is called from thence the Lake Gmunda, out of which Dravus a River of Austria riseth. At Gmunda there is great store of Salt, which is digged out of the neighbouring Mountaines, and so being brought to Gmunda in little Vessels (which in their Country speech they call Kivelin) it is transported by the River Dravus unto Danubius, and so from Vienna it is transported to other Citties of Austria, Hungaria, Stiris, and Carinthia, to the great gaine and commodity of the Gmundians. It is watered also with many Rivers; the chiefe whereof is Daubius, which was heretofore the limmiting bounds of the Country, but now it cutteth thorow the middle of it. The other Rivers are ^^^osinus, Genus, or Onasus, Tranus, Traunus, and Erlaphus, which ariseth out of a pleasant Lake, by the River Cella famous for the Church of the Virgin Mother: there are also the Rivers Traisius, Ypsius, Melicus, Marchia, and Tejus, which devideth Moravia from Austria, also Cambus which is full of divers kindes of Fish, and Leytha: also Suegadus, in which there are excellent Crabs, and others. It hath many Mountaines, the chiefe whereof are the Mountaine Cecius, commonly called Calenberg, which extendeth from Danubius even to the River Dracus, the parts of it are Schneberg, Semering, Kemperg, Hertperg, Deusperg, He^sterg, Plaitz: Also Cognanus now called der Haimburgerperg, which reacheth from Danubius to Arabon. It hath also some woods which are parts and pieces of the wood Hercinia, and the Moones Wood: And they are now called der Freystetter und Konigwiserwaldt. But let us proceede to other matters. In the Citie of Vienna, twelve Magistrates doe dayly sit in Iudgement. Of which foure are of the Clergie, the Officiall of the Bishop of Patavia, the Officiall of the Bishop of Vienna, the Deane of the Cathedrall Church, and the Rector or governour of the Vniversity. There are also foure Citizens, and foure out of the Citty. The chiefe whereof are these whom they call Regimentum, where all lower Austria doe bring their suits and causes to tryall, and they call the Court the Exchequer, whether all the accompts of the Province are brought. The rest are subject unto them, and causes are removed and brought from them to the higher, the Senate of the Province does appeale to the ordinary of the Province, the Senate of the Citie with the Consull doth appeale to the Citie Praetor, the Iudgement of Custome, and the Merchants Praetor, which they call the Landgrave, concerning which matter Wolfgangus Lazius, of Vienna doth discourse at large in his Vienna. Austria is the third Circle of the Empire, in which there are two Orders. In the first there are the Clergie, as the Bishops of Trent, of Brixen, of Goricen, of Segovia, of Labachia, of Vienna, Teutsch Ordens Meister, Ordens Maister in

Eischtall. In the second are the secular Princes, as the Archduke of Austria, Count Schaumberg, the Barren of Wolkenstain, the Lord Senster, the Lord Roggendorff, Count Hardkeck. And besides the Princes of the Empire, there are in Austria, the Counts of Thurn, Crentz, Ortenburg, Perneck, Garb, Freyhern, Landskron, Wanberg, Hohen, Osterwitz, Newberg, Guetenhag, Teuffenbach, Mairhofen, Awersperg, Dorneck, Saraw, Hartenstain, Schwartzenaw, Turnstain, Wachanthall, Hoffkirchen, Eyizing. The Lordships also are Aichelperg, Liechtenstain, Puchaim, Luetkurt, Porges, Schoukirchen, Shifftenberg, Altensperg, Hornstein, and Setbersdorff.



THE BISHOPRICKE OF SALTZBVRG.
THe Bishopricke of Saltzburg is so called from the Metrapolitan Citty Saltzburg.The Country whence so called. Francis Irenicus maketh this the chiefe of the five Bishopricks of Bavaria.The Country whence so called. This Territory is enriched with all kinde of Mettals, as Gold, Silver, Brasse, and Iron. Here is also Roren, Brimstone, Allom, and Antimony. There are also Mines of Marble. The plaine ground is ^it for planting of Vines or Tillage. The Mountaines doe afford great store of game for Hawking and Hunting. Munster doth name 58. Bishops of Saltzburg, the last was Ernest Count Palatine of Rhene, Duke of Bavaria, the Sonne of Albert and Ku^egundis the Daughter of the Emperour Frederick. Moreover in the time of Arno the tenth Bishop hereof, it was made an Archbishop by Leo the third, and it hath under it these Suffragan Bishops, the Bishop of Trident, of Patavi^, of ^e^^, of Gorcensa, of Brixen, of Frisingen, of Seccovia, of Lavintiniam, and the Chyenensiam. The Metrapolis or Mother Citty is Sal^^burgum, or Salt^burgum, it is commonly call'd Saltzburg, from the River Saltzach: though some suppose that it is called Saltzburg, from the Salt which is ^^gged neere unto it. There is also Iuvancia, or Iuvavia, or Iuvaviam, which was so called a juvando, from helping, and in the Germane language Helffenberg, because Iulius Caesar built a Castle there, to be a defence and refuge to his Legions against the Germanes whom hee intended to conquer, and subdue. For it is reported that the Romanes slew 3400000. Germanes, and tooke 1500000. Prisoners. Some thinke that I^vavia was so called from the River Iuvavius, which runneth neere unto it. It is called also the Iuvensian Castle, as Pighius sheweth. Aventinus affirmeth out of ancient writing, and records that it was that which Ptolomy calls Paedicum, and that there is a Village still re^aining of that name. But Francis Irenicus writeth that it is Ptolomies ^^^^darum, or Badacum, unto whom Volateranus doth also assent. Au^aicus his Itinerary maketh mention of Iuvaria. But Gasper Bruschia^ doth thinke that the name Helffenberg is more ancient than Iuvavia* and from thence it was called Iuvavia, which signifies the same. Pighi^^ writeth, that he read these Verses in a Church of this Citty:
Tunc Hadriana vetus, quae post Iuvavia dicta,Prasidialis erat Noraci^, and Episcopo dignaRuberti sedes, qui fidems coni^^it illisChristi, quam retinet, Saltzbargum sero vocata.Then Hadrian, which they did after callIuvavia was a seate PraesidiallOf the Noricians, and a Bishoprick it hathWhere Robert taught them first the Christian faith,Which since that time the people doe retaine,And now of late they doe it Saltzberg name.
For Rupert, or Rudpert, Bishop of Wormes, being descended of the Royall Line of France, when he was droven out of his seate after the death of King Childerick, about the yeere of Christ, 540. came to Ratisbon to Theodon Duke of Bavaria, whom he instructed, and baptized, and by his perswasions going forward to Noricum, he converted many to the Christian faith. And out of the ruines of the old Iuvavia he built a Church in honour of Saint Peter, and a Monastery of the Order of S. Benedict, and he was Bishop here 45. yeere, and dyed in the yeere of our Lord 1123. This Citty is situated on the middle of the Alpes, being strongly walled, and adorned with many faire publike, and private Buildings. It was heretofore a Royall seate, when it was proud of her high Pinacles and Churches. It is now an Archbishops seate, which was first instituted at Laureacum, then transported to Patavium, and lastly hither. This Citty hath Marshes, Plaines, Hills, and Mountaines.The fertility. The Marshes doe make good Meddowes, and the Mountaines affoord good Hawking and Hunting. In this Citty in an Hospitall neere Saint Sebastians, there is the Monument or Tombe of Theophrastus, a most famous Physician, with this Epitaph. Conditu^ hic Philippus Theophrastus insignis Medicinae Doctor, qui dira illa vulnera, lepram, podagram, hydropisin, aliaque insanabilia corporis contagia mirifica arte sustulit, a^ bona sua in pauperes distribuenda collocandique ordinavit. Anno 1551. di^ 24. Septemb. vitam cum morte commutauit. That is, here lyeth Philip Thaeophrastus a famous Doctor of Physick, who by his wonderfull Ar^ caused these grievous diseases, the Leprosie, the Gout, the Dropsie, and other incurable infirmities of the body, and gave order that his goods should be distributed and devided among the poore. Hee dyed in the yeere 1551. on the 24. day of September. This Country is watered with an innumerable sort of Rivers, and Rivalets, which doe flow out of the Mountaines.The Rivers. The River Anassus doth run Northward, which the Rivers Altzius, Saltzius, and Mathicius doe enlarge, by mingling their streames with it. Traunus riseth in the same place out of the Lakes. Hence also Mur and the noble River Dravus doe spring and arise, the latter Pliny. lib. 3. cap. 25. doth mention, and saith, that it riseth out of Noricum. The other lesser Rivers doe runne into those Rivers which I mentioned before. The Countrie is Mountainous, and full of Hills, which the Inhabitants doe call Taurn, as the Mountaines Radstatterthaurn,The Mountaines. Felbergthaurn, Kornthaurn, Casteinerthaurn, and many others which are so high, that those who goe to the top of them, doe finde the ayre very cold in the middest of Summer ^ no Cart or Waggon can passe over them, for the pathes and wayes are narrow, and sometime so steepe, that a Carriers Horse can scarce passe that way, but are in great danger as they ascend the Hill, fo^ sometimes sudden windes doe fling men downe headlong, and grea^ flakes of Snow doe fall downe, and kill Horses, and beate downe Houses neere unto them to the ground. Many Rivers doe flow ou^

map of SaltzburgTHE BISHOPRICKE OF SALTZBVRG.

of these Mountaines, which we have mentioned before. And besides the aforesaid Alpes, it hath the Alpes on the South, which they call Albis: and have divers names, as Villacher Albin, Swanberger Albin, etc. There are also the Mountaines Creutzberg, and Lettachberg, which have mettall in them in the Vale Oevinus, of which Conradus Celtes. lib. Amorum. 2. Odo. 6. singeth thus.



Qui mihi de celsis nuper fuit Alpibus actus


Oenus ubi, atque Athesis murmura rauca facit.


Argenti aeterno scaturit qua vena Metallo


Et ditat totam patriam Alemanicam.


Hic halant liquido puro and de fonte Salinae


Ditantes Bavaros, Austriacosque Duces.


Hic turba est tetrae nigraeque simillima morti,


Qui solvunt vastis ignibus aera suis.


Haud credas nostris decocta Metalla per ignem,


Sed Phlegetontaeis mundificata vadis.



Whom I did drive downe from the Alpes so high
Where Oenus, and Athesis runne by
With a hollow murmour, where Silver vaine
Enricheth all the Country of Alemaine^.
Here Salt doth boyle out of the pure spring,
Which to the Austrian Dukes much wealth doth bring.
And the Bavarians, while a smooty crew
Doe melt the Brasse, as blacke as death in shew.
You cannot thinke that fire doth make it runne,
But that it is refin'd in Phlegeton.


The Woods.This Bishoprick also hath many woods, as the woods Hardio, Hendard, and Weyhard which lye on the North. But let so much suffice concerning the Bishoprick of Saltzburg, it remaineth that we should speake something concerning the Dukedome of Carinthia, which is contained in this Table.

The Dukedome of CARINTHIA.
The Country whence so call^d.CARINTHIA, or Carnithia, (as Rithaimerus supposeth it should be written) was so called from the Carnians, who are the ancient Inhabitants thereof, whom both Pliny and other Geographers doe mention. But it is doubtfull, whether they were so called from Carnuntum an ancient Towne, often mentioned by Authors, or whether the Towne was so denominated from them. There is a place in Pannonia, almost seven miles distant from Vienna, where there are some ruines remaining of a famous Citty, which is now called D. Petronell. Moreover, the Carniolians are called in the Germane language, Karnten, Krain, Karst. This Country hath on the East and North Styria, on the West and South, the Alpes Carniola is a part of it: there are many

Valleyes and Hills in this Country which doe yeeld great store of wheat. Solinus cap. 30. saith,The fertility. that the Country Noricia is cold and unfruitfull, but that part which is more remote from the Alpes is very fertile. The Metropolis of this Country is Santo-Vicus, which is a faire Citty by the River Lana. It hath a large Market-place, and a cleare fountaine of water. There is also the Towne Villacum, where the forepart of the houses are curiously painted with Histories set forth in colours, which are very pleasant to behold. It is seated on a plaine by the River Dravus, and environed with high Rockes, and it hath a ^one Bridge: Clagenfurtum is a well fortified Citty, which as Lazius witnesseth was anciently called Claudia. Some doe write that the Citizens of this Citty are so severe and inexorable towards theeves, insomuch that upon suspition of felony, some have beene put to death without tryall, and three dayes after his execution they araigne him, and if they finde that he was not guilty they bury him honourably, but if they finde that hee was guilty, they let him hang on the Crosse or Gallowes. But Rithaymerus thinketh it to be a fabulous report: there is also Wolspergum which lyeth by the River Lavandus, also Santo Leonardus, etc. There are many Lakes in this Country,The Lakes. as Mulsettese, Ossiachersee, Werdsee, Lavandtsee, Iudenburgersee, Weisee. The chiefe River is Dravus, which runneth thorow Stiria and Pannonia into Danubus.The Rivers. The next unto it are Savo, Glana, Schleiniza, and Lavand, all which Dravus doth receive. Mura also runneth into Dravus. But most of the aforesaid Rivers have their Spring-heads and Fountaines in this Country, which is every where full of Mountaines. For the high Alpes, as Strabo writeth, doe runne hither in one continued ridge,The Mountaines. so that it seemeth one Mountaine, which is sometimes lower, and sometimes higher. I doe thinke there are parts of the Mountaine Taurus, which the Inhabitants call by divers name, on the West there is Gastein Taurn, Villacher Taurn, Rastatter Taurn, and Karnen Taurn. But some of the Alpes doe keepe their owne names, as Modringalbin, Serbisalbin, Sanalbin, etc. Dietzperg hangeth over the River Dravus, and above it there is the Mountaine Argentatus, which the Inhabitants call Silber Berg: in the Mountaine Rasperg there are the Fountaines and Spring-heads of the Rivers Mura and Isara, the one running Southward, the other Eastward. And betweene these high Hills of Taurus and the Alpes, there are many woods, which are parts of the wood Hercynia, as Hirschpuhl, Priewalt, Adelwaldt, Eremus, commonly called in der Einod. The aforesaid Alpes have Gold, Silver, and Iron in them. Concerning the Ecclesiasticall government it is devided as Paracelsus saith, betweene the Bishop of Saltzburg, and the Patriarch of Aquilegium. Munster in his third Booke of Cosmographie, and Pius 2. in his Europe, doth describe a strange custome which they have in inaugurating their Princes.





THE KINGDOME OF POLAND.
POLAND was so called from the Planesse of the Country, which they themselves call Role. It is a very great Country: on the North side it hath Borussia and Pomerania, on the East Massovia, and Lithuania; on the South it is enclosed with the Mountaines of Russia, and Hungaria: on the West it hath Lusatia, Silesia, and Moravia; it is 480. Miles long, and three hundred broade. The ayre of this Country is pure, but the Winters are cold and sharpe. All the Country is plaine, and yeeldeth good store of Barley, Wheate, and Pulse. It hath abundance of fruites, Waxe, Honey, and Butter. It hath also great store of Sale which is digged out of the earth. I and there are in these Mountaines Mines of Brasse, which the inhabitants call Tatri, and also Mines of Brimstone. It hath also great store of Cattell, so that Saxonie, and many Countries of Germanie, doe live by Poland Oxen. There is great variety of living creatures, and great store of cattell and wild beasts. It hath wild Oxen, Buffones, Bulls, and wild Horses, and Ounces, and the like. There are also great store of foule for Hawking. Poland was dignified with the title of a Kingdome, in the yeare 1001. in the raigne of Boleslaus Chabri, who received his royall Diadem from the Emperour Otto the third. But 77. yeares after, in the raigne of Boleslaus Audaci, or the bold, who cruelly murdered Stanislaus Bishop of Cracovia, the Pope devested it of that dignity, and tooke it away. And it was made a Kingdome againe in the yeare 1295. and Primislaus the second Duke of the greater Poland, and Pomerania was elected King. This Country is divided into the greater and lesser Poland The greater is more Northward, and the River doth part it in the middle. The lesser is Southward, and the River Vistula runneth through it. In the greater Poland, the principall Cities are these Posnania by the Rivers Varta, and Prosna, it is situate betweene the Hills, and walled with a double wall, it hath many faire tiled o^ slated houses: the Suburbs are large on the farther banke of the River Varta, and encompassed with a great Lake, and Marshes, it hath even yeare two famous Faires, and it is a Bishops seate. It hath the Townes under it Koscien among the Marshes, which is 7. Miles distant* Also Meidzyrzexze, in which the houses are built all of wood, and it is neere to Silesia and Pomerania. Also Ostresow, which is situate on plaine betweene the Woods, and the Townes Wschow, Sremck, Prene and Rogozno. Calisia is a walled Citie, among the Marshes, the Riv^^ Prosna runneth by it, and there are some ruines of a Castell. Vnd^^ this Citie there are Gnesna, Pizary, Wartha, Noklo, Land, Konin, Slupez and Kolo. Gnesna is walled about, and seated on a Plaine, between Lakes and Hills. This Citie was first built by Lechus, in which Boslaus

map of PolandTHE KINGDOME OF POLAND.

Chabri Prince of Poland, received the Royall Diadem from the Emperour Otto the third, which the Kings of Poland doe still enjoy Siradia is a Citie built of wood, walled about, and seated on a Plaine Vnder it there are the Cities Vielun^a, Sadeck, Petricovia, Rosprza, and Spicimiria. Petricovia is seated in a moorish ground. Lancisia is a pleasant Citie walled about, and seated on a plaine. Vnder it there are Orlovia, Piatec, Bresma, Kornazew, Biechow, and some other Townes. Cuiauia or Vladislauia is a faire Citie, and it hath under it Bistgostia by the navigable River Buda, by which commodities are transported out of Poland into Vistula. Brestia hath under it Raedzieiow, Crusphicia, and Cowalow. Crusphisia is the chiefe Citie of all Poland next to mes^a, it is built of wood, with a brick Castell, and it is seated by the Lake Goplo out of which Lake Mice heretofore came forth, who by the just judgement of God did devoure Pompilius Prince of Poland in that Castle. Raua is a woodden Citie by the River Raua, it hath under it these Townes Sochaczouia, Gostinin, and Gamhin. Ploozko is a pleasant Cittie seated on a Hill by the River Vistula, it is a Bishops seate: under it there are Bielsko, Raczyayaz, Steperoz, Strensko, Mlawa, Plonsko, and Radzanow. Dobrinia is situated on a rock by the River Vistula, it had a Castle which the Crucigerans did demolish. Vnder it there are Slonsk, Ripin, and Gorzno. In the lesser Poland there are these Principal Cit^ties, Cracovia, Sandomiria, and Lublinum. Cracovia is built on a Plaine by the River Vistula, (Peter Appiarus supposeth it to be the same, which Ptolomy calls Carrodunum) being walled with a double wall. It hath a Castle on a high rock, which they call Vanel. In this Citty the Kings of Poland keepe their residence, and are buryed. It hath also a Vniversity famous for study and Arts. But the Cracovians, have no chiefe Advocate, so that the King himselfe is the Praetor of Cracovia. There are three Cities neere unto Cracovia, Clepardia, Stradonia, and Casimiria. It hath two Dukedomes under it, Biecz, Wonincz, Sandecz, Lelow, Kzyaz, and Proszovice. Sandomiria is a principall Cittie, walled about, being situated on a Hill by the River Vistula, 22. Miles distant from Cracovia. It hath an ancient Castle, well fortified. Vnder which is Che^i^y seated on a Plaine, and famous for Mines of Blew, in which there is also some silver found, also Korzin, Wislicia, Pilzno, Opoczno, Radomia, Polonieck, Zannichost, Zarnow, and Mologost. Lublinum is a chiefe Citty, well-fortified with a wall and a Castle. In which there are yearely three Faires, to which both Turkes, Armenians, Graecians, Germanes, Moschovites, Lithuanians, and others doe resort, the River Bysterra doth runne by the Castle. Vnder it there are Vrzendow, Lulow, Parcow, and Casimiria. Moreover the Kingdome of Poland hath many Lakes, in which there are all sorts of Fish. It is watered also with many faire Rivers, the chiefe whereof is Vandalus or Vistula, which the Germanes call De Wixel. The next are Chronus, now called Pregell, Nyennien, Ruhon, Viadrus, Varta, Tyras now called Nyester, Hypanis, now Bugh, Borysthenes, now Nyeper, there are also many other small Rivers. There are almost no Mountaines, except Southward, where it is parted from Hungary by the Sarmatian, and Carpathian Mountaines which the inhabitants call Taury. The Country is full of woods, which are parts

of the wood Hercinia. But so much hitherto. The Politick state of the Kingdome of Poland hath 2. Members. The first are the Clergie, in which are the two Archbishopricks of Gnesna and Leopolis. The Bishops of Cracovia, of Ploczko, of Chelma, Vladislavia, Pomesania, Varmia, (...), and Sambiensis, Posnonia. Proemislia, Cavenez, Vilna, Medincque Luceo^^ In Livonia the Bishops of Riga, Dirpta, Absel, and Revalia. Secondly ^^e Nobles, in which there are Castellanus Cracowviae: the Palatine of Brevia, Posnania, Sandomiria, Kalischy, Siradia, Lancisa, Brezeste, Inowla^^via, Russia, Podalia, Lublin, Belze, Plocense, Mozavia, Rava. Also in ^^^^nia the Palatines of Vilna, of Trochy Poletsho, Novogrod, and (...). Also in Prussia, the Palitnes of Culma, Marienbourg, and Pomerania. The Counts are of Posnania, and miria, Kalische, Voinice, Gnesne, Siradie, Lucise, Brizeste, Inowladislavia, Leopolis, Camenezia, Lublin, Belze, Plocen^^, (...), Ravense, Sandecia, Myedzeris, Vislicie, Biece, Rogostia, Radom, Zarichy, Landense, Streme, Zarnowe, Molegost, Vielune, Premislia, Haine, Sa^^ Dobrine, Polaneice, Premetense, Criswinense, Czecovia, Nacle, ^^rie, Byechovia, Bydgostia, Brezezine, Crininice, Osvecimense, Camenetz, ^^^^rie, Inowlodense, Revalia, Zavoloo, Sachazonia, Vasovia, Gostine, Vis^^, (...), Steprecense, Wisogrod, Riprin, Zabrochzinense, Circhanouia, Li^^^, In Lithuania there are old Palatines of Vilna, and Trochi. In Prussia of Calma, Elbingen, and Pomerania. There are many Captaines in the Kingdome of Poland. And two Mars-halls, of the Kingdome and the Court. The Ecclesiastick doth consist of these Archbishops and Bishops aforesaid. The Noble men are very sharpe witted, and they doe travell into forraigne Countries to get knowledge, and languages. They are couragious, and doe not feare the stoutest Enemie, and if the Nobles doe wrong them, all their kinsfolkes and friends doe joyne with them to revenge it, and doe never cease untill they have revengd it or lost their owne lives. Lastly they are not so liberal as Prodigall, both in Banqueting, and imoderate guifts, and also in keeping a great retinew or number of Servants, whom they cloth and feede.

SILESIA.
ANd so much concerning the Kingdome of Poland, Silesia remaineth which I will briefely unfold. It was so called from a River of the same name, as Conradus Celtes witnesseth. Others have other derivations. It is bounderd on the North and East with Polonia: on the South with Moravia, and the Wood Hercynia, on the West with part of Lusatia and Bohemia. It is 200. Mile long and 80. broade. Though the ayre be somewhat cold, yet it is milde and gentle. The Country in regard it is watered with many Brookes and Rivers is very fruitfull in most places, and it hath in some parts Veines of Gold, Silver, Lead, and Iron, it yeeldeth also clothing for it selfe, and many other Countries beside. The Citties are well inhabited and adorned with Lawes, and good Arts. The Metropolis thereof is Vratislavia, some would have it to be that which Ptolomie cals Budorchis, it is comonly

call'd Breslaw, Duglossus writeth that it was built by Mieslaus Duke o^ Polonia, a little before the yeere of Christ, 1000. And 40. yeeres afterward it was adorned with a Bishoprick by Casimirus King of Poland and it encreased so much, that the Bishops of this Citty were called the golden Bishops, in regard of their wealth and riches. In the yeere 1341. it was burnt downe. But the Emperour Charles the third made it in stead of Brick, of Gold. On the Steeple of St. Elizabeths Church there is this Inscription. Mirabilis in altis Dominus. The Situation, the beauty of the Houses, Towers, and Churches, the faire Bridges, and large Streets, doe much set forth this Citty. Nissa is an Episcopal Citty. There are besides in this Country 15. Dukes, Lignicensis, Bregensis, Teschinensis, Monsterhergensis, Olsvicensis, and Beoustadiensis, and three ancient Families, namely, Ligvicensis, Teschinensis, and Monsterhergensis. Tropaviensis, Opoliensis, Nissensis, Vratislavensis, or Breslaum, Swinisensis, Hurensis, Glagoviensis, Ratibonensis, and Sagonensis. But these latter honours the Kings of Bohemia since the decease of their Lords have gotten. There are three Baronyes, namely, of Trachenberg, of Vertenberg, and Plessensis. The Kings high Court in Silesia is kept at Vratislavia, where there is a Bishops seate, as also at Kissa. Viadrus runneth thorow this Country, into which many Rivers and Streames, doe flow, as Elsa, Ola, Bobrus, Barusius, and others.



POLAND.
POLAND which is situate in the Europian Sarmatia is both long and wide, and doth take up a great part of it, it was so called from the Fields and plaine ground, for Pole signifies as much as Plaine: it is a very great Country, having on the North Borussia and Pomerania: on the East Massovia, and Lithuania; on the South Russia, and the Mountaines of Hungaria: on the West Lusatia, Silesia, and Moravia. It is devided into the greater and lesser Poland. The greater is more Northward, and the River Varta runneth thorow the middle of it. The lesser is Southward, and the River Vistula glideth thorow it. The Polanders are descended from the Sclavonians, as Neugebaverus witnesseth. Lib. Rer. Polonicar. and their Kingdome was never so large as it is now, because the great Dukedome of Lituania and Livonia are joyned ^nto it, albeit the King of Swethland hath lately gotten a great part of these Provinces. It reacheth from the River Notes and Obra, which doe devide it from Marchia, and from the River Odera, which doth part it from Silesia, even to Beresaia, and Borysthones, which seperateth it from Moscovia, and so it extendeth West and East 120. Germane miles, and as much from the farthest part of Livonia, to the confines of Hungarie. And so being of a round forme, it is very wide and capacious. There are in the greater Poland these principall Citties, Posnavia, built by the Rivers Varta and Prosna betweene the Hills, with a double wall, it hath faire slated Houses, and great Suburbs by the farther banke of the River Varta, being encompassed with a great Lake and Marshes, and having two famous Faires every yeere, it is a Bishops seate, and hath many Townes under it. Calisiae is a walled Citty among the Marshes, by which the River Prosna runneth. It had sometime a strong well fortified Castle, as the ruines doe testifie, there are other Townes also subject unto it. Gnesna is walled about, being situate in a Plaine betweene Lakes and Hills, and it is an Archbishops seate. This Citty was first built by Lechus, in which Boleslaus Chabri Prince of Polonia received the royall Diadem from the Emperor Otto the III. when before that time Poland was onely a Dukedome. Siradia is a woodden Citty, walled and seated on a Plaine, it hath a strong Castle by the River Varta. This Citty was honoured with the title of a Dukedome, which dignity belonged to the Kings second Sonne. It hath also many Townes under it, among which is Petricovia, which was heretofore of great note, where the Sessions for the whole Kingdome were wont to bee held, which are now translated to Warsavia. Lancicia is a pleasant Citty, seated on a Plaine, and walled about, having a walled Castle on a Rocke, by which the River Bisura glideth. Cujavia, or Vladislavia, is a faire Citty, being a Bishops seate; Bidgostia is subject unto it, which is seated by the navigable River Buda. Brestia hath under it Radzieiow, Crusphicia, and Cowalow. Crusphicia is the chiefe Citty of Poland next to Gnesna, it is built of wood with

a slated Castle by the Lake Golp^. Rava is a wodden Citty situate by a River of the same name. Ploczko is a pleasant Citty seated on a Hill by the River Vistula, in which there was a Castle which the Crucigerians did demolish. In the lesser Polonia, the chiefe Citties are these, Cracovia, Sandomiria, and Lublinum. Cracovia is built on a Plaine neere the River Vistula, being fortified with a double wall and a deep ditch. It hath a Castle on a high Rocke which they call Vanel, in this Citty the Kings of Poland keepe their residence and are buried. It hath a famous Schoole for the study of Philosophie. The Castellanus of Cracovia taketh place of the Palatine in the Senate, but in other Provinces the Palatine is preferd before the Castellanus. Moreover, there are three Citties neere unto Cracovia, Clepardia, Stradomia, and Cassimiria. It hath two Dukedomes under it Zarocensis, and Oswlec^mensis. It hath many Townes under it. Sandomiriae is a principall Citty, walled about and situate on a Hill by the River Vistula, being 22. miles distant from Cracovia. It hath an ancient Castle well fortified, under it there are Checiny in a Plaine, which is famous for Mines of Blue, in which there is Silver also found, also Korczin, Malogost, and other Townes. Lublinum is a Citty beyond Vistula, being fortified with a Wall, a Ditch, a Lake, and a Castle. In which there are 3. Faires every yeere, unto which both Turkes, Armenians, Grecians, Germanes, Muscovites, and Lithuavians doe resort. The Iewes doe ininhabite a great part of the Suburbs, and have a Sinagogue there. The River Bystizna doth runne by the Castle Poland as we said before is a plaine Country, the most part of it is coverd with Woods, and it yeeldeth good store of Barley, Wheate, and Pulse. It hath abundance of Cattle. It hath Lakes which are full of all kindes of Fish. The chiefe Rivers are Vistula, Viadrus, commonly called Odera, Tyres, now Niester, Hypanis, which is called Bugh. Vistula, now called die Weixel, was heretofore called Vandalus, some call it Issula, and Vissula. This River riseth in the Carpathian Mountaines, and before it commeth to Cracovia it is enlarged by the receit of many Rivers, and afterward being growne very deepe and broad before it come to Dantiscum, it dischargeth it selfe into the Codan Bay. Boristhenes so well knowne of old, is now called Nieper. It hath a few Mountaines, and those Southward where it looketh toward Hungaria. The State of the Kingdome consisteth of the Clergie and Nobles. The Ecclesiastick Order hath two Bishops, the Bishop of Ghesnia who is Primate of the Kingdome, who doth also crowne the King, and the Bishop of Leopolis in blacke Russia. The Bishops are of Cracovia in lesser Poland, the Bishop of Posnia in the greater Poland, and in other Provinces the Bishops Plocensis, Chelmensis Vilnensis, Kioviensis, Lucensis, Ianoucensis, Samogitiensis, Warmensis, Culmensis, Sambiensis, Pomasaniensis, Rigensis, and others. The Polltick order of the Nobles hath 26. Palatines, 60. Counts, 4. Marshals, a Chancellor, and a Vicechancellor, two Generals or Captaines: in the lesser Poland there are forty common Captaines, in the greater 30. in Massovia 12. So that the kings when occasion requires, can raise 200000. Nobles. He that desires to know more concerning the state of this Kingdome, let him have recourse to Stanislaus Kizistanowic his

map of PolandPOLAND.

description of the State of the Kingdome of Poland: or to Guagninus or Boterus their description of Germany, and Neugebaverus his Polonian History. There are also in Poland Mines of Salt by Bochnia and Veliscus, which doe exceed all others. Veliscum is 8. miles distant from Cracovia. Bochina is a faire Towne with a Castle, where the Governour of the Saltpits dwels, who is called Zupparius. The Country round about is barren, but this Country maketh a greater revenue out of these Mines, then some Countries doe out of Gold and Silver Mines. The people of Poland, especially the Nobles, doe now differ much from the Scythian barbarisme of the ancient Sarmatians. They have no Robberies, so that in Summer time they ride in Waggons, and in Winter time in Coaches, safely, and without danger. Most of the Nobility are very sharpe witted, and doe get experience and languages by travelling into forraine Countries. They are couragious, and will not shun the stoutest enemy: if anyone bee wronged by the Nobles, all their kindred and friends doe joyne together in revenging it, and doe never cease untill they have revenged it, or lost their owne lives. Lastly, they are not so liberall a prodigall, both in their frequent Banquets, and in the great retinue and number of Servants which they keepe and clothe.




THE KINGDOME OF HVNGARY.
HUNGARIA, commonly called Hongeren (which name it received from the Huns or Hungarians, who came out of Scythia, and did inhabit it, doth containe Pannonia, and the Countries of Iazigus and the Dacians, beyond Danubius. On the South it hath the River Sa^^^, which devideth it from Croatia and Servia, which are a part of Il^^^ over against the Adriatick Sea. On the North it hath Poland and Russia, which are disjoyned by the Mountaine Carpatus. On the West it hath Austria, which was heretofore the head of the higher ^^^^nia, together with Moravia, and Styria; on the East Mysia which (...) now call Rhetiana. It is an excellent Country both for the goodnesse of the soyle, and the pleasantnesse of the Situation. The Country is very fruitfull and fertill, and yeeldeth Pearles, Gold, Silver, Colours, and Salt, which are to be digged out of the Earth. It hath abundance of Grasse, Wheate, Pulse, and Fruit. That Country which (...) Danubius doth yeeld excellent wine, even from the Country of the five Churces to Taurunus, or Belgrad. But there is no Oyle, and accepting that, it is adorned with all the gifts of nature. It hath di^ets kindes of living Creatures, having such great plenty both of Oxen, and Sheepe, that great Droves are carried into other Countries, especially into Italy and Germany. It hath also abundance of wilde beasts, as Hares, Does, Goats, Harts, Wolves, Beares, and the like. And also great store of Birds, especially Thrushes, Partridges, and Pheasants. The Paeonians or Pannonians did first inhabit this Country: afterward the Gothes, who were expulsed by the Huns; and the Huns by the Longobards, who were seated here 13. yeeres. (...) the Huns came in againe under the conduct of their Captaine A^^^la: after whose death, Charles the Great tooke it into his owne possession. But in the yeere 700. the Huns comming out of Scythia, in the Raigne of the Emperour Arnulph, possessed those parts, being Pagans untill King Stephen, whom they called the holy, was inaugurated and made King. And after him, even untill our times Hungary did professe the Christian Religion. Hungary doth containe all the whole Country of Iazigus Metanastarum, which Ptolemy circumscribeth or foundeth with Danubius Tibiscus, and the Sarmatian Mountaines. There are some ruines yet remaining, which by contracting the word are commonly called Iaz. But they inhabit those parts which (...) describeth, and their speech differs from the Hungarian language. The first King of Hungary, after the Christian Religion was established therein, was Stephen surnamed the Holy, after whom there followed his Cosin Peter, his Kinsman Andreas, also Bela, Salomon, Geysa,

Ladislaus, Almus, Stephanus the II. Bela Caecus. Geysa the II. Stephen the III. Bela the III, Emericus, Ladislaus the II. and others, even untill the time of the Emperour Rudolphus, King of Hungary. The King of Hungary doth governe his Kingdome by two Magistrates: the higher is devided into three Magistrates, the first of which governeth the Kingdome in the Kings name, in which are the Palatine of the Kingdome, who is next to the King, and judgeth the King if he be accus'd, whom the people of the Kingdome doe chuse, neither is it an heriditary office. Also the Judge of the Court, who is one of the ordinary Judges of the Kingdome. The Chancellor, who is the Metropolitan of Strigonium, who is called the Primate, and Secretary of the Kingdome, and he hath power to annoynt the King that is chosen, and he keepeth the Privie Seale. The Master of the Court doth follow the Kings, and is one of his Privie Counsell. The Master of the Regallities doth judge of all matters concerning Mines of Gold and Salepits, and lastly, all matters which appertaine to the Exchequer. Secondly, those which sit in Judgement, of which there are certaine Officials, three of greater authority, as the Vice-Palatine of the Kingdom, the Judge of Personall Presence, The Vice-Palatines Protonotary, o^ chiefe Clarke, the Vice-Judges Protonotary. They are all called Masters, and have these assistants or associates joyned to them: the Archbishop of Strigoniums Secretary, who is called the Secretary of the Exchequer, twelve Assistants, and some sworne Clarkes. Thirdly, those that serve the King, as the Treasurer, the Master of the Bed-chamber, the Cup-bearer, the Master of the Pantry, the Master Porter, and other lesser offices. Moreover, because the Country is large there are severall Judges appointed thorow the Provinces, which the Hungarians call Counties. And they are these beyond Danubius on the West of the River Tibiscus. Posoniensis, Nitriensis, Cepusiensis, Gewinariensis, Posthiensis, Semliniensis, Comariensis, Leptoniensis, Novigradiensis, Abavivariensis, Bathiensis, Vngensis, Traachimensis, Barsiensis, Hontensis, Borsodiensis, Bodroghtensis, Peregriensis, Turoezensis, Omuzolis, Tornensis, Heweciensis, Zolnocensis, Moramarusiensis. Above Danubius on the East of Tibiscus there are Vgoghiensis, Bihoriensis, Zatmariensis, Oradiensis, Zabolciensis, Temesiensis. Betweene the Rivers Danubius, and Dravus, there are Musunensis, Zaladiensis, Tolnensis, Rhab, or Iauriensis, Vespriniensis, Strigoniensis, Soponiensis, Albensis, Sinigiensis, Castriferrensis, Pelisiensis, Waraniensis. Betweene Dravus and the River Savus, there are Valkonensis, Rifiensis, Syrimiensis, Warasdiensis, Prosegiensis, and Zagrabiensis. The Ecclesiasticall government belongeth to the two Archbishops, of Gran, or Strigonia, the Popes Legate and Primate of the Kingdome. It hath under it Agriensis, Vaciensis, Nitriensis, Quinque Ecclesiensis, Vespriniensis, who is the Queenes Chancellor, and crowneth her, and the Bishop Iauriensis commonly called Rab: Colosensis, or Colotz, under whom are Sagabriensis, Transilvaniensis, Voceadrensis, Visemburgensis, Suiniensis, Cenadiensis, or Chonad, and Bosnensis. All Hungary is devided into the hither-most, and the farther. The hither-most Hungary doth containe all that Country which is on this side Danubius: the farthermost doth containe that Country which is beyond Danubius, and Tibiscus

map of HungaryTHE KINGDOME OF HVNGARY.

glideth thorow the middle of it. The Metropolis and Mother Citty of this Kingdome is Buda, which was so denominated, as the most doe suppose from Buda the builder of it, who was Brother to King Artila, or as others write, from the Budines, a People of Scythia, of whom Herodotus maketh mention. If you consider the Situation of this Citty, it is seated partly on a Mountaine, and fortified with strong Bulwarkes, so that it is the strongest, and pleasantest Citty in all Hungaria, it hath many faire buildings both publike and private. It standeth in a fruitfull soyle, Soliman the Turkish Emperour tooke it from the Christians in the yeere 1526. on the 20. day of August. The Next is Posonium, commonly called Prezborgh, which is a noble Citty. Here the River Leyta deviding the higher Pannonia from the lower, doth mingle it selfe with the River Istrus. It is an ancient faire Citty, having a pleasant ayre and situation, and doth therein excell all tne Citties of Pannonia. It hath Mountaines planted with Vines, which are also full of Wood. In the Suburbs it hath a Castle seated on the top of a high Rocke. There is also Belgrad at the meeting or confluence of the Rivers Savus, and Danubius, it is commonly called Alba Graeca, the ancients called it Taurunum, and the Germanes Griechs Weissenburgh: Soliman the Turke tooke it in the yeere 1520. and having beene before a Towne of defence against the cruell enemy of Christianity, now it is the Turkish Emperours seat. A little lower downe the River Danubius there is Singidunum, which was taken by the Turke in the yeere 1439. In the midst betweene these two Citties, there is a Field famous for the victory of Hunniadus against Mahomet the Turkish Emperour: they call this Field Maxons. This Battle was fought in the yeere 1456. Downe the River there are many places where the Christians have received many fatall overthrowes. The Citty Valpo was taken in the yeere 1543. Quinque Ecclesiae by Dravus in the yeere 1543. Zigetha was taken in the yeere 1566. Buda wee have mentioned before. Strigonium by Danubius, commonly called Gran, was heretofore an Archbishops seat, but it is now in the Turkes hands. Alba Regalis, or Stulweyssenburg, is famous in regard the Kings are crowned and buried here, it was taken in the yeere 1543. In the same Country there is Stridon, where Saint Hierom was borne. There is also the Citty Comara, in an Iland of the same name, which the Turkes in vaine attempted. Iaarinum, commonly called Raab is an impregnable Citty by the River Danubius. I passe by the other Townes. There are also in Hungaria many famous Lakes, the chiefe whereof is Balaton, which the Germanes call Platze, being 40. Italian miles broad, and 8. Hungarian miles. The chiefest Rivers are Danubius, Savus, Dravus, and Tibiscus, the three former are common to other Countries, but Tibiscus runneth onely thorow Hungary. It riseth in Maramusia, in the high cliffes of Carpatus, and for plenty of Fish it exceedeth all the Rivers in Hungary, for it hath abundance of all kindes of Fish, as great Pikes, Lampreys, and Sturgeons. There are also other Rivers besides these, which have great store of excellent Fish, as Trowts, Salmons, Perches, Lampreys, Barbels, and others, and those Rivers have gold veines in them. The chiefe Woods and Mountaines beyond Danubius,

beginning from Austria and Moravia Lazius reckneth to bee ^^chzal, in Greeke Carpatus, which was heretofore so called from the Minerals in it, it stretcheth and extendeth it selfe thorow the Countries Turocensis, Arnensis, Liproviensis, Cappusiensis, Gewineriensis, and Sa^^^sis, which the Inhabitants call by divers names, as den Vatter, den ^^^ch, den Wurtgarten, den Schnepberg. The second River is Matran, which is planted with Vines neere Agria. The third and greatest of all is Erdel. There are many other Rivers, which for brevitie sake I ^^it, and so conclude Germany.



ITALIE.

IN VVHICH THES^ Countries are contained.
Lombardie.
The Dukedome of Venice.
Liguria, the Dukedome of Genua.
The Dukedome of Friulum.

Istria.

The Country of Romandiola.
The Dukedome of Thusany.
The Dukedome of Spoleto.
The Marquiship of Anconitana.
Latium, now called Campagna di Roma.

Abruzzo, Aprutium, Sa^^nites.

Terra di Lavoro, Campag^^ felice, a Principality.
Apulia, the Kingdome (...) Daunia piana.
Lucania, Basilicata, Princip^^

Terra di Barri, Apulio Peu^^tia.


Terra di Otranto Regnum.


Calabria superior Regnum.


Magna Graecia.


Brutij, Calabria inferior.



The Kingdome of Naples doth containe a great part of these Countries.

Because I know but a few Counties and Sigeionries in Italy and Greece, and seeing their names and places cannot be assign'd in Tables, in regard of the imperfection of Table therefore I will describe but a few of them. For every Stude^^ may set downe those which hee shall finde. It would affoord* a faire prospect into matters of Policy, if the Nobility of several Kingdomes, and their Offices, Places, and Lordships we^^ knowne. Which if every one would performe in his owne Country, hee should deserve much praise.



map of Italy
ITALIE.




ITALIE.
GERMANIE was described before both in general and speciall: and now having viewed the former I doe enter into Italy: which as Pliny saith Lib. Natur. Hist. cap^ 20. is a Country sacred to the gods, the most happiest in all Europe, the Mother of Plenty, the Mish^^ of Policy, the Princesse of Nations, and the Queene of the World. It had heretofore divers names. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, Lib. 1. of Roman Antiquities, writeth that the native people did call this noble Country Saturnia: and the Graecians did call it Hesperia, Ausonia, and Oenotria: and that at last in Hercules time it began to be called Italy. It was called Saturnia from King Saturne. But it seemeth that this appellation did not appertaine to all Italy, but to a part of it, which was also called Latium. Hyginus would have it called Hesperia, from Hesperus, who fled from his Brother Atlas: and Macrobius from Hesperus the Evening Starre, in Latine call'd Vesperugo, which is seene alwayes in the West. It was call'd Ausonia from Auson. They call'd it Oenotria from the goodnesse of the Wine, or from Oenotrus King of the Sabius. It was called Italy from Italus, whom Aristotle maketh to be King of Oenotria. But Festus saith, Lib. 9. Italiam dictam, quod magnos (...) est Boves habeat, vitulos enim Italos esse dictos. That is, Italy was so called, because it hath great Italy, that is, Oxen for Calves are called Itali, Timaeus fabulously reporteth, that it was so called from the O^^talus, one of Geryons Heard, which being droven away by Hercules did swim over the Sicilian Bay, and in the Tyrrhene language a ^all is called Italus. And the same Dionysius Halic. Lib: Antiq. Rom. saith, that it was heretofore called Vitalia, if we may beleeve Hellanicus. Other ancient appellations of Italy, which belong rather to the parts thereof than to the whole Country, we omit. Strabo and Ptolemy doe make Italy a Peninsula, beeing encompassed on three sides with the higher Sea, the lower Sea, and the Jonian Sea: on the fourth side it hath the Alpes, for towards the West it hath the Italian Alpes, which the ancients did distinguish by peculiar names, as the Sea Alpes, the Cottians, the Grajans, and the Rhetians, which lye Northward even to the River Arsia, and containeth the Poenine and the Julian Alpes: and so it runneth Northward by the Hadriatick Sea, even to the Jonian Bay, which is over against it Eastward: and lastly, Southward and Westward it is beaten with the Mediterranian Sea, as also the Tyrrhene and Ligustian Shores: and the Hadrian Sea washeth the Southerne part, where Forum Iulij and Histria lyeth. The length from Augusta Praetoria, to Brutium, even to the Promontory or Le^^ropetra, is 755. miles: the greatest breadth is 475. miles, the middlemost breadth is 130. the least breadth is 72. The whole compasse of Italy according to Castaldus is 2550. miles. Those which have measur'd it more exactly, doe make it to be 2250. and those who have measured it most exactly, doe reckon it to bee not above 2240. Buslathius doe

liken Italy to an Ivie leafe: Pliny, Solinus, and others, doe resemble it to an Oke leafe, because it is longer then broad, bending his head on the left hand, and so endeth in the figure of an Amazonian Brestplate. The latter Writers doe more conveniently compare it to a mans thigh, the skin whereof lyeth over against the lower Sea: the Calfe over against the higher Sea: and all the foote is washed with the Jonian Sea: The heele doth looke toward Epirum: the sole of the foote is the Tarrentine Bay, the more fleshy parts doe make the Pronontories Zephyrius, Carcinus, and Bruttium, the toes are turned toward Sicily, the knee is in the Populonian Promontory, the hippe and upper part of the thigh doe touch the Alpes. I have spoken of the name and quantity of Italy: the quality followeth, which alwaies ariseth from the Situation of a Country. If any one will take a diligent account of it, he shall finde that according to the Longitude, the most Westerne Meridian doth fall upon the 29. degree; and the most Easterne Meridian the 43. degree. It is 7. degrees in Latitude: for the most Southerne Parallel is 28. degrees distant from the Aequator, and the most Northward 46. and so he shall finde that Italy is in the fifth and sixth Climats, and all the Parallels between eleven and sixteene, in which space of Land the day differeth one houre. For the longest day of Summer in the Southerne Parallel is 14. houres long, with three fifths, but in the Northerne Parallel it is 15. houres long with three fifths.. Italy having such a Situation, and having the Alpes running thorow it, which passe length-wayes thorow the middle of Italy, on both sides, especially on the South side have faire fruitfull Fields and Hills lying by them: and therefore it is no marvell, that all the times and seasons of the yeere are so temperate, and that it is so fruitfull, especially in some places. The Country is very temperate, and very plentifull, and hath good store of Corne, being not chargeable in tilling, but very gainefull to the Husbandman. The Rosselanian fields in Vmbria are reported to have beene so fruitful, that Varro witnesseth, Cesar Vopiscus, when he pleaded his cause before the Censors, said that the Rosean Fields were the Senum Italiae, in which if a Pitchforke bee left the day before, the grasse will cover it over in one nights growth. Vnto speaking of the endowments of Italy, saith, that it produceth all things necessary for food. Campania doth yeeld Corne, Falernus wine: Cassinas Oyle: Tusculan Figges, Tarrentine Honey: and Tiber Fish. Moreover Pliny witnesseth that Italy is the Mother of all kindes of Trees. I will not mention the Vulgar common sort. For here are great store of Orange Trees, Lemmon Trees, and Quince Trees. All the Coast, as for example, Liguria, and that which belongeth to Genoa, is adorned and beautified with faire Trees, and great high Palme Trees, which are full of sweet smelling fruit, so that it is pleasant ^oth in sight and scent: and it hath every where pleasant Gardens to recreate sad mindes, and drive away Melancholy. And the same may be said of a thousand other places. The same Pliny sheweth that there are Pepper trees in Italy. The Hydruntine Country hath abundance of Olives, so that he that hath not seene the great Woods of Olive trees which are in these parts, would thinke it incredible. The Barian

Fields in Apulia Peucetia, doe bring forth great store of Oyle, Wine, Corne, Almonds, and Cotton, and other fruits. The Valley of Onelia in Liguria, hath such great store of Oyle, that sometimes it yeeldeth 32. and 22. thousand Jarres, which the Inhabitants call B^rilas. There is also Manna in Italy. For Manna is gathered neere Altom^ntium in Brutia, which falleth downe like dew by night, especially when the skie is serene and cleare after raine. It is gathered from the Leaves of certaine Trees. Pliny reporteth that it hath the choisest and best Vines, so that it excelleth the most odoriferous Nations of the world, for there is no scent to be compared with the delicious smell of the sweet budding Vines. As the excellent Wines which are so celebrated and praised by ancient Writers doe testifie. Pliny doth devide the Wines of Italy into foure sorts. He preferreth the Setine Wines before all others, which was so called from Setia a Towne of Latium. The next he accounteth to be the Falerne Wine. The third he ^^^kneth to be the Albanian, the Surrentinian, the Massu^ (...) S^^^nian, the Calenian, the Fundanian, the Vilitertian, the Pr^^^^tian, and the Signinian Wines. The fourth sort are the Pretut^^^ the Anconian, and the Palmesian Wines. But of these things others do report: I passe to the other gifts of Italy: and will describe th^^ briefly. It is very fruitfull in producing all kinde of hearbes. What should I speake of the Mettals, Stones, and other gifts. Pliny saith that it is inferiour unto no Country for Mettals. In Forum ^u^^um there is the River Hydra, and not farre from thence a Mine of Quicksilver Great store of Allom was found heretofore among the Etruscian^ in the Territory of Masla. In Campania there are Mines of Brimstone. Three miles from Volaterris toward the River Caecina, there are some Hills, in which there are Salt-pits. At Brutia also there are Salt Mines, which are hollowed into the inner parts of the Mountaine with digging forth of Salt. I omit the Stone Quarries, out of which divers Stones are cut. I doe not mention the Marble, the Alablaster, Chrystall, and divers sorts of precious Stones, nor the Saffron, Blue* and Rosen. And that I may not be tedious in reckoning up the variety of living creatures, Aulus Gellius. Lib. 11. Noct. Attica^. Cap. 1. T^meus in his History, and M. Terentius Varro in Antiquit. doe report that there are great store of Oxen in Italy, and that there are many Buffons bred in this Country. Lucillius witnesseth that the great strong Lucanian hearbs did graxe here: Quem neque Lucanis oriundi montibus TauriDucere pro telo validis cervicibus possent.
Italy, besides other Fowle, hath Eagles and Vultures, which are so often mentioned in the ancient Romane Histories. I come now to the ancient Government. There is no indubitable certainty concerning the ancient Government of Italie. Annius of Viterbium doth speake of Comer, who came first into this Country as a stranger, also of Chamus, Ianus, Sabatius, Sagus, Cranus, Aurunus, Malotte, Tages, Ofrides, Hercules, Tuscus, Alteus, Ritis, Italus, Morgetes, Roma, Romanessus, Iasius, and

others: but approoved Historians doe make no mention of them. But if we read Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, Pompeus Trogus, Solinus Polyhistor, and other Greeke and Latine Writers, that many yeeres before the building of Rome, wee shall finde that Italie was governed by divers people, as Sicilians, the Aboriginians, the Ligurians, the Umbrians, and the Etrurians: which at last were all reduced under the government of the Romane Empire. Rome at the first was governed by Kings for 245. yeeres together, as Dionysius and Livie doe witnesse, whom in the Romane History it is best to follow. In whom wee may read the order and progresse of their atchievements, and it is to be considered, that their power did encrease abroad by military Discipline, and at home by moderation and Justice, and by the order of government. Afterward the Kings for their tyranny and lust were expelled, which many times had caused many changes, and mutations in the Empire. The names of the Kings are these: Romulus, who raigned 38. yeeres, (...), who raigned 43. yeeres, Tullus Hostilius, who raigned 32. yeeres, La^^^ Martius, who raigned 24. yeeres, Tarquinius Priscus, who raigned 37. yeeres, Servius Tullius, who raigned 44. yeeres, Tarquinius Superbus, who raigned 25. yeeres. He was expelled the Kingdome for his Sons wicked act, who ravished Lucretia. But when the Kings were expelled, the government became Annuall, and two Consuls were created. The first of which was L. Iunius Brutus, unto whom was joyned Sp. Lu^^ius Tricipitinus. and after him M. Horatius Pulvillus. Thus Italie was governed by Consuls, untill the time of the Emperour Caesar Fl. Mo^^lus Augustulus, whom Odoacer Herulus King of the Gothes did depose, and subverted the Country to himselfe, and afterward being shine, he left it to Theoderick his Successors. I need not set downe a Catalogue of the Romane Consuls and Emperours, which are well knowne. And we may read in Histories the forme of the first royall government, the changes of Lawes and Magistrates, the Romanes valour, their warres, and their many civill dissentions, untill Rome had got the Monarchie of the World: and how by luxury, civill warres, and the fatall vicissitude and change of things, it lost againe both vertue, and Empire. I proceed to other matters. Italie hath many faire flourishing rich Citties, many famous populous Townes: and many Villages, adorned with Noblemens houses. It will not therefore be impertinent to set downe what Thomas Edwards an Englishm^n hath written concerning the most famous Citties of Italie.

Rome's holy by the blood of Saints there shed,
Rich Venice with the Sea's encompassed.
Parthenope doth Captaines stout beget.
Mediolanum pleasant is, and great.
Bononia doth for study much excell
Many Citizens in shining Florence dwell.
Ferraria doth yeeld much Iron Oare,
Verona hath of all things wondrous store.
For Law and Physick Padua is extoll'd
Se^as for eloquence may bee enrol'd.
Cremona is a miserable place,
And Mantua sweet Virgins birth doth grace.
Vtinus doth transport of Wine great store.
Rich Brixia is liberall to the poore.
Papia doth for Italian Verses shine
And Luca on two Dukedomes doth confine.
Risa bewailes her honour lost in th'end.
Milke, Cheese, and Butter, Parma doe commend,
And faire Placentia wants not Innes most deare.
Vertue and Piety in Taurinum are.
Perusia hath for Souldiers got much fame.
Vercella delighteth not in unjust gaine.
Mutina holds that Frogs most wholesome be.
Anconas walls contemne the Enemie.
Macerata doth all suits of Law decide.
Emporia is with Havens beautifie'd.
The Citty Livium is most prone to Warre.
In Bergomum they rude in language are.
Aretium doth make the sharpest Sword.
Viterbus to the poore doth helpe afford.
In Asta courteous Citizens are found.
Ariminium doth with fruit and Geese abound.
Fanum hath women faire, and most compleate.
Novaria hateth all Fare-like deceit.
Ravenna hath lost the fame she had before.
Anglia hath few Earles, Vincentia store.
Pisaurum hath great store of Figges so great.
Pistorium of Chesnuts, Oyle, and Wheate.
Dertona many rustick Clownes doth feed.
And Regium great store of Hogs doth breed.
Sweet Vineyards doe Cesena compasse round.
Cleare Springs and Streames are in Tarvisium found
Imola doth it selfe in two devide,
Vrbinum by her Dukes is dignifide.
Faventia is well knowne for Potters ware,
Spoletum harbours those which strangers are.
Pompeia doth faire Sheepe and Oxen breed.
And Narnia on Egges and Grapes doth feed.
Assissum doth rejoyce because that here
Holy Saint Francis Corpes interred were.
Comum with Fish and Flesh is amply stor'd.
Savona leaving studies, wealth doth hoard.

Italy hath many Lakes, the chiefe whereof are in Etruria Transumenus, Aprilis Marinus, Vadimonis, Ciminus, Vulsiniensis, Sabatus, Palus Bientina, and Ciana. In Latium there are Hostiae Lacus, Albanus, Aquae Salviae, Lacus Nemorensis, Iuturnae Lacus, Regillus, Fucinus, Pontina Palus, the Fundale Lake, the Tiburtine, Caecubus, the Simbruine Lake. In Picenum there is the Nursine Lake. In Vmbria, the Veline Lake, Floridus, and the C^^iliens^^n Lake.

In Campania the Lucrine and Avernan Lake, Linterna Palus, Stativa, and ^^mpeia. In Salentinum and Apulia, the Adurianian Lake, and the Lesi^^. In Flaminia there is 7. Seas, and the Moore Padusa. In Langbardia ^^^^s-padana, there are Verbanus, Ortanus, Larius, Luganus, Gaviratius, ^^^^tius, Trinatius, Chivensis, Puscianus, Sebinus, Benacus, Idrinus, and Poeni^^. In Venice Visigiolus. In Istria Costiacus. It is watered also with many Rivers, as Padus, Athesis, Rubico, Tiber, Arnus, Mincius, Tucinus, Ollius ^^d Abdua. The chiefest of these is Padus, which as Strabo affirmeth, is (...) greatest River in Europe except Ister. The Latine writers as Livy, ^^gill, and others doe call it Padus, but the Italians call that which is ^^lled Pades, as Metrodorus Scepsius noateth in Pliny, because there are many pitch-trees growing about the Fountaine, which are called in French Pades, and the Grecians and Poets did heretofore call them Her^^^^s. Servius would have it so called from Phaeton the Sonne of Apoll^, for before that Phaeton rhrough his owne temerity and rash^^^^e was cast downe headlong into this River, it was called Eridanus. (...) was called Bodincus as Pliny witnesseth, and Liguridus because it hath (...) ^ottome, Polybius Lib. 3. calleth it Bodegkos, and the ancients did (...) it Vesulus as Pliny sheweth, who noteth also that Spring-head ^^ereof is in the borders Liguria, which is called Visendo, because it is ^^^derfull, and worthy of sight. It floweth from the Fountaine with ^^^^eare streame, and so runneth, through the straight narrow Rocks, ^^d the Valleys of the Rockie Mountaine: and it falleth downe with (...) violence as is wonderfull. And so runneth with a murmering ^^^se through the stones, and afterward it floweth abroade, and is (...) confined with any channell, for the space almost of three Miles, (...) to Paysana, where it runneth almost under ground, so that very ^ittle of it can bee seene. But a Mile from thence it riseth up againe ^^^ete Paracolum, and so running forward it receiveth many Torrents, ^nd Rivers, from the Alpes, and the Apennine Mountaines, and so being much encreased by those tributary streames, it runneth through ^^e middle of Langbardia, and a part of Romonula, and so with 7. mouths ^^^letts, it dischargeth it selfe into the Hadriatick Sea. Pliny saith (...) it maketh 7. Seas, because it runneth with 7. streames a great ^^y into the Sea, in whome Lib. 3. Cap. 16. see more concerning the ^^^rse of this River, as also in Polybius Lib. 2. in Strabo, Lib. 5. in ^^^^itius Mela, Lib. 3. in Solinus in his Polyhist. Cap. 7. also in Leander Albe^^us, and other moderne writers. Virgill in the ninth of his Ae^^ds calleth it Rex Fluviorum the King of Rivers. And Lucan Lib. 2. ^^geth thus. Non minor hic Nilo, and a little after, Non minor hic Istro, (...) is, this River is as great as Nilus, or as great as Ister. The River (...) so called by Virgill and other doth follow next; Strabo calleth (...) Athigis, which the Italians doe now call l' Adice or l' Adese: and the ^ermanes Etcsh. Pliny reporteth that Athesis doth flowe out of the ^^lentine Alpes, at first with a small streame, but afterward having (...) more strength by the acsension of many Rivers, it runneth with ^^olent course Southward, and afterward from Tridentum it runneth ^^ch a more gentle streame through the Plaine: and so having glided ^^rough those fields, it runneth through the narrow passages of the

Mountaines with so great a violence, that it seemes to threaten these places by which it floweth, and with the same vehemency it doth runne headlong by Verrona, beneath which it is devided into two Rivers, the one whereof goeth toward the Marshes, the other bendeth to the Sea-ward, and maketh a faire Haven, you may see more in Leander. From the Spring-head thereof to Verona, it is not navigable o^ passeable for boates, by reason that it hath such a violent Current, but they bring downe trees, and pieces of timber out of the Tridentine Mountaines, which they tye together and make them swim downe the River. But from Verona it is navigable even to the Fossions. Torellus in his History of Verona, would have Athesis to be the same which Ptolemie calleth Atrianum. And some doe thinke that Adrias is the same with Athesis, which Stephanus and others doe mention. The third River is Rubicon, which Ptolemie and other Greeke writers doe cal^ Rubikoon: Strabo calleth it Roubikoon: now it is called Pisatellus. It was that River which a ^liuy witnesseth did anciently bounder Italie after the bounds thereof were translated from the River Aesus* The fourth River is Tiber, which is the bounds betweene E^ruria and Latium. There is no River more famous in Roman Histories. It hath had divers names, some prophane and some sacred. The prophane heathen names are Ianus, Albula, Rumen, and Tiberis, the Divine is Serra Athenaeus reporteth that it was anciently called Ianus, from the God Ianus. It appeares in Varro and others that it was called Albula, which Paulus Diaconus and Servius doe derive ab albo colore from the white colou^ of it, who sheweth also that it was called Rumon. But the chiefes^ name of this River was and is Tiber, of which there are divers Etymologies. Some doe derive it from Tibris, a King of the Aborigines Festius and Servius say that hee was King of the Tussians: Livy, Ovid, Festus Pompeius, and Eusebius doe derive it from Tiberinus Silvius, Prince of the Albanians. Varro delivers that this River was called Deh^beri^^ from Dehebris an Earle of the Vejentians: Servius saith that it was called in the Scripture by a sacred name Serra a secando from cutting* So much concerning the names, in which it is to bee noted that there was a difference observed in the pronunciation of these words Tiberis, Tibris, and Tiberini. For in common speech it was called Tiberis in Poesy Tibris; and in holy writers Tiberinus, as Servius noteth, which is not alwayes true. It was called commonly Tevere. The head of Tiber is in the Apennine Mountaines, in the middle of it neere the confines of the Aretineans, in that parte, where the Fountaine of Arnus, is above Aretium. It is a small streame at first like ^ little Rivilet, but when it hath runne forward it increaseth but a little, in regard it receaveth no great streames, but such as proceed^ from small Fountaines, but afterward by the receipt of some River it groweth larger, and is Navigable for boates and little vessels eve^ to Rome, and so running not farre from Tiphernum, Perusia, Otriculus, i^ divideth Eturia from the Vmbrian and Sabinians: and afterward 13^ Miles from Rome, it divideth the Vesentians from the Crustiminians an^ Fidenations: also it seperateth Latium from Vaticanum: and is so grea^ and broade a River at Rome, so that they cannot passe over it but b^

Bridges or Boates, as Halicarnassaeus writeth, and from thence it runneth forward, and rowleth into the Tyrrhene Sea. Pliny in his 3. Booke Cap. 4. and Servius Lib. 7. of his Aeneads doe describe the course of this River. See also Florus Lib. 1 Histor. Rom. Cap. 4. and Varao Lib. 4. de L. L. Paulus Iovius writ a Booke concerning the fish in Tiber, Pliny Lib. 3. Cap. 4. affirmeth that 42. Rivers doe runne into Tiber. The River Arnus followeth which Livy, Pliny, and others have mentioned, Strabo and Ptolemy doe call it Arnus: and in Italian it is called Arvo. It riseth, as Strabo reporteth on the right side of the Apennine Mountaine. It is a small streame at the beginning, and runneth westward through the steepe rocks and valleys: and afterward being encreased by the receipt of many Torrents, and Rivers, it entreth into the Florentine fields, and having divided Florentine and Pisa it runneth to the Sea. Virgill, Strabo, Pliny, and others doe call that Mincius, which the Ital^^^s doe now call Mencio of Menzio. This River having entred into the cleare Lake Benna^um, and having encompassed Mantua, 13. Miles from thence it runneth into Padus. Livy, Plinie, Silius, Polybius, Strab. Plut. Ptol. Steph. doe call it Ticinus. The Itenarie Tables call it ^i^enus: it is now called Tisino. It riseth out of the Mountaine Sumano, which is now called the Mountaine of S. Gothard; from whence Rhene, Rhodinus, Athesis, and other Rivers doe runne divers wayes. Out of this Mountaine it runneth by the Lepontians Southward among the steepe Rocks to Belinzona a strong Towne, and afterward growing greater by the aversion of many Rivers and Torrents, it rowleth it selfe into the Lake Verbanum, through which it runneth, as Pliny affirmeth, and so returning through the Plaine, it runneth with a cleare streame into Padus. The water of this River is so cleare, that you may see any thing in the bottome of it. It hath also some vaines of gold and silver, which may be seene in the sands. The River Ollius which in Italian is called Oglio, hath great stoare of good fish, especially of that sort which they call in Italian Thymallo. In this River neere the Pallace, a great many wicker wares are set, and at certaine seasons of the yeare the water brings downe infinite stoare of Eeles into them, which are taken out and salted. To search out the rising of this River would be troublesome. The common received opinion is that two small Rivers doe runne out of the Lake Frigidulph, which is betweene the Alpes, the one on the right hand is called Fridigulph, and at length is joyned with Ollius: the other on the left hand doth runne with another River, and from thence the River Ollius beginneth. Others make other conjectures. It runneth into the Lake Iseum neere the Towne Pisonium: it watereth the fields of Brixianum and Cremona, and make their barren soyle very fruitefull: and it seperateth the Brixian Country from Cremonia and Bergoma: It receaveth above 37. other Rivers. Pliny and Tacitus doe call that River Abdua, or Addua, which Polib. and Strab. doe call Adovas, it is commonly cal'd Adda. It divideth the Cenomanians from the Insubrians. It riseth in the Mountaine Baulius: and Strab. noteth that it taketh his force from the Mountaine Adula. And so returning from the Lake Larius, through which it runneth, it windeth through the Plaine toward Padus, and

bringeth with it many other Rivers, as Pilclavo, Meyra, Lira, Tartene, Lacieumortum, Brembrum, and Serimortum, and also Serius, which rising in the Mountaines above Bergomum, and flowing by Seriana, in the winter time it hides himselfe in his channell, and runns under ground, and afterward rising up againe neere Crema, it runneth into Addua: but in Summer by reason that the heate of the Sun melteth the snow upon the Mountaines, it doth so increase and swell, that it doth not onely fill those subterranean channels, and windings under the earth, but also it continually overfloweth the upper face of the earth. I passe over the other Rivers, which are many for brevitie sake. The Seas, Baies, and Havens doe follow. The higher Sea, the lower Sea, and the Ionian Sea doe encompasse three sides of Italie. Whence Pliny thus concerning Italie. Tot Maria, portus, gremiumque Terra^um c^mercio patens undique, and tanqam ad iuvandos mortales ipsa avide in mare procurrens: that is: there are so many Seas and Havens as if the Country did spread and lay open her bosome for traffique and Commerce, and for the good of men; shee shooteth herselfe farre into the Sea. It hath many Bayes, as Rappalinus Froycis, Amuclanum Mare, the Bayan Baye, the Paestanian Bay, Hypponiates, Scyllericus, the Tarentine Bay, Vrias, the Tergestine, the Largian, and Flanitian. After the Bayes I will name the Havens. Strabo Lib. 6. write that Italie for the most part hath no Havens, and those which it hath are very great and strong both to prevent the invasion of enemies, and for the more convenient trading and Commerce. These are the Ports or Havens, the Haven of Olivun^na, of Avaon, of Avison, of Hercules Menaecus, of Mauricus, of Alb^^g^unus, of the Sabatrian Vadians, of Savona, of Genua, of Delphin, of Er^cis, of L^na, of Pisanus, of the Vadians, of the Populonium, of the Scabrians, of ^^lamon, of Hercules, of Gravisia, of Augustus, of Antias, of Caieta, the Iulian Haven, the Bajon, the Vilinian, the Metaurian, Orestes Haven, Hanniballs Castra. The Tarentine, and Brundusian Havens, Garne, Agasus, the Anconitanian Haven, the Arminian, Ravenas, Peretolas, Livenza, P^la, and many others. After the description or Catalogue of the Havens, the Mountaines doe follow. The chiefe whereof are the Alpes, which whether we make them belong to France, Germany, or Italie it matters not: for these Mountaines running along doe with a wall as it were seperate Italie from France, and Germanie. Festus thinketh that the Alpes were so called ab Alberdine from their witnesse, for the Sabines saith hee called that Alpum, which the Latines afterward called Album or white. Isidorus would have the Alpes to bee a French name, and that high Mountaines are called in French Alpes. The Germaine speech doth acknowledge the name of Alpes, for Alp or Alpen signifies in their language pasturing Mountaines, on which no Hay is cut or got against Winter, but onely Oxen and other heards of Cattell are put there to graze. Strabo writeth that these Mountaines were heretofore called Albia and Alpioni: Stephanus also calleth them Alpia and Alpij. Phavorinus calleth them Olbia, and Lycophran, Salpij. Ovid. Lib. 3. de Arte amandi, Lucan and others doe call them Alpis in the singular number, and Dionysius Afrus calleth them Alpius. The Alpes in ancient writings and records have many names, which shew that there were many parts

of the Alpes over which they traveled. And these are the Sea Alpes, which ar also calld the Ligustina Alpes: The Cottian, Graecian, Penine, the Sammian Alpes, the Lepontian, the Rhetian, Iulian and Carnician. And so much concerning the Alpes, which breadthwayes doe seperat and parte Italie from France and Germanie, the Apinine followeth, which running with a continuing ridge betweene the higher and the lower Sea, it divideth it length wayes into two parts or sides. It is thought to have beene so called, because the foote of this Hill is by Hannibals Penine passage. Some thinke it was called the Apenine, because the Paenians or Carthaginians breaking into Italie under the conduct of Hanniball did make and open a passage this way, some derive it from Apis an ancient Captaine who overcame and conquerd all Italie. Ptolamie and others call it Appennina, Stephanus Apennium, the Apennine Mountaine, saith Pliny, is the greatest in Italie, running with a continued ridge from the Alpes to the Sicillian straite. Italie hath many other Mountaines, which are either parts or pieces of the Apennine, or such as it thrusteth forth here and there, or such as lye at the foote thereof, so that it overlookes them. But I passe over them, least I should be tedious. Moreover the Mountaines and aforesaid, the Valleys and fields are crowned with woods, groves, and thicketts, many of which are named and celebrated by the ancients. In Etruria there is the wood Viterbium, which in Italian is called Boscodi Monte ^i^^one, which is commonly calld Bolsena, the ancients as Leander reporteth did call it the Valsinan Wood. On Ciminus a Mountaine of Etruria, here was a wood, so thick that few travelld through it, of which Livy thus. Silva erat Cimina, magis tum invia atque horrenda, quam nuper f^ere Germanicj Saltus, nulli ad eam diem, ne Mercatorj quidem adita, Eam (...) e haud fere quisquam praeter Ducem ipsum audebat. That is, the Cimi^le^ Wood was more thick and impassable, than the Germane Forrests were of late, so that no man nor Merchant hath passed thorow it, into which none but the Captaine durst enter. In Latium among the Capenatians there was the Wood Feronia, of which Silius singeth thus.



Dives ubi ante omnes colitur Feronia Lucos;


Et Sacer humectat Fluvialia Rura Capenas.



Where Feronia is reverenc'd above the other Woods;
And Capenas doth moisten the Country full of Floods.


Neere the River Numicum there was a Wood sacred to Iupiter Indigites, as Pliny witnesseth. Livie placeth Dianas Wood by Agninum Compitum. Festus noteth that the Wood Naeviam was foure miles from the Citty. Livie writeth that the Wood Camenarus, was without the gate Capena. That which he calleth Algidum Nemus, is now called Selvadel Aglio. Servius placeth the Albunean Wood on the high Tiburtine Mountaines, and another of the name in the Laurintinian fields. Virgil intimateth that the wood Angitia, was neere to Alba of the Marsians. Cicero maketh the wood Lurina to be in the Territory of Romania.

D. Victor placeth the wood Furina, in the 13. Region beyond Tiber. Plutarch calleth it the Furies wood. Pliny placeth the wood Vacuna neere the Mountaine Fiscellus in Vmbria. Campania also hath faire woods, as Luco Sacro, and Gallinaria Silva. Livie calleth Sacer Lucus, or the holy wood, it is now called Hamij. Cicero writing to Poetus, and Strabo. Lib. 5. doe call it Gallinaria Silva. The Lucanian woods are Eboli, Perigrinalis, Velia. In Brutium there is the Rhegian Forrest. In Apulia there are Batini Saltus, and Lucus Gargani. In Gallia Cis-Padano there is the wood Lucina, and the Bedanian woods. In Trans-Padana there is that which Strabo calls Castrorum Lucus: Lastly, there are two woods in Venice, the one is called Iunoes wood, the other Diana^es. I come now to the publike workes both sacred and prophane, which are innumerable, but we will onely reckon some few of them. And that we may begin with the sacred workes, they are almost infinite, for Rome alone hath at this day above 300. Churches, of which seven are chiefly resorted unto for Religion sake; the first is Saint Peters Church in the Vatican: which exceedeth all the Churches in the World for costly Marble worke, and magnificent building. There are many singular things in it: as some Pillars which were brought out of Salomons Temple: two Brasse Peacocks which were brought from P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus his Pyramisse, which was heretofore in the Vatican Valley. There are also the Tombes and Sepulchers of many Popes, and a Marble Tombe of the Emperour Otho the second: and in the Popes Chappell there is Doomesday, or the day of Judgement lively drawne by Michael Angelo. And that I may not omit the Monasteries, the Hospitals for Strangers, the Hospitals for the Sicke, and for Orphanes. What should I speake of the Popes and Cardinals Palaces? The Popes Palace is in the highest part of the Valitan, being fairely seated: who leaving his Lateran Palace, did remoove thither in regard of the pleasantnesse and wholesomenesse of the Seate. It was begun by Pope Nicholas the third, and enlarged by others, but perfected by Iulian the second, and Leo the tenth, and at last it was adorned with Buildings and Pictures by Xistus the fifth, so that now the proud Pile seemeth to touch the Heavens. The Staires are broad and easie to ascend, so that one may ride on Horseback to the top of the House. For it is so great that it seemeth rather a Town than a House, there is Xistus Chapell which is as big as a great Church, whether when the See is vacant, the Cardinals doe meete together to create a Pope, which is commonly called the Conclave. It would be tedious to mention the other Palaces, and therefore we will passe to other matters. The government of Italie followeth, which is twofold; Politicall and Ecclesiasticall. Concerning the Politick and Civill government, this noble Country is devided into many Signiories. Among which, beside the Pope, the King of Naples, and the free Commonwealths, as Venice, Genoa, Lucensis, and others, the chiefe in the Northerne part are, the Princes of Etruria, Ferrara, Mantua, Mediolanum, Montis-Feratensis, of Parma, of Salluzzia, and Verona. In the Southerne part there are many Nobles, which when occasion shall be offerd, I will reckon up in their proper places. In Ecclesiastick

government the Pope is the Hierarch and the head of the Church, and hath a great Traine. Quoties pro cedit Gemmis conspicitur ornatus, and Seri^is vestibus, tectus Auro, vectus Equo albo, stipatus Milite, circumstrepenti^^s septus Ministris. That is, as often as the Pope goes forth, hee weareth silke Robes, embroidered with Gold and Pearle, he rideth on a white Horse, and is garded with Souldiers, and hath Officers which play on Musick before him. The other Priests are here much honoured, and have great authority. And are more honoured than Noblemen. The Cardinals as Peter Mossias noteth, did succeed in place of the Consuls, who heretofore governed the Romane Empire: the Archbishops are equall to Dukes: the Bishops to Earles, their Vicars or Substitutes are as it were Presidents of the Empire, and the Provosts are as it were Praefects: the Arch-priests are in the place of Tribunes of Souldiers, and the Chancellors doe represent the Tribunes of the People. Moreover, Italie hath a threefold Law, the Pontificall, the Caesarian, and the Municipall, the first and second are to be knowne ^^her wheres; the third consists of Statutes and Lawes, which the Citties themselves doe enact and make: but let so much suffice. I will ^^ely here set downe that which is read in a certaine Manuscript concerning the Counsels of these severall Citties. It is written the Mediolanians are excellent in Counsel: the Venetians wise: the Lucanians rash: the Pisanians inconstant: the Placentians provident: the Florentines slow: the Veronians faithfull: the Ferrarians wary: the Genoans ignorant: the Lucensians profitable: the Volscians envious: the Brutians blockish: the Mutinensians acute and ingenious: the Perusinians quick and ready: the Senenians slow: and the Patavians irresolute. The Italians doe maintaine, cherish, and honour Schollers, and are good Maecenasses unto them. And hence there are so many Universities in Italy, as Romana, Mediolanum, Bononia, Patavina, P^^iensis, Naples, Perusina, Salerne, Pisona, Ferrara, Senensis, Florence, Vene^^, B^gomensis, Mutinensis, and Taurinensis; for the Universities of Par^^, Placentia, Anconita, and Macerata, are for the most part decayed. And hence proceedeth that great plenty of Doctors, and famous men learned in divers Arts and Disciplines. It would be troublesome unto me to reckon up a Catalogue of them, and tedious to the Reader. Moreover, the Italians doe exceed other people for courteous conversation, for gentlenesse, and for witty conference, and discourse. They are very ingenious and witty, quick of invention, and very docible, in matters of study, and also in learning divers Arts. They have in all ages thirsted after honour and glory, and have beene more desirous of praise than any others. They are soft and effeminate, and given to Venery, quenching pleasure with Milke, as fire is with Oyle. They are very desirous of revenge: and they thinke it sweeter than life, and doe sometime leave it by Will to their Posterity. Moreoover the aforesaid Manuscript doth paint forth the women of divers Citties in this manner: the Senensians are faire: the Florentines delicate: the Perusenians neat: the Cajetanians faire: the Consentineans obstinate: the Beneventanians clownish: th^ Bononians arrogant and proud: the Mutinensians bountifull: the Cesenatians covetously

scraping: the Genoans wanton: the Cremonians deceitfull* the Placentians hard: the Lucensians chaste: the Pistoriensians loving and tractable. The Romans grave: the Capuanians proud: the Neapolitans carefull: the Brundisinians slothfull: the Ferrarians greedy: the Ravennatians courteous: the Urbinatians affable: the Vincentinians constant: the Parmensians covetous: the Papiensians desirous of gaine: the Mediolanensians witty conceited: the Pedemontanians prating and talkative: the Venetians wanton: the Verronians comely: the Brixians diligent: the Formianians faire and beautifull: the Laudensians superstitious: the Cremonensians costly: the Tarvisians jealous: the Bergomatians crafty: the Aretinians saving: and the Puteolanians faire. The Italians were heretofore sottishly adicted to many superstitions. But now they doe all religiously observe the Ceremonies and Rites of the Romane Church: but that some few in the Southerne part of Italy do follow the Graecian Rites, who are also descended of the Graecians. But what a warlike people the Italians have beene, the conquest of the world doth declare. And the aforesaid Manuscript doth shew which Citties doe exceed others in matter of Warre. In warlike affaires the Perusinians are stout: the Calabrians rash: the Spoletanians crafty: the Senensians fortunate: the Bononians fierce: the Neapolitans couragious: the Turentines are mitigators of their enemy: the Pratensians sacrilegious: the Collensians lustfull: the Picenians ravenous: the Aemilians inconsiderate: the Placentinians cruell: the Romanes valiant: the Mediolanians undaunted: the Vincentinians desirous of revenge: the Pistorians bloody: the Papiensians firme and constant. Their Diet is sober and frugall, and they are not curious in furnishing their Tables, but when necessity requires. They doe not all weare one kinde of habit, but they vary according to the time or the quality of the Person, and also in the forme and shape of it. The Matrons heretofore did goe with naked armes, brests, and shoulders, and now they cover all with thin Vailes according to the Spanish fashion. The Venetians goe civilly and neatly, the Florentians, the Tuscians, the Mediolanians, the Aemilians, and Ligurians, doe goe somewhat braver. But the Romane Courtier doth excell all the rest for long various colour'd Garments, but the Romane Citizen goeth more frugally, yet hansomely, but especially the women who of late did affect the Tuscane dressing. Naples hath a habit that is more shining and splendide than costly. The Mediolanians in their apparell are gorgious, the Genoas neat, the Mantuans childish, the Neapolitans costly, the Venetians magnificent, the Florentines ridiculous. In revenging of injuries the Lucensians are gentle, the Mediolanians are soone reconcil'd, the Perusinians are dissemblers, the Fulginatians are hot, the Mutinensians are placable, the Senensians couragious. The Neapolitans are bountifull, the Ferrarians stiffe conceited, the Venetians crafty, the Cremonians plaine and open, the Picenians backbiters, the Romanes unjust. Toward Strangers the Calabrians are inhospitable, the Lucen^^^s faithfull, the Senensians loving, the Venetian^ faire-spoken, the Patavinians hard, the Mediolanians unwary, the

Ferrarians sharpe, the Mantuans flatterers, the Placentians severe, the Picenians troublesome, the Neapolitans bountifull, the Florentines profuse and prodigall, the Astensians benevolent, the Spoletanes rude and rustick, the Verronians studious, the Papiensians wise, the Genoaes inhospitable, the Parmensians inconstant, the Mutinensians tedious in speech, the Novocomians inhumane. Lastly, the Italians are much given to merchandizing. And the same Manuscript sheweth their dispositions in trading and commerce: namely, the Florentines are crafty, the Genoaes tolerable, the Mediotanians plaine and open, the Lucensians faithfull, the Venetians stately and vary.



THE FIRST TABLE OF LOMBARDY.
IN VVHICH THE VVESTERNE Alpine part thereof is described, and also Valesia, which is commonly called Wallis.
Sedunu is a Bishoprick of Valesia, 260. 4534* it is subject to Tarentasia, also the Archbishoprick o^ Sabaudia, and Augusta likewise. 96. 454.
HItherto wee have described Italie in generall, now we come to describe the severall parts thereof in particular. Some have devided Italie divers wayes. August^^ as Pliny witnesseth hath devided it into 11. Countrie^ Strabo doth part it into eight. Others into more, bu^ we omitting them will follow the devision and method which Merc^tor hath propounded unto us. And the first is the Table of Lombardy in which the Westerne part thereof, together with Valesia is described. It is now Euphoniae gratia, or for the sound sake call'd Lombardi^ in stead of Langbardia, which was so called from the Langbardian^ who came hither out of Germany in the raigne of the Emperour Iust^nian: who for many yeeres together were seated on both bankes o^ the River Po. It was called heretofore Gallia Cisalpina. Gallia wa^ inhabited by the Frenchmen, the Boyans, the Senonians, the Insubr^ans, the Cenomanians, and others, who inhabited all that part whic^ is between the foot of the Alpes, and the River. That Rubicon was calle^ Cis-Alpina, because it was on this side the Alpes, as the ancient Ital^ans and the Romane Writers doe report, and the other was th^ which was inhabited beyond the Alpes. This Cis Alpina where it^ most Northward, and lyeth neerest to the Mountaines, Pliny calls S^ Alpina, and Caesar calleth it the higher France for the causes befo^^mentioned. Ausonius calleth it ancient France: Appian calleth Italia Gallica, or Galatiken: the Register Booke of the Provinces c^^leth it the Mediterranean Italie: not because it lyeth in the Medite^ranean Sea, but because it lyeth in the inward part of the Countr^ it is encompassed on the North, West, and South with the Alpes, a^ the Apennine: on the East with the Hadriatick Sea. Polybius and Pl^^

map of LombardyTHE ^IRST TABLE OF LOMBARDY.

doe make this Country to have a Triangular forme, the top whereo^ is the Alpes, and yet Plutarch in Camillus witnesseth that it is watered with many Rivers. Sidonius speaketh elegantly of this Country. Camp^ adeo culti and uberes intercedunt (de Pado loquitur) ut satis constet haud temer^^ alios repiriri aut natura feraciores, aut rebus necessarijs ad hominum vitam instructiores. that is, The Fields are so rich and fruitfull that doe lye on either side (for he speaketh of Padus) so that there are none more fertill, or that affoord more necessaries for the sustentation of man^ life. Sigonius afterward addeth that the Ligurians and Etrurians were the ancient Princes thereof: afterward the Frenchmen: and lastly, the Romanes after whom the Gothes succeeded: and the Romanes againe after the Gothes: and after the Romanes the Langbards, as we may see in Sabellicus. Lib. Hist. Venetae 1. Decade 4. Strabo, Pliny, and others doe make Gallia Cis Alpina toward the West twofold, either Cis-Padana, commonly called Lombardia di qua dal Po, or Trans-Padana, dell^^ dal Po, because the one is on the hither side, the other beyond Po. But here we describe the Westerne part of the Alpine Lumbardy, which doth containe a great part of Lombardy Trans-Padana. This Country although it be Mountainous, and in some places wooddy, yet it is enriched with divers naturall gifts: for the Valleys and Champion grounds, are of a fruitfull soyle, having abundance of Corne, Wine, and other fruits. And Hills which beare excellent Vines. In the Woods also and the Mountaines there is good hunting of wild beasts. Here are many Citties and Townes: as Mediolanum, Crema, Bergomum, Comum, Clavenna, Luganum, etc. which may be seene in the Table. It hath also more great Lakes than any other parts of Italy: among which is that which Pliny and Strabo call Verbanus, which the Italians, in regard it is greater than the rest, doe call Lago majore: and the Germanes Langsee. Strabo maketh the length of it 300. furlongs, and the breadth of it 30. furlongs. It is so deepe in most places, that it seemes to have no bottome. It doth breed excellent Fish, especially large Trouts and great Pikes, also Perches, and others. The Lake which Virgil and others call Laris Lacus, and Paul Diaconus and Antonius doe call Comacenus from the adjacent Citty, the Italians doe now call it Lago di Como, and the Germanes Chumer-see, it is greater than Benacus, and almost equall to Verbanus. Strabo writeth that the length of it is 300. furlongs, and the breadth 30. furlongs. But moderne Writers doe measure it otherwise. It runneth Northward unto the South, but somewhat bending Eastward. But betweene Verbanum and Larium, there are some lesser Lakes. As the Lakes Luganus, Gaviratius, Monatius, and others. These Rivers also doe water this Country, Ticinus, Adava, Serius, Tosa, Bremba, and many others. There are also divers Mountaines, as Lucumonis Mons, commonly called Lucmannier, Gothards Mountaine, and the greater Alpes of Lepontium: also the Rhetian Alpes, and many others. But so much hitherto: now it remaines that we should entreat of Valesia in the other part of this Table.


VALESIA.
I Have not yet found whence the name of Valesia is derived, which they call Wallis, or Walisser Land^. But it is supposed that it commeth from the Latine word Vallis, which signifies a Vale, or from Valeria a Castle of the Citty Sedune. Valesia hath on the North the Bernatians, L^cernatians, and Helvetians: on the South the Cottian and Lepon^^^^ Alpes: on the East the high Rhetian Alpes: on the West the C^^cian Alpes, and the Lake Lemman. The length of it from West to East is 5. dayes journey: but the breadt^ is very narrow, but that it is somewhat broader neere to Octodurum, and Sedunum. This Coun^^y although it be encompassed with high Mountaines, and sharpe Rockes, which for the most part are a Germane mile high, and many of them are cover'd with continuall Ice and Snow: yet it wanteth ^^thing for the sustentation of mans life: for it hath good store of Corne, Wine, and other kindes of fruits: it hath Wheat, Barly, Oates, ^^^nes, Pease, Fetches, and Mill. Wine beginneth to grow among the Brigentian Dioecese among the Mountaines, and the Plantation both continue thorow all the descent of Rhodanus, untill you come to ^. Mari^ius. At Sedunum the red Wine is better than the white, and it is so black and thick, that you may write with it. Neere Octodurum (...) white is better than the red. And there is no better Wine in (...) than that which groweth at Sedunum, and so is transported ^nd carried into neighbour Countries. Here as also in Siders and (...) Saffron groweth in great abundance. There are Oranges, Al^oods, and Figges. And thorow the whole Country you shall finde all kinde of Apples, Peares, Nuts, Prunes, Cheries, Chesnuts, Mul^eries, Peaches, Apricocks, and the like. Moreover the Mountaines of this Country doe yeeld many sorts of Physicall Hearbes and Rootes, which have speciall soveraigne vertues. This Country also ^very fruitfull of Mines: and pure Christall is digged forth in Gums ^^ere the Spring-head of Rhodanus. It produceth also divers kindes of living creatures, as Kine, Oxen, Horses, Asses, Mules, Sheepe, ^ogges, Goates, and Cunnies: also Geese, Ducks, Hens, Peacocks, ^^d Doves. It hath also abundance of Bees, of which they make great profit. Moreover the Mountaines have some beasts unknowne ^o us as the Aegocerots, which are horned like Goates, also wilde Oxen, Alpine Mice, and Hares unlike to ours, also Pheasants, Wood^^cks, and Birds which they call Parnifas, also Partridges, Vultures, ^^ing-Doves, Hernes, Finches, Magpies, Stares, and Thrushes. They ^^ve also abundance of Beares, Wolves, Leopards, Foxes, Martines, ^^d Faulcons. But they have no Harts, Goates, Boares, Scorpions, or ^^^lfrogs. Yet they have such great store of Venison in this Coun^^^, that it is sold in the Market like Oxe-flesh, and sometime chea^^^. Moreover the Bishop of Sedunum is Prince and Lord of all Vale^^^, both in spirituall and temporall matters, and Charles the great a^^ the yeere of Christ 805. gave this Country and Praefectorship to

S. Theodolus Bishop of Sedunum, and to his Successors. And many other Emperours did confirme this donation, and strengthen it even vntill this day. Valesia is devided into the higher and the lower. The higher doth speake the Germane language, and beginneth at the Mountaine Furca, and so runneth forth to Marca which is under Seduum, neere the River Morsus, and it containeth seven Tithings, or Dioeceses, which they call Zenden, namely, Sedunum, Syder, Leuck, Raren, Visp, B^igg, and G^mbs. In the lower Valesia they use the Sabaudian language: i^ beginneth from the River Morsus, and stretcheth even to the Bridg^ of S. Mauritius, the Inhabitants whereof were formerly called Veragrians. This lower Valesia hath sixe communities which they cal^ Vexica or Bannerat, namely Condes, Ardon, Sallien, Martinacht, Intremen^ and S. Mauritium. The Metropolis of Valesia is Sedu^um, in the Germane language Sitten, and in French Siun, it is a neate Citty and groweth every day more faire and beautifull. It is seated by a Mountaine which riseth Eastward in the middle of a Plaine betweene the high Mountaines which doe enclose the Valley, and it hath two forked high Rockie tops. But Sedunum a Bishoprick of Valesia is subject to Torentasia the Archbishoprick of Sabaudia, and likewise Augusta. Ther^ is no walled Citty in Valesia besides Sedunum, although S. Mauritius, o^ Agaunum may be counted a pretty Towne. Moreover here are th^ Castles of Martinacht, or Octodurum; of Gradetsch and old Sider, als^ the Townes, Sider, Leuc, Raronia, Vespia, Brig, Naters, and Mo^^ll. Th^ Mountaines which doe encompasse Valesia, have other names now than they had heretofore. The Mountaine out of which Rhodanus riseth, was heretofore called Subecus, Coatius, and Vrsellus, it is now called Furca. Neere unto this is the Mountaine Gothard, neere to Briga i^ the Mountaine Sempronius, now call'd Simpelberg. Neere unto it ar^ the Mountaines Saces and Matter. On the other side of Rhodanus are th^ Mountaines Loetsch, and Gemmi. In the Poenine Valley, is the Ici^ Mountaine Arolla. Over against Sider Northward is the Mountain^ Silvius, which is called Austalberg, and on both sides the Mountaine o^ S. Bernhard. The Wood Hercynia reacheth forth some of his armes hither, which are called by divers names, for in some places neere Arne^ it is called the Wood Milebach, and neere Perigrad it is called Persin^ Waldt, and in other places it hath other names. The people in Valesi^ are now very courteous and affable unto Strangers. But they ar^ somewhat more harsh and riged, then it becommeth friends an^ neighbours to be.




THE SECOND TABLE OF LOMBARDY. IN VVHICH THESE COVNtries are especially described, the Country of Tirolis, and Marca Tarvisina.
THe second Table of Lombardy containeth the County of Tirolis, and Marca Tarvisina. The County of Tirolis is so named from the Towne Tirolus, which was heretofore very faire. It lyeth betweene the Rivers Athesis, and Oenus, and betweene the Alpine Rocks: on the North it is enclosed with Bavaria, on the South with Lombardy: on the East with Marca Tarvisina, and Forum Iulij: on the West with Helvetia. It was heretofore a part of Rhetium. This Country although it be enclo^^d with Alpes, and extendeth it selfe thorow the Rhaetian Rockes, (...) it is rich in fruits, and all things necessary to life, as also it hath great store of Gold, Silver, and all kindes of Mettals, which are drawn out of the bowels of the Mountaines, the tops whereof are crowned with vast Woods, and full of great store of wilde beasts: the Hills and Cliffes, are full of fruits and Vines: the Valleys are watered with fountaines and Rivers, and full of Heards and Flocks of Cattle. And ^herefore this County may be equal'd and compared not onely to a Dukedome, but also to a Kingdome. It was joyned to the House of ^^stria, in the yeere 1460. by Rodolph the Sonne of Albert Duke of Aus^^ia. The Chiefe Citty is Oenipons, commonly call'd Inspruck, on the right hand banck of the River Oenus, being the seate of the Prince, and the Parliament of Austria is kept here. There are also the Towne Ma^^^^m, by the Royall Castle; and Bolzanum a Mart Towne of Tirolis. Hella is a Town by the River Oenus famous for making of Salt: Brixia ^s an Episcopall Citty by the River Isacus where the River Rientius doth disburden it selfe into Isacus. There is also the old Citty Triden^^^ by the River Athesis, which Pliny and Strabo doe place in the tenth Country of Italy, some would have it built by the Frenchmen; and so ^^ogus delivers. It is supposed that it was so named from Neptunes Tri^^nt. For as the Randenensians doe worship Saturne, so the Triden^^nes did worship Neptune, whose effigies and statue may be yet seene ^t the Church of B. Viglius, on that side which lyeth toward the Mar^^t. Theodorick King of the Ostrogoths did wall this Citty with faire ^^ee stone. And hee fortified the Castle of Tridentum on the other

banck of the River in Verruca in like manner. Afterward when t^^ Ostrogothes were expelled out of Italy, the Langbards did possesse^ as a Dukedome. But Desidorius King of Langbards being overcome (...) Charles the great, it came againe to bee under the Emperours Juris^^ction; and the Emperour did enlarge it, by the accession and additio^ of the Towne Ripa neere Benacum, with some Valleys and Villag^ After him Charles the Saxone gave to the Church the whole Coun^^ of Tridentum, together with a faire Valley, and the Towne B^lzam^ And the Earle of Tirolis was made Defender and Protector thereo^ And from that time the Bishop had Jurisdiction over both. The Cit^zens doe speake partly the Germane language, and partly the Ital^ans: and which is seldome seene in Frontiere Citties, they speake pure language, as in the middle of Germany, or in the middle of Ita^^ In this Citty that famous Counsell was celebrated, in the yeere 15^ under Pope Paul the third. This Country is watered with two speci^^ Rivers, Oenus and Athesis. The other may rather be called Rivule^ than Rivers. Here are no particular Mountaines, for they are (...) called by one generall name the Rhetian Alpes, although they a^^ afterward distinguished by their proper names. Here are also ma^^ woods: as Grinwald, Hofgarten, In der Aich, Milrinald Forrest. ^^ser P^wen Holtz, etc.

Marca Tarvisina.
I Have spoke of the County of Tirolis: it remaineth now that w^ should speake of Marca Tarvisina. It was so named from the Ci^^ Tarvisium, where the Marquesses of Lombardy kept their residen^^ who were Governours of this Country. Cassiodorus and others d^ call it Tarvisinum. It is called also Venetia from the Venetian peop^^ But now in the Country speech it is called Marca Trevigiana. Conce^ning the bounds thereof, Leander writeth, that Mincius, Benacus, a^^ the River Sarca doe enclose it on the West: on the North the Tar^^sanian Mountaines, which devide Italy from Germany: on the East t^ mouth of the River Timavus, and part of the Hadriatick Sea: on t^ South the mouth of Athesis, and the Melarianian, and Brigantini^^ Marshes: and the same Leander affirmeth that these were the boun^ of ancient Venetia, and not of Marca Tarvisina, which was far straig^ter, and lay lengthwaies betweene the Rivers Mincius and Alsa, a^ that beyond Alsa they were joyned to Forum Iulium, and besides t^ which is now called Marca Tarvisina, did containe some places of (...) Cenomanians, etc. The Country is fruitfull, the ayre wholso^^ pleasant, and temperate. It hath pleasant Fields, which yeeld gr^^ store of Corne and Wine, and other fruits. It hath plenty of Mett^^ and good store of Cattell. And it is adorned and enriched with many gifts of nature, that it is worthy to bee accounted one of (...) principall Countries of Italy. Heretofore the Euganeans dwelt h^ the derivation of whose name if wee seeke it from the Greeke, (...)

map of LombardyTHE SECOND TABLE OF LOMBARDY.

be derived from their noble generous birth. The Venetians as Livie noteth, Lib. 1. did drive the Euganeans from home, from whom the whole Country wa^ called Venet^a. The Citties of Marca Ta^visina are Verona, Vin^^nti^, Patavi^m, Venetia, Tarvisium. Of the former of which, namely, Verona, Vincentia, and Patavium we will speake in their proper Table. Venice is a Citty which containeth about 60. small Ilands, and it is seated in the innermost part of the Hadriatick Bay, in the middest of the Lakes, which the Tyde filleth every 6. houres: the Sea floweth on the East side, which that the violence and rage thereof may doe no harme, some other Ilands doe lye before it to restraine the fury of the Sea. And although it be not fortified with walls, Bulwarks, or Towers, yet it is strong by the naturall situation. It is devided with many Channels. There are Rivers in all the streets, which are joyned together by 450. stone and woodden Bridges. The chiefest Channell is that which is called Canal grande, three miles long, which devideth the whole Citty into two parts. So that you may either goe on foote, or by Boate, of which there are 8000. thorow the Citty, they commonly call these Boates Gondelas. The compasse of this Citty is about 8. miles, which is famous for populousnesse, wealth, and store of Merchandise: it hath produced excellent wits, and most learned men, and it is adorned with good Lawes, and laudable Statutes. It doth abound with Corne which is brought thither out of divers parts of the World, as also with divers sorts of Wine, among which is that generous sort of Wine, which is commonly called Malmesy, and with other things, necessary to mans life, so that it may be rightly call'd the Paradise of Delight. There are in it 64. Parishes. There are also magnificent and sumptuous publike and private buildings. The chiefest Church is that which is dedicated to Saint Marke the Evangelist, which is gilded in many places. And to omit other matters, there is an Armory within the Citty, commonly call'd the Arsenale, which is about two miles in compasse. Here are made of Wood, Iron, Brasse, Hempe, and Flaxe, all kindes of provision for Ships, as Anchors, Guns, Cables, Ropes, Tackles, and Sailes. Here are also some Ensignes kept which were taken from the Turke, or Pirates, or Enemies, and those Trophies which were taken at Naupactum in the yeere 1581. And also there are the Praetorian Barges, and the Ship Bucentaurus, in which the Prince accompanied with the Senate and chiefe men of the Citty, is carryed every yeere to the entrance of the Sea, where the Castle standeth, and there after some Ceremonies performed by the Bishop, he marrieth the Sea, and puts a Ring upon it to shew his perpetuall dominion over it. There is also a publike Library, together with the Library of Bessarion Cardinall of Nicen, which at his death he gave to the Common-wealth of Venice. Venice is very populous, so that there are thought to be in it about 300000. Citizens. They are of three sorts or rankes: the Patricians who governe the Empire and Common-wealth: the Citizens who doe beare under Offices: and the Artificers who use Mechanick Arts. And besides these there are great store of Merchants and Strangers, which come thither in divers habits out of all parts of the World to

trafficke: as Turkes, Aethiopians, Slavonians, Arabians, Syrians, Cretensians, Cyprians, Macedonians, Germanes, Hungarians, Spaniards, Frenchmen, and others. The Venetian Common-wealth was governed at the first by Consuls, afterward by Tribunes for 252. yeeres: afterward in the yeere 707. it began to be a Dukedome. The Duke commonly call'd Doge, is the head of the Common-wealth, and the Prince of the Senate, and he can doe nothing neither in time of peace or warre without the consent of the Senate, for he consulteth with them. The Senate make Decrees which yet are published in the Dukes name. The Duke hath certaine stipends paid him out of the publike stock: and after his decease another is chosen by suffrages and voyces, out of the Senate. The Senate which is commonly call'd Gr^^ Co^siglio, is the Basis and Foundation of the whole State: the Members of it are all Nobles, of 25. yeeres of age, or above: who have free liberty to speake: very faithfull in Counsell, and very carefull to preserve their liberty, and enlarge their Empire, and very constant in adversity. There are many other Magistrates besides the Duke, which here for brevity sake I omit. This Citty is held to bee ^e fairest and most flourishing Citty of all others, the Theater of the World, and the common Mart for the whole Universe, the Mistresse and Conquerour over so many Enemies: the Queene of the Hadriatick Sea, and the glory and honour of Italie. Although it hath waged many warres, and tryed the varieties of fortune for the space of a thousand yeeres, yet it was never subdued by any forraine Enemy. I passe by the other Citties and lesser Townes. The most famous Rivers of this Gountry are Plavis, commonly call'd Piave, also Brenta, Ba^^^io,, and Athesis, which is the greatest of them all. There are Mountaines in this Patavine Country, which neither belong to the Alpes, nor to the Apennine, so that in this respect there is no Country like it in Italie. One of these Mountaines is Gemula, the other Venda, and the Euganean Hills so famoused by Poets. There are subject to the Patriarch of Aquilegium, the Bishopricks of Mantua, of Cuman, of Tri^^^tum, of Verona, of Maravia, of Padua, of Vicentium, of Trevisium, of Ce^^da, of Feltre, of Bellun. And so much briefely concerning the County of Tirolis, and Marca Tarvisina.




THE THIRD TABLE OF LOMBARDY. IN VVHICH ARE DESCRIBED Pedemontana, the Marquiship of Montisferrat, and the Dukedome of GENOA.
THe third Table of Lombardy followeth, in which Pedemontium, the Marquiship of Montisferrat, and the Dukedom^ of Genoa are describ'd and delineated. Pedemontium is th^ first, which is so called, quod ad pedem sit montium, becau^^ it is at the foote of the Mountaines, or the Alpes, whic^ doe devide France and Sabaudia from Italie: it is commonly call'd P^^^monte. It is bounderd on the East with Padus; on the South with th^ Ligurian Alpes: on the West with the Alpes of France: on the Nort^ with Duria and Riparia. This Country is full of fruitfull pleasa^^ Hills, which doe yeeld excellent Corne, Wine, and other fruits. An^ it hath Mines of Iron neere Turinum, and of Marble neere Paisan^ Here the Turinians dwelt heretofore, who were well knowne t^ Polybius, Livy, and Plutarch; and also Strabo, Pliny, and Ptolemy doe plac^ them in the ninth Country of Italy, and doe make them to be of th^ stock of the Ligurians. Afterward this Country began to be calle^ the Taurinian Dukedome under the Langbardians, who having reduced it into a Province, made it a Dukedome. After them it cam^ to be under the government of the Kings of Italie: and afterward o^ divers other Princes: especially of Sabaudia: and the Country o^ France: it was much wasted in the time of the warres betweene th^ Emperour Charles the fifth, and Francis King of France. The chief^ Citty of this Country is the ancient Citty Taurinum, which Tacit^^ Pliny, and Ptolomy doe call Augusta Taurinorum. Antonius saith in man^ places that this Citty was called Taurinorum from the people, it i^ commonly called Turino. Stephanus the Gramarian would have it s^ called from a Bull, which was the armes of the Massilians, whose Colonie it was: it lyeth at the mouth of Duria on Padus, in a foure squar^ figure, and hath foure Gates, and many faire Aedifices or building^ and it hath plenty of all things. The chiefe Church is consecrated t^ Saint Iohn Baptist, besides which there are some 20. other Churche^ or thereabouts, also there is the Dukes Palace; and a famous Unive^sity, in which Erasmus Roterodamus was made Doctor of Divinity. Th^^ was one of the first Citties in Italy, which had a Printing house: it

map of LombardyTHE THIRD TABLE OF ^OMBARDY.

also a Bishoprick. Neere the Hill there is Rivoli, a populous Towne: and a little farther neere the River Po there is the Towne Carignano: A little higher betweene the Rivulets and Aviliana there is the faire Monastery of Saint Antonius Ravisinus: and a little from thence neere the Monastery of Saint Ambrose, there is Susa, which the most doe reckon to be in Saubaudia. Neere to Po, sixe miles from the mouth of Sangonus there is a Towne, which they call in their Country speech Pinarolo^, which is very rich, and hath a sumptuous Monastery: a little above there is Petrosa: and on the left side of the Fountaine Sangonus there is Pagellato, and Bricasse, on the right side of the Mountaine Bobius. Not farre from the River Pelice, which runneth into Po, there is Villa Franca, where a Bridge doth joyne both the Bankes of the River Po. There are also by the Springhead or Fountaine of Padus, Revello, and Paisana, and a little farther Critio: and a little farther Mambrino, where the Valley of Po beginneth. The Inhabitants doe call it Valle di Lucerna, from a Castle which is there of the same name.

The Marquiship of MONTIS-FERRAT.
NOw the pleasant and fruitfull Country Montis-ferrat is to bee unfolded which is so called as Leander thinketh as it were Mons Ferax the fruitfull Mountaine, in regard of the fertility of the little Hills which are in it: or from Ferro, that is from Iron, by comparison, because as Iron doth excell all other Mettals both for strength and hardnesse: so this Country doth excell all other Countries for plenty of sweet and pleasant fruit, as also for Wine. Merula. Lib. 6. Antiqu. Vicecom. doth describe Montis-ferrat in this manner, Mons est perpetuis expansus jugis, totus amaenus and fructifer, omniumque rerum ad vitam utilium fertilis, est colonis admodum frequens. Incipit diurno fere itinere ab Alpibus, planitieque seperatur, quae inter hos colles and Alpes intercedit. Nihil his incultum quidquam propter summam soli bonitatem oportunitatemque. Laevam Tanarus, dextram Padus alluit, nec ullius alveum Regio egreditur. Quanto magis autem ab amnibus abscedunt Colles, tanto majores amoenioresque Campi inter eos panduntur, quos haud male Mesopotamiam queas dicere, quippe quod amnibus utrinque sint inclusi. That is, it is one continued Mountaine, pleasant, and fruitfull, and yeelding abundance of all things necessary, and it is full of Husbandmen. It beginneth almost a dayes journey from the Alpes, and it is separated from them with a Plaine which lyeth betweene these Hills and the Alpes. It is all tilled in regard of the goodnesse of the soyle. This River Tanarus watereth the left side, and Po the right side, neither doe their Channels reach further than this Country. But where the Hills lye farthest from the Rivers, there are fairer and pleasanter Fields, which may be well called Mesopotamia (...), because they lye in the middle betweene Rivers. The Of-spring of Palaeologa did first possesse the Marquiship of Montis-ferrat, even to the yeere 1534. when after the decease of George, the last of the Palaeologians, the Emperour Charles the

fifth declared the Duke of Mantua to be lawfull Heir of Montis-ferrat. ^^e Marquiship was made a Dukedome in the yeere 1575. by the ^^perour Maximilian, and the first Duke of Montis-ferrat was William ^^e third, Prince of Mantua. In this Country the Duke of Mantua (...) three famous Citties, which are Casalis D. Evasij, which was made (...) Citty by Sixtus the fourth, in the yere 1474. it is a Bishops Se, and the (...) of the Marquesse of Montis-ferrat. It hath two Castles: the old ^^ich was heretofore the Marquesses Palace, and the new, which ^^^^tius G^nzaga, Duke of Mantua and Montis-ferrat, built, which is ^^^monly called La Citadella: Also Alba, which Pliny calleth Pompeja, ^^d so calleth the Albensians Pompejanians. It is farre bigger than (...) D. Evasij, but it hath not so good an ayre, it was heretofore ^^bject to the Marquesses of Montis-ferrat, but now to the Dukes of (...). That part of the Country is very fruitfull which is commonly call'd Lag^villa. The third Citty is that which is commonly call'd (...) Acquae Sa^yellorum, which Pliny Lib. 3. Cap. 5. placeth in Liguria. ^teninus call it Aquae: from the hot and wholesome Waters and fountaines which are here: for there are in this Citty publike Bathes with stone Tables, and steps to goe downe into them. Beside the aforesaid Citties, there are Bassimana, Valentia, S. Salvatore, Moncalvo, Alexandria, Nicaea surnamed Palea, Asta, Pollentia, Ceva, and many others.


The Dukedome of GENOA.
THe Dukedome of the Genuensians, or the Country of Genoa was heretofore called Liguria, yet not all but that part, which was beyond the Alpes. There are divers opinions concerning the name of Lig^ria. Some, among whom is Paulus Ciaconus, doe report that it was so called ab legendis Leguminibus from gathering of Pulse: some from Ligo one of the fabulous Captaines of Iapetus, and Berosus, Caro, ^abius Pictor, and Semprocius suppose that it was so named from Ligures the Sonne of Aegiptian Phaeton: Now it is commonly calld Riviera a de Ge^^^, from Genua a famous Cittie. It is bounderd on the West with the Alpes which divide Gallia Narbonensis from Italie: on the East with E^^i^ and Macra or Marga which floweth betweene them: on the South it is beaten with the Ligurian Sea: on the North it is enclosed with the Apennine. This Country as Strionnius writeth, was heretofore barren, and had nothing in it worthy of memory, but that it had great vast Trees, fit for building of Ships. But now it yeeldeth good fore of Wine, Oyle, and other fruits. The Country Dianus doth so abound with Oyle, that sometimes it maketh 18. sometimes 20000. ^^rres, which they commonly call Barilas. Genoa is now twofold: the Easterne, and the Westerne, which from the Metropolis, which standeth in the middle of them both, is called Riviera di Genova, di Ponente, and de Levante. Livie and others call the chiefe Citty Genua, Stephanus calleth it Genoa, and Luitprandius Ticinensis, and the Writers of his age,

Ianua; it is now called Genoa and Genova, concerning the situation. I fronteth on Meridium, and the Iland Cirnus, the banke of it is opposit^ to the North, and so it hath a gentle descent into a Plaine, being seated at the foote of the Mountaines, and behind a Trench or Bulwar^ doth keepe off the cold Northward, having neither a Mountainous Situation nor a plaine, but of a mixt kinde. The Compasse of it is 35955 foote, as the Bishop Nebianus reporteth. So that if we allow 7. foot^ to a pace, the measure of the whole Citty will be 5. miles, but if we^ allow 6. foote, then neither the Bulwarke nor the Haven can com^ within this compasse or dimension. It hath a faire Haven which lyeth to the South and Southwest, which affoordeth safe harborage fo^ Shipping. But concerning Genoa there are these smooth Verses o^ Scaligers extent, in English thus.

The Asian wealth, and Easterne honours great,
And all that Land the Euxine Sea doth beate,
The Pisanian Armies, and the youth of worth,
And the French Colours I alone drew forth.
The subdued Alpes I held and kept in awe,
And Affrick trembled when my Ships it sawe.
And the Venetian hath fled from the shot
Which in my Haven he hath found too hot.
O France you are deceived much, and Spaine
In your attempts, you take up armes in vaine,
I conquer being conquerd, for if I obtaine
Victory, or lose it, I am still the same.

Having viewed the Metropolis, wee will shew some of the other Townes and Citties. Not farre from Varus is that which Ptolemy calls Nicaea. Antoninus Nicia, and now Nizza. It is a Sea Towne, built heretofore by the Massilians, and seated behinde the Alpes, partly on the Cliffes, and partly on plaine ground. Now it is strong, having a well-fortified Castle, and it is subject to the Prince of Sabaudia. A mile farther above the Port or Haven of Hercules Monae^us, T^bia, or Turbias is seated on the high Mountaines. There are also the Townes of D. Remi, or S. Remo, seated in a pleasant fertile soyle, and wonderfully terrified and adorned with Citterne-trees, Palme-trees, Lemmon-trees, and others. Castellum Tabia is but a little Towne, but famous for good rich Appian Wines. Albigaunum is an ancient Citty, seated in a Plaine, 500. paces from the Sea, which hath an ill ayre, but very rich, and abounding with all things necessary. Finartum also, or Naulum. Savona is an ancient Citty, adorned with many magnificent buildings, and the compasse of it is 1500. paces. These Citties are on the Westerne side of Genoa: on the East side there are Claverium, Sestri di Levanto, and others. The Rivers here are Varus which devideth Province from Liguria, the latter being a Country of Italy, the former of France. This River on the Westerne banke thereof which is toward France, receiveth those Rivers which are commonly called in French Caremp, Lavaire, and Esteron: on the Westerne banke toward

Italy, it receiveth the Rivers La Lince and La Vesubie. There are also by the Coasts of Liguria Paulon, now called P^lion: Rutuba now called (...). There are also Merula, Porzevera, Ferisano, Lavagna, Maera, now called Magra. Concerning the Ecclesiastick government you may read in Mercators Table: the Bishop of Taurinium, under whom are the Bishops Casalensis, Salutiarum, Montis Regalis, Novariensis, Lodensis, ^^^cellensis, Ipporegiensis, Actensis, Aquensis, Albensis, Terdonensis, Saonensis, Albingaunensis, Vintimeliensis, Placentinus, and Papiensis, are subject to the Archbishop of Mediolanum. There are under the Archbishop of Genoa, the Bishop Bobiensis, Aprumacensis, or Brumacensis, Metenensis, or ^^^^nensis, Acotensis, or Ampruniacensis, Nubiensis, in Corsica, or Nebiensis, Naulensis, Albigaunensis, or of Arbenga, which is reckoned among the Suffragans to the Archbishop of Mediolanum.




THE DVKEDOME OF GENOA.
THe Dukedome of Genoa which stretcheth forth to the Ligustick Sea, belongeth properly to the Transalpine Liguria. The Metropolis of it is the Citty Genoa, the other part is devided into the Easterne and Westerne. The bounds of the former is the Lunensian Haven, of the latter the Haven of Monaecus: This Country hath a rude stony soyle, so that it bringeth forth nothing but that which is forced out of the Earth with great paines. It was heretofore cover'd over with woods, having a few Husbandmen, who did live rather by robberies than tillage. Strabo the Geogr. Lib. 4. writeth thus concerning Liguria. Qui Liguriam habitant, ut plurimum ex pecore victum agitant, lacte hordeaceaque potione, maritimis ex locis ac montanis pastum quaeritantes. That is, those which inhabit Liguria live for the most part of Cattle, their drinke is Milke, and a kinde of drinke made of Barley, they get their food on the Sea-shore and on the Mountaines. These Mountaines affoord good Timber for building of Ships, and great Trees, which are so thick that the Diameter of some of them is 8. foote. The Ligurians were heretofore a very warlike People, who put the Romans to much trouble, and at last could hardly be subdued. Whence Livie calleth them, Durum in armis genus, a People hardy in the Warres, and Virgil saith, Assuetumque malo Ligurem, the Ligurian is inured to trouble.
Genua the Mistresse of Liguria is supposed to be the ancientest Citty of Italie, and that it was built by Ianus, whom some suppose to be Noah, others conjecture that it was so named from Genuus the Sonne of King Saturne. Paulus Perusinus delivers that Genuinus an Egyptian and one of Phaethons Companions who lay sicke here, after he had recovered his health call'd it after his owne name Genua. Others devise other Fables, but it is the famousest Mart-towne of Liguria, and it hath increased much within these 400. yeeres, and now it is very strong, and much feared. The Territories of this Citty did reach heretofore even to the River Tanais. It had under it Theodosia a Citty of Taurica ^hersonesus, which is now called Caffa, as also Cyprus, Lesbus, Chius, which are Ilands in the Mediterranean Sea, and Pera a Citty of Thrace. It contended long time with the Venetians concerning the Dominion and Empire of the Sea. In this Citty there are 28. Patrician Families, out of which a Counsell of 400. men is chosen, and the Duke is President thereof. It began to be established at Genoa in imitation of the Venetian Common-wealth about the yeere 1237. but afterward being much troubled with the factions and discords of the Citizens, and being enforced to obey forraine Lords, as the Mediolanians, Frenchmen, and Spaniards, it lost much of her former power and authority,

map of GenoaTHE DVKEDOME OF GENOA

and being now subject, it enjoyeth rather an imaginary than a free Common-wealth. But to conclude, referring the Reader that desireth to know more, to Bracelius, Bizarus, Aug. Iustinianus, Fr. Leander Albertus, I thinke it fitt to set downe Scaligers Verses.

The Asian wealth or Easterne honours great,
And all that Land the Euxine Sea doth beate.
The Pisanian Armies, and the youth of worth,
And the French Colours I alone drew forth.
The subdued Alpes I held, and kept in awe,
And Affrick trembled when my Ships it sawe,
And the Venetian hath fled from the shot
Which in my Haven he hath found too hot.
O France you are deceived much, and Spaine,
In your attempts, you take up armes in vaine:
I conquer if conquerd, for if I obtaine
Victory, or lose it, I am still the same.




THE FOVRTH TABLE OF LOMBARDY. IN VVHICH ARE THESE Countries Romandiola, the Dukedomes of Parma and Feraria, and the Marquiship of Mantua.
THE fourth and last Table of Lombardie doth present to your view Romandiola, and the Dukedomes of Parma, and Mantua. The first is Romandiola or Romanula, which was so called by the Pope and the Emperour Charles the great. The bounds of Romanula on the North are the Moores or Marshes of Verona, and Patavina, even to the Mouth of the River Po, together with a part of the Hadriatick Sea: on the East Isaurus together with Picenum, on the South the Apinnine, with Etruria, concerning the Western bounds there are different opinions. Some goe no farther than the River Vatrinus on this side of Fo^an C^^nelij: some passe over to Scultenna, now Panarium, and there they stay. Wee will follow the latter, and make the length thereof to bee 11^. Miles or thereabouts betweene Folia and Panarium: and the breadth almost 96. Miles, betweene the Apennine and the Marshes before mentioned. Concerning the qualitie of this Country Leander writeth that it hath a very good soile, yeelding all kinds of fruites both for delight and necessary use. Here are large fields planted with al kinds of fruite bearing trees, pleasant Hills full of Vines, Olives, and Figgs, Woods full of fruite, Meddowes full of grasse, and Bushie thickets fit for hunting, also many wholsome waters, many Salt-pits, both neere the Shoare side, and within the Countrie, also Mettalls Mines, and innumerable other excellent guifts of nature, which would be tedious to rehearse. There are some famous Citties in this Country and many Townes. The chiefe are, that which Ptolemy and other call Arminum, the Inhalitants doe now call it Rimini, and the Germanes Rumelen. It was so so called from the River which watereth it. Others have other derivations. It aboundeth with plenty. The Haven was heretofore very faire, large and capable of Shipping, but now it receiveth onely small vessells being filled and choaked up with sand. There is also Cervia a Sea Cittie, heretofore called Phicoles. The Cernians for the most part are Salt-makers, of which they make so great gaine, that the Pope hath yearely from thence 60. thousand Crownes. There is also Cesena, which Ptolemy calleth Caeseni. Strabo, Caesena, and now the most

doe call it Caesena and some Cesnadigo, and lastly Cesna. It is now a very populous Citty, and in former time it was enlarged on the West and Noth sides, by Bernardine Rubrius of Parma. There is a strong Castle seated on a Hill on the South side of the Cittie, which was built by the Emperour Frederick the second: Sarsina is an ancient Cittie at the foote of the Apennine, where Plautus was borne. Ravenna which Strabo calleth Raovenna and Ptolomy Ravennai, is an ancient Cittie. Concerning the situation whereof Strabo writeth much Lib. 5. There are under the Archbishop hereof, the Bishop Adriensis, Comaclensis, Cerviensis, Foroliviensis, Foropompiliensis, Vellimensis, or Fille, Cesenatensis, Sareniensis or Sarsinatensis, Faventinus, Imolensis, Mutinensis, Bonotensis, Reginensis, Parmensis, and Barcinensis. There are very good Meddowes and Pastures by this Cittie, which doe yeeld grrat stoare of Milke, Butter, and Cheese. Forum-Livij is now called Forli. It is a Citty that cxcelleth both for Situation, and plenty, being seated betweene the two Rivers Roncus and Montonus, and hath a good ayre. Forum Cornelij commonly calld Imolais seated by the River Santernus, the soyle round about it is fruitefull, and yeeldeth great store of Corne, Wine, Oyle, and other fruites. Bononia is an ancient noble Cittie, commonly calld Bologna, it is seated at the foote of the Apennine, by the River Rhene, and the Torrent Aposa runneth through the middle of the Cittie: it lyeth all against the East, on the South side it hath Vine-bearing hills, on the other sides faire fruitefull Meddowes. The ayre is not very wholesome. The compasse of it is 7. Miles. It hath 12. Gates, and Magnificent houses, and Noblemens Pallaces. The Emperour Theodosius did institute an Universitie here, in the yeare 423. Now we come to Ferraria, concerning the name whereof there are divers opinions. But it is most probable that it was called from the Inhabitants of Ferrarida, which was beyond Po, who were translated hither in the yeare 423. by the Decree of the Emperour Theodosius: at what time it was a Village without walls, and afterward about the yeare 658. it was walled about by Smaragdus, Exarchus, and by degrees it was so much enlarged, that at length it became a noble Cittie. The Bishoprick was translated hither by Pope Vitellianus about the yeare 658. and 12. neighbouring Villages made subject unto it by the Emperour Constantine the 2. who gave it also many Priviledges. It is now called Ferrara. And it is seated on the Banck of the River Po which watereth it on the East and South sides. The ayre is thick, in regard that it is situate in the Marshes. It hath straite, long, broade streetes, the most whereof the Marquesse Leonell caused to be paved with brick, and it is wonderfully beautified with publike and private buildings. There is a greate Church, and two Castles, the one by the River, the other over against S. Georges Church, which is the Dukes Seate: and both are well fortified: it is populous, and aboundeth with plenty of all things, and it is one of the pleasantest Citties in Italie, being the head seate of the ancient and noble family of the Atestines. The Emperour Frederick the second did institute heere an University in contempt of Bononia. It hath a greate Plaine round about it but barren. I passe by the other Citties of Romandiola and the lesser Townes.



map of Lombardy
THE FOVRTH TABLE OF LOMBARDY.





The Dukedome of PARMA.
THE Dukedome of Parma is so called from the Citty Parma. The Soyle is pleasant, and beareth excellent fruite and good Vines, it hath also wholesome waters,Parmizan. and pleasant Meddowes, and it is very much commended for cheese and fleeces of wooll. This Citty of Parma from whence the Dukedome is denominated, was built by the Tuscians, and as many other Citties in these parts, afterwards it was possessed by the Borians, and in Processe of time the Romans were Lords of it, who as Livy delivers Lib. 29. in the yeare 570. brought, thither a Colonie. Mar. Tul. in the last of his Philippicks, bewaileth that calamity which L. Antoninus brought upon it. Afterward it was freed from the power of the Romane servitude: and now it sometimes belonged to the Emperours, sometimes to the Popes, but it was alwayes joyned in friendship with Bononia. It endured two whole yeares a grievous siege which was laid against it by the Emperour Frederick the second about the yeare 1248. because it tooke part with the Pope. But he being driven away, it had afterward many Earles, as the Corregians, Scaligers, Atestians, also the Galeatians, and the Sforzas, who were Vicounts: and lastly, the Frenchmen, with whom the Pope of Rome did often contend for the Dominion and Soveraignty over this Citty, who at last being ayded by the Emperour Charles the fifth, expulsed the Frenchmen out of Italy, and got the Citty. Now it hath Dukes, the first whereof was instituted by the Pope, namely, Peter Aloysius Farnesius, the Sonne of Pope Paul the third, who within two yeere being cruelly murder'd; his Sonne Octavius was put in his place, and after his decease his Sonne succeded him. But Strabo and Ptolemy doe place Parma in the Aemilian way, five miles from the Apennine. It was so called from the River Parma: or as others suppose, Quod Parmam, hoc est breve scutum, referat, that is, because it resembleth a little round Buckler or Target, which is called Parma. It hath faire houses, strait broad streets, and plenty of all things necessary. It is very populous, and seated on a Plaine: the ayre is very wholesome: so that Pliny maketh mention of 5. men of Parma, three whereof lived 120. yeeres, and two 130. yeeres. The Winters and Summers are temperate. It hath a strong Castle, and many Palaces belonging to Princes and noble Families. In the Market-place which is very large there is a faire Fountaine: and a Church built in imitation of the Romane fashion: and a Bell hung on three Pillars: and a Steeple like that at Bononia. The Suburbs are devided from it by a River of the same name, and it is an Archbishoprick. The Inhabitants are comely, noble, Martiall, couragious, and witty. Also the ancient and noble Citty Placentia hath a Duke as well as Parma, which Ptolemy and others call Plakentia, and commonly Piazenza. It is seated neere Po, from which it is distant about 1000. foote, it standeth in a pleasant soyle, and glorieth in her fruitfull fields, and famous Citizens. The walls are new: the Bulwarkes and Fortifications very large and

strong. It is also a Bishoprick. It hath a Schoole for all Arts and Disciplines. The fields round about this Citty in regard they are well watered doe yeeld Wine, Oyle, Corne, and all kinde of Fruits: for it hath many Springs, Rivers, and Rivulets, which doe water the Pastures, and Meddowes.

The Dukedome of MANTUA.
THe Dukedome of Mantua is so named from the Citty Mantua. It was first governed by the Thuscians, who built this Citty, afterward the French Cenomanian did governe it, after whom the Romanes obtained it. It endured much misery under the Triumvirate. For when Cremona was left as a prey to the Conquerours, it lost a great part of his Territory by his vicinity and neighbour-hood unto it. Whence Virgil saith.
Mantua vae miserae nimium vicina Cremonae.Mantua alas doth stand too nigh,Cremona opprest with misery.
There succeeded after the Romanes, the Gothes, and Langbards: who being expelled; it was reduced to the obedience of the Romane Empire, which afterward decaying, it got liberty with many other Citties, which it enjoyed, untill the Emperour Otho the second gave it to Theobald Earle of Canossaw. There succeeded after him his Sonne Boniface, and he dying without any Issue Male, his Wife Beatrix, and his Daughter Mathilde succeeded, who much enlarged Mantua. That Citty which Strabo and Ptolemy did call Mantua, is now called Mantoa. Divers have sundry opinions concerning the originall of this Citty. Howsoever, the originall is most ancient. It is seated in the middest of the Marshes, which the River Mincius flowing out of the Lake Be^^^um doth make, neither can you goe unto it but by great high Bridges: hence in regard of the naturall situation it is accounted one of the strongest Citties of Italy. It is a faire Citty, adorned with magnificent publike and private buildings, and faire streets.




THE COVNTY OF BRESSIA, AND THE DVKEDOME OF MEDIOLANVM.
HItherto wee have viewed Lombardy: now wee must describe the County of Bressia, and the Dukedome of Mediolanum. The former was so named from the no^ Citty Brixia. It containeth part of that Country, which the Cenomanians heretofore possessed. And the Territory of Brescia is 100. miles long, from Limon a Towne neere the Lake Benacum, to the Towne Vrceanum. The breadth of it is 50. miles from Moso even to Dialenges: and it is situate between the Lakes Benacum and Sabinum. The soyle is fruitfull, and yeeldeth great store of Wheate, and other kindes of Corne, as also great store of Wine, and Oyle, it hath also Iron and Brasse. And moreover it hath Gold, Silver, Allum, Marble, Porphiry, and an other kinde of Stone enameld with blacke and greene spots, which they call Serpentium; Pliny cals it Ophites which is a kinde of Marble having spots like a Serpent and many other Precious-Stones: also the Marchasita, which the ancients did call Pyrites, or the Fire-stone. And it hath abundance of all things necessary for the sustentation of mans life. Brixia did alwaies continue faithfull unto Rome: especially in the Punick Warre, after that overthrow which Hanniball gave them by the River Trebia, C^ Pompeius. Strabo brought thither a Colony with other Transpadanians, in the yeere 665. and afterward Caesar the Dictator made it a Citty with many others. Afterward it was subject to the Romane Emperours as long as the Romane Empire flourished. But afterward Ra^gisus King of the Gothes did waste it with fire in the yeere 412. an^ then it was ruinated by Attila Prince of the Hunnes, but it was reed^fied in the yeere 452. by the Emperour of Martianus; afterward th^ Langbards possessed it untill Charles the great tooke Desiderius: aft^^ whose decease the Frenchmen succeeded. Afterward the Empero^^ Otho a Saxon made it a free Citty of the Romane Empire, in the yee^ 1136. and not long after Henry sackt it, threw downe the Walls, a^ and deprived it of all Priviledges: and the Scaligers, Dukes of Vero^ being ayded by the Gwelfians tooke it. After them there succeed^ Vice-Counts, who were Princes of Mediolanum: by whom being oft^ vexed, it revolted unto the Venetians: from whom the Frenchm^ tooke it, and afterward it was restored to them againe. Th^ which Strabo and Ptolemy doe call Brexia, is now called Brescia. Th^ are divers opinions concerning the originall of this Citty. But Li^ opinion is most probable which many follow. For he noteth tha^ was built by the Cenomanians: and by the Captaines Elitovius a^ Belovesus, when they came out of France, over the Taurine and Iul^ Alpes into Italie. Hence Pliny and Ptolemy doe attribute the build^

map of Bressia and MediolanumTHE COVNTY OF BRESSIA, AND THE DVKEDOME OF MEDIOLANVM.

of it to be the Cenomanian Nation, and Livie also, Lib. 32. mentioneth that Brixia was the head Citty of the Cenomannians. It is an ancient, rich, populous, large, and well-fortified Citty, having an impregnable Castle. and faire buildings both publike and private. Also the River Garcia slideth by it, which some call Mela. It hath a strong Castle which overlooketh the Citty, which was fortified by the Venetians with a strong Garrison: it hath also magnificent Churches, wondrous great Monasteries, and a faire Hospitall. In the Captaines Palace there are these Verses.


Hic locus odit, amat, punit, conservat, honorat,


Nequitiem, pacem, crimina, jura, Probos.

This place doth love,1 hate,2 punish,3 keepe,4 and reverence,5
Wickednesse,1 peace,2 faults,3 lawes,4 and good mens5 innocence.

There are many inscriptions upon Marble, and many Elogies of Statues, and divers Epitaphs both in the Churches, the Bishops Palace, and also in all parts of the Citty and the Territories thereof. The Inhabitants are wealthy, neate, Noble, subtile, and witty. It flourisheth now for riches: so that it is usually called Vrbis Veneta Sponsa, the Citty of Venice his Bride. It received the Christian faith from D. Appollinaris Bishop of Ravenna. And it is a Bishoprick. Of which Scaliger thus.
Quae pingues scatebras specula despectat ab altaPostulat Imperij Brixia magna vices,Caelum hilarum, Frons laeta urbi, gens nescia fraudis,Atque modum ignorat divitis uber agri.Si regeret patrias animas concordibus oras,Tunc poterat Dominis ipsa jubere suis.Great Brixia that from a Hill doth viewThose fruitfull springs which doe the ground bedew,Complaines of change of government, the ayreIs pleasant, and the Citty is most faire.The people are ignorant in all deceit,The richnesse of the soyle is very great,And if dew concord could be here maintain'd,Those who are now her Lords, she might command.
There is also in this Territory the Towne Quintianum, situate 20. miles from Brixia Southward, neere the River Ollius. Also Reggiate, Bottesino, Vtele, Novalara, with many others, it hath also the Lake Benacum, so called from a Towne, the ruines whereof are still remaining. Catullus calls it Lydius, from the Lydians that is the Tyrrhenians, who as fame reporteth did sometime inhabit the Country neere unto it: it is called in Italian Lago di Garda: and in the Germane speech

Gard-se, from the Castle which is seated on the East banke thereof. This Lake, as Alexius Vgonius writeth to Cardinall Pole, doth excell all others for good fish: it is environd with pleasant Hills, and Springs ^e every where breake forth: here there are woods, and greene Medowes, Vines, Olives, Maple-trees, Bay-trees, and Cedars: and Townes full of all provision doe encompasse it round about, so that ^t wanteth nothing either for delight and pleasure, or for use and profit. There is also another Lake called Sebinus or Sevinus, now it ^s called Lago d'Iseo, from the Castle Iseus which is on the banke there^. This receaveth the River Ollus on the North, and casteth it forth againe on the South. Lastly, there is also betweene Sebinum and Be^um the Lake Idrinus, commonly called Lago d'Idro, or Idro Lago. It was so named from the Castle Idrus: Some suppose it was so called from the Hydra, which Hercules slew here, it hath abundance of fish. It dischargeth it selfe into Idrinus by divers streames: the lesser Lakes are those which are called in their Country speech Lago Cap. Lago ^cone, and others. The River Mella or Mela doth cut thorow the middle of this Territory. It still retaineth the name of Mella even untill this day. But yet it doth not runne by the Citty as we may see, b^^ by the Precincts thereof. The little Rivulet which glideth by the Citty is now called Garza.

The Dukedome of MEDIOLANUM.
THe Dukedome of Mediolanum is 300. miles in compasse. The soyle is very fertile and fruitfull. Livie, Florus, and Polybius, doe report that this Country, with the most of the Transpadane Citties did yeeld themselves to the power of the Romanes, and became a Province, Marcellus and Cn. Scipio. being Consuls. And it is manifest that some of the latter Emperours, allured by the conveniency of the place, did make this Citty their seate of Residence, as Nerva, Trajane, Hab^n, Maximinian, Philip, Constantine, Constantius, Iovianus, Valentes, Valentinian, and Theodosius. Trajane built a Palace here, which still retaineth that name. But when the power of the Caesars grew weake, this Citty was wasted and spoyled by the incursions and in rodes of the Barbarians: as the Gothes, Hunnes, and Langbards. Whom when Charles the great had droven out of Italy, this Country did put it safe under the protection of the Kings of France, and afterward of the Germane Emperours. The most of which were yeerely crowned here with an Iron Crowne, in the ancient and famous Church of Saint Ambrose, as ^eander proveth by severall examples. At length under the raigne of the Emperours Frederick the first, and the second, against whom it continually rebelled, it had new Lords, which were the Vicounts Caloatij, who afterward in the yeere 1394. were created Dukes by the Emperour Wenceslaus. Afterward they had the Dukes of Sfortia, by the suffrage and consent of the Citizens, and by the authority of the Romane Empire: which the Galeatians could never obtaine. But

their Line being extinguished, the Emperour Charles the fifth was their Successor, who passed over this Principallity to the Kings o^ Spaine his Successours. The chiefe Citty is called by all Latine Writers Mediolanum: Polybius, Strabo, Ptolemy, doe call it Mediolanium, and Mediolana, the Italians doe now call it Milano, the Germanes Mey-lands, Mediolanium was built by the French Insubrians, as Livy, Trogus, and others doe report; who comming into Italie under the conduct o^ their Captaine Bellovesus, and having expulsed the Tuscians, they founded a Citty here: in the yeere, as some doe reckon, before the birth of Christ 339. and as others recken, 380. Howsoever it is most ancient. Isaac Causabone. Lib. 4. and Strabo doe thinke that it was so named from Mediolanium a Citty of the Santones in France. Some say that it is derived from a Germane word, as it were May-landt, from the greene fields, which are as fresh and pleasant as the fields are in the Moneth of May: or else it is called Midlandt, because it is the middle and Navell, as Iovius sheweth of Insubria, being enclosed with the River Ticinus: or lastly, it is called Maegde-landt, or Meydel landt, that is the Virgin Country, from Minerva who had a Temple there, which was heretofore consecrate to our Saviour, afterward to the blessed Virgin, and now to Saint Tecla. Mediolanum is situate betweene Ticinus and Abdua, not farre from the Alpes: having a temperate ayre and climate. It is thought to be one of the greatest Citties of Europe, and it flourisheth for wealth and merchandizing: it hath faire buildings, great Churches, and wide large streets: and it is well fortified with Walls, Bulwarks, and an Armory, which doe take up a great space of ground. It hath large Suburbs, some of which may compare with great Citties, being ditched and walled about as the Citty is next to the Church which is call Domus, being fairely and magnificently built, there is Saint Laurences great Church, which was built upon the ruines of Hercules Temple. There are also in it seven high channelled Pillars curiously wrought. There is also the strongest Castle which is in this part of the world, and it is called Porta Iovia, it is impregnable, and the fairest in all Europe. There is in the Suburbs an Hospitall for Strangers, or for the sicke, by the way of Bernomatius, the foundation whereof containeth many Acres, it was begun by the Sfortians, but is not yet finished. Also there is the Church of S. Gothard, in which are the Tombes, and Sepulchres of many noble Vicounts. There are many ancient Inscriptions in the Citties, and many other Monuments of Antiquity. It hath an ancient University, where it is thought that Virgil studied. And Leander writeth that it hath a famous Library. There are so many diversities of Tradesmen, that it is a common Proverb. Che chivolesse rassettare Italia, si ruma Milano, which is to say, Mediolanum scilicet destruendo, Italiam instrui posse. That is, if Millan were destroyed all Italie might be furnished with all kinde of Tradesmen and Artificers. It is said that the King of Spaine receiveth yeerely from hence 80. thousand crownes. The ridding and determining of civill and criminall causes belongeth to the Senate of Millan, in which there are 16. Doctors, and some Prelates and Patritians of Millan. Millan is an Archbishoprick, the Archbishoprick

whereof hath these Suffragans under him, Bergomensis, Brixi^sis, of Cremona, Landensis, Novaria, Vercellensis, Ipporegtensis, Vigleviensis, Astensis, Aquensis, Albensis, Terdonensis, Saonensis, Albingaunensis, Vin^liensis, Placentinum, Papiensis, and Ferrara are exempted.




THE DVKEDOME OF MILLAN.
THis is the greatest and most potent Dukedome of a Europe, which heretofore the Insubrians inhabite^ betweene the Rivers Abdua and Ticinus. The chief Citties in it are Millan, Lauda, Ticinum, which is now called Papia, and Novarra. The soyle is every wher^ fruitfull, pleasant, and watered with many Streames and Rivers: th^ chiefe Citty hereof is Millan built by the Frenchmen, for when Tarquinius Prisius raigned at Rome, King Bellonesus having passed over th^ Alpes with a great band of Frenchmen, and having expulsed the Hetruscians, he built a Citty in that place, which Leander saith was called Subria, and he called this Citty Mediolanum, or as some are perswaded Meydlandum, as it were the Virgin Land, perhaps from Minervas Temple, who was worshipped in this place, which is now consecrate to S. Tecla, whence Alciat thus.


Quam Mediolanum sacram dixere puella
Terram: nam vetus hoc gallica lingua sonas.
Culta Minerva fuit, nunc est ubi numine Tecla
Mutato, Matris Virginis ante domum.


Mediolanum the Virgin Land they name,

For in the French it signifies the same,

'Twas sacred to Minerva, now they adore
Tecla, and the Virgin Mother heretofore.


Some thinke it was so denominated from a Sow that was halfe cover'd with wooll, which Alciat seemes to glance at thus in his Emblemes, when he saith.
Laniger huic fignum, Sus est, animalque biformeAcribus hinc setis, lauitio inde Levi.Their armes a Sow, a creature most uncouth,Th'one side bristled, 'tother woolly smooth.
So also Claudian in the marriage of Honorius and Maria.
-- ad maenia GallisCondita lanigerae suis ostendentia pellem.The wall built by the French, which yet doe showThe skin and shape of their wooll-bearing Sow.



map of Milan
THE DVKEDOME OF MILLAN.


This Country was reduced to the form of a Province, and was subject to the Romanes, as Polybius and Livie report. And many Emperours taking delight in the conveniency of the place, did make the Citty of Millan their seate of residence, and adorned it with many publike Aedifices and Buildings; whence Ausonius.
Mediolani mira omnia, copia rerum,Innumere cultaeque domus; tum duplice muroAmplificata loci species, populique voluptasCircus, and inclusi moles cuneata Theatri:Templa, Palatinaeque arces.All things at Millan are most wonderfull,There's plenty, and the houses beautifull.A double wall the Citty doth augment,The People in the Cirque take much content,And in the Theaters they doe delight,There are Temples, and faire Palaces most bright.
But when the Emperour decayed, it was oftentimes vexed by the Huns, Gothes, and Langbards. It was taken and destroyed by Fred. Barbarossa. It was a long time governed by Vicounts, Iohn Galeatius was first created Duke by the Emperour Wenceslaus, and from thence it descended to the Aurelians and Sfortians, and at length Charles the fifth did bring it into his owne Family. In this Citty there is the royall Castle of Porta Iovia, the strongest in all Europe. It is full of Artificers, especially Smiths, who forge out of Iron, Swords, Brest-plates, Bucklers, and other Military instruments. Hence ariseth that saying, Qui Italiam armis instruere totam velit, eum destruere Mediolanum oportere; That is, Hee that would furnish all Italie with armes, must destroy Millan. But I conclude with this eloquent Elogie of a Divine Writer.

This Land a people did first entertaine,
From whom this Kingdome at the first began.
The French, Italians both all'yd did grow,
And gave new lawes unto the ancient Po.
Then Germany joyned in so great affaires,
And Fame her golden Trumpet now prepares,
Let one poore honour some poore Towne advance,
While threefold honour doth unto me chance.




THE PRINCIPALITIES OF VERONA, VICENTIA, AND PATAVIVM.
And the Territories of the chiefe Citties of MARCA TARVISINA are amplie described.
IN this Table the Territories of three chiefe Citties of Marca Tarvisina are delineated and described, Verona, Vicentia, and Patavium. The first is the Territory or Country of Verona. The length of it from the Towne Bruchelius unto the River which cometh out of the Lake Bevacum, is 65. Miles: the bredth from the Castle on the Frontiers even to Rivoltella is forty Miles. The soyle in some parts is stony, and therefore untilled, and some part of it is very good. It hath abundance of Wheate, Oyle, Wine, Cattell, Wooll, and other pretious commodities. It hath also famous Quarries of Stone. And many wholesome medicinall hearbes, especially on the Mountaine Baldus, whether Phisitians doe often resort to gather them. The Tuscans are supposed to have built Verona, others thinke that the French Cenomanians did build it: who being expulsed, it was a long time subject to the Romanes, and Cn. Pompeius Strabo, the father of Magnus brought thither a Colonie. Afterward being wasted by Attila King of the Hunns, it was afterward subject to many Tyrannies, first to the Kings of the Gothes: the Langbards did expel them, and the Frechmen under the conduct of Charles the great did expell the Langbards: after whom the Berengarians being droven out of Italy by the Emperour Otto the first, it enjoyed some quiet and rest under the authority and Protection of the Romane Empire. Actiolinus Romaninus having got it by force, did change the Praefectorship into a Lordship, having expulsed Azo Atestinus, whom the Senate and People of Verona had made Praetor. Hee dying obout the yeare 1259. the Saligerians by the suffrage and common consent of the Cittizens were entituled Princes of Verona almost 128. yeares; who being droven out, and partly made away by poison, the Galleatians got possession of it, and afterward the Cariensians, whom the Venetians did drive out, under whose jurisdiction it constantly and peceablely continueth. The Citty which Ptol. calleth Verona and Overona, doth still retaine that name. The Germanes call it Dietrichs Bern. It hath a thinne aire. It is like the Citty Basil in Heluetia, for situation, having many faire buildings: it is seated on a plaine levell, both Southward, Eastward, and Westward, but on the North side the ground riseth a little, like a Romane Theater. It is fortified, and encompased round about with the River Athesis. There are divers Monuments of antiquity, which doe testifie the ancient magnificence and riches of this Citty. It hath straite, large

streets, paved with stone, and about 35. Churches, the chiefe whereof is the ancient Cathedrall Church, and the Church of S. Anastasius; it hath 10. Monasteries. On the top of a rock there are two famous Castles of S. Peter, and S. Faelix. Also an ancient Castle, which is commonly called Citadella. There is also a great Amphitheater in the middle of the Citty. This Citty is a Bishoprick. The Inhabitants are magnificent, beautifull, comely, very witty, and prone to learning. I cannot omit this one thing that when the Venetians did fortifie this Citty, they found certaine hollow Caves, and when they digged in the Mountaines, they found Vrchins or hedghoggs of stone, also Oisters, Birds bills, and starre fishes which were as hard as any Stones.

The Territory of VICENTIA.
THe Country of Vicentia followeth, the soyle whereof as it is pleasant, so it is fruitfull, yeelding greate store of Wine, and other fruites, especially Mulberries, on whose leaves Silke-wormes doe feede. Not farre from the Citty there are two famous stone Quarries in the Mountaine, which the Latines call Cornelius, it is commonly called Covelo. There are also Marble Mines in the Valdanian streete. This Citty was built by the Tuscans, or as Trogus writeth, by the Frenchmen, afterward it continued faithfull to the Romanes, untill Attilas time who wasted it, and afterward it was subject to the Goths, the Langbards, and lastly to the Kings of Italie. They being expulsed, it was subject to the Roman Empire, untill the raigne of the Emperour Frederick the second, by whom being sacked and burnt, it had afterward divers Lords, as the Carrasieni, of Patavini, the Scaligers of Verona, and the Galeatians of Millan: and also the Venetians. At length being infested and vexed by the forces of the Emperour Maximilian the 1. it was restored at last to the Venetians. This Citty Trogus, Pomponius, Tacitus, and others doe call Vicentia. Plin. and Antoninus doe call it Vicetia: Aelianus Bisetia and Bitetia, Ptol. calls it Ovikenta, and it is commonly called Vicenza. It is seated neere the foote of a Hill, being divided into unequall partes by the two navigable Rivers Rerone and Bachilione. It is not very faire or beautifull, but populous, and abounding with plenty. There are foure things here worthy of noting, the Praetors magnificent Pallace, a Bridge of one Arch, the greate Altar stone in S. Laurences Church, which is of a wonderfull length, and lastly the Theater, which is commonly calld L. Academia. There is also the Monasterie of St. Corona, where there is also a famous Librarie. The Inhabitants are of a lively disposition, prone, and apt to learning, warfare, or merchandising, and Industrious, they live bravely and goe decently in apparrell. It is a Bishoprick. Moreover in the Territory of Vicentia, there are these Townes, Morostica which is a famous rich Towne. Also Brendulum which is rich and populous. Also Leucium both for wealth, populousnesse, and largenesse, may compare with many Citties of Italie. There is also six Miles about Vicentia, toward

map of VeronaTHE PRINCIPALITY OF VERONA.

the South, the Towne and Castle Custodia, which was so called because delinquents and loose persons, were kept there at worke in greate Quarries of stone, to digge stones for building of houses.


The Territory of PATAVIUM.
THe Territorie of Patavium followeth, which wee are to describe in this Table, which is thus bounderd by Bernardinus Scardeomus: on the South the River Athesis runneth: on the North the little River Muso glideth: on the East the gulfe of Venice: on the West the Euganian hills, and the Country of Vicentia. The compasse and circumference of this Country is 180. Miles, in which there are six hundred and seaven and forty Villages. Caelius Rhodiginus writeth that Constantinus Palaeologus was wont to say, nisi secreta sanctissimus viris affimari in Oriente Paradisum esse, arbitrari se non alibi eum reperiri posse, quam in persuavi Patavina amanitate. That is if holy men had not affirmed that Paradise was in the East, hee should thinke that it could not be found any where else but in sweet and pleasant Patavium. The soyle is fruitfull, yeelding corne, fruite, and rich Wines, whence Martiall, Pictaque Pompineis Euganea arva jugis.

The Euganean fields which painted are
With hills that purple Vines doe beare.

It affoordeth also great store of Hunting, Fowling, and Fishing. The Inhabitants have a Proverb, concerning the incredible Plenty of this Country, Bologna la grassa, Padova la Passa. This Citty was alwayes joyned in friendship and amity with the Romanes, as appeareth in Livie Lib. 41. and in M. Tullius his Phillippicks. The Colonie brought hither was better conditioned than other Colonies. For the Patavians had power to give their voice and suffrage, as the Romane Cittizens. It was taken and sackt with other Citties by Attila King of the Huns, and an hundred yeeres afterward by the Langbards, who burnt it, when in the raigne of Charles the great, it began to be partly under the Kings of Italy, and the French King: partly under the Berengarians: but afterward it became free in the raigne of the Emperour Otho the first. The forme of this Common-wealth lasted, untill Frederick the second, by whose command and authority Actiolinus Romaninus possessed this Citty: after whom it had these Lords, the Carrariensians, the Scaligerians, and the Galeatians, and about the yeere of Christ 1404. the Venetians, whom it still obeyeth, and like a good Mother, finding her selfe weake and infirme through age, shee yeeldeth all her right to her Daughter (for the Venetians were a Colonie of the Patavines) not to bee governed, but rather sustained and helped by her. Patavium is a most ancient Citty, the flower and honour of all the Citties in Italie, Ptolemy calls it Patavium, it is now called Padua. Ptolemy also in another place calleth it Baetobium.

Some suppose it was so named in regard of the Vicinity and neerenesse thereof unto the River Po, and the Marshes, and so called as it were Padaveum: some derive it a petendo or from hitting, because An^^r the builder of this Citty, Avem telo petiverit, did there shoote a Bird with an Arrow. But Antenor is reported to have built it as he came from Troy. Thit Citty is situate in a fruitfull levell soyle, and it hath a gentle temperate ayre, it is happy both for the goodnesse of the soyle, the pleasantnesse of the Euganian Mountaines, and the vicinity of the Alpes, and the Sea. The River Brenta floweth by it. The compasse of it is now twofold, and heretofore threefold: the outward compasse or circumference doth containe 6200. paces, with 6. magnificent Gates. The inward circumference 3000. paces, having a long walke round about it. It is also faire and magnificent, abounding with all things necessary, it is also paved, and well fortified with Ditches, Trenches, and Bulwarkes: it hath magnificent, and sumptuous Aedifices, both sacred, prophane, publike, and private. There are 23. Friaries, and 49. Nunneries. There is a Palace which was built by the Emperour Henry, which is now a Court of Iustice, and the chiefest of note in all Italy, which is not supported with any Pillars, but covered with Lead. Moreover there is the Court of publike counsell, with a Porch, it is supported with Marble Pillars, built of stone, and covered with Lead, there are 5. great Market-places, 38. Bridges, arched with stone, over the River Bronta. There are large Porches, spacious Courts, three Hospitalls for the sicke, and as many for strangers. There is also an Hopitall for Orphanes. It doth containe 4000. houses. The Inhabitants are very witty, apt and prone to warfare, vertue, and studies. Titus Livius, Cn. Valerius, Flaccus, L. Ar^^tius Stella, and many others have graced Padua with their birth. It hath the famous University of Padua, which was founded and instituted by the Emperour Charles the great, or as some thinke by Frederick the second, which was much enlarged by Pope Vrbane the fourth, and perfected and established by the most illustrious Common-wealth of Venice. There are also many Libraries, well furnished with Greeke and Latine Bookes, one at S. Iohns in the Garden, another at S. Iustines, the third at S. Antonies. This Country is so watered with Rivers, that to the great commodities and profit of the Inhabitants, there is no Country Towne which is above 5. miles distant from a River.




FRIVLI, and ISTRIA, KARSTIA, CARNIOLA, AND the Marquiship of the VVindorians, and the County of CILIA.
THere followeth in Mercator, Forum Iulij, and Istria, with other Countries. This Country was at first so called from Forum Iulij, the chiefe Citty, or as some would have it, from Iulius Caesar, who brought hither some Legions against the Germanes. The Italians call it new Friuli, the Germanes Friaul: the Venetians and others doe call it Patria. It appeareth also in Histories that it was called Aquilejensis. The bounds of this Country on the East are Istria: on the North the Stony Mountaines: on the West the Vindelician and Norician Alpes: on the South the Hadriatick Bay. This Country hath a temperate climate, a wholesome ayre, faire fields, well watered, and yeelding abundance of all kindes of fruits, the Medowes and Pastures flourishing and full of Cattell, it hath also Vines which yeeld excellent rich Wines. Woods it hath which affoord good Timber, and excellent Hunting, and also Mountaines full of Mettals, Marble, and other Pretious Stones. The Euganians did first inhabit this Country, afterward in processe of time the Venetians, afterward the Frenchmen, afterward it was under the Romane Empire, which declining, it was subject to the Langbards. After them succeeded the Emperours, and after them the Berengarians, who being destroyed and extirpated, it returned to the obedience of the Romane Empire. The Emperour Otho gave a good part of it to the Church of Aquilejum, and Conradus gave the other part with Istria. The Venetians at length possessed it, about the yeere 1420. who still doe governe it, although the most part of it bee subject to peculiar Earles and Lords. The Metropolis of this Country is Vtinum, commonly call'd Vdene, the Germanes call it Weiden. Leander supposeth that it is an ancient Towne, and that Pliny maketh mention of it. Niger beleeveth that it is that which Ptolemy and others doe call Forum Iulium. Howsoever it is a large Citty, magnificent, and abounding with plenty of all things. The compasse of it is 5. miles. The Venetians doe now governe the Common-wealth by Presidents sent thither, which they call Locumtenentes or Substitutes. There are in it 16000. Citizens. There are also other Citties, Aquileia, commonly called Aquilegia, the Germanes call it Agler. It is situate by the River Natison. The Citty was heretofore large and spacious, and fortified with walls, and also beautified with Churches, a magnificent Theater, and other publike and private Buildings. It is now unfrequented, which was heretofore very faire and populous. It remained faithfull and constant to the Romane Empire, untill the time of Attila King of the Huns, by whom being besieged and much distressed for

map of FriuliFRIVLI.

want of Corne, at length it was taken and sackt, and 30000. men who lived in it were put to the Sword, the rest fled to the Iland. Afterward it was re-edified by Narsetes, and for a time it was under the power of the Langbards, untill the comming of harles the great into Italy, after which time it was subject to the Kings of Italy, and afterward to the Romane Emperours. Afterward it began to bee under the government of Patriarkes, from them it came to the Venetians, under whom it now continueth in peace and tranquility. But these Bishops are subject to the Patriarch of Aquilegium, the Bishop of Concordia, Pola, Parentium, Triestinensis, or Tergestinensis, Coma^lensis, or Petenensis, Iustinopolitanus, Madrientis, of the New Citty, or Emonians. Seeke the rest in the second Table of Lombardy. Under the Bishop of Gradensis, are the Bishops of Castellanium, or Venice, also Tercellanensis, Equilensis, or Eusulanus, Caprulensis, Clodiensis, of the New Citty, or Goritia according to Leander, which Ptolemy and Antoninus call Iulium Carnicum. Amasaeus Lib. of the bounds of Venice, placeth Goritia where Noreja was heretofore, Candidus calleth it Noritia. Goritia hath his Princes, which are subject to the Dukes of Austria. It is a Towne famous for wealth and nobility. There is also Portus Gruarius, which Pliny calleth Portus Romatinus, or Spilimbergum, which is well fortified both by nature and Art; also Maranum which is very populous and rich. The Mount Falcon is a noble rich Towne. There is also the Citty Palma, and a round Castle built by the Venetians in the yeere 1593. under the foundation whereof there was money laid with this Inscription on one side, Pasale Ciconia Duce Venetorum, An. Dom. 1593. On the other side, Fori Iulij, Italiae, Christianae fidei propugnaculum. That is, the Fortresse of Forum Iulium, of Italy, and the Christian faith. I omit the other lesser Townes. These Rivers doe appertaine to this Country. Romantinum, Tilaventum, Sontius, Frigidus, Natiso, Alsa ^urus, and others. The Inhabitants are very prone and apt to humane Arts, Merchandise, and other honest studies.

ISTRIA.
AFter Forum Iulium followeth Istria, well knowne to Latine and Greeke writers, which still retaineth that name, the Germanes call it Hister-reich, as it were the Kingdome of Istria. Plinny sheweth that it was heretofore called Iapydia. It resembleth a Peninsula, and lyeth for the most part betweene the two Bayes Tergeslinum and Carnarium, it is encompassed with the Hadriatick Sea, on the North it is bounderd with the Carnician and Norician Alpes; on the West before it runneth forth into the Sea, it hath the River Formio, and the River Arsia on the East. The breadth of it is eleven Miles, the compasse of it 122. Miles, from Formio aforesaid, even to the Fanatick Promontorie, or the innermost corner of the Carnarian Bay. The whole Country is rugged, yet more hilly then Mountaines, which hills doe yeeld

great store of wine, oyle, and other fruites, but little wheate or other graine, except the fields Piscino and Humagio. There is a Mountaine commonly calld Major, which is full of wholesome drugs and hearbes, and Phisitians doe resort hither to gather them. Istria doth yeeld abundance of Salt. There are also stone Quarries. Marble is cut forth of the Rovinian fields, which is calld Istrian Marble, which is of greate esteeme through all Italy. Moreover part of Istria belongeth to the Venetians, and part to the Austrians. Let us come to particulars. The first Citty that wee meete withall is Iustinopolis, which is a chiefe Citty of Chersonesus. For so the learned call it, which is commonly call'd Cab^ d' Istria. It was so named at first from the Emperour Iustine. Afterward it was called by a latter name, because it lyeth in the entrance of the Country as you come from Forum Iulium. It possesseth a small Iland, which is a Mile long, and of a little breadth being divided from the Continent unto which it is joyned by Bridges, which may bee drawen up. It hath a Castle in the midst fortified with foure Towers: It belongeth now to the Venetians. Five Miles off, there is another Castle, which is joyned to the continent with a stone Bridge. Afterward there followeth Vranum, which the Italians call Castellatium, and Cistellerium, commonly call'd Castelier. Fiftie paces hence is S. Simon and Piranum is 5. Miles distant from thence: and Salvorum as many: and Vinacum. From Vinacum it is two Miles to S. Peregrine: and a Mile from thence to S. Iohn della Corne; and as many to S. Laurence commonly calld di Daila: a Mile off is Daila it selfe, and three Miles off is the raw Citty, commonly called Aemonia. From the River Quietius it is three Miles to Port Cerverius. Foure Miles from thence is the Citty ^mium, which is now called Parenzo. The Towne Orser followeth, which in Latine is called Vrserium. Lemus being passed by, we come to ^nium and afterward to that Towne which is commonly call'd Le ^ne, also to Portesuol, and Mutazzo: and from thence it is three (...) to the Promontorie Cisanum, Muratio, and Phasiana, and from t^ence it is two Miles to the Bandonian Valley, and as many to Marco^um: and it is three Miles from thence to Port Pola. Afterward there is the Episcopall Citty Pola seated on a high Mountaine, which ^^ll retaineth his ancient name, a hundred Miles from Tergeste: and ^^. Miles from Ancona being divided from it by the Hadriatick Sea. The Rivers of Istria are Risanus, Draconia, Quietus, Lemus, and Arsia. There are also woods which afforde very good Ship timber. The Inhabitants are poore in regard the Venetians doe engrosse all traffique to themselves. We will speake hereafter concerning the Marquiship of the Vindorians, and therefore I will here omit it. I have scarce any thing to write concerning Karstia, and the County of Cilia: but I will adde something concerning Carniola.




CARNIOLA.
CArniola was so named from the Carnian people, as also Carinthia. Concerning whom Valaterranus writeth thus Lib. 2. of his Ge^graphie. The Carnians are beyond the Istrians, the Country is broade, beginning from Forum Iulium, and reaching to the Mountaines. The Country of Carniola although it bee Mountainous, as the other Countries of this Province; yet it hath plenty of Wine, Oyle, Fruite, aad Corne. But they make Carniola twofold: the drye which wanteth water: and the moist, in which the River Nauus riseth, and also Nauportus which is now called Labatus, and many other Rivers. It is adorned with the title of a Dukedome. The chiefe Citty is Labacum, which hath the same name with the River. Some doe place Goritia in Carniola, which we mentioned before in Forum Iulium. On the left hand banck of Sontius upwards, there are two Fortresses, which the Venetians built heretofore to defend the River, and to prevent the incursions and inroads of the Turkes. Moreover there is a Lake in this Country, which affordeth every yeare a harvest, fishing, and hunting. The Inhabitants doe call it Zircknitzerzee from the Towne Zircknitz, which is situated by it. But I will make a more accurrate description of it out of George Wernherus: it is enclosed every where with Mountaines, for halfe a Mile together it is not very broade. Out of the Mountaines there doe issue certaine small Rivers, which are every one contayned in their owne Channells: on the East side there are three, on the South five. The farther that they runne the more narrower they grow, for their bankes are straite, untill they are swallowed up in the hoany passages of the Cliffes, which seeme as if they were cut out by humane Industry. So that where they find an open place the waters doe spread abroade, and make a Lake. These waters doe as speedily runne back as they flowe forward, not onely in those narrow channells, but also through the earth, which when the Inhabitants perceive, they stopp the greater passages, and Concavities, and so goe to fishing, which is both pleasant and profitable. For the fish which they take here being salted is transported to other Countries. Moreover when the Lake is drie they have a kind of harvest, for they sowe it and mowe it before that it be overflow'd againe. It beareth such abundance of grasse, that in twenty dayes it will be ready to cut. Who therefore cannot chuse but admire at these wonders of nature? But so much cocerning these things, I passe to the rest.



THE BISHOPRICKE OF TVSCIA
TUSCIA followeth, which ancient Writers doe celebrate by three speciall names, Tyrrhenia, Etruria, and Tuscia: the latter of these three names it still retaineth. For it is commonly called Tuscany. The bounds of it are on the South the Neather Sea, or the Tyrrhene Sea: on the North the Apennine Mountaine, where there is a part of Vmbria, and Gallia ^ogata: on the West Liguria, from which it is parted by the River Macra: on the East Tiberis. That part which is neerer to the Sea, is plainer and pleasanter, but the inward parts are more Mountanious; but in generall it is as faire and delightfull as any Country in Italie. It hath spacious flourishing fields, very fruitfull, pleasant Vales, Mountaines, and Hills, which are adorned with faire houses, and Orchards planted with Orange-trees, and Cittorne-trees. It hath abundance of Vineyards, which yeeld excellent rich Wine. The ancient Inhabitants were heretofore generally called Tyrrhetians, Etruscians, and Tuscians. Afterward from Romulus time the Romanes began to warre against the Tuscians, which warre they maintained a long time, so that matters being brought to a dangerous estate, they were faine to send out a Dictator against them. But in the yeere from the building of the Citty 474. the Vulsinensians and the Vulciensians the most flourishing people of the Etruscians being overcome by the Consul. Ti. Coruncanius, they were added to the Romane Empire, and so the Empire was enlarged on that side even to Arnus. Neither had they afterward any just occasion to warre with the Tuscians. So that being thus subjected they continued faithfull to the Romane People. But when the Romane Empire began to decline, they were oppressed with many calamities, by the Gothes, the Langbards, the Huns, and others. At length it came to passe that the greater part of Etruria is now subject to the great Duke of Etruria, under whose government there are these noble Townes, Florence, Pisa, Sena, Pratum, Pistorium, Volatterra, Mons Politianus, Aretium, Cortona, Pescia, Pientia, Mons Alcinus, Liburnum, Plumbinum, and many other Townes. That which they call S. Peters Patrimony belongeth to the Pope. It beginneth from the River Pescia, and S. Quirie, and so reacheth to the Castle Caparanum in new Latium not farre from the River Lirus. Pontremulum neere the Fountaine of the River Marca belongeth to the King of Spaine, which heretofore belonged to the Dukes of Millan, also Portus Herculis, Orbetellum Mons Argentarius, and Plumbini Arx, also the Carfenianian or Grasinianian Valley, which lyeth beneath the Apennine on both sides of the River Sercia, in which there

map of TusciaTHE BISHOPRICKE OF TVSCIA.

is the new Grasinianian Castle, with many other Castles and Townes, are subject to the Duke of Ferrara. Sarzan by the River Macra looketh toward Genoa. Massa and Carraria do belong to particular Marquesses, who are adorned with their Titles. There are also other Townes which were subject to the Romanes, as Bracianum, of which the Ursines are Dukes. Moreover in Tuscia there are these chiefe Citties: Pisa a very curious Citty, which Trogus, and others call Pisae. The Inhabitants have a very good memory, because the Citty is seated in a thick ayre. It lyeth betweene the Rivers Auseres, and Arnus, as Strabo, and Pliny doe note. Now Arnus runneth by it which hath three Harens. Dionysius Halic. Lib. 1. doth celebrate and praise the antiquity and nobility thereof. Others doe deliver, that it was usually accounted one of the 12. chiefe Citties of Etruria, the Duke of Etruria, is often stil'd Duke of Pisa, and the Knights of S. Stephen, who were instituted by this Duke, have a house in this Citty. The Pisanians did build the chiefe Temple which they call Domus, or the House, which is 540. paces in compasse, and supported with 70. Pillars, and also they built the Bishops house with, the spoiles which they brought away after the conquest of the Sarazens at Panormus. The soyle round about this Citty is fitt for tillage; and so fruitfull, that it feedeth all Etruria, and sendeth Corne to other Countries. The Wines are not very good: but there are excellent Melons. There is also Leuca, of which Iulius Scaliger saith, Tuscis delitium, Tusci laus incluta Coeli: Luca is well known both to Latine and Greeke Writers: Strabo and Ptolemy call it Leuca. It is a faire Citty, and populous, seated on a Plaine, and environed on every side with Hills strongly walled, and well paved, it is not very great, but full of Citizens, and hath continuall traffique and trading. The Inhabitants are neat, wise, witty: who have a long time kept their liberty, albeit their neighbours have often assaulted them. Pistorum, ^ow called Pistoja, is walled about and was much enlarged by Desiderius King of the Langbards. At length the Florentines laid it to their own Territory. Florence is the chiefe Citty and Metropolis of Etruria. It is now commonly called Fiorenza, or Firenza. It is thought that Florence was so called ab Flore from a Flower, in regard that the happy and flourishing estate therof resembleth a Flower, or else in regard of the flourishing excellent wits of the Inhabitants, or lastly, because it was derived from Rome the most flourishing Citty. It is 6. miles in compasse, and containeth above 90000. Inhabitants, it is seated on a levell plaine by the River Arnus, which cutteth it into two parts which are united again, and joyned together with faire Bridges, it is paved, and adorned with faire streets, and on the East and North it is encompassed with pleasant Hills clothed with fruit-bearing trees, and on the West side it hath a faire Plaine. It lyeth in a middle Climate between Aretium and Pisa, the former of these Citties doth produce sharpe wits, and the other, men of a strong faithfull memory. The armes of the Appennine doe fortifie it against the invasions or incursions of enemies, it is very faire and beautifull, insomuch that it is a common saying Florenza la bella, totiusque flos Italiae; that is, Florence the faire, and the flower of all Italy: there are here many sacred, and prophane publike Buildings, which

for brevity sake I omit. The Inhabitants are witty, grave, eloquent, and studious of good Arts. They love to get money, and to that end they trade into forraine Countries. The Women are very beautifull, and chaste, and their habit, as also that which the men weare is very decent and comely Volaterra, which Ptolemy calleth Ovolaterrai, and the Itinerary Tables Aquae Volaterrae, is seated on a steepe rugged Rocke. The walls are of Free square stone, sixe foote broad, which are neatly and cunningly built without Morter. This Citty hath five Gates, and at every one of them a Fountaine of pure water. The walls doe shew the antiquity thereof, as also the Sepulchers, Epitaphs in Etrurian Letters, and ancient Marble Statues, and also carved stones which are digged forth daily, and other things. That which Ptolemy calls Saena, and the Itinerarie Tables Saena Iulia, is commonly called Siena, being distant from Rome 800. Furlongs, and seated on a high ground, on this side Arbia, having as it were three corners, of which that which looketh Southward is broader than those which are Eastward and Westward: it hath a good wholesome ayre, but that it is troubled sometimes with blasting windes. Many of the Poets doe call it delitias Italiae, that is the delight and pleasure of Italie, Saena is paved, having strait long streets, and high Towers, and also many noblemens houses. The Citizens are very courteous towards Strangers, much adicted to gaine and worldly affaires. That which Ptolemy calls Perusia, and Eutropius and the Itinerarie Tables Perusium, the Italians doe now call Perugia. It is seated on a Hill of the Apennine, and fortified by the naturall situation. It hath many faire Buildings both publike and private, Viterbium standeth in a faire spacious place, and hath Cyminian Mountaines behind it, it is built of square stone, and hath many Towers. Among the publike workes there is a famous Fountaine, which springeth continually. It hath a good fruitfull soyle, which yeeldeth abundance of Wine and fruits. There are also many Lakes in Etruria. As that which Livie and others call Trasumenus, and Silius Trasimenus, and now it is called from the Citty neere unto it Lago de Perugia, that which Antoninus calleth Lacus Aprilis, is now called Fangosa Palude, the Sea-lake, or the Salt-lake, or Lago d'Orbitello, is called in their language Lacus Vadimonis, there are also the Ciminian Lake, the Volsiniensian, the Sabatian, the Bientinian, and the Cianian. It hath many Rivers, which are full of excellent Fish, as namely, Laventia, Frigidus, Anser, Arnus, Cecinna, Cornia, Alma, Brunus, Vmbro, Osa, Albengia, Floris, Martha, Minio, Eris, Vacina, Sanguinaria, Aron, and some others. It hath also wholesome Bathes, and other waters endued with wonderfull vertue. Here are divers Mountaines, as also the Mountaine Ciminus, well knowne to Livie, Vibius, and Virgil. That which Pliny calls Soractis is now called Mente de S. Silvestro. Orosius also placeth the Fessulanian Mountaines in Etruria. The Corronensians also are there on the North side of the Lake Transumenus. The Woods are the Volsinian wood, the Ciminian wood, and Maesia. It hath also divers Libraries, as at Pisa by the Dominicans, at Luca by the Franciscans, sixe in the Citty of Florence, and one at Saena, and Perusia. Moreover Livy and Diodorus doe report that the Etrurians are the strongest,

richest and best governed Nation of Italy. It appeareth by ancient Writers that they were alwayes much adicted to ceremonies, insomuch that they were the first that invented Sacrifices, Divinations, South sayings, and Auguries, and so delivered them to the Romanes, as Tully in his Booke of divination and others doe note. Mercator doth reckon these Bishops in Tuscany, Nepesinus, Castellanensis, Montis Falconis, Viterbiensis, Suavensis, Castellanus, Vulteranus, the Archbishop Senensis, Fesulanus, Zarzanensis, Sutri, Ortanensis, Cornetanensis, Tuscanensis, Clusinus, Aretinas, Pientinensis, Pistoriensis, Binensis, Corthonensis, Civitatensis, Bal^^rigensis, Vrbevetanus, Castrensis, Perusinus, Grossetanus, Lucanus, Florentinus, Arch, Lunensis: the Archbishop of Pisa under whom are Messanensis, Civitanensis, and other Bishops in Corsica.



THE MARQVISHIP OF ANCONITANA, AND the Dukedome of SPOLETO.
THE Marquiship of Ancomitana was so called by the Langbards from Ancone a famous Mart Towne, where the Marquesses of this Country had their seate of residence. Livy and others doe call it Picenum. There confineth on the Marquiship of Ancomitana, on the South the Sabinians, Vilumbrians, and Vmbrians, with the Apennine Mountaine: on the West Gallia Cisalpina, with the River Isaurus; on the North the Adriatick Sea. Concerning the Easterne bounds there are divers opinions. Pliny maketh them to be the Rivers Aternus and Ancon: and Ptolomy the River Matrinus with Ancon. The moderne writers the chiefe whereof is Leander, doth make the River Truentum to bee the bounds and limmits betweene them and the Preturiarians. The Country of Picenum according to Livy, is very fertill, but yet it hath greater store of fruite than corne. The best wine is made at the Towne called Sirolum, which Plinny calleth Anconitanian Wine. This Country is for the most part under the Popes Iurisdiction: there are these Townes in it Ancona, Recanatum, Fanum D. Mariae Laureti, Camerinum, Fanum Fortunae, Tolentinum, Firmum, Macerata, and some others Townes: also Eugebium, Coligum, Forum Semrronij, S. Leo, Senogallia, V^binum, and some others. The chiefe Citty is Ancona, which Ptolomy calls Ancon. It still retaineth that name, which was first given to this Citty, because the Country bendeth here like an Elbowe. It is opposite to the Promontorie Cumeras, and it is enclosed on the North with the Sea and the Haven: moreover it is well fortified with Gates, Bulwarks, and Walls: It hath a Port or Haven which is strong both by Art and nature, and hath a convenient entrance into it, and is able to receive many shipps, which was built by the Emperour Traian. The Citty hath twelve Fortes, which are all well furnished with ordinance. It is famous in regard that Graecians, Illyrians, Pannonians, and all Europe doe trade and traffique here, it is very populous, and the streets are long and straite. The soile round about is fruitfull, yeelding Wine, and other commodities. There are also Firmium, now called Firmo, an ancient Citty. Ricenetum, Reccanoto, or Recunati, which the Italians doe now call Ricanati, is a famous Mart-towne, in so much that Merchants out of all Europe and Asia doe come thither twice a yeere to Faires. Some ruinous pieces of Helvia Ricina may be seene as you travell along, among the rest there is a great brick Amphitheater on the banke of the River Potentia, and other carkasses of great Buildings. Auxinum is an ancient Episcopall Citty, commonly called Osmo. Livy calls it Oximum. Many Epitaphs and Elogies which have beene found here of late do shew the antiquity thereof. Fabrianum in Latine call'd Faberiana, is a Towne

map of Anconitana and SpoletoTHE MARQVISHIP OF ANCONITANA, AND the Dukedome of SPOLETO.

very full of Shops, which are so distributed, that every street hath severall shops, so that one street hath all Smiths, and another all Shoomakers, and another Papermen. Sevogallia is an Episcopal Citty, which as it appeareth by Polibius and others was first called Sena, afterward Senogallia: it is now called Sinigaglia, or Sinegalia: it hath a thick ayre. Parvum is watered on the West with the River Misa: being fortified with a thicke brick wall, with a Ditch and Bulwarkes. But yet in regard it is so neere unto the Sea it wanteth fresh water, so that they are faine to use that which is brought thither. Fanum is an Episcopall Towne not very great, situated on a Mountaine, commonly called Fano, Tacitus and Ptolemy doe commonly call it Fanum Fortunae, for there are still many ruines remaining of that sumptuous Church which was dedicated to Fortune. Here is a Marble Arch of costly and curious workmanship, which is thirty Cubits high, and thirty broad. On the top whereof which is fallen downe, there was an Elegie engraven in praise of the Emperour Constantine. The River Argilla runneth by it Forum Sempronium, now called Fossumbrunum, or Fossumbruno, is an Episcopall Towne, in which there are many tokens of antiquity, for besides Aquaeducts, paved wayes, pillars and other things, there are many marbles throwne downe with ancient inscriptions, which have beene gathered by others. Pisaurum is an Episcopall Citty now called Pesaro. A famous Mart-towne of Italy, rich in Merchandise, beautifull, and adorned with faire houses. Vrbinum is situate on a high unlevell Mountaine betweene the same Rivers, it is a neate Citty fairely built, and hath a fruitfull soyle round about it, and it is adorned with a faire Library, which is furnished with many excellent Bookes. In Picenum by the side of the Mountaine Victor there is a famous Lake, which they call Nursinum. The common people doe affirme that evill spirits doe swim in it: because the water doe continually leape up and fall downe againe, to the great admiration of those who are ignorant of the cause thereof. These Rivers doe water it, Truentus, commonly called Tronto, Castellanus, Asonus. Letus mortuus, Tenna, Chientus, Flastra, Letus Vivus, Asinus, Potentia, Muson, Esinus, Misa, Sontinus, Cesanus, Metaurus, Cantianus, Boasus, Argila. There are these Mountaines, Furcas, Pescas, and Auximus so called from the Citty Auximum, and Corvus, whence many Rivers together with Albula and Truento doe runne thorow the Marrucinians, the Praecutianians, and the Marsins. But the Apennine Mount in this place where it hangeth over this Country is highest. Here are these Bishopricks, Asculanensis, Firmianus, Camerinensis, Auximanensis, Humanas, Anconitanus, Esinensis, or Exinas, Senogaliensis, Fanensis, Pisaurensis, Forosemproniensis, Calliensis, Vrbinas, or S. Leonis, Maceratensis, Racanatensis.

The Dukedome of SPOLETO.
THe Dukedome of Spoleto commonly called Ducato di Spoleto, is so called from the Citty Spoleto, which was heretofore the Palace

of the Dukes of Lombardy. It was heretofore called Vmbria. It may bee clearely collected out of Strabo that the bounds of Vmbria were heretofore very large, who make the Apennine Mountaine, and the Hadriatick Sea to be the bounds thereof. Some doe make the length of it to be from Ravenna to Tiberis, which is a 1650. Furlongs, or 1128. Furlongs and an halfe. The Country is here full of high rugged Mountaines, and there garnished and trimmed with Hills, which doe yeeld great store of Wine, Oyle, Figges, and other fruits, and then againe it openeth into fertile and fruitfull Plaines. The Citties of the Dukedome of Spoleto are Eugubium, which is seated at the foote of the Apennine, and there lyeth a pleasant faire Plaine before it. Some would have it to be that which Silius calls Inginium: Cicero Iguvium: P^^l. Isovion. It is an old Towne, and of great Antiquity. It is now a populous Towne, and the Inhabitants doe live by dressing and spinning of Wooll. The soyle is partly Mountainous, partly Champion. And it hath every where great store of Corne. Neuceria also cleaveth to the side of the Apennine, the Itinerarie Tables doe call it Nuceriu^, commonly Nocera, and in their language Fulignum or Fuligno, it is above an hundred and threescore Furlongs from Perusia. Sillus Italicus calleth it Fulginia. Timia is devided with a little poore streame. In the Market place there are three Palaces: in one of which there doe dwell the 7. men called Fulginates, before whom all civill controversies are brought, who beare that office for two yeeres: in the other the Praetor who judgeth of more waighty causes, and his office lasteth sixe moneths: in the third is the governour, who hath chiefe power under the Pope. Assisum was so called from the Mountaine Asis neere unto it, Ptolemy cals it Aesisium, Strabo Aesium, it is commonly called Ascesi, and Sisi, it hath a Bishop. Here S. Francis was borne, who instituted the Order of Minorite Friers, and it hath a sumptuous Church. Here is also a well-furnished Library. Mons Falco is a new Towne seated among pleasant Hills, and very populous, B. Clara, who founded the Order of S. Clares Nunnes, was borne here. There is also Spoletum, from whence Vmbria was called the Dukedome of Spoleto. It is commonly called Spoleto, Strabo and Ptolemy doe call it Spoletium. It hath an unequall situation, partly on a Plaine, and partly on a Hill, on which there is a strong Castle built out of the ruines of an Amphitheater. It is now a faire Citty, abounding with plenty of all things. There is besides many other ancient Edifices, as the foundation of an Amphitheater, and the old Church of Concordia without the Citty, and there are pieces of Aquaeducts, which were cut out of the Apennine, and partly conveyed to the Citty thorow bricke Vaults and Channels. Ceretum is a new Towne but populous, from whence the Ceretain are now called Errones, or wanderers, who travell thorow all Italy under the pretence and colour of sanctitie and religion, and get their living by divers Arts. The Castellanian Bridge, or Ponte Castello was built by the Ceretanians. Here Iohn Pontanus was borne, a famous, learned man. Conissa is a new Towne seated on a Mountaine, but very populous. That which Strabo calleth Interamna, and Antoninus Interamnia, and the Itinerarie Tables Interamnium; is

commonly called Terni, or Terani: it aboundeth with all things necessary, and is very populous. The River maketh the soyle very fruitfull. Vernaccia hath excellent Wine. Tuder is an ancient Citty situate on a pleasant Hill, adorned and garnished with Figges, Olives, Vines, and other fruits. It hath these Lakes Floridum, Velinum, Cutiliensis. And besides Inginium which Strabo mentioneth, it hath these Mountaines, Eugubinum, Floridum, and others. There are also the Crustumenian Mountaines, out of which the River Asia floweth with a deepe Channell. There is all Fiscellus which Pliny calls the top of the Apennine, whence the River Nar issueth from two Fountaines; it is now called Monte Fiscello. There is also a part of the Apennine, which is called Mons Victor, where it lifteth up his high top above the Castle Arquatae, and seemeth to exceed it selfe in height, and thence it is called Mons Victor, because it exceedeth the rest in height. The Inhabitants are more warlike then the other people of Italy. The Bishop Ar^^inensis is subject to the Archbishop of Ravenna. There are these Bishopricks in the Dukedome of Spoleto, Assisinas, Fulginas, Nucerinus, Eugubinus, Spoletinus, Tudertinus, Ameliensis, Narniensis, Interamniensis.




CAMPAGNA DI ROMA, HERETOFORE CALLED LATIVM.
NExt Latium offers it selfe to be described, which is a Country of Italy much celebrated and praised by all Authors. It is thought that Latium was so callen from Saturnus, who flying from his Country in his locis latebat, hid himselfe in these parts. Varro thinketh that this Country was so na^ed, because it lay hidden among the high steepe Rockes of the Alpes, and the Apennine, the Sea, and Tiber. Others say that it was named Latium from King Latinus, some derive it from the Latitude, because there is no Country betweene the Mountaines and the Sea, that hath a greater Latitude then this. It is now called Territorio Ro^um or Campagna di Roma. The most do make the bou^ds of Latium on the North the Apennine Mountaine, and the River Anio: on the East Li^. on the South the Tyrrhene Sea; on the West the River Tiber, which ^^th encompasse the Tuscians, Sabinians, Marsians, Samnites, Praeguti^ians, and Campanians. It is a very fertile Country, except in some places neere the Borders, where it is stony and mountainous, and hath many Marshes, which doe make the ayre thick and unwholsome. The Sicilians, the Aboriginians, the Pelasgians, the Arcadians, the A^^uncians, the Volscians, the Oscians, the Ausonians, and others did first inhabit it. So much briefly concerning Latium in generall: now our method requireth that wee should describe it in particular, beginning from that Citty which was heretofore the Compendium or Epitome of the whole world. This Citty sheweth her selfe in ancient Latium, as soone as you have passed out of Etruria over Tiberis. It will keepeth her former name. It is situated in a soyle not very fertile, right against the South, and hath an untemperate ayre and climate. It was three miles in compasse, which was the compasse of ancient Rome, but now it is farre lesse. It hath 360. Towres on the walls, and heretofore 750. There are the 14. Quarters and Regions of the Citty, but their names are changed. It is watered with the River Tiber and Almo. There are also in many places the ruines of Fountaines, and Aquaeducts, or Conduites. There are divers Market-places, and seven Hills within the walls. Whence some doe call Roma Septicollis, because it is seated seven Hills, Varro calls it Septimontium, and Statius Septemgemina. Moreover there are in this Citty above 300. Churches. There are foure Vaults under earth, where when the Emperours did persecute the Christians, they hid themselves. There were, and are ^8. Churchyards or burying places. There are five publike Hospitals for Strangers of all Nations, and 20. severall Hospitals for severall Nations, besides an University. And there are Seminaries and Colledges of all Nations instituted by Pope Gregory the third. There are many publike Libraries, three in the Vatican, one of choise Bookes

which is shut, and another which is not kept so close, and a thir^ which on Holy-dayes is open two houres for all commers. There ar^ also other Libraries in S. Maries Church, and the Church of the Alta^ of Heaven, S. Martins, S. Augustines, and otherwheres. There are als^ divers Gardens and Palaces in this Citty which belong to the Pop^ and the Cardinals. There are both publike and private Conduite* Bathes, Triumphant Arches, Amphitheaters, Theaters, Cirques, Ga^leries, Pillars, Spires, Colosses, or great Images, Pyramisses, Horse^ Statues, and many other such like antiquities, which our intende^ brevitie will not permit us to number or describe. He that beholdeth these things, and compareth them with ancient Rome, may worthily say,
Qui miseranda videt veteris vestigia Romae,Ille potest merito dicere, Roma fuit.Hee that the ruines doth of Rome behold,May justly say that this was Rome of old.
And so much concerning Rome from whence as you goe Southward, the Towne which the Latines and Greekes call Ostia doth offe^ it selfe, which hath an unwholesome pestilent ayre, but the soyl^ beareth great store of Melons. So leaving Ostia, I will take a view o^ the other chiefe Townes of Latium, which are seated by the Sea. Neptunium is situate on a more fruitfull soyle, where the Citizens hav^ leisure to Hawke and Fish. There is also Astura which is a memorable place, both by the vnworthy death of M. Tullius Cicero, who wa^ slaine there as he fled from Antony: and also by the fatall death of Co^radinus the sonne of the Emperour Frederick the second, whom Charle^ Eculismensis put to death. There is also Taracina or Tarracina, which Strabo calls Taracina, Ptolemy Tarraecina, Stephanus Tarracine, and Antoninus Tarracina. In the Volscian language it was called Auxur. It is (...) small Towne but neat and populous. The walls are made of squar^ stone without Mortar or Cemont, the soyle round about is fruitful^ and pleasant, abounding with Oranges, Citternes, Lemmons, and such like fruit. Cajeta, which Strabo calls Cajatta, and now Gajetta, is (...) well fortified Citty having an impregnable Castle on the top of (...) Mountaine, which in former time, the Frenchmen being expulsed Ferdinand King of Arragon and Naples, did wall it about. Spart^an^^ reports that there was a famous Haven here, which was much renewed and re-edified by Anton. Pius. But now there is none. The next (...) Velitra, which Strabo calleth Belitra, and Stephanus Belitre, or as some do^ write Belletri, it is an ancient Towne of the Volscians, faire and populous, and it is a Bishoprick, it hath a delightfull Situation, and (...) pleasant Prospect, and it is walled about. That which the Latines an^ Graecians doe call Alba, the ancient Writers doe surname it long Alba, or long Alba, in regard of the Situation. It is now called Savell^ if we may credit Leander, others doe call it Gandolffi, or S. Gandolffe. I^ was built by Ascanius the Sonne of Aeneas, 30. yeeres after Laviniu^

map of Latium^AMPAGNA DI ROMA, OR, LATIVM.

was built, but now it is desolate. Now let us describe the more Northerne parts of Latium by the way Valeria T^burtina. Here the first is that which Ptolemy calls Tiber, Strabo Tibura, and now Tivola. It is a Citty by the River Aniene being 150. Furlongs distant from Rome, having a temperate ayre, and a wholesome situation in regard it hath great store of Waters and Springs, and it is a Bishoprick. Maruvium by the Lake Fucinum, was heretofore the chiefe Citty of the Marsians, now there are some ruines onely remaining, which are commonly called Marvo. The Latines and Strabo doe call it Alba. And Strabo reporteth that the Romanes were wont to assigne Alba, because it was situate in the innermost parts of the Country, and was well fortified, as a Prison for those which were to be kept in custody, but now it is fallen downe, and ruinate. Praeneste, which Strabo calls Praenestus, Ptolemy Praenestum, and now Pilastrina, had heretofore a very pleasant and delightfull situation on a bending Mountaine by the River Venestris, in so much that when the Romane Empire flourished, the Emperours did often make it their place of retirement and recreation. There is a Castle on the top of the Mountaine, and it is now a Bishoprick. Tusculum was famous heretofore, which they suppose by the ruines yet remaining was not farre from Frascata. There are more Townes in this noble part of Italy, which for brevity sake wee omit. There are also Lakes in Latium, as the Lake Hostia, which is commonly called Stagno. Betweene Marinus and long Alba there is the Alban Lake, which Livy mentions, Lib. 5. it is now called Lago di ^astel Gangolfo: there is also the Nemorensian Lake, which is now called Lago di Nemo: the Lake Iuturna, or Regillus now called Lago de S. Prassed^: the Lake Fucinus, now called Lago di Marsos, Pliny also describeth the Pontine or Pomptine Lake in Latium, which is now called the Lake Aufente. There is also the Fundane Lake, the Tiburrine, the Coecubian, and the Simbruine Lakes. The Rivers are Tiber, which I have delineated in the generall description, and divers other Rivers, which having lost their names doe runne into the Sea with it. The other Rivers of Latium as they were anciently call'd are Numicius, Loracina, Stura, Nymphaeus, and Vfens. Moreover besides the 7. Hills aforesaid whereon Rome is seated. Albanus is most famous in all Greeke and Latine Writers. The Mountaine Caecubus which reacheth to the Cajetan Bay, is noted for bearing excellent rich Wines. There are also the Mountaines Vestinus, Algidus, Aventinus, Lepinus, Catillus. Halecarnassaus doth mention the Ceraunian Mountaines of Latium. The Woods are Feronia, Iupiters Wood, Diana's Wood, the Wood Naevia, the Muses Wood, the cold Wood, the Wood Albuna, the Wood Angitia, and the Wood Furina. The people of this Country even untill these times, except it be in the Cities, are rude, rustick, stout, and strong of body. Mercator doth thus describe the Ecclesiastick government. Rome is the Mother Church, in which the Pope resideth, and hath under him within the Citty 5. Patriarchall Churches, which are these, the Church of S. Iohn of Lateran, S. Peters Monastery, and S. Pauls Monastery within the walls of the Citty, S. Maries Church, and S. Laurences Monastery. There are 8. Bishops assigned to governe these

Churches, the first and chiefest is the Pope, the rest are under him, as the Bishop Ostiensis, who is Patriarke of Campania, and doth consecrate the Pope, unto whom is joyned Velletrensis, or Valeriensis, Portuensis, Salinensis, Tusculanensis, Praenestiensis, and Albanensis. There are also assigned for the government of the same Churches 28. Cardinals, ^amely, by the title of the holy Crosse of Ierusalem, by the title of S. Iohn and Paul, by the title of S. Stephen, in Celio-Monte: by the title of S. Susanna: by the title of S. Peter, by the title of S. Prisca: by the title of S. Siriack: by the title of S. Marcellus: by the title of S. Balbina: by the title of S. Grisogoni. S. Marcellinus, and Peter, S. Anastasia: S. Clement, S. Potentiana, S. Martin on the Mountaines: S. Praxedis: S. Marcus: S. Laurence: S. Mary: S. 4 or. Coronatorum: S. Sabina: S. Nereus, and Archileus: S. Sixitus, S. Eusebius: S. Vitalis: the 12. Apostles Church: S. Laurentius: and S. Cecilia: unto which are adjoyned 18. Cardinals as Deacons. Without the Citty there are in Campania, the Bishops, Agnaninus, Alatrinensis, Fundanus, Tiburtinus, Sagninus, Terracinensis, Verul^nus, Feretinus, Soranus, Aquinus. Moreover, the Pope hath under him in other parts of the world foure Patriarchall Churches, unto which all other Churches in the same parts are subject: as the Church of Constantinople, of Alexandria, of Antioch, of Hierusalem.



ABRVZZO, AND TERRA DI LAVORO, A PART of the Kingdome of NAPLES.
IN this Table two Countries of the Kingdome of Naples are to be described, Aprutium and Terra Laboratoris. The former or Aprutium, the Italians doe now call Abruzzo. The bounds thereof on the West are the Sabinians and Picentians, with the River Truentum: on the North the Hadriatick Sea, on the South the Picentinians, Campanians, Martians, Aequicolians, dwelling on every side of the Apennine Mountaine. The Country hath a very wholesome ayre, and is very populous, pleasant, and commodious toward the Sea, but the inward parts are Mountainous. Besides other commodities it hath abundance of Saffron, and it breedeth great store of Cattell. The chiefe Citty of this Country is Aquila. They report that the Langbards did build it, and afterward Charles Martell, or as some thinke, the Emperour Frederick the second did wall it, and fortifie it, and did call it Aquila, or Eagle, because the Emperours Standard had an Eagle in it. And this Citty in short time was so much enlarged, that it is now the principall Citty in all this Country. Moreover, there are the Townes Guastum, or Amonium in Italian Guasto di Amone, which Pliny and Mela call Histon^um, and Ptolemy Istodium without an aspiration. Laucianum is a famous Mart-towne, whether every yeere in the Moneths of May or August, Italians, I^luricians, Sicilians, Graecians, Asians, and Merchants from other parts of the world doe come to traffick. Soulmoon, which Ptolemy calleth Sulmo, and Strabo Soulmon, is now called Sulmona, as Leander witnesseth, and some doe call it Sermona. It is a faire Citty, both for beauty, populousnesse, and abundance of waters, and famous, because Ovid was borne here. Chieti commonly called Civita Cheto, is an Archiepiscopall Citty. Asculum is an ancient Citty, which Antoninus calleth Asculum, and Pliny calleth it the noble Colonie of Picenum. It standeth in a plaine open soyle, being well fortified with strong walls On one side there is a high Mountaine with a Castle seated on it, on the other side it is fortified with the River Truenius. It is called now by a more fortunate and auspicious name Beneventum, though at first it were called Maleventum, from the ruines which it suffered a malo Vent^, or from evill fierce windes. It is commonly called Beneventi. This Citty hath a very convenient and pleasant situation, and an excellent fruitfull soyle round about it. Sora is neere unto the River Lirus, being populous, and adorned with the title of a Dukedome. There is also the Towne which Ptolemy calls Aquinus, where the great Philosopher Thomas Aquinas was borne. It retaineth still that name, but it is almost fallen downe, yet the ruines doe shew the ancient largenesse thereof: and it hath the title of a Country. I omit the description of the other Townes for brevity sake. The Rivers here are Phinternus,

map of AbruzzoABRVZZO.

which devideth Samnium from Apulia, commonly called Fortore. The Fountaine whereof issueth out of the Mountaine Tifernus, not farre from Bovianum. And it dischargeth it selfe into the Hadriatick Sea neere the Lesinensian Lake. There are also Trintus, which Pliny noteth is full of Havens, also Asinella, Sentus, Sangrus. There are also the Rivers Morus, Feltrinus, Pescara, Aternus, Rafentus, Orta, Liberata, Salinus, Plumba, Vomanus, Turdinus, and others. Moreover, there are also among the Samnites Mountaines so high, that they doe exceed the Apennine Mountaines. Among which is the Virgins Mountaine, famous for S. Maries Church which is built thereon. Majella is a very great Mountaine, having a very difficult ascent, and full of rugged cliffes and Rockes. The top of it is continually coverd with Snow, yet it hath many greene Meddowes, and it sendeth forth many Rivers, and hath very spacious woods, which are full of wilde beasts, especially Beares, and it hath many rugged cliffes. There are also the tops of the Apennine, which they call Montes Tremuli, or the trembling Mountaines.

Terra di Lavoro.
THis Contry is now called Terra Laboris, or Terra di Lavoro, that is the Land of labour. It was heretofore called Campania. The bounds thereof, as we may see in Strabo, Ptolemy, and others, are on the west the River Lirus and Latium: on the North the Samnitian Mountaines: on the East the River Silarus, which parteth it from Lucania, and a part of the Samnitians Country: on the South the Tyrrhene Sea. Truely Campania is Campus, or a Field, into which nature hath powred forth of her owne bosome, all the delights, pleasures, and delicacies, which any place can affoord. So that it may bee rightly called the Paradise of Italy, for fertility and fruitfulnesse. Divers people did heretofore governe this Country, which Strabo mentioneth Lib. 5. and Pliny Lib. 3. Cap. 5. as namely, the Opicians, Ausonians, Oscians, Cumanians, Tuscians, and Samnites, whom the Romanes last of all subdued. So much briefely in generall concerning Campania, now I come to a more particular description thereof, and first of the Citties. The Metropolis or mother Citty of Campania and the Kingdome of Naples is called in Coynes Neapolis or Naples. Which name it still retaineth, and is commonly called Neapolis. It taketh up a great space of ground being magnificently built betweene the Sea and the foote of the pleasant Hills: being fortified with Bulwarks, Townes, and Castles, by Charles the fifth, so that it is now impregnable. It hath Ditches, which are 80. feete deepe, 8. Gates, and spacious Market-places. There are great store of common Condiutes, out of which the water is conveied thorow an hundred Pipes. The figure of it is long, and it bendeth like an halfe Moone. The compasse of it heretofore was 3. miles, but now the Territories thereof being enlarged, it is 5. miles about. It hath a gentle pleasant ayre, and scarce any Winter. This Citty hath many faire Churches, and private Buildings, and a

strong impregnable Castle, with an University which was instituted by the Emperour Frederick the second, unto which Students do come out of all parts of the Kingdome. There are also some Libraries, the chiefe whereof is S. Dominicks Library. The Country round about it and the neighbouring Hills are pleasant and delightfull, and doe yeeld good store of Corne, Wine, divers Fruits, Hearbes, Flowers, and all delicacies, both for necessity and pleasure. I omit many things concerning this Citty for brevity sake. There are also other Citties, as the old and new Capua, the ancient is knowne to all Latine Writers, and the beauty, fairenesse, and magnificence thereof is praised by all men. Great ruines thereof may be yet seene a mile from new Capua, neere S. Maries Church. New Capua was built out of the ruines of the old, which standeth now on the left banke of Vulturnus, 22. miles from the Sea, on a plaine well inhabited, but not much frequented: it hath straite streets paved with stone and high buildings, on the East and North the River Vulturnus doth water it, and from thence it runneth Westward. There is a faire stone bridge over the River. There is also Teanum surnamed Sidicinum, it is called in Italian Theano, and it is a Bishoprick. There is also the Towne Calvus which is a Bishoprick: Virgil calleth it Cales. Strabo and Ptolemy, and other Grecians Cuma. But now it is fallen downe, and buried in ruines, yet the foundations of some faire buildings may be discerned. There are also Aversa, Cas^^, a Nola, Summa, Puteoli, and other lesser Townes. The chiefe Lakes of Campania are the Lucrenian, and Avernian. There are also in Campania the Lakes Linterna, Popeja, and Statina. The Rivers are Lirus which receiveth on the right hand Fibernum, Cosa, Alabrum, Trerus, and others. On the left hand Casinus, Melfa, and Omnes. The next to Lirus is Vulturnus, which receiveth many Rivers and Torrents, among the rest, on the right hand it receiveth Cusanum, and Correctam, on the left hand Freddus, Pratellus, Sabbatus, Isclerus, and others. Also Glanis, Sebetus, Linternus, Sarnus, Furor, Ebolis, Silarus. The Mountaines that belong to this Country, are Gaurus, Massicus, Falernus, and others, as Vesuvius, Pausilypus, Misenus, Culma, Christs Mountaine, Taburnus, Tifata, Planus, Astrunus, and Trifolinus. Moreover in the Kingdome of Naples there are these Principalities and Dominions. Namely 10. Principalities, as Ascolt, Besignano, Evoli, Melfi, Mefetta, Monchercole, Squilaci, Sligliano, Sulmona, Venosa, And 23. Dukedomes, namely, Andri, Amalphi, Ariani, Asu, Boyano, Castrovillari, Gravina, Martina, Montalto, Monteliano, Nardo, Nocera, Popoli, Rocca di Mondragone, S. Petro in Galatina, Seminara, Sessa, Somma, Sora, Tagliacozzo, Termoli, Terra Nova, Trajetto. There are 30. Marquiships, 54. Counsellors of State, 11. Lords, 403. Titular Barons. The Archbishops and their Suffragans in this Table are taken out of the Romane Province. In Aprucina and Marcicana, there are these Bishops, Aquilensis, Forcanensis, Marsicanus, Valvensis, or Sulmonensis: Theatinus, Adriensis, Pennensis, Aprutinus, or Teranus. The Archbishop of Beneventum under whom are these Suffragans, Telesinensis, Agatha, Alphiensis, or Alepharensis, Mons Marani, Avellinensis, Vicanensis, Arianensis, Rojanensis, or Rojanensis, Asculanensis, Nucerinus, Tertibulensis, Traconensis, Vulturanensis, Alarinensis, Ferentinensis, or Florentinensis, Civitacensis,

Termelensis, Lesinensis, Frequentinensis, Triventinensis, Biminensis, Vadiensis, or Gadiensis, Musanensis, S. Mariae. The Archbishop of Naples, under whom are Nolanus, Puteolanus, Cumacensis, Acerranus, Iscalanus. The Archbishop of Capua, under whom are Theanensis, Calvensis, Calmensis, Suessanus, Venefranus, Aquitanensis, or Aquinatensis, Iserniensis, Casertanensis. The Archbishop Amalfitanus, under whom are Capricanensis, Scalensis, or Camensis, Minorensis, Siteranensis. The Archbishop of Salerne, under whom are Aquensis, Palicastrensis, Nusautanensis, or Nuscanensis, Sarnensis, Acervensis, or Acernensis, Maricensis. The Archbishop of Surrentine, under whom are Lobrensis, Serpensis, Aquensis, or Equensis, or Vianus, Castellimaris, or Stabiensis. And let so much suffice concerning this part of the Kingdome of Naples, I passe to the other part.




PVGLIA PIANA, TERRA DI BARRI, TERRA DI Otranto, Calabria, and Basilicata.
The other part of the Kingdome of NAPLES.
NOw we must view the other part of the Kingdome of Naples, in which the first Country is that which the Italians doe call Puglia Piana, from the large spacious fields there of. It was heretofore called Apulia Daunia. It is bounded on the East with Apulia Peucetia, and the River Aufidus: on the South with the Apennine, together with the Hirpenians, and Samnites: on the West with the Frentanians, Caracenians, now called Aprutians, and Phiternians: on the North with the Hadriatick, and Jonium Sea. The soyle is very fruitfull, yeelding abundance of Wheate and Corne. Here are both Citties and Townes, as Manfrelonia, a faire and populous Citty, being situated on the banke of the Bay, which lyeth in the hollow winding of the Mountaine Garganus, and it hath an invincible Castle by the Shore side. Leuceria is an Episcopall Citty; which Ptolemy and Suetonius call Neuceria: the ruines yet remaining doe shew the spaciousnesse of it. Troy is a rich Citty, having a fruitfull Soyle about it. Asculum is a Citty, which is adorned with the Title of a Dukedome: Appianus Alexandrinus calleth it Asculum, it is commonly called Asculo, and surnamed Sattriano. There are also Salpe, or Arpi, which Pliny mentioneth, which was sometime called Argos Hippium, and afterward Agrippa: and two Citties, which became a Proverb, Apina and Trica, etc. The Rivers are Aufidus, now called l'Ofanto. Also Candilaris, and Cervaria.
So much concerning Apulia Daunia: the next Country which is to be described is Peucetia: now it is called in Italian, Terra Bariana, or Terra di Barri, from the chiefe Citty Bario. This Country for fertility of soyle, and plenty of choise fruit, may compare with other parts of Italy. But yet there are some places which are full of Boggs, and Waters. The chiefe Citty is Barium, which Pliny calleth Barion, it is commonly called Barri. It is an ancient Citty, and so faire and populous, that it is the chiefe Citty of the whole Country, which is called from thence Terra Bariana. There are also Monopolis, which is a new Citty adorned with the title of a Marquiship, which is not very great, but faire and beautifull, and full of magnificent Buildings. The soyle round about it yeeldeth great store of Oyle. Polonianum or Polignano is an Episcopall Citty, which although it bee seated on a high stony Rock, yet it is faire and populous. Mola hath many houses, but inhabited with rustick people. The Marquesse Polinianus built a Castle there for the defence of the Coast. Iuvenatum, or Ginvenazzo, is an Episcopall Citty, seated in a fertile soyle. Marfette or as some write it, Morfitta, or Melfatta, flourisheth with the Title of a Principality. Vigiliae commonly call'd Bisegli is an Episcopall Towne seated by the

shore, on high Rocks: Tranum is an Archiepiscopall Citty, commonly called Trani. It had faire Buildings, but now for the most part it is desolate. There are Woods of Olives and Almonds, which do reach from this Towne even to Tarentum. Barulum is commonly called Barleta. Ostuna is a populous Citty, seated on a little Hill. Cilium, or Cilio, which Ptolemy calls Cilia, and Horace Venusia, or Venusium, where hee was borne, is now called Venesa. There are also Canusium, Acherontia, Biletum, and other Townes.
Next to Apulia we must describe the Country of the Salentinians, which is also called Iapygia, Massapia, and Calabris. The Italians doe now commonly call it Terra d'Otranto. This Country hath on the South Tarentum, and the Sea even to the Salentinian Promontory: on the East the same Promontory, with the Jonian Sea: on the North it is watered with the River Hidruntes, even to Brundusium: on the West it hath Apulia, Peucetia, and a part of great Greece. This Country hath a wholesome ayre, and a cleere faire Climate except on that Coast, which reacheth from the Hydruntine Lake to Brundisium, where there are Marshes in those places which are neere the Sea. The Country is fatt and fruitfull, and the chiefe Citty which nameth the Country is Hydruntum, which Strabo, Ptolemy, and others doe call ^arous. Mela calleth it Hydrus: it it now call'd Otrante. It is an ancient Citty, having a sweet milde ayre, a strong Castle, built by Alphonsus the second, and a large spacious Haven. The soyle is pleasant and fruitfull. The other Citties are Gallipolis, now called Callipolis. Others call it Callipoli, as it were the faire Citty. It hath a strong situation: for it is seated on a Rock or small Iland, which is encompassed every where with the Sea, and it is joyned to the Continent with a stone Bridge. Castrum is a Citty much frequented by Merchants, who come thither to buy Oyle. Brundusium, or Brundisiam, which Ptolemy calls Breundesium, Steph. Brentesium, and Benjamin Barnedis, is now called Brindisi. It hath a gentle ayre. It had heretofore a famous Haven, out of which the Romanes did formerly passe safely into Creece, but now it is filled up, so that a Galley can hardly come up into it. The Citty is fortified with a strong Castle. The Citty Oria is seated on a Hill looking toward Tarentum, and hath a strong Castle. That Towne which Ptolemy calls Aletium, is now called Leze, and Leccie. It is the prime Citty of the Salentinians, in regard that the Royall Counsell of Apulia is held here, and because all the Nobility of this Country have houses here. Vxentem, now called Vgento, Vsenti, or Ogento, is a very small Citty,
Calabria is so called from the Calabrians, who as it appeares in Ptolemy, did possesse a part of great Greece from the Salentinians to the Jonian Sea, about the Promontory Iapygium. It is a Country of Italy which being stretched foorth in the farthest borders thereof like a tongue, doth lye betweene the higher and lower Straites. It doth plentifully produce all things that may serve for necessity, or delicacy, as Wheate, Barley, and other kindes of Corne, also Wine, Oyle, Sugar, Manna, Honey, Wax, Salt, Figges, Oranges, Lemmons, and other excellent fruits: also Gold, Silver, Wooll, Cotton, Saffron, Silke,

map of Puglia PianaPVGLIA PIANA.

Hempe, and what not? Calabria is twofold, the lower which was heretofore the Seate of the Brutians, which is now called the lower Calabria, and the higher which was heretofore great Greece. The bounds of the lower Calabria are on the West Laus the Lucanians: on the South the Tirrhene and Sicilian Sea: on the East it is enclosed with part of the Hadriatick Sea: on the North with great Greece, and the River Crathus. Strabo Ptolemy, and other Graecians doe call the Metropolis, or Mother Citty hereof Consentia: it is now called Consenza. It is seated by the bending of the Apennine, and it containeth 7. Hills, on which the most part of the houses are situate. The other Citties are Manthia, Fredus, Belmontium, Sancta Euphemia, Fanum Rhegium, Tropia, Castrum Villare, Altomonti, Turranom, Rugianum, Marturanum, Nicastrum, Briaticum, Hippo, and that Citty which was called Vibo Valentia The bounds of the higher Calabria which was heretofore called great Greece, are on the East the Adriatick Sea: on the South the River Alex and the Brutians: on the West the River Crathis, with the Apennine, and the Lucanians: on the North the Tarentine Bay with Apulia. Here is the ancient and noble Citty Tarentum, which Appianus Alexandrinus calls Tarantum: Strabo and Ptolemy, Tarus: now it is called Taranto. Lucius Florus saith that it was heretofore the chiefe Citty of Calabria, Apulia, and all Lucania. It is situate in the innermost part of a Bay, which is called from the Citty, the Tarentine Bay.
There remaineth in this Table Lucania to bee described, which is now called Basilicata, but from whence it is uncertaine. The bounds thereof on the West are the River Silarus, which bounders Campania: on the South the Tyrrhene See: on the East Laus the Brutians, and great Greece: on the North the Peucetians in Apulia, with a part of Hirpinia. Livy sheweth that it is all Mountainous and rugged. But now perhaps it is more inhabited than it was formerly, yet in many places it is very desolate, in regard of the hard uneven wayes, and the dreadfull hideous woods in which many robberies are committed The Townes here by the Sea are Paestum, which Virgil mencioneth Lib. 4. Georg.


Biferique Rosaria Paesti.
The Rose-Gardens of Paestum, where
Sweet Roses doe grow twice a yeere.


Servius maketh Paestum a Cittie of Calabria, where Roses doe growe twice a yeare. Acropolis is a Towne 12. Miles from the mouth of the, River Silarius, having an excellent ayre. The name sheweth that it was built by the Graecians, as the most of the other Townes in this Country. There is also Pisciotta, which Pliny, Mela, and Ptolemy doe call Buxentum. Palicostrum is a Noble Citty and adorned with the title of a Dukedome. In the middle of the Country there is the Towne Padula, which is honoured with the title of a Marquiship. The Citty Capacia was heretofore very populous, and rich. I omit the other Townes. Moreover in the other part of the Kingdome of Naples

there are these Archbishops, the Archbishop of Regiensis: under whom are Lucrensis, Cotroniensis, Cassanensis, Cathacensis, Neocastrensis, Giracensis, ^^^etensis, Vibonensis, Squilacensis. The Archbishop of Consentinus, under whom is Maturanensis. The Archbishop of Rosania hath no Suffragans. The Archbishop of S. Severine, under whom are Ebriacensis, Strangulen^is, Geneocastrensis, Gerentinensis, S. Leonis. The Archbishop of Larcatinus under whom are Mutulensis, Castellanensis. The Archbishop of Brundi^^us, under whom are Astrinensis. The Archbishop of Hidrontinus, under whom are Castrensis, Gallipolitanus, Liciensis, Vgentinensis, Lucensis, Nolanensis is exempted. The Archbishop of Barensis, under whom are ^entinensis, Calphajanus, Iuvenacensis, Rubentinensis, Salpensis, Cauriensis, ^^rensis, Conversanus, Minerviensis, Polignercensis, Cathericensis, Lavellinensis. The Archbishop of Tranensis, under whom are Vigiliensis, An^ensis, and Penensis. The Archbishop of Sipontinus, under whom are Tesenensis excepted, Trojanensis excepted, Melphiensis, Monopolitanensis, and R^polensis are excepted, Cannosanus under whom are Auranensis, ^^ranensis, Montisviridis, Laquedonensis, S. Angeli de Lombardis, Bisaciensis. The Archbishop of Acheronti, under whom are Potentiensis, Tricariensis, ^^^^siensis, Graviensis, Angelensis.



THE ILANDS CORSICA AND SARDINIA.
CORSICA was so called from Corsus, who was Lord o^ this Country. The Graecians called it Kurnon from Cyrnus the sonne of Hercules: Ovid names it Teraphne, as Villanovanus writeth. On the West and North it hath the Ligustick Sea: on the East the Tyrrhene Sea: on the South Sardinia. It is not above 120. Miles long, although Strabo maketh the length thereof to be 160. Miles, and Pliny 150. who also maketh the breadth thereof to be 60. Miles: and Strabo maketh it 70. Miles, which appeareth to bee true by measuring it with a paire of Compasses. The compasse of it according to Pliny is 3^0. Miles, but according to Maginus 325. which hee saith that hee found out by measuring it exactly. This Iland is hard to come unto, being enclosed on every side with inaccessible dangerous cliffes, and Hills. Within likewise it is for the most part Mountanous, and therefore it yeeldeth no great store of Wheate and Pulse; which grow but in some few places, where the Country opens it selfe, and is watered with Rivers, which make it fruitfull. That part which looketh toward Etruria is indifferent plaine, having a fruitfull Soyle, which beareth excellent sweet fruites. This Iland hath excellent wines, of chiefe note, which the Romanes much esteemed, they are called from the place Corsican Wines. Here is great store of Honey, Rosen, Oyle, and Figges. But Servius noteth in his 4. Booke of Geogr. that the Corsian Honey is bitter, which comes to passe by reason that there are great store of Ewe trees, from whence the Bees doe gather Honey. And Ovid beleeved that it was venemous. This Country onely doth produce the Precious stone Catochites, which Democritus the Abderite used when hee contended against the Magitian. Rhenus concerning Corsica saith thus.

Hanc solam perhibent Catochitem gignere terram:
Corporibus lapis hic seu glutine tactus adhaeret.

Pliny, Lib. 37. Cap. 10. and Solinus Cap. 9. doe report the like. But Pliny doubteth of the truth thereof. Here is also Allom: and there are Iron Mines neere the River Bivincum, in the County Nebiensis. There are also Saltpits, commonly called della Roya, not far from the Haven of S. Florence: and neere Niolum there are deepe Valleys, which are alwaies cover'd with Snow, under which they say there is great store of Christall. There is also, as Pliny and Diodorus witnesse, great plenty of Boxe, and Eewe trees. It breedeth divers kindes of living

map of Corsica and SardiniaTHE ILANDS CORSICA, AND SARDINIA.

creatures, especially lusty Horses, and great Hounds, and also a kinde of beast called Mufmo, which Pliny saith, is a kinde of Ramme, they call it now Mosoli: which beast is not found in any part of Europe, except in this Iland, and Sardinia. It hath a hide and haire like a Hart, and Hornes like a Ramme, which are not long but doe bend backward about his eares, and are so hard, that if hee should fall downe 50. foote high among the rocks, and alight upon his head, it would not hurt him; it is as bigge as an Hart, and feedes onely on grasse, being very swift of foote, and the flesh of it is very pleasant in tast. Moreover this Iland is full of sheepe and Oxen: It was heretofore inhabited by the Phocensians, then by the Ligurians, and afterward by the Romanes, who brought thither two Colonies, the Marian, and the Alerian, which doe still continew. The Barbarians possessed the rest: afterward when the Romanes invaded them, they brought a great Company of Slaves from thence to Rome, of which they made no great commodity, for they were such bruitish people, that albeit they were bought for a small price, yet their Masters repented them of their bargaine. After the Romanes the Sarazens succeeded, and after them the Geonoa's: then the Pisanians, and now it belongeth to Genoa. It is devided now into two parts: they call the Easterne part the innermost side, and the Westerne side the outermost side. That part which is neerer to Italy is called Cismontana, or on this side the Mountaines, and that which runneth out towards Sardina is called Vltramontana or beyond the Mountaines. Pliny witnesseth that there are 33. Citties in it, which also Martianus Capella doth note out of him. But it apeareth by Strabo that they were rather Castles then Citties. There is now the Towne Bastia, in which the chiefe Governour liveth, and hath a Garrison to defend him. There is also the Citty Nebbium which Ptolemy calls Cersunum. It is watered with the Rivers Gelone, Tavignano, Sago^a, Bavono, Tegiamo, and some others. The Mountaines also are clothed with woods which doe yeeld Rosen. The chiefe Mountaines are Illia Orba: also the Mountaine Cheparteno, the Mountaine Tenda, the Mountaine Gualango, and the Mountaine Russus. In the Sea betweene Corsica, Sardinia, there is Corrall gathered. This Iland hath two great Havens, which are able to receive great Ships, in S. Florences Bay. There is also S. Bonifaces Haven, which Ptolemy calls the Syracusan Haven. The Inhabitants of Corsica both were, and are accounted very poore men, that live by stealing and robbing: and altogether unletterd. There are these Bishops in Corsica, who are Suffragans to the Archbishop of Pisanum, namely, Aciensis, Alariensis, Sagonensis, and Civitanensis, and the Bishop Nubiensis, or Nebiensis, who is subject to the Archbishop Ianuensis.


SARDINIA.
SARDINIA was so named from Sardus the Sonne of Hercules. Timaeus called it Sandaliotin, because it resembleth the shape of a shooe-soale. Mirsilus and Chrysippus called it Ichausa, because it is like the soale of the foote. Which Manilius intimateth when hee saith.
Sardiniam in Lybico signant vestigia plantae.
It is now called Sardegna. On the East the Tyrrhene Sea doth beate upon it, on the South the Affricke, on the West the Sardian; on the North the Sea that floweth betweene it and Corsica. This Iland hath an ungentle ayre: and therefore Q. F. doth admonish M. Cicero to have a care of his health, and to remember that although hee were now in health, yet hee was in Sardinia: and in his Epistles hee saith that one Sigellius a Sardinian was a man more pestilent and contagious than his Country. All the Iland aboundeth with fruite, Wheate, Wine, Mines of Silver, Cattell, and all things necessary. There are such store of Horses, that many runne wilde, and have no owners; they are lesser than ours, but full of mettall, strong and nimble. It affoordeth much Hunting, so that the Country people doe live onely by it. For this Country hath abundance of Boares, Harts, Does, and another kinde of Beast which they call Muflo, which we have described before in the description of Corsica. But Sardinia hath no Wolves, nor any other harmefull beast, nor Serpent, and therefore Silius saith.



Serpentum tellus pura, ac viduata Veneno,


Sed tristis coelo, ac multa vitiata palude.



This Country is from poysond Serpents free,
But many noysome Marshes in it bee.


But the Soligunda in Sardinia is as offensive and hurtfull as Serpents are in other Countries. It is a little creature like a Spider. L.S. calleth it Solifuga, because it shunneth the day-light. It liveth much in the Silver Mines, for this soyle is very rich in Silver Oare. It creepeth closely along, and if any one sitt upon it unawares, it infecteth him. There is also a strange Sardinian Hearb, which Pausanias saith, is like unto Parsly: which if it bee eaten, it doth contract and draw together the Visage and mouth, so that they dye as it were laughing. Strabo writeth that the Spaniards make poison of it, which being drunke, doth dispatch them without any paine, and hence grew the Proverb Sardonius risus, or the Sardinian laughter. The chiefe Citty of Sardinia is Calaris, commonly called Cagler. It is situate on a Mountaine neere the Sea, looking toward Affrick, and it hath a faire Haven. This Citty is adorned with many priviledges: it createth Cons^ls, who have power to punish delinquents without authority from

the King: and it hath power with the peoples consent to make new lawes. In this Citty the reliuqes of S. Augustine were kept, untill Heliprandus King of the Langbards did translate them to Papia. In this Citty the viceroy of Sardinia resideth, together with many Barons, Earles, and divers rich men. Mela and Pliny doe make mention of the Citty Sulchitana. There are now also the Citties Oristagnum, which is a Metropolitan Citty, situate on a Plaine, not farre from the Sea. It was heretofore called the Country of trees, but now it is called the Marquiship of Oristagnum. There is also the Citty Sassaris which hath a pleasant soyle watered with many Springs, and abounding with divers sorts of fruites, but it is weakely fortified. Algher is a new small Citty, but yet populous and strong, and adorned with many faire aedifices and buildings: the inhabitants whereof are almost all Tarraconians. Sardinia hath also other Citties, and Townes, which for brevitie sake wee omit. It hath many pleasant Rivers which are not deepe, so that in sommer time you may passe over the bards. There are many Magistrates in Sardinia. The chiefe is the Viceroy, who hath al the Kings authority: and according to their ancient lawes none but a Spaniard can beare this office. The King doth assigne and appoint him one assistant, who is Doctor of both Lawes, whom they call there the Regent. Moreover hee hath other Counsellors, who dispose and order all matters, and this Court is called the Kings audience. Heretofore it was a priviledge of the Kingdome that no man could beare this office longer than three yeres, and then another succeedeth in his place. But now one continueth in that office as long as the King pleaseth. Concerning the manners and dispositions of the Sadinians: they are strong of body, and inured to Labour, except it be some few who are given to effeminacy and wantonesse. Many of them doe keepe Cattell, and are contented with poore fare and water. Those that dwell in the Townes and Villages, doe live peaceably and quietly together. They love strangers, and doe use them kindly. They live from hand to mouth, and goe in a poore habbit. And which is strange, there is not one Artificer in all the Iland, that can make either Swords, Daggers or other weapons, so that they fetch them out of Spaine and Italy. Mercator mentioneth these Bishops. The Archbishop Claritanensis, under whom are these Bishops, Sulcitanus or Sulciensis, Doliensis, Suellensis. The Archbishop Turitanus, under whome are these Bishops, Sorrensis, Plotanensis, Ampuriensis, Gifacensis, or Girardensis, Castrensis, Othanensis, or Othricensis, Bosanensis, or Bossa. The Archbishop Alborensis, under whom are the Bishops of Vssellensis. S. Iustia, Terra Alba, Civitatensis, and Gastelliensis are excepted.




THE KINGDOME OF SICILIE.
SICILIE is next to bee described, which excelleth all the Ilands of the Mediterranean Sea. Thucidides calleth it Sicania from Sicanus, who, as Solinus and Capella doe write, came with a band of Iberians into that Country before the Trojan warres. Many doe call it Trinacria, and especially the Poets, in regard it hath 3. Promontories. Or else because it resembleth a Triangle or three cornerd figure, for it runneth forth divers wayes with three Promontories, and so is like the greeke letter Delta, which beareth this shape D. These three Promontories are Pelorus, Pachynus, and Lilybaeum. The Graecians did call it Sicelia. But some suppose, --Trinacria quondamMutavere, situm: rupit confinia Nereus:Italiae pars una fuit, sed pontus and aestusVictor, and abscissos interluit aequore monteis.Trimacria hath her situation chang'd,And now the Sea their borders hath estrang'd,Heretofore it was a part of Italie,From whence 'tis now divided by the Sea.
And hence RhegiumRhegium is so called from (...), which signifies to breake, because Sicilie is here broken of and divided from Italie. is so called in Italie, because Sicilie is there divided from Italie: On the North it hath the Tyrrhene Sea; on the East the Hadriatick and Ionian Sea; on the South the Affrick Sea, and on the West the Sardinian Sea. Thycydides writeth Lib. 6. that the compasse of Sicile is about 8. dayes journey, and yet it lyeth but 20. furlongs from the maine land or continent of Italy. Moreover this Iland doth excell for the wholesomenesse of the ayre, the fruitfullnesse of the soyle, and plenty of all fruite, and other things, which are necessary for the use of man: For it lyeth in the 4. Climate, which for the gentlenesse, and temperatenesse of the ayre, doth exceede the sixe others. So that Sicilie produceth the best fruites. So that Marcus Cato calleth it the Stoarehouse of the Commonwealth, and the Nurse of the Romane People; and Strabo the Barne of Rome. In the Sunensian fields, where the ancients doe faine that Proserpine was tooke away violently, which they call the Navell of Italie, the Corne yeeldeth so great an increase, insomuch that one bushell of Wheate sowed yeeldeth an hundred, which field they call therefore Campe dallo cento Sal^e. The Leontine fielde is not inferiour unto this, concerning which Cicero saith in his third Oration against Verres. Quid Vina commorab^

optimi saporis adorisque? What should I mention the fragrant pleasant Wines.? Pliny (who was most diligent and curious in reckoning the best sorts of Wines) doth affirme that there is excellent good Wine made in Sicilie. And hee saith that there is the Balincian Wine in Sicilie, which tasteth like Methegling, or Wine mingled with honey. So that they suppose the Balincian Wine is that which they call Muskadine,Muskadine whence so called. which is very sweete. For both Alpes Muskadine whence so called, that is Bees, and Muscae that is flies doe haunt these Grapes, which are therefore called Muskadine Grapes, out of which a sweet pleasant wine is pressed which they call Muskadine: though some suppose that it was so called because it smelleth like Muske. So that the Wine of Sicilie may be rightly esteemed the best, for it is as good as the Italian Wine, and as pleasing to the Pallat, and will keepe as long. Moreover Sicilie hath great store of Oyle, Suger, Saffron, Honey, Salt, all sorts of fruites, and excellent Silke. Besides Sicilie is rich in Mettalls: for it hath Gold, Silver, Iron, and Allom. It produceth also Pretious stones, as the Emerald, the Achates, the Berill, the red Marble stone, the Iasper, and it hath great heards and flocks of Oxen and Cattell. There is excellent hunting of Does and Boares, and Hauking at Partridges and Quailes, which they commonly call Francolinas. And Falcons, who are enimies to all flying fowle, are taken heere. The fierce Lestrigonians did first possesse this Country, afterward the Sieanians, a Colonie of Spaniards, and lastly the Trojans and Cretensians came hither. Afterward the Graecians did invade it, then the Romanes, and after the division of the Easterne, and Westerne Empire it was subject to Constantinople almost 200. yeares. But in the raigne of the Emperour Iustinian, the Gothes invaded this Iland, who 17. yeares afterward were expelled and droven out by Belisarius. Afterward the Saracens did possesse it, under Michael Ba^bus, and held it 400. yeares. The Normans succeeded them, and afterward the Langbards, Suevians, and Germanes: but they being droven out by Clement the 4. the Frenchmen possessed it 16. yeares. Afterward it was subject to the Aragonians, untill the raigne of King Ferdinand, after whose decease the Kings of Spaine were also Kings of Aragon, and Sicilie. Pliny reckoneth that there are 72. Citties in it. But now there are 173. Citties and Townes, as Maginus witnesseth. The Metropolis or mother Citty of the Kingdome is Panormus, which Ptolomy and others doe call Palernum, it is now called Palermo. It is an ancient Citty, and a Colony of the Phoenicians, as appeareth by some Epitaphs written in Caldean letters. It is thought that it was built in Abrahams time, being seated in a pleasant fruitfull soyle. It looketh Northward, and is washed with the Tyrrhene Sea, having high walls, which were built by King Frederick. Neere the Sea there is a Castle, which hath beene much enlarged, which they call Castrum ad Mare, or the Castle by the Sea. There are also three Gates of the ancient Citty yet standing, and the old Walls, with many Towres built of foure square stone. There is a Church at Panormus consecrate to S. Peter, which was built by Rogerius King of Sicilie, which excelleth both for beauty, and costly building, all the ancient and new Churches in

map of SicilyTHE KINGDOME OF SICILIE.

Italy, so that learned men and travellers that come to see it doe much admire it. The greater Church of this Citty is of a kind of a networke building, carved with divers figures and Images, and built by Gualther the second Archbishop of that name, which was founded in the yeare 1185. where the bodies of the Kings, and Queenes, and Dukes are buried and interr'd. There is also a publike Schoole, and an Hospitall for strangers. It would be tedious to rehearse the other faire buildings, and aedifices which are in this Citty. The other Citties are Siracusa, which was heretofore a great Cittie, which the Orator thus describeth in his 4. Oration against Verres. You have often heard that Siracusa is the greatest and fairest of all the Graecian Citties. And so it is, O Iudges as you have heard. For it is strongly situate, and hath a faire comming to it both by Sea and Land, and it hath Havens which are inclosed on every side with bvildings, which having divers entrances, doe at last meete and flow together. Where a part of the Towne, which is called the Ile, being disjoyned by their meeting together, with a straite Sea, is joyned together againe with a Bridge. It is so great a Citty, that they say it doth consist of 4. great Citties, one of which is the Iland aforesaid: which is encompassed with two Havens, at the Mouth of one of which there is King Hierons Pallace, in which the Praetors now dwell. There are many Churches in it, but especially two, which doe farre exceede the rest, one consecrate to Diana, and the other to Minerva, which was a faire Church before Verres came thither. In the farthest part of the Iland, there is a Fountaine of sweet water, which is called Arethusa, which is very great, and full of fish, which would be coverd with the waves of the Sea, but that it is walled about with stones. But there is another Citty of Syracusa which is called Acardina, in which there is a great Market-place, a faire Gallery, and Counsell-house, a great Court, and a Temple of Iupiter Olympus, and many private Aedifices. There is a third Citty which is called Tyche, in which there is a great Schoole, and many Churches, and it is well inhabited and frequented. The fourth Citty is that which because it was last built, is called Neapolis, or the new Citty, in which there is a great Theater, and two great Churches, one consecrate to Ceres, and another to Bacchus, and a faire Statue of Apollo, which is called Tennites. But not all the beauty of this Citty is decayd, and onely some ruinous parts of the Towne are remaining. Messana is a Citty by the Sea side, the Inhabitants whereof were first called Messanians, and afterward Mamertinians, which Herodotus and Thucydides doe mention. There is also Catina, which is called Catana, where Charonda the Lawmaker was borne, and it hath now a famous Schoole. Taurominium is a Citty built by the Zanclaeans, it is now called Taormina. There is also Leontium, where Gorgias Sophista was borne. Agrigentum is an ancient Citty, which heretofore the Carthaginians raced, and Megalus and Feriscus re-edified it againe. There are also Augusta which was heretofore called Megara: also Castrogianum, heretofore Ennea: Drepanum, Monreale, Heraclea, and many other Citties. It is watered with many Rivers, in which, as in the Lakes there are good store of Mullets, Eeles, Tenches, and Trowts. And in the Sea

there is good fishing for Tunyes, not onely at Pachynum, but also at Panormum, and Drepanum, and all that Coast which lyeth by the Tyrrhene Sea. There are also Sword-fishes taken in the Massonian Sea. Lastly, there is excellent good fishing in the Sicilian Sea, for there are great store of Mullets, which the Grecians call Trichias, and Sophrorius and Cicero doe call them Barbels, and also great store of Lampreys. But the Cicilian straites are narrow, dangerous, and rough, and are called by the name of Scylla and Charybdis. The chiefe Mountaines Aetna and Eryx. Aetna by Pindarus is called the Pillar of Heaven. Silius ^adicus calleth it Tiphoeum. It is now called Monte Gibella, or Mongi^ello. Eryx is much memoriz'd for Venus Chappell, which was built by Encas. In Sicily are the Archbishops Panormitanus, under whom are the Bishops Agrigentinus, Masarensis, Milevitanus, or Maltensis. The Archbishop of Montis Regalis, under whom are Siracusanus, and Cothanensis. The Archbishop of Messanensis, under whom are Cephaludensis, Pacensis, Liperiensis, Marc^^ and Mili^ensis, now Milaza.



STIRIA, COMMONLY CALLED STIRMARCK, which was made a Dukedome by FREDERICK BARBAROSSA.
In it there are many Countries, among the which is WARASDEN; by the River DRAVUS and LEBNAW, by the River MURA.
STIRIA commonly called Stirmarck, was without doubt so called from a Bull or Steere, to which opinion Aegidius Tschudus subscribeth: where he reporteth out of Pliny, that Caro doth affirme that the Lepontians and Salassians were of the Taurick Nation: but these Tauriscians were Frenchmen, who in the ancient French warres seated themselves beyond the Alpes, of which Polybius Lib. 2. of the French warre writeth thus. Those that are called the Transalpine French* doe dwell by the Alpes on either side of Mountaines, on that side which looketh Northward, and towards the River Rhodanus, but on that side which lyeth towards the plaine ground, there are the Tauriscians, the Agonians, and many other barbarous people, from whom the Transalpines are onely distinguisht by their different habitation, and therefore called Transalpines, because they live beyond the Mountaines. But after these Tauriscians departed hence, they sought themselves other habitations, and possessed the Country, which is now called the County of Goerts, and so comming into Stiria, they left their name unto that Country. For a Bull in the Germane language is called a Stier. And so they spred and dispersed themselves into Austria, and Hungary. Some affirme that Stiria was heretofore called Valeria, in honour of Valeria the Daughter of Dioclesian, as Marcellinus doth report. Volateranus thinketh that it was called Iapidia: for so he writeth in the 8. Booke of his Geogr. The next unto this Iapidia, which they now call Styria, though Pope Pius thinketh it should bee called Valeria, by according to Rufus his description, doe thinke that Valeria should be rather called Croatia, betweene Danubius and Dravus* The last Marquesse was called Ottocarus, whose Daughter Lupold Duke of Austria married, who by the Emperour was made Duke of Stiria* Afterward his Line being extinct, the Governour of Hungary sent hi^ Sonne to governe his Country, but hee living loosely, and having laid intolerable taxes and taxations on the Stirians, was droven out and Ottocarus the King of Bohemias Son was called in, who did usurpe the Dukedome of Austria, and got Carinthia in the yeere of Chris^ 1269. but he could not keepe it long. For he grew so arrogant, tha^ hee contemned the Emperour, and would not doe homage for the

map of StiriaSTIRIA OR STIRMARCK

Lands which he held in Bohemia unto the Emperour Rudolphus Habsburgius: the Emperour at Augusta called a Counsell of the Princes of Germany, and citeth Ottacarus to appeare at his perill and to answere concerning those Provinces of the Empire which he unjustly possessed, as also concerning his contempt against the Emperours Majesty. Ottacarus laughs at the Citation: and sends no body to the Counsell to answer for him. In the meane time Embassadours being sent from the States of Austria, came to Augusta to the Emperour, and the Counsell of Princes there assembled, and there having grievously complained before Caesar and the Princes of Ottocarus his injury and cruelty, they shewed that he had gotten Austria by an unjust Title: and that he had repudiated and divorced his lawfull wife Margarite, the Inheretrix of Austria, and kept a Whore, and at length poysond his owne wife: and that he tooke away the lawfull Inheritance of Austria from Agnes Badensis, and her Daughter Elizabeth, with her Brother Henry: and that he had murderd many of the Noblemen in the Citty of Vienna, and had butcherd many innocent people: and that hee had secretly devided Austria, Stiria, Carniola, and the Marquiship of the Vindorians, which were in the Emperours gift, and that hee might hold Austria by the ayde of a forraine power, and lay the yoke of servitude on the people, he did therefore revolt from the Empire and Caesar, etc. It was hereupon decreed by the Princes, that Embassado^s should be sent to Bohemia. But they in stead of an answere giving reproachfull speeches to Caesar, and the Princes of the Empire, they decreed and agreed that Caesar should make warres against them, and should have their ayde therein. Hee having levied a great Army goeth into Austria. On the other side Ottocarus marcheth forth with no lesse forces, but he doubting the event of the warre, and fearing Caesars wisedome and force, by the intercession of two Noblemen, made a peace with him, and restored back Austria, and did homage unto Caesar for Bohemia, and the other Provinces which he held of him: and while he did his homage, he kneeled before the Emperour, and the whole Army, which matter being taken in dudgeon by his wife, and some factious spirits, they violated the peace, and entred Austria with a great Army. On the other side the Emperour Rodolphus marcheth forth with his Army of Germanes, and his auxiliarie Hungarian forces, and so joyning battle with Ottocarus not farre from the Towne Mar^he^^us, he overcame him, and slew him, afterward hee invaded Bohemia, and with fire and sword enforced the young man Wenceslaus the Sonne of the deceased Ottocarus to seeke peace, and prescribed him conditions according to his Imperiall pleasure. But hee made his eldest Sonne Albert Duke of Austria: and afterward by the common consent of the Princes of the Empire, hee was made Duke of Austria and Stiria. Stiria is distinguisht into the higher, by the turning of the River Mura, and the lower neere the confluence and meeting of Dravus and Mura, which is next unto the second Pannonia, or Hungarie, whence that place is called am Hungerischen. The chiefe Citties of Stiria are Bruga, by the River Mura, and also Grazium, Viana, commonly called Voylsperg, by the River Kaynacha. Also Wolspergum by the River Lavandus. Marchpurg

is a Metropolitan Citty on the left banke of the River Dravus, and on the same side there is Petovia, or the Petovian Colonie, where the Romane Legions were seated. Beyond the River is Warasinum, which they call the Varian Castle, there is also Rachelspurg seated on the left banke of the River Mura, where the Country of Savaria beginneth. In this Country also there is Cilia on the banke of the River Savus, which seemeth to be an ancient Citty, for there are many Inscriptions of Romane names in it. The Townesmen say that it was built by Sulla, and that it was called Sullaces, but on no ground as Volaterrarus saith. For perhaps it was that Citty, or built out of the ruines thereof, which Ptolemy placeth not farre from home, and calleth Celia. In the Dukedome of Styria there are more Counties, among which are Warasden, by the River Dravus, and also Lebnau, by the River Mura. Stiria is watered with these Rivers, Dravo, Lavanda, Sackan, Sulmo, Raynatho, Mura, Martza, Arrabone, Veystritza, Lausintio, and infinite many Torrents, and Rivulets, which at length doe all runne into Danubius. Here are no particular Mountaines, for they are all called by one generall name the Norician Alpes, whence they are called by the name of Alpes, as Rauch Alben, Subalben, Saw Alben, Schwaberger Alben. In the confines of Austria, Carinthia, and Stiria, there is the Mountaine Taurus. The Mountaine Gesacus doth hang over the River Mura, which is now commonly called Der Schockel, and Sattli, Mansenperg, Wemsperg, and neere unto the River Salzis it is called Ina Sawrussel, that is, os porcinum, or Hogs mouth, and Deifelsteig, that is, the Devils Praecipisse. Below the River Mura it is called in Gaistal, Stainperg, and Kainacher Alben: and somewhat lower are the Mountaines Kreiczpergus: and toward the East Radel and Plaitzperg. Beyond Dravus Southward is the Mountaine Claudius, which is now called Dracimperg. Vadianus relateth, that it was a current report at Vienna in Austria, that a Mountaine began to burne in Stiria, whereupon the Emperour Maximilian sent Messengers who found it to bee true. And it is probable that this hapned about the yeere of Christ 1520. at what time Vadianus writ thus much. Moreover the aforesaid Mountaines are every where clothed and crowned with woods. The Stirians are a rustick people, and some of them have such swellings about their necks, that it hindereth their speech, and women that give sucke doe cast it behinde their back, that it may not hinder their Children from sucking. Ortelius doth report that he saw at Frisachium, while he traveld from Vienna to Venice, in the yeere 1558. a man that had a Chin that was as broad as his shoulders, and it hung downe upon his breast. The Inhabitants doe thinke that the ayre and water are the cause of this swelling. The Stirians doe use the Germane speech and habit, except it be those that dwell by the River Dravus.




SCLAVONIA, CROATIA, BOSNIA, VVITH PART of DALMATIA.
AMONG the Countries which are presented in this Table Selavonia is the first, which was so called from the Sclavonian Nation, who did heretofore inhabit by the Maeotick Lake. Pliny calld it Illyricum, from Illyricus the Sonne of Cadmus, or as some thinke of Poliphemus. Ptolemy, calls it Illyris, and Stephen Illyria. Ptolemy doth stretch it forth from Istria even to the confines of Macedon, by the Sea shore, and doth make it extend to Pannonia and Maesia. Pomponius Mela, and Dionysius Alexandrinus doe describe it to be larger, for hee maketh Illyria to containe all the coast of the Hadriatick Sea, from Tergestus even to the Ceraunian Mountaines, and placeth it beyond Danubius. For Mela reckoneth Danubius among the Rivers of this Country. But Pliny maketh the Rivers Arsia, and Tisius to be the bounds thereof. And the most doe follow Ptolomies description, who saith that Illyris where it looketh toward Macedoe, doth containe Dalmatia, and Liburnia, which Lazius doth call Crabates: and others Croatia. Pinetus calleth it Contado di Zara. The length of it from Arsa to Drinus is 380 Italian Miles. In some parts it hath a pure wholesome ayre, but in other places not so wholesome, by reason of Moorish exhalations and vapours. This Country, as Strabo witnesseth is very pleasant: it hath strong Havens, a fertile Soyle, and full of Vines, unlesse it bee upon the stony rockie cliffes, or on that side which lyeth toward Pannonia, where it is cold, and coverd with snow. Florus in his booke of the first P^nicke warre, writeth that the Illyrians grew so licentious, that they slew the Romane Embassadors like sacrifices, and burnt the Captaines of the Shipps, and to disgrace them the more, at the command of a woman who as he writeth was called Teuta. Againe the Illyrians being hired by King Perses, began to set upon the Romanes behind their back, but Scorda which was the head Citty of the Nation being rased, they straightway yeelded themselves. Pliny writeth that the coast of Illyria was more frequented than the Ilands, when on the contrary, the coast of Italy over against it is very impetuous and stormy. The chiefe Citties and Townes of Illyria are Senia, commonly calld Segna, being seated on a Plaine by the Sea, which is often troubled with the North wind. Iadera is now the chiefe and strongest Metropolis of the Liburnians. Also Zara commonly call'd Sebenicum, Ptolomy calls it Sicum. It is situate in the Bay Scardonicor neere the Sea, at the foote of a Mountaine, where there is a Castell. It hath fruitefull fields, but it is thinly inhabited, by reason that the Turkes doe continually vexe it. Spalatum and Salena is celebrated by Ptolomy and Strabo. There is also Salona, which is a Haven of the Dalmatians, which hath few inhabitants, because it is so neere unto the Turke. Tragurium now called Tran, is divided from the Continent by

map of SclavoniaSCLAVONIA

a small arme of the Sea. Epidaurus is an ancient Citty, by the ruines whereof there is Ragusium commonly call'd Ragusi, the Turks call it Pobrovicha, it is a small Citty with a strong Castell: heere is a famous Mart for all Turkish commodities, the Commonwealth is governed by good lawes, the Cittizens are rich. This Country is watered with two chiefe Rivers Savus and Dravus, which doe runne into Danubius. Beyond the Mountaines many lesser Rivers doe breake out into the Hadriatick Bay, as Edanius, Ticicus, Naron, Rhizon, and Drinus. The Illyrians or Sclavonians doe dwell in woodden houses, thatched, unlesse it be some Townes upon the Coast where they live civiller. And so much concerning Illyricum or Sclavonia in generall. But Sclavonia which our table doth exhibit, is onely a part of that Illyricum, unlesse we make it to be Plinyes Sclavonia. It containeth the Marquiship of Windorum, and the County of Zagabria.

CROATIA.
CRoatia is a part of Illyricum towards Hungarie, which wee described in the beginng. Rufus and Volaterranus call it Valeria: others Liburnia. It joyneth to Istria on the East by the Fanatick Bay and is situate betweene the Rivers Cuspa and Savus, and the higher Maesia. The Metropolis of this Country is now called Bigihon, and sometime Fumium. It hath many other Citties at Zeng, Wickat, Tu^naw, Modrish. But the Turk by his invasions made this Country knowne, having broken the league with the Christians, had a great desire to joyne this Country to his Kingdomes and Provinces, that so he might more conveniently invade Italy and Germanie, whereupon at the beginning of Summer in the yeare 1592. the great Turke sent an Army into Croatia, under the conduct of his Bashawes and Captaines. The Souldiers being terrified at the approaching of this army, the Bashaw of Bosnia tooke the stronge Fort Hrastovitza by treachery. And afterward the fury of his Souldiers being not appeas'd therewith, hee laid siege to Wyhitz, a strong walled Citty: the Souldiers having neither munition nor victualls, yeelded up the Towne by surrender, and the Turke afterward contrary to his promise put them all to the Sword, and many inconveniences follow'd after this surrender, which I omit. Moreover in the yeare following, which was 1593. The Turke glorying in his many victories, and Townes which hee had taken, had a great desire to get the strong Citty Sissegkum: and so raysing an army hee besieged it. But the Germanes considering what great detriment and losse, not onely Germanie but all Europe should sustaine, if the Turkes should take it, they levied an army, and so passing over the River Savus, they intended to relieve the Citty. The Turkish horse-men who were 8000. or some say 10000. made haste to possesse themselves of the other Banck of the River Savus by the Bridge which was built before, that so they might hinder the Christians approach, where joyning

battell with the Christians, the Turkes were put to flight, and fled to the Bridge, which the Carolostadien Souldiers had first possessed. The Turkes were at last all cut off, and a great many drown'd in the Rivers Savus and Kulpa. The other part of the Turkish Army fled, the Bridge being cut downe, so that they could not retire to the rest of their army. And so on the 22. of Iune in the yeare 1593. this Citty was freed from this straite siege.


BOSNIA.
THe Easterne part of Liburnia they now call Liburnia, from the Bessi, a people of lower Moesia: who afterward being expulsed by the Bulgarians, did remove into higher Maesia, and by changing the letter e for o, they were called instead of Bossis Bossi or Bosni: and afterward Bosna, and Besnia. There have beene the like changes in other cames, as Melita, now called Malta, Langones and Lingones, Scandia and Schondia, etc. Iaitza is a Citty of Bosnia, seated on a high hill, and encompassed with two Rivers. These Rivers doe flowe at the foote of the Mountaine, and so having encircled the Citty, doe joyne together, and runne both into Savus. It was the Metropolis of Bosnia, and it hath a strong impregnable Castle. This Country also hath other chiefe Citties, especially Schwonica, and Warbosayne, which is now the Metropolis, but not walled about. The River Milliatzka doth devide it into two parts, etc.


DALMATIA.
IT remaineth that wee should speake somewhat of Dalmatia, a part whereof is described in this Table. It was so caled from Deliminium the Metropolis of this Country. Heretofore Dalmatia was a potent Kingdome, and the Dalmatians were heretofore strong and rich, and confident in the situation of their Country. They lived for the most part in Woods, and so were much given to robbing. The Citties are Salanum, and not far from the borders of this Country, the Citty Apollonia is situated by the Sea side, neere unto which there is a Rocke which sendeth forth flashes of fire, and beneath it hot water and Brimstone doth boyle forth, especially when the Rocke blazeth and burneth. The Ecclesiasticall government according to Mercator is in this manner. There is the Archbishop Iadra, who they now call Zara. Under whom are Anzara, Vegla, Arbe: also the Archbishop of Spalato, under whom are the Bishops Tragurium, of Teniensis Tina, Sardona, Temnensis, Nenensis, Nonensis, Almisa, Sibinicensis, Farensis. The Archbishop of Ragusine, under whom are Stagnensis, Rossonensis, Tribuniensis, Bacensis, Rosensis, Bidnanensis, Budva. The Archbishop Antiberensis, under whom are the Bishops of Dulcinium, Suacinensis, Drinastensis, Polastrensis, Scodrensis, Sardensis, Surtanensis, or Acutarensis, Arbensis.



VVALACHIA, SERVIA BVLGARIA, ROMANIA.
VALACHIA was so called from the Flaccians, a Nation of the Romanes. For the Romanes having overcom^ the Getes, brought thither a Colonie under the conduc^ of one Flaccus, whence it was first called Flaccia, and afterward Valachia. The Alpes and a continued ridge of Mountaines doe devide it from Hungary and Transilvania. It hath on the East a Lake full of Fish, which the River Pruth maketh: on the South it is bounded with Danubius; and on the West it toucheth upon Transilvania, by the Towne Severine, where there is Trajans Bridge, which had 34. Piles. On the North it is bounderd with the small River Ho^na and Ister, and so the Country bendeth over against the Iland Pau^^ well knowne to Writers, which they now call Barillana. But Valachia although it be encompassed with high Mountaines, yet it yeeldeth al^ things necessary. Moreover, it is rich in Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, and Salt. Neither doth it want Vineyards, but it hath divers kindes of Cattle, especially excellent Horses and Ginnets. Here is the Towne Teniovizza where the Vaivode resideth. There are also other Townes, as Braila, and Trescortum, not farre from which there is Brimstone digged, of which they make Candels, as of waxe. The other parts of this County doe consist of Villages, the Rivers Hierasus, which the Inhabitants call Pruth, Hoyne, Danubius, and others.


SERVIA.
SERVIA, which Lazius calls the higher Maesia, is a Country betweene Bosnia and Bulgaria. Some suppose that this was the Triballians Country: and that these people came hither, at the declining of the Graecian and Romane Empire. Cuspianus and Volaterranus doe write that the Trojans did inhabit Servia and Rasica. The chiefe Citty of Servia was Sinderovia, which some doe call Spenderoben, and other Simandria, or Semendria, the Turkes doe call it Semender, and the Hungarians Zendrow, which lyeth not farre from Belgradus by the bankes of Danubius, and it was taken by the Turkish Emperour Amurath, in the yeere 1428. and reduced into a Sangiacate under the Beglerbeg of Buda. There are also the Townes Vidina, which the Turkes call Kiratovum, which is seated by the Mountaine Argentarus. Also Novogradum on the borders of Servia, which some do call the new Mountaine, it hath an impregnable Castle. There is also the black Mountaine, in which there are Silver Mines. There are also Samandria, and Prisdena, where the Emperour Iustinian was borne. Also Stonibrigadum, and Belgradum, heretofore called Taurunum.



map of Walachia
VVALACHIA.





BVLGARIA.
BULGARIA is so called as it were Volgaria, because certaine people comming from Volga about the yeere of our Lord 566. did possesse this Country. Some thinke that this Country is the lower Maesia. It lyeth betweene Servia, Romania, and Danubius. This Country for the most part is Mountainous, and it runneth out on the back side of the Mountaine Haemus toward Danubius, and Romania, whence the middle part of the Country is ragged, and the steepe parts of it are ful of solitary Woods. The Metropolis of this Country is Sophia, which Niger thinketh to be that Towne which Ptolemy calls Tibiscum. Here the Beglerbeg of Greece resideth, whom the Turkes call Rumeli Beglerbeg, who hath 21. Sangiacates under him. There is also Serrajum a famous Citty of Bulgaria. And Nicopolis which is governed by Sangiacks. Neere this Citty there are some ruines of an admirable Bridge, which the Emperour Trajan built over Danubius, when he warr'd against the Getes.


ROMANIA.
ROMANIA is next to Bulgaria, which was so called from the chiefe Citty Constantinople, which was called also Roma nova, or new Rome. It was heretofore called Thrace, either from Thraces the Sonne of Mars, or from the Nimph Thrara, or rather, a feritate seu temeritate, from their wildnesse or rashnesse. It is parted from Macedon by the River Strymon; on the North is the River Haemus, on the other sides the Sea washeth it. This Country hath neither good ayre, nor soyle: and except it bee that part which lyeth toward the Sea, it is cold and unfruitfull. But by the Sea it hath fruit, and Corne. It hath few Apple trees, and but few Vines, which unlesse they be defended from the cold, the Grapes of them doe seldome come to maturity or ripenesse. It hath these Citties Abdera where Democritus was borne; also Nicopolis, Philippopolis, Hadrianopolis, Trajanopolis, Selymbria, Perinthus, and many others. The Metropolis or Mother Citty is Bizantium, which was built by Pausanias, now they call it Constantinople, from Constantine, who made it the seate of his Empire. The Turkes call it Stampolda, as it were a large Citty. It is seated by an arme of the Sea, and it hath Pera over against it, which they call Galata, which was an ancient Colony of the Genuensians. There are divers Monuments of Antiquity in this Citty, some of which were brought thither from Rome. The chiefe are the Church of Sophia, which was built by the Emperour Iustinian. The Palace of Constantine. St. Lukes Church. A new Castle, a Colossus, a place to ride Horses, and many old Steeples. Two Rivers doe water it Cydrus, commonly called Machl^vam, and Barbises, also Chartaricon. The compasse of this Citty is 13. miles. And

there are in it 700. thousand Inhabitants. This Country hath but few Rivers but those very famous, as Hebrus, Melanes, Tearus, Arsus, Bithynia, and Nesta. It hath these Mountaines, Haemus, Rhodope, Orbelus, Pangaeus, and Messapus, these Countries are now subject to the Turke, who hath a Palace at Constantinople. Of whose power, and government I will speake briefly. There are about 200. whom the Turke every 4. yeeres doth command to gather thorow Greece, Walachia, Bosnia, and Anatolia, and his other Territories all the Christian Male Children, out of every Family, as a tenth due unto him, which they bring to Constantinopolis, Pera, and Adrianopolis, and deliver them to Citizens to bring them up, and the lesse hopefull they put forth to Country people in Bursia, and Caramania. All these are called Aza^^gla, or Iamogla, that is, innocent Infants, that know nothing, and when they are 8. yeeres old, 50. of the handsomest and hopefullest of them are placed in the Emperours Palace at Constantinople, which is called Saray, and there they are instructed in learning and rudiments of warre, untill they have attained to 20. yeeres of age. Out of these beside other Officers of the Court the Janitzaries are chosen, of whom there are 12000. who are the Turkes Garde. Out of the Janitzaries 3000. Spachoglani are chosen, who goe on the Princes right hand, and doe every one keepe 4. or 5. Horses for service. Hemus is a very high wood, so that from the top thereof you may behold the Euxine and Adrian Sea. The Inhabitants of this Country are yellow of complexion, long hayrd, couragious, fierce, and cruell: they are great drinkers, and doe love Wine.




GREECE, VVHICH CONTAINETH THESE CHIEFE COVNTRIES, ALBANIA, MACEDON, EPIRE, ACHAIA, and MOREA.
GREECE followes which is a famous Country of Europe, and the Fountaine and mother of learning. The Inhabitants did call it Hellas. But these that doe now inhabite it doe call it Romechi, and the Turkes Haromels. Leunclavius calleth it Rumelia: and the 70. Interpreters Phobel, and Iava. But Greece hath severall bounds assignd it. It reacheth properly from Epire by the River Achelous. On the East it hath the Aegean Sea: and thus Greece is properly bounderd. Which Pliny doth intimate, who saith, that Greece beginneth from the Istmus, and againe he saith, that Greece is joyned to Peloponesus with a short neck of ground. Sometimes also Peloponesus and Thessalia are comprehended in Greece. So L. Aemilius Paulus, when he travaild thorow Greece, he went to Delphos thorow Thessaly, from thence to Lebadia, then to Chalcides, afterward to Aulides, and from thence to Athens, then to Corinth, Sicyon, Argos, Epidaurus, Lacedemon, Megalopolis, Olympia: and so having travelled thorow Greece, he returned to Amphipolis. Homer calleth the Phtiotae onely Graecians. Herodotus maketh a difference betweene the Thracians and Pelasgans. But now we call Greece all the Country, which lyeth Westward, and is washed with the Jonian Sea, on the South with the Libian Sea: on the East with the Aegean; on the North it is parted from Thrace, Mysia, and Dalmatia. This Country did heretofore excell other parts of Europe, both for the temper of the climate, and fertility, and Heards of Cattell. This is that Country which flourished along time, and was a famous Empire for Learning, Arts, and warlike Discipline. It was first free, but while it affected Soveraignty over others, it was it selfe brought into servitude, for now it is under the Turkes Dominion. And heretofore Cyrus, afterward Xerxes, and other Kings of Persia did vexe it. Afterward the Macedons governd it, and then the Romanes, after the division of their Empire it was subject to Constantinople, untill the Gothes, the Bulgarians, and Sarazens did waste and destroy it, and now last of all the Turke hath brought it all into miserable servitude, except some Ilands which are subject to the Venetian, namely, Corcyra, Cephalenia, Zacynthus, Crete, and other little Ilands. Greece had heretofore many flourishing Citties, as Athens, Lacedemon, Delphos, Argis, Mycenis, Corinth, and many others, the most of which are ruinate, and decayd. Here are 32. great Rivers, as Strymon, Chabrius, Echedorus, Axius, Erigon, Lydius, Aliacmon,

map of GreeceGREECE.

Pharybus, Peneus, Sperchius, Panyassus, Apsus, Lous, Celidnus, Thyamus, Acheron, Arachthus, Achelous, Evenus, Ilissus, Asopus, Ismenus, Cephisus, Boagrius, Asopus, Sus, Peneus, Alphejus, Selas, Panysius, Eurotas, and Inachus. The Seas are called the Jonian Sea, from Ionia who was a Queene in the farthest parts of Italy, as Solinus affirmeth: or as Archidamus thinketh, from Ionius a King of the Illyrians, or from the Jonians who were drownd in passing that Sea. It was called before the Cronian and Rhaean Bay, and the Cretian from the Ile Creete, as ancient Writers doe witnesse, it is now called Mar di Candia, or the Candian Sea. There is also the Carpathiam Sea, so called from the Iland Carpathus, which lyeth by the Easterne Promontory of Creete. The Aegaean Sea, as Festus and others doe write, was so called from Aegeus the Father of Theseus, who cast himselfe into it. I omit other opinions. Valerius Flaccus calleth it Aegon, and Aegeon, Thucydides calleth it the Greeke Sea, and the Europeans doe call it by a Greeke name Archipelagus: The Turkes call it the white Sea. The Romanes did heretofore call this Sea by two names, as Pliny witnesseth, namely, all that which touched Macedon and Thrace, the Macedonian Sea; and that which touched Greece, the Graecian Sea: Ptolemy calls it Myrtoum, or the Myrtoan Sea, being a part of the Aegean, which beateth on Caria a Country of Asia the lesse: Castaldus calleth it Mar di Mandria. Strabo, Pliny, and others doe place it betweene Peloponesus, and Attica. It was so called from Myrthus the Sonne of Mercury, who as Solinus and Isodorus report was cast into this Sea by Oenomaus, or as Pliny thinketh, from a small Iland, situate not farre from the Towne Carystum. The most doe call it the Icarian Sea, from the fable of Icarus. It is now called Mar di Nicaria, as Castaldus writeth. It hath also divers Mountaines, as Bertiscus, Athos, Olympus, Ossa, Pelion, Citerius, Othris, Oeta, Pindus, Aroceraunij, Stimphe, Calidromus, Carax, Parnassus, Helicon, Cithaeron, Himettus, Stimphalus, Pholoe, Cronius, Zarex, Minthe, Taigetus, and others. Moreover Athens famous for Arts and Disciplines was in Greece. So that Diodorus Siculus calleth it the common Schoole. Cicero Lib. 4. Epist. Famil. calleth it the famousest University of Europe, whether Romanes and other Nations did repaire to study Philosophy and the Greeke tongue. Cicero doth often commend Greece for Arts, Eloquence, good wits, and plentifull speech, so that the Romanes got the knowledge of Philosophy, and other Arts and Sciences from them. And Flaccus singeth thus.



Graijs ingenium, Graijs dedit ore rotundo


Musa loqui.--



The Muses gave the Graecians wit,
And eloquence of speech to it.


GREECE hath yeelded these famous Schollers, Nusaeui the Poet, Solon, Socrates the Prince of Philosophers, Xenophon, Plato, Isocrates, Demosthenes, Thucidides, and many others. Concerning the Graecians religion, Idolatry raigned amongst them, so that they had an infinite number of Gods and Goddesses. Augustine Lib. 3. of the

Citty of God, affirmeth according to Varros opinion, that the Romans and Graecians together had above 3000. gods, of which there were 300. Iupiters. Every one had his Lar or Houshold god. And they had Tutelary gods for every affection of the minde, and for defence and protection from danger, and every god had distinct and peculiar Ceremonies, Prayers, Priests, Sacrifices, and Offerings. The common people doe not now keepe their ancient fashions. For they let their haire grow long, and doe onely cut the forepart of their haire, and doe weare a double thicke Hat. They use but little houshold ^^^ffe as the Turkes: neither doe they lye on Fether-beds, but on Flock-beds, or Beds stuffed with Wooll or Toe. They never mingle any wine with water, and women are not present at their drinking feasts and meetings, neither doe they sitt doWne at Banquets. But the Heathenish Greekes have an ancient custome in bewailing the dead. The Greeke Christians doe differ in Religion from the Romanes, and doe call themselves the Easterne Church. They have foure Patriarks, the Patriarches of Constantinople, of Alexandria, of Hierusalem, and Antioch. These are created by the Metropolitan Bishops, as the Popes are by the Cardinals, and they are famous for their sanctimonious, holy, modest, and religious life. Their yeerely revenue is 400. crownes, which is begged in the Churches which are under their government. For the Clergie men have no Inheritance. They may marry one wife, but no more, they acknowledge onely two Sacraments, Baptisme and the Lords Supper. They communicate in both kindes, both in Bread and Wine. They hate Purgatory, and detest graven Images, and doe not shave their haire. But the richer Graecians, and men of Authority, doe weare Princely apparell. Those that are under the Venetians doe goe in habit like to Venetians. Those that are under the Turkes, doe goe like Turkes. The Governour of Greece is called Vromeli Beglerbey, that is, King of the Romane Princes, for hee governeth all those Countries which the Turke hath in Europe, which are subject to Constantinople. Hee hath 40. Sangiacks, under him, who are Captaines of the Horse troopes chosen out of the Spachoglans, and they are Governours in the chiefe Citties of the Provinces, to keepe them in peace and obedience, and they have 150. Sobasci Cimmeriotae, or more, who are Vice-governours under them of lesser Townes. Under these Sangiacks there are 30000. Spachi, every one of which maintaineth 3. or 4. Horses for service. And these Spachi are distributed thorow the Flamboler, that is, the bands, which doe containe 200. 300, 400. or 500. Horsemen. The chiefe of the Sangiacks is the Governour of Modena, who is President also of all Morea, who upon the Beglerbeys command is to bring forth a thousand Horse, who are bound to serve him for wages. Also the Governour of Bosna bringeth 900. Horse, and the Governour of Thessalonia bringeth forth 500. Horse, an hundred whereof he hath alwaies in a readinesse, the rest hee sends when the Turke demands it. There are also under this Beglerbey, 20000. Horsemen who are subject to the Sangiacks, who are called the Tymariots, because they have stipends out of the Tymar, which is the Emperours Exchequer. And also 40000. Akengi, or Acconti,

that is, Scouts or light Horsemen, who being free from any taxes or contributions, doe serve without wages, and are supplyd with victuals by the chiefe Citties thorow which they passe. There are also many Feudataries who are called Mosselin, out of which there are sometime raised 60000 Horsemen, and a great number of Footemen. It would be tedious to rehearse all matters, neither doe we intend it, wherefore we returns to the more speciall parts of Greece.


MACEDON, EPIRE, AND ACHAIA, VVITH which ALBANIA is described.
SOME have divided Greece in another manner. But wee will follow Mercator, who doth accurately describe the parts thereof in three Tables. But in this Table he setteth forth 3. Provinces of Greece, Macedon, Epire and Achaja, afterward Morea, and in the third and last place Candia. The first is Macedon, being a large Country, and so called from King Macedon the sonne of Orsiis, some say that it was so denominated from Iupiter and Thia, or as Salinus thinketh, from Ducalions Nephew. It was heretofore called Emathia, as Pliny and Trogus doe witnesse. Livy writeth that it was first called Paonia, afterward Aemonia, Solinus calls it Edonia, and Pieria. Trogus writeth that it was heretofore called Baeotia. Stephanus and Hesychius doe write that a part of it was called Macetia, and from thence Eustathius reporteth that the whole Country was so called. It is also called in the Booke of Machabees, Cethim, where we reade that Alexander went out of the Land of Cethim. It is situate in the middle of two great Seas, the Jonian Sea on the West, and the Aegaean on the East: on the North it hath a part of Dalmatia, and the higher Maesia: on the South it toucheth Epirus and Achaja. The Country is every where fruitfull; and encompassed with great Mountaines; and the borders thereof toward the Jonian Sea are plaine and woody: for that part which is called Albania is well knowne to bee large, fruitfull, and pleasant. Moreover, it is very rich in Gold and Silver, and as Aristotle witnesseth, a kinde of strange Gold was heretofore found here, there is also Brimstone digged out of the Earth. Moreover Macedon doth produce a Precious stone called Paeantides, which doth helpe women to conceive, and bring forth children, as Solinus writeth. This is that Macedon (saith Pliny) which heretofore had the Empire of the whole World, that is, that Country which passed over Asia, Armenia, Iberia, Albania, Cappadocia, Syria, Aegypt, Taurus, and Causasus: this Country had Dominion over the Bactrians, Medes, and Persians, and possessed all the East, this conquerd India, following the steps of Bacchus and Hercules, this is that Macedon, in which our Emperour Paulus Aemilius in one day tooke 72. Citties and sold them. Such was the change of Fortune. Macedon containeth many Countries, among the which Thessaly is the chiefe, which Castaldus calleth Comenolitari. There are also many faire Citties in Macedon. The chiefe now are Thessalonia, which was and is now frequented by divers Christian Nations, and Jewes, who have there 80. Synagogues. The Sangiack of Macedon resideth here. He at the command of the Beglerbeg, as often as the Turke setteth forth any Army hath 500. Horsemen well appointed, an hundred whereof he keepeth neere him to defend his owne borders. Neere unto this Citty is Siderocapsa famous for

Gold Mettall. And Pella where the Kings Treasure is kept, and 3000. of the Kings Mares are kept to breed, as Pliny and Strabo doe witnesse. Stagira was the Towne where Aristotle was borne. Also Apollonia where Augustus Caesar learned the Greeke tongue. Dyrrachium which was heretofore called Epidaurus, is in the Country of Brundusium: also Aulon, Croja, and Cavalla. The Rivers of Macedon next to Strimon, in the borders of Thrace, are Axius, Erigonus, Aliacmon, and Peleus. It hath these Mountaines, Pelion, Ossa, Pindus, Nimphaeus, and Athon. Athos is a great steepe rugged Mountaine, which casteth a shaddow even to the Iland Lemnos: it is planted with Vines, Olives, Bay-trees, Mirtle-trees, and Apple-trees. Now it is inhabited by the Colojerians, who are so religious, that even the Turkes doe abstaine from this part alone, and doe often give the Monkes gifts, and benevolences.

EPIRVS.
EPIRUS is a Country of Greece, as Ptolemy and others doe call it. Martianus Capella writeth that it was heretofore called Chaonia, Grabellius affirmeth out of Dionysius and Thrasibulus that it was called Oricis and Dodona, Leander and Erythraus doe write that it is now called Albania, Richerius, and Aeneas Silvius Larta. Castaldus saith, that it was called Ianna. This Country is bounded on the East with the River Celydnus, or Pepylychnus: on the North it hath Macedon. This Country in many places is Woody and barren, but by the Sea Coast it fruitfull. It produceth great store of living creatures, except Asses, but it is hath faire large Oxen, and great Dogs, and also Sheepe. Virgil. 1. Georg. doth commend Epire for Horses.


India mittit Ebur, molles sua thura Sabaei,
At Chalybes nudi ferrum, virosaque pontus
Castorea, Eliadum palmas Epiros equarum.


India her whitest Ivory doth send,
The soft Sabaeans Frankincense doth lend,
The naked Chalybes digge Iron forth,
And Pontus hath that precious stone of worth,
Which usually is call'd the Bezars stone,
Epire hath the best Mares to breed upon.


The Molossians first possessed this Country as Trogus reporteth. But in the Trojans time Vlisses govern'd it. After whom it came to Achilles, who much enlarged his Empire. Afterward it came to the Romanes, and afterward to the Emperours of Constantinople, and by their grant and donation to the Despotians, which were a family in Epire. But Amurath the Turke at last having droven out the Christians, did subject it to himselfe. Here are the Citties Dodone, famous for the Oracle of Iupiter Dodonaeus. Also Nicopolis built by Augustus in memory of

map of MacedoniaMACEDON.

that victory, when in a Sea-fight he ouercame Marcus Antonius and Queene Cleopatra. It was heretofore a great City and populous, now it is called Prevesa. Ambracia is now called Laria from a Riuer of that name. Here was the Palace of Pyrrhus of Epire, and the Countrey of Cleombrotus Ambraciota, who as Cicero relateth, having read Platoes Booke of the immortality of the Soule, being wearie of the miseries of this life, did cast himselfe downe from a high place. There is also Actium, which Gerbelius maketh to bee a famous Citty of Acarnania. It was heretofore a Colony of Augustus, now it is called Capo Figulo. Strabo, and Virgil doe call Buthrotum. Pliny calls it Colonia. Sophianus calleth it now Butrinto. There is also Leucas, where Apollo hath a Chappell, and a Grove which hath power to mittigate the flames of Love, and Strabo doth report that the Poetesse Sappho did first come out of it full of poeticall inspirations, as Ovid doth mention in one of his Epistles to Sappho. The Rivers of Epire are Acheron, which Livy calls Acheros. Strabo Achelous, Sophianus Aspri, Niger Catochi, Kyriacus Ancomtanus calleth it Geromlia. The Ceraunian or Acroceraunian Mountaines are very high, and fearefull to the Marriners. For as soone as clouds doe begin to arise from thence, Tempests doe immediately follow. There is also the Mountaine Stymphe, out of which the River Arachtus followeth, as Strabo witnesseth, the Inhabitants as Bellonius relateth, doe goe forth of their Country in troopes in the Summer time, in regard of the barrennesse of the soyle, and so doe remove to some other place, namely, into Macedon, Romania, and Natolia, where they worke under the Turke for hire and wages, sometimes they reape Corne, and so after Harvest is done, they returne againe in Autumne with their Wives and Children. But they are Christians, and have a peculiar speech different from the Greekes: yet they are of the Greeke Religion, and because they are neighbours to the Graecians, therefore they understand the Greeke.


ACHAIA.
THere remaineth in this Table Achaja, which is a Country of Greece. Ptolemy calleth it Hellades. Pliny in his Epistles calleth it Maera-Graecia, or meere Greece. It is bounderd on the North with Thessalia, neere the River Sperchus, the Maliacan Bay, and the Mountaine Ceta, on the West with the River Achelous, beyond which the Country of Epire beginneth: on the East it bendeth somewhat Northward, and is washed with the Aegean and Mirtoan Sea, even to the Promontory Sunium, which is now called Cape delle Colonne: On the South it hath Peloponesus, over against it, which is joyned unto it by our Isthmus. I finde in Writers that here are 9. Countries which are Dorus neere Parnassus. Aetolia by the River Evenus. This latter is plaine and fruitfull toward the North, but rugged and barren towards the South. It hath many ancient Citties, one of the chiefe whereof was Calydon, which is now ruinated with the rest. Evenus a most cleare transparent

River doth flow thorow this Country, which afterward runneth into the Sea. The Country of the Locrians and Opuntians was rugged, the chiefe Citty whereof is Amphissa, There is also in this Country Naupactus, which some doe place in Aetolia. Phocis is by the Mountaine Pernassus. The Citty thereof is Delphos, where there was the sumptuous Church and famous Oracle of Apollo. Baeotia lyeth among the Mountaines, in a moist moorish place, but fat and very fruitfull. There is also the Citty Ascra at the foote of the Mountaine Helicon, where Hesiod was borne. And Orchomenus famous for Tiresias Oracle. Also Thebes which as Pliny witnesseth, was sometimes equall to Athens, where many famous men were borne, but now these Townes lye buried in their owne ruines. There is also Cheronaea where Plutarch was borne. Also Plataea memorable for a famous victory which the Graecians obtained under the conduct of Pausanias, against Mardonius. Tanagra was a most superstitious Citty. And Aulis where the Greekes assembled themselves before their comming to Troy. Attica is a barren wooddy Country. The chiefe Citty is Athens, which needs no commendation to make it famous. Euripides calls it the Grace of Greece, or the Compendium and Epitome of Greece. Cicero doth much praise this Citty, in his Oration for Lucius Flaccus, Lib. 2. of Lawes, and in his Dialogue de Partitione. There was also Marathon well knowne by Milti^^^es his famous victory. And Eleusis famous for Ceres sacrifices, which were therefore called Eleusinian. Stephanus calleth Megaris a rugged Country. The chiefe Citty hereof is Megara seated by the Isthmus from whence the Country was so called. The most famous Rivers of Achaja are Ismenus a River of Baeotia, which watereth the Citty of Thebes. Also Cnopus which Strabo calls Asopus. Homer surnames it flowry Cnopus. Also Evenus which before as Apollodorus and Strabo doe witnes, was called Lycormas. It is a River of Aetolia. The most famous Mountaines are Parnassus, which Lucan Lib. 4. calleth Mons Phoebo Bromioque sacer, A Mountaine sacred to Apollo and Bacchus. Which Claudian and Lucretius doe situate in the middle of the World. There is also Helion which Pliny calleth Musis natale, the Muses birth place. The Mountaine Hymettus is famous for Honey, Marble, and all things medicinable. There is also Citheron, which Lactantius calleth so from Cithara a Harpe, because this Instrument was often playd on in this place, and Poets Verses were frequently sung here. There are these Bishopricks in this Country. The Archbishoprick Philippensis, under whom are Citrensis and Veriensis: Also the Archbishop Laricensis, under whom are Dinutriensis, Almurensis, Cardicensis, Sidoniensis, Dinucensis. The Archbishop Neopatensis, under whom is Lariaetensis. The Archbishop Thebanensis, Iorocemensis, Castoriensis, The Archbishop Athenensis, under whom are Thermopylensis, Davaliensis, Salonensis, Nigropontensis, Molgarensis, Roonensis, Eginnensis. The Archbishops Corcyrensis, and Duracensis.




MOREA, HEERETOFORE CALLED PELOPONNESVS.
SO much concerning the chief Countries of Greece, which are in the Continent: Morea and Candia are next to be unfolded. The former Ptolemy, Srabo, and Steph. doe call Peloponnesus, it is a Peninsula, but now it is happily called Morea from the incursions of the Moores. Heretofore as Apollodorus and Pliny doe witnesse, it was called Apia and Pelasgia. Strabo delivers that it was Argos, and afterward Argos Achaicum; and Orosius Lib. 1. cap. 11. saith that it was called Achaja. And also Apulejus in his 6. Booke of the golden Asse. Eustathius did also call it Pelopia, and Stephanus Inachia. And in Eusebius Chronicle it is called Aegialia. It was called Peloponnesus from Pelops a barbarous man, who comming out of Asia raigned here. For Pelopis signifies an Iland, whereas it is not an Iland, but a Peninsula. and as Mela writeth it is most like to a Plantine leafe, being as broad as long. The Perimeter or compasse of it is 4000. Furlongs, unto which Artemedorus addeth 400. It is joyned to the continent by an Isthmus or necke of Land, the breadth whereof is 40. Furlongs. Many have vainely attempted to (...) thorow this narrow tongue of ground, as Demetrius, C. Caesar, Caligula, Ne^^, and others: but being frustrated of their purpose, they made a wall there which they called Hexamilium. Amurath the Turke threw it downe, and the Venetians re-edified it in the yeere 1453. in 15. dayes space, but the Turkes afterward did raze it downe to the ground. In this Isthmus there was heretofore the Temple of Neptune, where the Isthmian sports and Playes were celebrated. Peloponnesus hath on the East the Cretian Sea: on the West the Jonian or Hadriatick Sea^ on the North it hath the Corinthian and Saronick Bay, betweene which is the Isthmus: on the South it hath the Mediterranean Sea. This Peninsula is the Castle and chiefe part of all Greece, and Pliny saith that it is not inferiour to any Country. For it hath plenty, and abundance of all things which serve rather for pleasure or necessity. It hath fruitful Plaines and Hills, and it is full of Bayes and Havens which doe make many Promontories. The Elians, the Messenians, the Achivi, the Sicyonians, the Corinthians, the Laconians, the Argives, and the Arcadians did heretofore inhabite Peloponnesus. And this part of Greece was famous heretofore thorow the whole world for the Commonwealths of the Myceneans, Argives, Lacedemonians, Sicyonians, Eliensians, Arcadians, Pylions, and Messenions, out of which there came many famous Princes, as Agamemnon, Menelaus, Ajax, and others. For this Country in regard of the situation, and Majesty thereof did governe all the other parts of Greece. But now all Peloponnesus is under

map of MoreaMOREA.

the Turkes Dominion, as also the rest of Greece, although it were valiantly defended by some Earles of Greece, whom they call (...), or Lords, and also by the Venetians. But now a Sangiack doth governe all Morea under the Turke, who is more potent than all the rest, who resideth at Modonum, and at the Beglerbeys of all Greeces command hee is to bring a thousand Horse into the Field at his owne cost and charges. This Sangiack is called by the Barbarians Morabegi, whose yeerely revenewes in this Province 700000. Aspers, that is, 14. thousand Crownes. But it appeareth in Ptolemy and other Authors, that all this Country was devided into 8. Provinces, which are Corinth, Argia, Laconia, Messenia, Elis, Achaja, Sicyonis, and Arcadia. Corinth is seated in the Isthmus, it was so denominate from the chiefe Citty which was first called Ephyre. Cicero doth worthily call it the light of Greece. It hath a Haven on either side, the one whereof looketh toward Asia, the other toward Italy, so that the convenient situation made it soone grow famous, and the Isthmian Playes which were celebrated here. Acrocorinthe was seated on a Mountaine 3. Furlongs and a halfe high, and under it was Corinth 40. Furlongs in compasse. On the top of the Mountaine there was a temple dedicated to Venus: neere which was the Fountaine Pyrene, which did first spring up as the Poets report, from a stroke of Pegasus his hoofe, who was the winged Horse of the Muses. This Citty was raz'd by L. Mummius, because they had discourteously entertained the Romane Embassadours, after it had beene builded 952. yeeres by Aletes the Sonne of Hippotes, as you may finde it in Paterculus. Argia followeth, which Ortelius calleth Romania. The Citties of this Country are Mycenae, where Agamemnon had his Palace, whence Ovid calleth it Agamemnons Mycenae, it was famous for the ancient temple of Iuno, whence Iuno was called Argiva. They report that the Cyclops did wall it about. Not farre from hence was the Lake Lerna, where Hercules kild the Lernaean Hydra, or rather did scatter and kill the Theeves that did rob in those parts. The Citty Argos was built as some report by Argus. Nauplia now called Neapolis is a strong Citty of Romania, Epidaurus is in the innermost part of the Saronian Bay, a Citty famous for Esculapius temple. Next to Argia is Laconia. The Metropolis or Mother Citty whereof is Sparta, which was also called Lacedaemon, and now Misuhra: it was heretofore a great potent Citty, being not fortified with walls, but by the valour of the Cittizens, neither doth Pomponius praise it for magnificent Buildings, but for Licurgus his Lawes and Discipline, in which it contended with Athens, as Thucidides noteth in his 8. Booke. Leuctra may be knowne out of Plutarch by that sad and tragicall History of Scedasus Daughters. There is also Epidaurus which is now called Malvasia. Messenia reacheth from the Mountaine Taygetus and the River Panijsus even to Alpheus. The chiefe Citty of it is Messene situate by the Sea, it is now called Mattegia. Aristomenis was the Country where renowned Messenius was borne, who as Pausanias reporteth, being ripped open after he was dead, had a hairy Heart. There is also Methone, now called Modon, where the Turkish Sangiack did sometimes keepe his residence. Corone is now called Coron. Pilus was the Country, where

Homers eloquent Nestor who lived three ages, was borne. And Ciparissi is now called Arcadia. Elis is situate betweene Messenia, Achaja, and Arcadia. The Citties are Elis thorow the middle whereof Peneus and Alpheus did runne, famous for Iupiters temple. Olympia was famous for the solemne Graecian Playes, which were called Olympian games, and for the sumptuous Temple of Iupiter Olympius, which by the offrings and gifts of potent Princes and other men grew so great and beautifull, that there was no Church in all Greece that could compare with it for magnificence and riches, for Iupiter was religiously reverenced here. Cipselus the Tyrant of Corinth did consecrate and sett up a golden Iupiter at Olympia of massie gold. Afterward Phidius the Athenian did sett up a great Image of Iupiter of Gold and Ivory, being 60. foote high, which worke was reprehended by other Artificers, because the Image was not proportionable to the Temple. For whereas this Iupiter sate in an Ivory Throne, and yet touched the top of the Church with his head, it must needs come to passe that if this Ivory god being weary of sitting would rise up at any time, that hee must throw downe the top of the Church. There is also Pisa. Achaja which Ptolemy calleth Propria, reacheth from the Promontory Araxas, even to the Sicyonian, from whom it is devided by the River Sus, on the South it hath the Mountaine Stymphalus, on the North the Corinthian Bay. There are also the Citties Dyme, which they now call Charenza, whence they call the Araxean Promontory Capo di Chiarenza there is also the famous Citty Patrae which is now called Patras. The Citty Aegium in former time was called Vostiza or Bostizan, and it was raced by the Turkes. Aegira was heretofore a chiefe Citty, being seated on a rugged steepe Hill, which is now ruinate, and called Xilocastro. And in the Crissaean Bay there are Helice, Bura, and Pellene. Sicyonia is situate betweene Achaja and Asopus: the chiefe Citty thereof is Sicion, the ancientest of all the Greeke Citties, and built in Abrahams time, being full of Churches, Altars, Statues, and Images. There was also Phlius, which happily is that which they now call Vasilicon. There remaineth Arcadia which is a Mediterranian Country in Peloponnesus, being every where encompas'd with the Sea.Which was so great that they seem'd to shadovv and obscure the beams of the Sunne. a (...). i. e. ab obstipando vel obscurando. Pli. In this Country there is the Citty Megalopolis, where Polibius a grave and wise Writer was borne. It is now called Leontari. There is also Stimphalus, whence the Stymphalian Lake, and the Stymphalian Birds. There are also Lilaa, Mantinea, and Psophis. But the chiefe Citties of all Peloponnesus, Ovid Lib. 6. Metamorph. hath thus briefly described and Epitomized.

Finitimi Proceres coeunt, urbesque propinque
Oravere suos ire ad solatia reges:
Argosque and Sparte, Pelopejadesque Mycenae,
Et nondum torvae Calidon invisa Dianae,
Orchomenosque ferax, and nobilis aere Corinthus,
Messeneque ferox, Patraeque humilesque Cleovae,
Et Melea Pilos, nec adhuc Pitheia Troezen,
Quaeque urbes aliae bimari clauduntur ab Isthmo.
The neighbouring Princes met: the Citties neere
Intreate their Kings the desolate to cheere
Renown'd Mycenae, Sparta, the Argive State
And Calydon, not yet in Dian's hate;
Fertile Orchomenos, Corinthus, fam'd
For high-priz'd Brasse, Messene, never tam'd;
Cleovae, Patrae, Pylos, Nelius crowne;
And Throezen, not as then Pitheus Towne,
With all that two-sea'd Isthmus Straites include:
And all without, by two-sea'd Isthmus view'd.

The most famous Rivers are Asopus, which Theverus calleth now Arbon, also Penejus, which Thevetus and Niger call Igliaco: there is also Alpheus which the Inhabitants call Rophea, and as Niger saith Orphoa: the Italian Marriners call it Carbon: and 140. streames and Rivulets doe runne into this River. There is also Panisus which Niger calleth Stromio, but Castaldus and Mercators tables call it Pirnaza, which is the greatest River of all Peloponesus. The water whereof doth heale (as it is reported) all diseases belonging to Children and Infants. (...) is now called by Stephanus and others Basilopotamo, but Niger calleth it Iris; whose bankes are full of Bay-trees: and Inachus, which Sophianus and others doe now call Planizza, but Niger calleth it Iris, whose bankes have also great store of Bay-trees. I omit the other Rivers. The Mountaines are Stimphalus the highest Mountaine of Arcadia, which Dominicus Niger calleth Poglici. Xitias Niger calleth it Phalos. Mela Cillenius, Strabo Cyllene, it is the highest Mountaine in all Arcadia. There is also the Mountaine which Mela calls Menalius, Ptolemy Cronium. Also Grevenos, which Niger calleth Zarex, and Gemistus Zaraca. That which Ptolemy and Strabo call Minthe, Niger calleth Olonus. Pausanias calleth it Evan, from Evoe, a noise which Bacchus his Priests did use; because it is reported that Bacchus and those women that followed him did use this acclamation or cry. That which Pliny, Pausanias, Vibius, and Stephanus do call Taigotus is a Mountaine of Peloponesus in Laconia, neere unto the River Eurota. From the top whereof there is so faire a prospect, that you may behold all the Peninsula, and every famous Citty in it. This Mountaine doth breed many wilde beasts, being consecrate to Bacchus, Apollo, Diana, and Ceres. In Morea there are these Bishopricks: the Archbishop of Corinth, under whom is Argivensis: The Archbishop Patracensis, under whom are the Bishops Coloniensis, M^thonensis, Coronensis, Amiclensis, and Androvillensis.



CANDIA VVHICH POPE BONIFACE of MONTIS-FERRAT, sold unto the VENETIANS.
WEE are come at length to the last Table of Europe, in which Mercator doth delineate and paint foorth Candia, with some small Ilands neere Greece. Ptolemy calls it Crete which is an Iland in the Mediterranean Sea. It is now commonly called Candy. On the North the Aegean Sea doth beate upon it: on the South the Lybian and Aegyptian Seas: on the West the Hadriatick Sea: on the East the Carpathian Sea. The forme of it is long: on the East the Promontory Samonium shooteth forth, on the West there is the Promontory Criu Metopum: on the North there is a third Promontory, which Stra. lib. 10. calleth Cimarus, now it is called Capo Chesis. The length is 270. miles, the breadth 50. The compasse of it 588. The Country is every where rugged and Mountainous, but it yeeldeth good store of Corne and Grasse. The soyle is very fruitfull, and there are abundance of trees. Pliny also witnesseth that whatsoever groweth in Creete, is better than any of the same kinde that groweth otherwheres. It beareth Vines, Olives, Oranges, Figges, Lemmons, Cittrons. Malmesie is made onely in this Country, and so is transported from thence to Venice, and other parts of the world. This Wine as Bellonius witnesseth, the ancients did call Pramium. But Volaterranus thinketh that those wines which they called Arvisia, are now called Malvisia or Malmesie, by the addition of one letter, and he addeth that those kindes of Vines, were brought out of Arvisium, a Promontory of the Iland Chios, into Creete, whence they were heretofore called Arvisian Wines. It beareth also and produceth Honey, Waxe, Cheese, Saffron, store of Gum and Bitony, peculiar onely to Creete. In the whole Iland there is neither Wolfe, Foxe, Serpent, or any harmefull creature except Spiders. In regard whereof the Flockes and Heards of Cattell doe feede securely and safely in the Meddowes, especially Sheepe, which they call Striphoceri. But it produceth divers living creatures. And Authors doe report of Creete. That it hath no Owles, and that they dye if they bee brought into this Iland. Iupiter did first governe this Iland, then Radamanth, afterward Minos and the Graecians. The Romanes power over it began from Metellus, who was therefore calld Creticus. Afterward the Constantinopolitans did possesse it. Baldwin Earle of Flanders, and Emperour of Constantinople gave it to the Marquesse of Montis-ferrat, who sold it to the Venetians in the yeere 1194. for a great summe of gold: and so it is still under their Empire. Ancient Writers doe report that it had heretofore an hundred famous Citties, and Pliny mentioneth about

40. The most noted City is Gnossos, where Minos had his Palace, whence came the Gnossian Bow, and the Gnossian Darts. Cortina followeth, whence came the Cortynian habit, as Claudian saith in his Booke of the rape of Proserpine.


Crispatur gemino vestis Cortynia cinctu.


Her Cortynian Garment then
With a double Girdle was girt in.


And also Phestos. Proxima Gnossiaco jam quondam Phaestia regno. Also Cidon whence the Cydonian Bow, and Cydonian Horne. Also Dictinna, Mannethusa, Licastos, Lictos, Holopixos, and others. But now as Bellonius witnesseth, it hath onely three Citties of any note, which are Candy, heretofore Matium, the chiefe Citty of the whole Iland, from whence the Iland is denominated. The second Citty next to Candy, is Canca, heretofore Gidon. The third is Rhetimo, which the ancients called Rhetimna. This latter hath an inconvenient Haven, (...) Canea and Candy have convenient Havens. There are no Navigable Rivers in the whole Iland. Yet there are many great Rivers, in which Beane; doe grow of their owne accord. On the Northerne shore there are Melipotamus, Scasinus, Cladilis, Epicidanus, Giffo, Divotro: on the West there is Naupuliar: on the South Limens. Crete hath great (...) of a kinde of Fish as bigge as Mullets on the Coast which are (...), being very rare in other Countries, which ancient Writers for often mention, and the Romanes did account them great dainties and a very dainty Dish. The chiefest Mountaines are three, Ida, which the Inhabitants call Psilori: Leuci which Pliny calleth Cadissi, now de Madara: and Dicta which is now called Sethia. They are so high, that all the Winter time they are covered with Snow, but yet Cypresse trees doe grow here and there among the Cliffes. The Mountaine Ida is the highest of them all. It beholdeth the Sunne before the Sunne riseth, for as Lucretius saith.


--Idaeis fama est e montibus altis
Dispersos igneis orienti limine cerni.


They say the Idaean Mountaines are so high,
That ere Sunne rise, the Sunne we may espie,
Whose scattered beames within the Easterne skies
Are seene before the Sunne it selfe doe rise.


It hath abundance of rare Hearbes and Plants, which Bellonius lib. 1 cap. 7. doth reckon up. Many do mention the Labyrinth in Crete which was built by Daedalus, of which as also of the Italian Labyrinth Plin. lib. 36. cap. 13. witnesseth that there is now nothing remaining. Wonderfull therefore is the stupidnesse and ignorance of the Inhabitants, who doe still shew at the foote of the Mountaine Ida, a new Labyrinth in stead of that old one: but it is no wonder that the Cretensians

map of CreteCANDIE.

should Cretissare, that is, should be Lyars. For the Inhabitants whether by the influence of the Heavens, the quality of the soyle, or their owne disposition, are naturally given to evill. They were heretofore Lyars, deceitfull, greedy, covetous, and gluttonous Drinkers, idle, and not adicted to any trade or course of life, but much given to drinking and Banqueting. But now, as Bellonius reporteth by the instinct of nature, they delight from their child-hood in the Scythian Bow, and therein doe follow their ancient custome. For they report that they heretofore adored Diana: and therefore they exceeded the Turkes themselves for shooting, also they are nimble and stout in Sea-fights. For the Cretensians were the first that were strong in Shipping, and Bowes, whereby it is to be understood that they were the first Graecians that followed these studies. For as the Philosopher hath it (...) Lib. 2. Politick. This Iland naturally belongeth to the Principal^ (...) Greece, and is better seated than any other. For it lyeth in the Sea over against Greece. And one part of it lyeth but a little distant from Peloponnesus, the other part lyeth not farre from a part of Asia which is above Triopium, and not farre from Rodes. Wherefore King Minos was governour of the Sea, and held other Ilands in subjection: and upon others which had been long uninhabited he planted Colonies. There were these Bishopricks in it. The Archbishop of Crete or Candy under whom are these Suffragan Bishops; Kirokensis, Archadensis, Gerapetrensis, Sicinensis, Milopotamiensis, Ariensis, Calamoniensis, Aglensis, Kissaniensis. The Archbishop Atridensis, under whom are Casensis, S^epulensis, Napronensis, Margaricensis. The Archbishop Soltaniensis, who hath these Suffragans under him, Helenensis, Sudensis, Monovasiensis, Taurisiensis, Marrachitaniensis. The Archbishop Vospreniensis, under whom are these Suffragan Bishops, Tephiliensis, Matrehensis, Cersonensis. And so much concerning Candia: there are some Ilands yet to bee described, which lye round about Greece.
Corfu which Ptolemy calls Corcira is a faire Iland, being strong both by Land and Sea. It is 2. miles distant from Epirus, where the Sea is straitest, but where it is broadest 20. miles. It is 97. paces in length, as Pliny witnesseth. The Climate is very temperate and gentle. so that there are whole woods of Citterne Trees, Orange Trees, and those kindes of fruits. The soyle is fruitfull, having abundance of Vines, Olives, Apples, and other sorts of fruits, here is also great store of Honey. But it hath no good Corne in regard of the Southerne windes, which dryes it so much, that it withers before it come to Maturity and ripenesse. It is now subject to the Venetians, who defended it valiantly against the fury of the Turkes. It hath a Citty of the same name. The Inhabitants are Graecians.
Zacynthus commonly called Zante. Pliny placeth it betweene Cephaleria and Achaja. It is 36. miles in compasse. This Iland bringeth forth great store of Corne, but especially Raisons, Wine, and Oyle, out of which the Inhabitants doe yeerely make 150000. Crownes. They are Graecians and subject to the Venetians. It hath a Towne of the same name, with a Castle seated on a Mountaine, which hangeth over the Sea: it is full of Woods, and it is much commended for the

wholesomnesse of the ayre, the fruitfulnesse and the fertility of the soyle. The Mountaine it selfe is called Elatos.
Milo is an Iland which was anciently called Melos, which is in the Cretian Sea. The compasse of it is 80. miles. It hath fruitfull Fields, which doe yeeld Corne and Oyle, but little Wine. In this Iland a Mine of Silver is also found, and the Onix stone.
Naxus is an Iland which Sophianus and others call Nissia. It is 80. miles in compasse. And it is reckoned among the fruitfull Iles. It hath great store of Wine, and there is a kinde of Marble found in it, which the Graecians and Pliny doe call a Carbell, having spots like a Serpent. The stone also Smirillus wherewith Glasiers cut their Glasse, which Pliny calls Smiris is found here. Some thinke that there are veynes of Gold here, which are not found out by reason of the Inhabitants sloth and idlenesse. Here is also a kinde of Waspe, which if it sting any one, he dyeth presently afterward: also here are great store of Bats. It was heretofore subject to Iohn Quirinus a noble Venetian. Afterward to Duke Iob Crispus, whom Selinus the Turkish Emperour drove hence. But now it is inhabited by Turkes and Iewes.
Santorini, or Santorino, or Therosia, which is an Iland in the Aegean Sea, according to Strabo and Ptolemy, hath the figure and forme of an horned Moone, although it had another shape before it was burned, and that the Sea devided it into two parts, betweene which some Rockes doe lye. It is fruitfull and hath convenient Havens. The Inhabitants live by fishing. And it is subject to the Turke.
Scarpanto was heretofore called Carpathus, or according to Homer, Crapathus. Hence the Carpathian Sea. It is situate in the middle between Crete and Rhodes. The compasse of it is 60. miles, or as some will have it 70 miles. It is rugged and full of Mountaines, in which there are Mines of Marble. It had heretofore foure Citties, and therefore it was called Tetrapolis, as Eustathius hath it upon Homer. It hath many Havens which are not very great, nor safe. The Inhabitants speake Greeke, and doe embrace the Graecian Religion: but they are subject to the Venetians.
But let so much suffice concerning Europe. Now we enter upon the other parts of the world, and first of Affrick, which in our devision is next to Europe.




BARBARY, IN VVHICH ARE THE KINGDOMES OF TVNIS AND AEGYPT.
IN Affrick, which with Ptolemy wee make to bee the second part of the World, Barbary doth first present it selfe to view,The Country whence so called. being a noble Country of Affrick. It was so nominated either from the Inhabitants murmuring speech, which the Arabians call Barbar, because the Numidian speech seemed such to the Arabians; or from their frequent deserts; for Bar signifies in their language a Desart. It reacheth from Aegypt even to the Gaditane straite,The Situation and doth containe both the Mauritania's, namely, Tingitana and Caesariensis, properly called Affrick, also Cyrenaica, Marmarica, with the farther Lybia. Late Writers of Affrick doe make the bounds of it on the East to be the Desarts of Marmarica, (which is now called Barcha) which reacheth to a part of the Mountaine Atlas, now called Mejes, which part Strabo describeth under the name of Aspis: on the South it hath the Mountaine Atlas, which lyeth from the East to the West, even to the Sea, which from thence is called the Atlantick Sea: on the West it hath the Atlantick Sea: on the North the Mediterranean Sea.The quality of the Soyle. The Ayre and Climate of this Country is various and different. In the Spring the ayre is gentle, milde, and cleare; in Summer the heate is most vehement, especially in the Moneths of June and July, but in Autumne it is somewhat cooler: in the Winter the cold is somewhat sharpe, especially about December and January, but it is but in the morning onely, so that no man is compelled thorow cold to come to the fire. The end of Autumne, and all the Winter, and a good part of the Spring, hath great store of impetuous and violent windes and stormes. And sometimes they are troubled with Hayle, Lightning, and fearefull Thunder: and in some places there is thick Snow. This Country yeeldeth great store of Dates and Pomegranats, but it hath but little Wheate, so that the Inhabitants for the most part doe make Barley bread. It hath also great store of other fruit, as Cherries, Figges, Apples, Peares, Prunes, Peaches, Apricotts, Quinces, Olives, and the like. It hath abundance of Oyle, Honey and Sugar, and great store of Heards of Cattell and wilde beasts. For this Country doth breed Dragons, Elephants, Goats, Bulls, or wild Oxen, and the like;The variety of living creatures. also Lyons and Libbards: it hath also Wesils which are as bigge as Cats, but that they have not such great jawes, and great store of Apes. The Phaenicians and others who came out of Asia or Aegypt did first inhabit this Country: afterward it was subject to the Romanes, then to the Graecian Emperous, and afterward to the Vandals, Sarazens, and Arabians, now it is partly subject to the Turke, and partly to a Seriffe of its owne: also the King of Spaine hath some Castles

map of BarbaryBARBARY.

in it. There are foure Kingdomes in Barbary, the Kingdome of Morocco, of Fesse, of Teleusinum, and Tunis, unto which some doe adde Barca. We will entreate of the two former, namely, Morocco and Fesse in the following Tables, but of the other we will entreate here. The Kingdome of Teleusinum which they call Tremisen, is Mauritania Caesariensis. The length of it from the West to the East is 380. miles. The breadth of it is narrower being 25. miles, namely, from the Desarts of Numidia, even to the Mediterranean Sea. The most part of this Country is unhabited, dry, and rugged, especially Southward. But the Coasts by the Sea side are somewhat more fruitfull and fertile. There are few Citties or Castles in it. The Metropolis is Teleusina, which was heretofore a great Citty, but now it is for the most part ruinated. In the same Country there is also Algiers, a great Citty and well fortified. This Citty did first revolt from the King of Telusianum, and paide tribute to the King of Bugia: afterward it revolted from him and received Ferdinand King of Spaine to be their King. And at last it was taken by Barbarossa, and added to the Ottoman Empire, it is famous for the Shipwrack of Charles the 5. for the sad captivity and slavery of the Christians, and the excursions of the Turkish Pirates. It is now so fortified, that it is thought to be impregnable. Castaldus supposeth that Ptolemy did call this Salden, but Ortelius and our Mercator doe thinke that that which Ptolemy called Salden, is now called Tadelis: Iovius thinketh it to be Iulia Caesarea, and others Critae. There are also the Citties Mersalcabir, Messagran, Mustaganin, and others. This Kingdome hath two famous Havens, the one the Haven of Horamus, or Orania, with a strong Castle, the other of Marsa Eltabirus, whether great store of Merchants Ships doe resort, especially from Italy, both which the King of Spaine got some yeeres agoe, to the great detriment and losse of this Kingdome. The Kingdome Tunitanum doth containe Affrick the lesse, and a great part of Numidia. For it reacheth from the River Major, which Maginus supposeth to be that which Ptolemy calls Audum, even to the River of the Country of Mesrata.

AEGYPT.
AEGYPT is a noble ancient Country, which was first inhabited by Misraim the Sonne of Chus, Nephew to Cham, and Nephew once remoov'd to Noah. Wherefore in Osiris sacred rights, it was called from Cham Chemia, in stead of Chamia, as from the other Misraim, for the Arabians doe still call it Mesre. The Turkes call it Elquibet or Elchebit. The bounds of it on the West beyond Nilus are the Desarts of Barch, Libya, and Numidia, with the Kingdome of Nubia. On the South it is enclosed with the Bugiensian Country, and Nilus, where Nilus bendeth his course from the West Eastward. Pliny doth bounder it with the Citty Syene, which is now called Asna. On the East it hath the Desarts of Arabia, which lye betweene Aegypt and

map of EgyptAEGYPTUS

the red Sea. On the North it is enclosed with the Mediterranean Sea, which is there called the Aegyptian Sea. It seldome raineth in Aegypt, ^^d Plato saith that it was never seene to raine in Aegypt, so that the ^re is continually serene and cleare, whence happily it was former-called Aeria. The Country is wonderfull fruitfull, being full of ^en, and all kinde of creatures. The River Nilus, which runneth ^orow the middle of it, and doth overflow it every yeere, doth so ^oisten, and fatten it, so that it is wonderfull fertile, and fruitfull.The fruitfulnesse of the Soyle. ^riters have left many Elogies in praise of the fruitfulnesse of this ^ountry, Iustine affirmeth that there is no Country more fruitfull ^^n it. For (saith he) there is in Aegypt great store of Wheate, Pulse, ^^ly, Oates, Beanes, and other kinde of Graine; and also excellent ^ine. It hath also pleasant Pastures, but hath but little Oyle and ^ood. Besides wilde beasts, of which this Country hath abundance, ^oth breed great store of tame Cattell, as Buffes, Oxen, Camels,The variety of living creatures. ^orses, Asses, Rammes, and Goates, all which are of a great size, as ^onius witnesseth, in regard of the temper of the ayre, the abundance of Fother, and the sweet Grasse which groweth there, by the overflowing of Nilus: among the rest there are very fatt great Rams, which have a great thick taile that hangeth downe to the very ^ound, and dewe lappes hanging downe under their neck as Oxen ^^e, and their wooll is black. Moreover all Aegypt did heretofore ^^ish under divers Kings of divers names, even to the Ptolemies: for ^^re were few Phar^es. But the Ptolemies raigned a long time, even the Romane Empire, which declining, Aegypt was governd by the ^^^renes of Arab a felix, the Prince whereof was called the Sultan, ^ those that followed him were also called Sultanes, being all Mahometans, they raigned many yeeres untill they were expulsed by the ^^urkes. But now Soliman the great Turke doth possesse all Aegypt, and ^^veth there a President, who is called the Baxa of Aegypt. Alexander Macedon did devide it into Praefectureships of Townes, whereof He^^tus reckoneth 18. Strabo one more, and Ptolemy 46. Pliny 50. who ^o addeth that some of them had changed their names, so that it is ^ot to be imagined that there were heretofore so many Praefectureships of Aegypt as are nominated in Historians, seeing there might bee ^any names of one and the same Praefectureship. Leo Africanus saith, that the Mahometans did devide it into three Provinces. Sahid the ^^her or Thehais from the borders of Bugia even to Cairus* Errifia (...)

Heliopolis was heretofore the Citty where the Priests dwelt, and the place where Strabo the great Astronomer and Philosopher lived. Memphis heretofore called Arsinoe, was a royall Citty, where Nilus first devideth it selfe into two parts, and maketh the forme of the Greeke letter Delta. They call it now Cairum, or Alcair. This Citty is built in a triangular or three-cornerd forme, being above 8. miles in compasse. The Turkes, the Aegyptians, the Arabians, the Hebrewes and others doe inhabit it. Bellonius placeth Babylon a little above Cairus, and the ruine of many famous Buildings are yet remaining. It is now a little Towne of the Christians. Alexandria was heretofore a noble faire Citty built by Alexander the great, upon the Mediterranean Sea-coast, and seated pleasantly. The Turkes doe call it Scanderia. Pelusium is called now Damiatum, which is a potent rich Citty, famous for the conveniency of the Haven, wherein many Ships may ride, being at the Pelusiacian mouth of the River Nilus. This Country is devided, watered, and made fruitfull by the River Nilus, which is the fairest River in all the world.



THE KINGDOMES OF MAROCCO and FESSE.
THat part of Barbary which was heretofore called Mauritania Tingitana, doth now containe two Kingdomes, namely,The Country whence so called. of Marocco, and Fesse, of which we will now speake in order. The Kingdome of Marocco was so called from the chiefe Citty thereof Marocco. It lyeth betweene the Mountaine Atlas, and the Atlantick Ocean, in a triangular or three cornerd forme.The fruitfulnesse. It is a pleasant Country abounding with all kinde of Fruit and Graine, as Oyle, Honey, Sugar, and other fruits, as also Dares, Grapes, Figges, Apples, and divers sorts of Peares. It hath also great Flockes and Heards of Cattell: and many Goates,The variety of living creatures. whose hides are called Marocchini, and the haire of them are good to weave a kinde of cloth which they call Camelottes. Lastly, this Country produceth all things which are necessary for food, or to delight the smell, or recreate the sight. The Provinces hereof are Hea, which on the East is enclosed with the River Essivalus, on the South with the Mountaine Atlas, on the West and North with the Ocean, it is a rugged Country, Mountainous, Wooddy, rich, and populous. It hath not such plenty of Wheate as of Barley and Millet. But there is very little fruit, which ariseth rather from the slothfull idlenesse of the Inhabitants, than the indisposition of the Climate or Soyle. But there is great store of Honey, on which they live for the most part, but they cast away their Waxe, not knowing how to use it, here are few Citties,The Citties. but many strong Townes, Villages, and Castles. Susa hath on the North the Mountaine Atlas, and the Towne Hea, on the East the River Sus, it is a fruitfull, pleasant, and rich Country. It hath abundance of Wheate, Barley, and Pulse, and in some parts great store of Sugar, although the Inhabitants know not how to boyle it, or use it: in other parts it hath divers fruits as Egges, Grapes, Peaches and Dares* it (...)

a triangular or three cornerd figure: Tedsi is a great Citty, founded heretofore by the Affricans, and seated in a pleasant soyle: and Tagavost the greatest Citty of all this Country. The Country of Morocco hath a triangular or three cornerd forme, the bounds thereof on the West are the Mountaine Netisa, on the East the Mountaine Hadimeus: on the North it is extended even to the confluence and meeting of the River Tensift and a sisinual. This Country as Leo reporteth, is well inhabited, and aboundeth with Heards of Cattell and wilde beasts. It is a continued Plaine, not much unlike to Lombardy, those Mountaines which it hath, are cold and barren, so that they beare nothing but Barley. In this Country there is the Citty Marocco, which some think to be that which Ptolemy calls Bocanum Hemerum. It is accounted one of the greatest Citties of the world. For it is so great, that in the raigne of Prince Halis the Sonne of Iosephus, it contained above 100000. houses, and it had 24. Gates. But this great famous Citty hath beene so harassed and wasted by the Arabians frequent inrodes and excursions, so that now there is scarce a third part of the Citty standing. There are also in this Country other lesser Townes, as Elgiumuha, a little Towne, seated on a Plaine, neere the River Sesseva, and built by the Affricans. Tenezza is a strong Citty, built heretofore by the Affricans on that side of the Mountaine Atlas which is called Ghedmina, Delgumuha is a new Citty seated on a high Mountaine with a strong Castle. Imizmizi is a faire Citty seated on a Rocke: Tesrast is a small Towne seated on the banke of the River Asiselmel: also Agmet and Hanimmei. Guzzula is seated on the North side of the Mountaine Atlas, and on the East it joyneth to Hea. This Country doth yeeld great store of Barley, and Cattell, and it hath Mines of Brasse and Iron. The Townes here and Castles have no Trenches or Ditches: the Villages are faire, populous, and rich: and all the Country is well inhabited. Duccala is a Country which beginneth on the West from the River Tensiftum, it is bounderd on the North with the Ocean, on the South it is enclos'd with the River Habiel, and on the West with the River Hammirabith. There are few walled Citties in this Country. Among which is the Citty Azaefi situate on the Ocean shore. The Affricans built it: there is also Conie which was built by the Gothes, and Tit built by the Affricans: Elmedina is the head Citty of all this Country: Centopozzi is a small Towne: There (...)

map of MoroccoMOROCCO.

large, it is bounded on the West with the Rivers Servi and Omirabih, on the South it joyneth to the Mountaine Atlas, on the North it is bounderd with the confluence and meeting of the Rivers Servi and Omirabih, so that the Country lyeth in a triangular or three cornerd figure. There are some Townes in it, the chiefe whereof is Tesza, built by the Affricans, and well inhabited. There are also Esza, Githiteb, and others. The chiefe Rivers of this Kingdome are Tensift, and Omirabih, which issuing out of the Mountaine Atlas, doe runne into the Ocean. But Tensift riseth in the Country of Morocco, and is enlarged by the receit of many Rivers, the greatest whereof are Sifelmel and Niffis. But Omirabih doth breake forth among the Mountaines, where the Province of Tedles confineth on the Kingdome of Fesse. On the shore side in some places there is found great store of Amber, which is very cheape there, so that the Portugals and other forraigne Nations doe transport it into other Countries. Here are many Mountaines, as Nisipha, Semede, Sensana, and others. The most whereof are cold and barren, so that they beare nothing but Barley. In this Kingdome there are no great store of Churches, Colledges, nor Hospitals. In the Citty of Morocco there are many Churches, and one of the most curious and magnificent is that which standeth in the middle of the Citty, and was built by the aforesaid Halis. There is also another built by his successor Abdul Miomem, and enlarged by his Nephew Monsor, and enriched which many Pillars brought thither out of Spaine. He made a Cisterne under this Church, which is as bigge as the Church, he coverd the Church with Lead, and made leaden Pipes at every corner, to receive and convay the raine water into the aforesaid Cisterne. The Tower or Steeple of stone like unto Vespasians Romane Amphitheater, is higher than the Steeple of Bononta in Italy, the steps which goe up into it are very broad, and the walls thick. This Tower hath three Belfries or Turrets, on which there is another little arched Tower built. And this hath three Turrets one over another, and they goe from one to another by a wodden Laddet. If any one looke downe from the highest Tower he will thinke that men of great stature are no bigger than children of a yeere old. And this Tower hath a golden Moone for a Weathercock, and three golden Globes, so fastned upon Iron, that the greatest is placed lowest, and the lesser highest. There is also a strong Castle in this Citty so that (...)

doe use no Tables, nor Table-cloathes. They are clothed with a kinde of cloth made of Wooll like Carpeting stuffe, they weare a great deale of fine cloth about their heads, yet the forepart of their head is bare, none weare Hats or Caps but old men, and learned men, they weare no Smocks, and in stead of Beds, they have haire Blankets in which they wrap themselves. They shave their beards before they are married, but afterward they weare them long.



THE KINGDOMES OF THE ABISSINES AND CONGVS.
THE Kingdome of the Abissines is called Aethiopia, which Ptolemy placeth beneath Aegypt.The Country. The Moores doe call the Prince thereof Asiela Bassi, and in the Aethiopian language he is called Iohn Belul, that is, High and Precious, not Presbyter, as some are of opinion. Hee glorieth that he is descended from the stocke of David, and this is his Title. N. N. The supreme Governour of my Kingdomes, the onely beloved of God, the Pillar of Faith, descended of the stock of Judah, the Sonne of David, the Sonne of Salomon, the Sonne of the Pillar of Sion, the Sonne of the seed of Jacob, the Sonne of Mary, the Sonne of Nahu according to the flesh, the Sonne of the Saints Peter and Paul, according to Grace, the Emperour of the higher and lower Aethiopia, and of my large Kingdomes, Iurisdictions, and Territories; King of Noa, Caffares, Fatiger, Angola, Baru, Balig^^ca, Adea, Vangua, and Goyama, where there are the Spring-heads of Nilus, etc. Hee is without doubt one of the greatest Monarchs of the world, whose Territories doe lye betweene the two Tropickes, even from the red Sea to the Aethiopian Ocean. And that we may describe the bounds of his Empire more accurately: on the North it hath Aegypt which is subject to the Turkes: on the East the red Sea, and the Bay of Barbery: on the South it is encompassed with the Mountaines of the Moone, on the West it is bounderd with the Kingdome of Cengus, the River Niger, the Kingdome of Nubia, and the River Nilus. In which bounds are contained ancient Aethiopia, below Aegypt. Troglodite, and the Cinnamon-bearing Country, and part of the innermost Libya. The Country in general (as appeareth by those who have taken a late view of it) is most fruitfull.The fruitfulnesse if the Soyle. There is a double Summer, which almost lasteth all the yeere, so that in some Fields they are sowing, and in others they (...)

map of AbissinesTHE DVKEDOME OF THE ABISSINES.




