



AN ECLOG BETWEENE DAMAETAS and SILENVS.

STANZ. 1.
OF all the Trees in heavenly Silvans guard,
The ancient wise men of Britaine were called Bardi, Diodor. Sic.
(Wherewith the worthiest browes were crown'd of yore)
There is but one, or few, (oh reverend Barde)
In whose peculiar Vertues my desire
Hath studied much, and observed more:
But chiefly I the Genest doe admire,
Whose humble Highnesse makes mee oft surmise
That lowly steps be ladders to the Skies.
Humilitas scala coeli, Bernard.


2.
Her gentle nature doth not climbe to dwell
In proudest soile, nor tops of mountaines hie,
By that shee shews, that shee fore-seeth well
The perills which doe all extreames impend:
Flexit Pinum ferox astris minantem, and de nube media vocat: Seneca.
Th'aspiring Pine (whose top dos threat the sky)
Divine revenge doth headlong oft downe send,
When this is safe upon her humble hill,
Not thrall to any proud superiours will.



3.
The Cedars tremble when th'enrag'd winds blow,
Which shake not her: such peace and safety lies
In sweet Humility: yet she will gently bowe
To pliant hands, which shews some hid effects
And parts of man,
Genuum doloribus medetur; hinc Genista dicta Fuchsius. that duty onely ties
To bow to Kings, and pay their due respects.
Oh just Deserts, who can so well deserve
For to command, as one that knowes to serve.


4.
Besides, the Genest doth by nature hold
A speciall honour of eternall Greene:
Her verdant boughs being charg'd with flowers of gold,
And many secret gifts and graces more,
Which vulgar observation hath not feene,
In which your skill and knowledge I emplore;
And what those flowers be, the God of light
Hath made a Wreath of for his Favorite.



Silenus.

5.
What I doe know I will impart to thee,
And happily perhaps, thou hast referr'd
The satisfaction of thy thoughts to me:
For why, this thing was argued long agone
In Helicon, and I my selfe it heard,
Where Phaebus' mid'st the Muses on his throne
Establish'd by those sacred maids advice,
What Garlands should bee each atchievments price.


6.
The question grew because Apollo, he
Preferr'd complaint against such as presum'd
To weare a
The Italian, French, and Spaniard write the first sillable of garland with an I. and that is neerest to the Etymologie of Guir and Dalen i. greene leaves in British. garland of his holy tree,
Without desert, or special grace divine:
Apollo was much mov'd, and chaft and fum'd,
And so did call a councell with the Nine,
And when he had a leafe of Laurell eat,
Hinc vates (...) olim dicti Lycophro^ ap. Caelium Rodig.
With Delphick browes thus did his mind-repeat.



7.
The Lawrell crowne was given and shal be still
To peerles men, to Clerkes and Emperours,
The Lawrell garl. Plin. L. 15
And such as by their learned Art, and skill,
Could of my favours make their vants at large:
And then this long induring Palme of yours
Was due my sisters (and my sacred charge)
To such as worthily to gaine the price,
The Palme garl. A. Gell. Lib. 3.
Had suffer'd watching, famine, fire and Ice.


8.
And he which had with valiant hand preserv'd
A Citizen, receiv'd a crowne of Oke:
But he a wreath of Olive leaves deserv'd
The Oken garl. Gell. Lib. 5. The Olive garl. Gell. et Textor.
Who had with Art, and pleas of peace beguiled
The bitter times, which discord had forespoke,
Or else some dangerous foe had reconciled:
And hee who long had flam'd in true loves fire,
The Myrtle garl. Virgill et Ovid
Receiv'd a crowne of Myrtle for his hire.



9.
I meane whose amorous flame is fed by grace
And love of her, who doth his love persever:
He whose firme vowes and service takes no place
Where he affects, must bitter Willow weare:
The Willowe garland authorized by Homer and Virgill: Homer ealleth this tree (...), i. Frugi perdam Odyss. and Virg. placeth the forlorne lovers Inter salices Eclog 10. The grasse garland Plin. Lib. 12.
For as that Tree by buds doth promise ever
A hope of fruit; yet fruit doth never beare,
So vaine and fruitles is his hope and love
Who an inconstant womans faith doth prove.


10.
Of all, the most authentick is of Grasse,
For that before I had my Bayes was vs'd;
And with those words his colour altred was:
Daphne versa in laurum: O vid. Met. and hereupon Lucian saith Apollo was infortunate. (...).
Whilst a deepe sigh exprest his agonie,
So much his guilty conscience him accus'd,
Whose rape to fly a maide was made a tree:
And so his amorous passion did prevaile,
That he had much adoe to end his tale.



11.
Asham'd to pause so? then he shak'd his tresses
And at the length collects his fires divine,
Yet vents on sigh more, e're hee more expresses
The ghirland of the grasse did serve (quoth he)
For some such politicke,
The Cypresse Garl. Apud Plin. Li. 16. or Paladine,
Who froma siege should set a City free.
And then the hood of Cypresse leaves was worne
Of such as had (as I have) cause to mourne.


12.
For safe convoy is borne the Vervaine wreath
Of Faecialls and Mars his Oratours.
The Vervaine Garl. Virg. Plin. Ivy garland, Plin. li. 16. The Garl. of Lylies, Roses and Thistles. De his vide Pierium in hyeroglyphic: The Pine gar. Propertius Lib. Eleg. 1.
To Tuiscons race the Ivy we bequeath,
Lillyes, Chardons and sweets of Erycine,
Of severall Empires be the signall flowers,
Symbols of beauty, power and grace divine;
The Pine is Pans, and he to Herds gives that
Which tune an Oate and make their cattle fat.



13.
But there's an Island Luceessa call'd,
Orpheus calls Britaine (...) in Argonautic.
Within whose fertile bounds there growes a Tree,
Whose boughes be all of carved Emerald,
Her flowers far more golden then my beames,
For her abode shee listeth not to be
Where she must suffer heat, or colds extreams,
To whom the Bee (of homages most true)
Comes oft to yeeld his suit and service due.


14.
Now thou faire Genest art my dearest Tree;
Thy Garlands now of all shall be most rare:
None shall presume to weare a branch of thee^,
Or with thy sacred wreaths begirt their browe,
But such as of immortall linage are,
And more then earthly favours doe endowe.
So crown'd by thee, their names shal never die,
But fixe them Comets in bright Honours skie.



15.
And let your hallowing hands adorne this Crowne,
Which I have destin'd onely unto one,
The Genest Garland.
And such an one, as Merite and Renowne,
Hath recommended to the supreame good:
Who for his Vertues doth deserve alone
To weare a Wreath of all sweets in the wood;
Whose Vertues Christian and Heroicall
Crownes him the greatest and the best of all.


16.
To him his neighbour Potentates shall bend,
The Poplare Princes shall his vassals be:
Affricke and Inde to him shall Presents fend:
The Turke shall sheath his raging Semiter,
And prostrate stoope unto his Amity:
Esteeming them the happiest, which preferre
A League with him, and so his name grow great,
As farre as Neptunes wand'ring surges beat.



17.
Thus said the King, the Prophet and the God,
To which (with adoration) thrice he bow'd,
And so he made his parting period:
When with prophetick hymnes Parnassus rings,
And Altars smoakd with many holy cloud:
But that thou maist the better note those things,
I will declare what all those Worthies be,
Which have worn branches of this gentle
Gentle hath divers significations, sometimes it signifieth supremo gradu de perfectione per natura, per costumi and per valor, etc. Russell 1. sometime it signifieth of, or belonging to the same stocke, or nation, as gentilis Clypeus, gentile sacrum, and gentile huemo in Italian: and as it is used here, sometime it betokeneth milde, or pliant. tree.


18.
You see Damaetas, that the Gods decree
Admits but one to wear the compleat ghirland,
But some whose fame hath scal'd a high degree,
May weare a branch, and some a Chappelet.
Th' empresse Matildas son who conquerd Irela^d
The greatest Britaine King which hath bin yet,
K. Henry. 2. Vide Preface.
Must by good right, lead the triumphant band
Of the great Royall worthies of this land.



19.
A Prince form'd of the true materiall mould,
He was as valorous as politicke,
Hee could well win, and what he wan could hold;
And fortune followes such men in their traine;
Normandy, not Neustria, Pithaeus.Westria was his, he rul'd in
Little Britaine. Armoricke,
And raignd in Albion and Aquitaine,
In briefe a Sov'raigne he did raigne and rule
From Pyraene Mount ains to the frozen
Terrarum ultima Thule, Seneca, Island or Thy-leusell, that is, Shetland, secundum Gasp. Peucerum apud G. Camdenum. Thule.


20.
His glorious enfigne next he doth display
Whose valiant zeale, and Chivalry divine.
K. Richard 1. surnamed Caeur de Lyon, married Berengaria, daughter of Garcia, King of Navarre.
Made in the Pagan Kingdomes such a way,
As all the Christian Hosts might enter in:
He tooke Acon, and Ioppa in Palestine,
And did besides the Realme of Cyprus win;
He ward with Men, and slew the Austriak Lyon
Then made a peace with God, and went to Syon.



21.
Next rides King Iohn, to whom stout Calidoun
Tooke solemne oath to be a true Leig-man
To him the King, and the heires of his Crown,
K. Iohn brother to Rich. 1 surnamed Sans terrae. He got Angolesme by marrying with Isabell, daughter and heire of Almery, Earle of Angolesme, and the Isle of Man by conquest. Walter Buck brought 700 men out of Brabant, wan Ely and divers Castles for this K. Iohn: Vide Camdenu^ in Occadini, et Holinsh.
And by his auspices the Brabant Knight
From Rebell Lords their Isle of refuge wan.
By him great Thamsis bridge so exquisite,
Which lay in wooden modells, was begun,
A braver worke in Europ ne're was done.


22.
Then comes his Sonne with other Architects,
Hen. 3. surnamed Winchester, maried Elianor daughter of Raymond, Ear. of Provence.
(Not to build Babells, and Castles in the Aire)
But he a holy house for God projects,
The which he doth at Westminster performe:
A Temple high, magnificent, and faire,
A glorious pile for sacred use and forme,
And shall remaine to all posterity,
The hallow'd Monument of his Piety.



23.
Now adde the formost two which bore his name,
K. Edward 1. surnamed Longshank, married first Elianor daughter of the K. of Castile: she was heire of Ponthieu, and Mother of K. Edward 2. by his second Wife Margaret, Da. of the French K. He had Tho. of Brotherton, from whom by Segrave and Moubray the Howards are descended.
(Who of the Saint disguis'd a Ring received)
To th'one some give a Hammer, for surname,
Because he bruis'd Gaiothell in his rage,
And him of Iacobs Stone and Chaire bereaved:
But Iacob repossess'd them (by praesage.)
The other Edward the Templars did expell,
Of whom I can no more say, to say well.


24.
Behold him next who in his doome supreme,
Pouuoire above an Estre did advance:
For he was offered Caesars Diadem,
(2) Vide Tho. Walsingham in Ed. 1. K. Ed. 2. surnamed of Carmarvon, married Isabell, daughter and heire of Phil. le Bel, K. of France. K. Edw. 3. surnamed de Windesore, married Philip, daughter of William, Earle of Henalt, etc. He tooke Calais, and wan many victories of the French: as at Crecy and Sluys, etc. refused to bee Emperour. Paralipom. ad Abb. Vrspergens.
But followed boones forbod, and downe anon
Cuts with his Mothers sword the flowers of France,
And plants them in his field of Albion,
And puts them in his royall Lyons guard:
For so (quoth he) Dieu et mon droyt award.



25.
Phillip the famous Macedonian,
Ed. de Woodstock, P. of Wales and of Aquitainc married Ioan Da. and heire of Edm. Plantagenest Earle of Kent. First he overthrew 60000 Spaniards and Fre^ch in Spain betwixt Naveret and Naiara.
Had not a son of higher worth then he,
For where the Prince, blacke Edward went, he wan:
This honors comet first did faire appeare
At Cressy field, which Navaret did see
After, more bright then Mavors in his Spheare,
But Poiters chiefly where hetooke King Iean,
For there a double victory he wan.


26.
Two Richards more succeed, the one a Prince
K. R. 2 his son surnamed de Burdeaux married Anne of Lexeinbourg Da. of the Emperour Wenceslaus. K. R. 3 surnamed de Fotheringay Du. of Gloster etc. married Anne Nevill Da. of Ric. the great Earle of Warwick.
Whose goodly presence men to wo^der moved
And was as bountifull as any since;
Fame hath bin sharp to th'other, yet because
All accusations of him are not proved,
And he built Churches, and did make good lawes,
And all men held him wise, and valiant,
Who may deny him then his Genest Plant.



27.
But Henry Bullingbrook me thinks doth frowne,
King Henry 4. surnamed de Bolenbrock, married Mary Daughter and heire of Humphery, Bohun Earle of Hereford etc. He was Duke of Lancaster in the right of his Mother Blanch Da. of Hen. Duke of Lancaster etc.
That Gloster here should next to Bourdeaux com
Because he from his Cozen tooke the Crowne:
Mistake not Henry, for by right for neither
Of yee, in these triumphall Carrs is roome;
But best of all you may be matcht together.
Yet I must grant thou wert a Princely knight,
And Patron of the bloody Rose by right.


28.
But to thy sonne the Dolphins strange repaire
King Henry 5. surnamed de Munmouth, married Kath. Da. to Charles the 6 the French King. Of this Dolphine vid. Tho. Walsingham in An. Do. 1392. He conquered France for the most part. He dyed at Blois de Vinciennes neere Paris.
Swimming in post up to the royall Porte,
Foretold that he was borne the Lillies heire,
This signe was soone by sequels verified:
Dolphin he was by right, or swords effort:
And he in France victorious liv'd and dyed;
whom Agincourt so nobly did receive,
At Vinciene Parke of all he takes his leave.



29.
Henry his sonne surnamed of Windlesore
K. H. 6 surnamed the Saint, built a Colle dge at Eaton and the Kings Colledge in Camb. married Marg. Da. of Rene. K. of Sicil. Du. of Aniou.
(Who was in London and in Paris crowned)
Most worthily a Plant of Genest bore
But not by Scepters sole his praise beganne:
K. H. 7. solicited the Pope to Canonize. K. H. 6 who refused.
His christian vertues made him most renowned
For he was deem'd a very holy man,
And had bin made a Saint, and long since shrin'd,
But that the vice-Saint maker was unkind.


30.
I must omit that proud Plantagenet,
R. Du. of Yorke, heire generall of the Crowne, Regent of France, Married Cecely Nevill Da. of Ralph Earle of Westmerland.
Who in high Parliament the King defide,
But I may not his gallant sonne forget,
Who twice did win the royall Gole by armes,
And was the father of the happiest bride
That ever Camber compast in his armes,
K. H. 4. married Wydevile Da. of Ant. Earle Rivers, extinguished Lancaster. Q. Eliz. 1. King Ed. 5.
She made the losse the lighter of that sonne,
Whose raigne then ended, as it was begunne.



31.
She and her Richmond (on'd by sacrament)
K.H. 7. Earle of Richmond, married Eliz. Plant. Da. and heire of K. Ed. 4. for them Christopher Columb. offered todiscover the Indies Ric. Hacklet 3.
Refus'd the golden offer of Colone,
Foreseeing that the riches and the rent
Would hardly countervaile the keepers care;
And had beside a secret reed that one,
(Who should hereafter sit in Arthurs Chaire,
Should fetch the fleece, when he occasion saw,
And hold the golden Monarke in his awe.
H. Earle of Richmond got both the field and Crowne at Bosworth. Marga. his mother was an heire of the house of Somerset! he extinguished the heire Male of the house of Yorke


32.
This Richmond was a very prudent Prince.
And therefore was surnamed Solomon:
The world hath seen great workes accomplisht since^,
Which were projected by his active braine,
This man of Fate did happily attone
The civil feud which long before did raigne
Betwixt the Rose which first grew in the wood,
And that which Venus coloured in her blood,
Vid. Ovid in Metam. these Roses were the devises of Yorke and Lancaster.



33.
These happy plants have overspread this Isle
By Henry and more fruitfull Margaret.
Marg. their da. was married to Iam. 4. K. of Scotland, by whom he had K. Iam. 5. who married Mary Da. to Claud. Du. of Guise, who bare to him Mary Qu. of Scotland and France heire apparant of Eng. and grandmother to our Soveraigne Lord K. Charles.
But Henryes branches flourish'd but a while,
She is the roote of this immortall seede:
Whence Iames the wise and new Plantagenet
Did spring, and was her father, who did breed heere.
The great Polistiphan, as shall appeare,
When they are past which come triumphant


34.
This is that Henry whose great soule did first
Giue a check-mate unto the pride of Rome;
K. H. 8 married Katherne Da. of Ferdinand K. of Castile, by whom he had Queene Mary hee had Q. Eliz. by Anne of Bolein Da. of the Earle of Wiltshire he had K. Ed. by Iane sister of the Du. of Somer.
A stirring worke, which else no Monarch durst;
What he avowes, he executes indeed,
And is not startled with their Churches doome:
And see how duely vertue hath her meed
For the Pope himselfe (
Doctor Coop. Bi. of Linc. in Chronici. as the Bishop saith)
First stiled him defendor of the Faith.



35.
His hopefull sonne brought happily to passe,
K. Ed. 6.
What was attempted by that hardy King;
For he abolished the Romish Masse;
Qnem Dij diligunt, moritur Iuvenis Menander.
Timely resolv'd to maintaine Christian truth.
And as his yeares, so did his vertues spring,
But envious fates untimely nipt his youth;
Then let this serve, to make compleat his praise;
Whom Gods do love, he dyes in tender daies.


36.
This is King Henries eldest daughters place
A Queene endued with heavenly vertues many
Devout sans dout, a Mary full of grace,
Just of her word as any prince hath beene,
Her liberall hand was never clos'd to any
whose need requir'd or where a want was seen,
And whatsoever piously is given,
Q. Mary married Phillip 2. K. of Spain.
Is with great usury restor'd in heaven.



37.
Her younger Sister next to her doth set,
Q. Eliz. 2 addeth Virginia to her Empire.
Who was in acts and age the happier much;
And therefore weares the braver Chappelet.
A Queene whose state so happily did stand,
That men did say, seeing her greatnesse such,
This Lady leadeth Fortune in her hand;
A virgin that her sexes Fame exceld,
And for her rarenesse was a Phoenix held,


38.
For weigh her peace, established at home,
And next her victories atchive'd abroad,
As well in Indies as in Christendome;
Then her safe guarding her confederates:
Her zeale to the true worshiping of God,
Her wisely moderating her three estates,
Those spok her name, with wo^der, love, and feare
Which al the world did with amazement heare,



39.
Adde more which joyn'd strange Scepters to their plants,
Ri. Earle of Cornewall, Brother to K. Hen. 3. elected King of Almaine, or Romans. Jo. of Gant, Du. of Lancast. K. of Castile and Lyon by Q Consta^ce his wife.
As Cornewall did the Scepter of Almaine:
And that of Castile, royall Ion of Gant,
Progenitor by sonnes, and either daughter,
Of all the Kings of Britaine, and of Spaine,
Without Sir
K. Hen. 4. ut supra. Bolenbrook, who for the slaughter
Of a King inunct, ashamed hid his eyes
In the darke bosome of a strange disguise.


40.
But Bedford shall his Fathers place supply,
Jo. Duke of Bedford, 3 son of K. Hen. 4. Regent of France, where hee tooke the great Champion of France, Jeane la Pucille: overthrew the Vicount of Narbone at Sea, wan the battaile at Vervell, which as Ceres sayth, Fasoit porter dueil a toute la France.
Who though no King, yet was a great Viceroy,
And in his place behav'd him royally:
Th'arm'd sorceresse committed to the flame,
Narbone, Alanson, and their
K. Charles 7. was called in scorne le petit Roy de bourges. petty roy
Vanquaish'd at Vernveil, witnesse wel the same.
And while he liv'd; preserv'd th'inheritance
Of his dread Liege, and kept in aw all France.



41.
Some more great Genesters recount I may,
Whose fro^ts shold with this crown have circled beene
But they wer abse^t at the sacring day;
As Arthur, heire unto the greatest King.
Artur Plantag. Earle of Britaine, son of Geffrey, 3 sonne of K. Hen. 2. Heire apparant proclaimed by K. Ri. 1. Ma. Da. and heire of James 5. K. of Scotland, by Mary de Louraine, Da. of the Duke of Guise ut supra 38. St. Peter calleth the crown of immortall glory (...) 1 Epist. Cap. 5.
And she that was of France and Scotland Queene,
Whose vertues praises all the Muses sing,
And weares instead a Chappelet of Plants,
In Heaven a Diadem of Amarants.


42.
And divers others set on Fortunes knee,
Highly advanc'd for Vertues just respects,
Have worne a branch of this Imperiall Tree.
Farther, they neither did presume, nor might,
For they were men, and had some light defects:
But yet they past as farre each other wight,
As hee that followes here, eclipseth them,
Who in his Cradle wore the Diadem.



43.
This is that Olive bearer of this Isle,
Sic Minerva dicta Olivifera ab Ovidio. K. James high Senescall of England, Scotland, and Fra^ce, by private heritages, viz. by Leicester, ab. and Aniou: He married Anne, daughter of Fredericke the second King of Denmarke.
Who did by high preordinance, divine,
That great intestine quarrell reconcile,
Which so unnaturally so long had beene
Betwixt Brutes sonnes Albanact and Locrine:
As Theodore did that which was betweene
The bloody brothers Lancaster and Yorke,
And was a figure of this greater worke.


44.
To this his reunited Albion,
Let us annexe the Crowne of Pharamound,
And faire Hibernias (joyning three in one)
Tria juncta in uno: it is the Motto of his Majesties device for the Knights of the Bath.
Whilst bright renowne builds trophies of his fame
Unto the Southerne and the Northerne bound,
And all the Muses consecrate his Name:
Whose Wisedome, Justice, and Piety hath given
His acts a monument, shal endure with Heaven.



45.
And Britaine had no sooner faith and force
Combin'd, but her Dolphin in tender age
Henry Prince of great Britaine. K. Henry 2. buried in Fro^tenalx. King Charles hath so many, so ancient, and so lawfull Titles to this Empire, as never any Prince Heire general of this Kingdome had. He married Mary, Daughter to Henry 4. of France.
Vowes to redeeme from Gallike bonds the Cors
Of his Grandsire, the Great Plantagenet,
And seise upon his southerne heritage:
And bou^ds and trophies in the Pyrens set.
Stay Muse, here drop a teare, for deaths blacke cloud
Too soone his glory and our hopes did shrowd.


46.
But turne our eyes now from the clouded west,
And see the new Sun rising in the East,
With what auspicious browes the heavens exprest
Their glad praesages, the Coelestiall signes
With holy Auguries shin'd: Saturne did feast
With sprit'ly Icve, whil'st Apollo divines
In Delphicke raptures: the Age renu'd againe,
And tooke new influence from bright Charles his waine.



47.
The Stars of all yet were not absolute,
And Fates conspir'd to keep the^ in their wants:
But Gods and Fates, desert and publicke brute,
Have all pronounc'd him sole the worthy one,
To weare the Garland made of many plants,
And adde eternall Scepters to his Throne:
Of whom Apollo in his sacred rage,
Did as you heard, such wondrous things praesage.


48.
And to accomplish full his happinesse,
Heavens have to him a royall Spouse decree'd:
All those fraile Saints and flatter'd Goddesses
Shall kneele to her, so wise, so faire, so loyall,
So great, yet meeke; as doth her sexe exceed,
And both thrice blessed in their issue royall.
For he and they which shal from them descend,
Shall raigne in Britaine till the world have end.
Charles Prince of great Bricaine.



49.
Away prophane, sinke to the lowest Hells,
With your detracting murmurrs and hoarse
Envy wil yeeld, that fame not paralels spleens,
The fate of this great pair, which doth out shine
The luster of all former Kings and Queenes
Strengthned with al the powers and hands divine:
And in so just a scope their soules are spheard,
None ever liv'd more lov'd, admir'd and fear'd.


50
And every Nimph and Goddesse of the plaines
Shall weare rich favours of Genesta's plants.
And that no common injury prophanes
The sacred priviledge of her blest abode:
The Muses there shall keep their solemne hants
And in her shades sing many learned Ode:
Whilst Poets make her garlands more diuine,
Then that which doth for Ariadne shine.




Damaetas.

51. 
Thanks blessed Prophet, praised be thy art,
Which hath so much resolv'd my travailed minde:
My wish is satisfied in every part
My thoughts and doubts, are ridled every one;
And I confesse his name thou hast divin'd
To whose high worth, this garlands due alone,
For whose immortall raigne and happy fate
Let all our vowes and prayers be consecrate.





VPON KING HENRIE THE SECOND the first Plantagenet of ENGLAND, etc.

WHen Warlike HENRY by his Puissance
Had set his Foote upon the brest of France,
Scepter'd Hibernia, without Blood, or sweat,
And by his Conquests made his Name so great,
That it found way to Victory and Fame,
And burft the gall of War, where ere he came.
To Crowne his fate, and make him greater yet,
There was no Title but PLANTAGENET:
To whose immortall linage Fame could adde
No greater glories; then from him they had
A Name so Great in Destiny and Fate,
Rome would haue envi'd, or have trimbled at,

And her proud Tryumphs, too, looke pale; set
By the brighter honors of PLANTAGENET,
whilst their imperial bayes, as checkt with thu^der
Dropt fro^ their swelling te^ples, even with wo^der,
To see their Fate so farre out shin'd by odds,
And Pedigree of all their Demy-gods;
And to be heire unto great Henries fame,
Would not be Rome, but change her fate and name.

FINIS.






