


AN INTRODVCtion, and exhortation to PENANCE. CAP. I.
OVr weakenesse is so great, and they that fight against vs so strong, that it is no great maruaile, if many vnwarie persons be often ouercome; Wherefore the vessel of Election, holy S. PAVLE considering the great subtilities and dangers of the world,Eph. 5. writing vnto the Ephesians, warneth the^ to walke warily and prudently, in so dangerous a time and place, saying: See my brethren that you walke warilie, not as vnwise, but like wisemen, redeeming the time, because the daies are euill, S. IOHN also the holy Euangelist, and deerely beloued disciple of our SAVIOVR,Epist. ca 5. Ioh. cap. 5 speaking of the corruption of the worlde, saith, That the whole world is set in
 wickednesse,S. Bernard. which holy S. BERNARD did most notably note in his time, saying, There is nothing in this world but filthy loue, there is no sincere faith, for all things that belong thereunto are defiled with pride, auarice, couetousnesse and leacherie, for pietie is gone from Priests* Iustice from Princes, Counsell from the auncient True Discipline from Religious loue from Parents faith from the people, reuerence from subiects, loue of Chastitie from virgins, shame^acenesse from married people; and what else should wee expecte, but the comming of Antichrist, for now Christ is forgotten, and not knowne of many, and is helde as a stranger by the mighty Potentates: hitherto S BERNARD.
If the holy Apostles did complaine of wickednesse which raigned in their time, and S. BERNARD in like sort of his, how much more cause haue we now to lament, where all sinnes and iniquities do so greatly abound,Tren. 3. that we may iustly say, It is the great mercy of God that we are not consumed. Wherefore most necessar e it is for vs, that deuoutly ma^king, and diligently remembring the foresaid holsome doctrine of the Apostle,Eph. 5. we set^le our steps warily and wisely in this vale, and time of miserie, and returning by Penance, redeeme with auster^^^e of life, the time misp nt in all libertie. and so walke perseuerantly with open eyes of the interiour man, at the least, in that straight and narrowe way, which leadeth
 Vnto the heauenly countrey, from whence we were banished by sinne,Math. 7. Gen 19. Psal. 118. and not to looke backwarde, least declyninge from that way we erre and goe astraye, and so fall into the bottomeles pitt of eternall damnation, from which that by Pena^ce and Austerity of life we may the more securely escape, our Sauiour exhorteth vs to enter by that narrowe gate sayinge.Math. 7. Straight is the way that leadeth to heaue^, and few doe find it, but broad is the gate, and large is the waye which leadeth to perdition, and many enter therbye.
The reason why manie doe enter into perdition, of eternall damnation by the broad gate and large waye, is this (as it is written in Eccle. 1.) The peruerse and wicked men are hardly corrected, and infinite is the nu^ber of fooles, which alas do more look vnto this present life,S. Chrys. the^ vnto the end which followeth. Vnto whome S. Chrysost: saith. Doe not thou regard that the waye is hard, but consider whither it leadeth: neither doe thou respect that it is straight, but whither it bringeth.
This differerence is betweene the good and the bad, that the euill and wicked, will celebrate the Feast before the Vigill, and reiectinge Pena^ce, will reioyce temporally in this worlde, and therfore in the world to come, they shall celebrate the Eue, for the Feast which they haue had here, for there shall they weepe euerlastingly: as most notably declareth S. Gregory sayinge.S, Grego. Perpetuall lamentation,
 and weepinge doe follow the present ioyes of this life.S, August. Therfore O brethren flie here vaine ioye and mirth if you feare there to lame^t for none can reioyce here with the World and raigne there with God. S. August. affirmeth as much sayinge. Noe man can take ioyes and delights in both worlds neither can an^ man reioyce here and in the world to come, but of necessity he must loose the one, which wille possesse the other, he therfore which will raigne in the eternall life, let him despise the triumphes and pleasure of these transitorie vanities, which doe greatly hinder, and deepely wounde the poore soule, whome Christ so dearely loueth, that he refused noe panies to cure and heale the greiuousnes of thy woundes wherfore Saint Bernarde speakinge of the loue of Christ to thy soule, exhorteth thee to weighe well the greatnes of the wou^des therof sayinge. Knowe o man and well consider, howe noble and worthy is thy soule, and how great were her woundes, for which it was needfull that our Lord and Sauiour Christ should be wounded If these wounds ha^ not bene great euen vnto death, yea eternal death, the So^ne of God would neuer haue died t^ cure them. Doe not thou therfore neglect to doe ^ennance for thy sinnes, for which ou^ Sauiour hath endured so manie torments, and regard not what the flesh suggesteth but what the spirit is able to doe: most worthely therfor sayth the same S. Bern. If the sayest this i^ very harde. I canot co^te^ne the word and hate myne owne flesh in doinge Pe^nance T^
 me I pray you, where are the louers of the world who were within a small time with vs? Nowe there remayneth nothinge of them but ashes and and wormes: consider well what they now are, and what they were, they were men, as thou arte, they did eate, drinke and laughe, they ledde their dayes in ioyes, and in a moment desce^ded into hell, where their flesh is deputed vnto wormes, and there their soules to eternall paines. Now what hath it proffitted them, their vanie glorie, short ioye, power of the worlde, pleasure of the flesh, deceitfull and false riches, their great and wicked concupiscence? where is nowe their mirth? now how great sorrowe remayneth? After so much voluptuousnes and pleasure, nowe howe great miserie and greife? They haue fallen from that exaltation and height, to great ruine and confusion, and noe lesse torment and paine. VVhatsoeuer hath happened vnto them, may also happen vnto thee, because thou art a man, a man of earth, dunge of dunge, of earth thou art, of earth thou livest, and into earth thou shalt returne, when thy last da^ shall come (which will come suddenly and paraduenture this present hower) it is most certaine thou shalt dye, but it is vncertaine when, howe, or where, for that death doth euery where expect thee, if thou art wise, thou wilt also attend him in like sorte. All these are S. Bernards wordes: wherby euery one may see how iust cause ^he hath to prepare him self by daylie Pe^nance against this vncertaine hour (...), and specially seing that althoughe the
 hower of death is vncertaine, yet most assuredly shall he dye. Wherfore holde and esteeme thyself alwayes and in all euents humbly patiently, and wisely, as a dead man, and say: these things would not moue a dead man, neither ought they to moue thee, whether they are prosperous or contrary: let euery day be also vnto thee as the last day, and ponder well with thyself what preparatio^ thou hast made for it, what Pennaunce thou hast hitherto done, or what spirituall riches thou hast heaped together, that is, what vices thou hast ouercome, and what vertues thou hast gotten, or what good deedes thou hast coffered vp in thy soule all the time of thy life. Where is the fruite thou hast brought forth beinge a tree so longe planted, so diligently pruned, and so carefully conserued in our Lords vineyard? and whether the fruite that thou hast offred be swete and pleasant to thy espowse, or galle and vineger to disgust his taste? whome therin hast thou sought? whome hast thou had a minde to co^tent: thy self, or him? O silly blynd fooles that we be, that in seeking our own conte^tme^t, we loose it, and our Sauiour also, for who so seeketh himself, at his last end, shall assuredly loose himself whether he will or noe: who so runneth after his owne pleasure and contentme^t, shall fall into discontentmentes, seeing that he is an Idolater, in respect of himself, and forsaketh his true God, who is the only repose and comfort of our soules.

Let vs turne bridle, and thinke that we are farre out of the waye we should houlde, and let vs bend our pace towards the commaundements of God (which are the principall parte of the vowe of our profession) that we may walke in them assuredly, hauinge so sure a promise of our Sauiour himself of his heauenly kingdome, if we truly obserue them. Let vs seeke his good pleasure and contentment, be it neuer so much against our owne: let vs be seuere, and austere: against our selues, that we may be me^k and gratious towards him, seeing that to haue once our desyres and pleasures we haue so ofte offended, and displeased his diuine Maiestie: let vs from henceforth crucify this naughty man of ours, that Iesus Christ our Sauiour may liue in vs, seeing that he hath beene crucified for vs, and suffered death to giue vs life, let vs therfore humble our selues to death, euen of the Crosse: let vs mortify our flesh with great feruor; let vs chastice it with abstinence and seuere pennance, hauing so much offended God in not acknowledginge his goodnes; let vs cast off the yoke of vanity, accordinge to our professio^, and as one who hath bene slothfull and lazie most parte of the day, let vs make hast and be diligent to dispatch our busines at night: and seeing that we haue taken vpon vs a higher estate of perfection then the common sort, let vs not content ourselues with the common course and kinde of life, but as our profession
 is of Pennance, so let vs endeuour that our life may be correspondent there vnto, and as our sinnes haue not bene little, let our pennance be accordinglie, and considering that we haue had force and strength to sinne, let vs in like sort haue it to satisfie by Pennance therfore; what reason were it that haiunge by miserable diligence serued sinne, we should after a cold sort and in a ma^er against our owne will, serue vertue, shewinge our selues able and vigilant men to spoile our soules, and weake and negligent in purginge, and clensinge them againe?
The Deuill hath heretofore obteyned much at our hands against our selues, shal we continually be so miserable and wretched that God cannot find like fauour with vs, when his holy motions and desyres tend only to our good, both here and euerlastingly? Let vs not be like vnto these which walke ^o negligently in the waye of God, that that they care not much in what sorte they trauell, and what path they take, but seeing that our Sauiour hath towched our soules, let vs aunsweare his diuine inspiratio^s, and thankinge him infinitely for his grace, walke so carefully in this holy waye of Pennance, that by it finally we may come to euerlasting ioye and felycity.



Of the Necessitie of Pennance. CAP. 2.
IN the 3. Chap. of S. Iohn, our Sauiour shewing the necessity of the Sacrament of Baptisme to be such, that the verie Infants could not enter into the kingdome of heauen without it, sayth.Ioh. 3. Vnles a man be borne againe of water and the holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdome of Heauen: so in like sorte in the 13. of S. Luke, he sheweth plainly the necessity of Pennance to be noe lesse for poore sinners, sayinge. yea,Luke. 13. I say vnto you vnlesse you doe pennance, you shall all perish together. In which wordes he sheweth the necessity of Pennance to be such, that he leaueth a harde choyce for poore sinners, that would neglect it, that is, that if they will not make choyce to doe Pennance, they ca^not auoid eternall perditio^ and therfore said plainly, vnles they should doe it, they shoulde all perish together S Hierome therfore worthily calleth it,S. Hier. ad, Demetr. cap. 6. the second table after Shipwracke: for that the world after the sinne of Adam, is likened vnto the sea, wherin all that enter into the shippe of Baptisme doe ascend and saile: which vessell is said therfore to be whole, for that by it all sinnes are absolutely forgiuen, both in respect of the fault, and paines also due thereunto, and therfore by it men sayle and swymme in great safety and innocency: but that shippe
 beinge once broke^ by mortall sinne (which is the Shipwracke of the soule) for as much as Baptisme imprinteth a Caracter which ca^not be reiterated, therfore remayneth Penna^ce to saue the sinner after such Shipwracke, whereu^to of necessity by our Sauiours wordes, euery one must ru^ne that will not perishe
Howe necessary Pennance hath alwayes bene vnto saluatio^, doth manifestly appeare herein, that the father of mercy and God of all consolation, did by his faithfull seruaunts inuite men alwayes thereunto. For what other thinge did Noe in the lawe of Nature preache vnto the people of God,2. Cor. 1. by Gods expresse commaundement for an hundred yeares together,Genes. 6. but Pennance and amendme^t of life, which they neglectinge to doe, not anie of the whole worlde was saued from the deluge and generall floud, but perished euery one, 8. persons only excepted which followed him? In like ^orte, what did God crye out by the mouth of all his Prophets in the writte^ lawe, but Pena^ce, behould I here my saith. Conuert o Children flying from me saith our Lord,Iherom. 3 and I will heale your auersions. But how they should returne, he sheweth in the 4 Chap. sayinge. Girde your selues with hayre cloth, mourne and howle out, for that the wrath of the fury of God, is not turned awaye. The like did God commaund Ezechiel to preache to Ionas and all the rest.Ezech 33. Ion. 3.
Holy S. Iohn Baptist who (beinge betweene the Prophets and lawe of gtace) was by
 the testimonie of our Sauiour more then a Prophet, what was the beginninge of his preachinge but Pennance, for as testifyeth S. Luke, he said vnto the troupes that came to be baptized of him. Ye vipers broode, who sheweth you to flye from the future wrath, doe therfore the worthy fruites of Pennance; as thoughe he would say, if you will fly fro^ the future wrath, you must doe pennance: and to make them to be the more diligent therin to obteyne therby the kingdome, of heauen said, as reporteth S. Math. Doe pennance for that the kingdome of heauen draweth neare.Math. 3. And not onlie did he teach it by his words but much more by deedes, his whole life beinge noe other but a continuall pennance leading it in great austerity, where vpon holy S. Bernard taking occasion to reprehend the loosenes of the worlde saith.S. Berna. The austerity and strict course of life of holy S. Iohn Baptist is a hard Messenger of eternall death vnto delicate and wa^ton persons. VVhy are we senceles and vnreasonable beasts, and wormes of the earth so madde, when that most holy and blessed man, of whome our Sauiour himself saith that, Amongst the So^nes of wome^ there hath not risen a greater; did so afflict and punishe his most innoce^t body, and we make hast to cloth ourselues with pretious and gorgeous apparrell? to ba^quet and riot largely and liue delicately? It is not so (o wicked) this is not the way to heauen: for that our sweet Sauiour, and louinge Redeemer, the giuer and institutor of the lawe of grace,
 therin also sheweth that the way to goe to heauen is quite contrary, when he saith that, straight and narrowe is that way, and that the path of Pennance is so necessary, that whosoeuer will goe to his heauenly kingdome, must of necessity passe therby: and to induce all men to walke therin, he himself came into this worlde to direct them, and call them thereunto.Luc. 5. Therfore he saith. I come not to call the iust, but sinners to Pennance, therby insinuatinge, that Christian religio^ is a crosse and pennance, for Christ calleth not vnto delights, nor to riches, neither vnto honour or dignities, but vnto Pennance, and for it, doth promise to cleanse our sinnes:Esai. 1. saying by the Prophet Esay: If your sinnes shall be like vnto Scarlet, they shall be made as white as snovv: signifyinge by this colour of scarlet which hardly changeth, that thoughe our sinnes were neuer so much inueterated, and engraf^ed in vs, yet by his grace, if we doe pennance, they shalbe clensed and made as white as snowe; and how we should doe it, he shewe^h by h^s Prophet Ioel sayinge. Turne vnto me with all your heart with fastinge,Ioel. 2. weepinge and mourninge, that by the abundance of our teares we may washe away the multitude of our sinnes, and offences. In all these afore said sentences of holy Scripture we may see plainly, the necessity of Pennance to be great, in that it is alwayes required at our hands for the clensinge of our sinnes: therfore not without iust cause doth
 S. Aug. say. That he which created thee,S. August. without thee vvill not iustify thee without thee, that is vnles thou doe thy part, and returne vnto him by Pennance.
Amo^gst all the diuine admirable workes which God hath wrought in the worlde, one of the most wonderfull and hardest, is to make of a wicked and peruerse sinner, a iust holy and vnspotted man, wherin truly he sheweth all his power and mercy more clearly and manifestly, then in all other things whatsoeuer; Great certainlie and diuine power is required to make so^thinge of nothinge, yet no lesse power but rather greter is expected to iustify a sinner. For in creating, though he were to create the world againe, there can be no impedime^t to hinder him, for in the creatio^ of the whole world he said but the worde, and al things were made.Genes. 1.
But in the iustifyinge of a sinner ther is great difficulty, if the wicked and sinfull person continue and make little account of his diuine counsell and meanes (that is) Pennance. S August. therfore vpon these wordes of our Sauiour (He that beleiueth in me shall doe the workes that I doe and greater then those) saith in this manner.S. August. ho. 14. Ioh. 5. Ioh. 14. Let him iudge that can, whether it be more to create iust Angells, then to iustifie the vvicked, certainly if both be of equall power, yet this is of greater mercy.
The gretest and chiefest worke of God, was to absolue and clense a sinner from his offe^ces, for that to accomplish this worke, it
 was necessary for the Sonne of God, to suffer most cruell and bitter death, and to shedde his most pretious blood, to purify and make white the soule infested, and defyled with the spotts, and filth of sinne. If the necessity herein were so great in the Sonne of God, truly it is not lesse needfull, that thou shouldst suffer some paine with him for thy soules health,Philip. 2. seeing that the Apostle S. Paule saith. Christ suffered for vs leauinge you an example, that you should followe his stepps. And the said Apostle sayeth againe. If we suffer with him we shall raigne with him also. Wherby we see plainly, that if we will be partakers of his glory, we must of necessity be partners of his paines and followe his stepps, and to that end doth our Sauiour say.Luc. 9. If any will followe me let him renou^ce himselfe, and take vp his Crosse and so followe me. For in the wordes immediatly going before, he hauinge made me^tio^ of his death and passion, and of his Resurrection, doth now here insinuate, that it is not enoughe for vs, that he suffered his bitter passion, and shed his most pretious blood for our Redemption, but that it is also necessary that we followe him, and renounce our selues, bridelinge our sensuall appetites, taking vp the Crosse of labour and pennance, least that any man should vainlie and foolishly thinke, that Christs only passion were sufficient to saue vs without this, that we should doe any thinge at all; wherfore most
 notably truly, the Sonne of God, of his eternall wisdome, when he maketh mention of his passion, and what he had done for vs: presently there treateth of these things, which of necessity we must doe, if we will enioy the fruite and merits of his passion, that is if we will followe him, this of our parts must we doe: first renou^ce our selues, and take vp our Crosse, and followe him in his sufferings and passion, and therby be partakers of his glorious Resurrection. Excuse can we make none, for that our Sauiour sheweth plainly, that all doth depend vpon our owne will, and therfore saith.Luc. 9. If any one will followe me. Behold, his great, clemency and benignity! he declareth manifestly that he refuseth none, but any one that will may, of what estate or condicion so euer he be, noble or base, rich or poore, stro^ge or weake, whole or sick, our Lord doth admit all indifferentlie that will followe him, here perfectly by the waye of Pennance, to raigne with him euerlastingly in glorie.
But alas how miserable and dolefull a thinge is it to see, howe little account we make to be his followers and Seruaunts, which he foreseeinge did worthily say.Luc. 9. If any one will followe me, If any one will renounce themselues, If anie one will take vp their Crosse of Pennance and mortification? therby insinuatinge, how fewe there are which doe soe; as if he should say more plainly: amongst such and so manie which
 fullfill the desyres of the flesh, seek to satisfye their concupiscence, and obey the deuill, is not there any one, which will followe me? Amongst manie which runne into the broad waye of perditio^, is there no body that will enter into the straight way of vertue and Pennance, which leadeth directly to eternall felicity? how great is this to our shame and confusion, that the worlde calleth to deceiue vs, the flesh to spot and defile vs, the deuill to ruine and ouerthrowe vs, and Iesus Christ the kinge of glory calleth to saue vs, and not withstanding manie followe the others, but fewe or none in comparison will followe Christ our Lord, which came from the highe throne of glorie, into this vale of misery, to call sinners to Pennance, which is a thinge of such necessity, that without it, thoughe Gods mercy be infinite, yet neither will he, or yet can he by his ordinarie power, remitt actuall sinnes, because to pardon a man his sinnes, is to receiue him againe into his grace and fauour, but God accepteth of none into his freindship, vnles he be iust and good, which a man cannot be, vnles he conuert his will to God from whome by sinne he had auerted it, which true conuersion is made by detestation of his sinnes, and sorrowe for it, which is pennance: for thoughe in little ones (before the righ: vse of reason) their sinne may be remitted, and they without their proper mouinge and
 meanes, may be iustifyed, because without their owne personal act they had co^mitted in Adam originall sinne, but whosoeuer committeth actuall sinne, God will neither remit the sinne, nor pardon and forgiue the paines due thereunto, vnles the sinner doe first Pennance, wherfore holy Iobe said. I did feare all my workes knowinge that thou wilt not spare the offender;Iob. 9. that is vnles he doe pennance as holy Dauid, S. Peeter, S. Mathewe, S. Mary Magdalen and manie others did, wherby their offences were pardoned and they receiued highly into the fauour of God. Seeing therfore, that the necessity of Pe^nance is so great and needfull for all sinners, and accordinge to S. Iohn we haue all offended in manie things, let vs herein time, doe pennance that therby we may come to gayne Gods holy fauour, and consequenlie euerlasting ioy.


Of the dangers in deferringe of Pennance. CAP. III.
DAylie experience teacheth vs, that brute beasts, thoughe voide of reason, yet by the verie instinct of nature, haue such care of the conservation of their bodies, that if they feele them selues to be sick or wounded, they diligently doe seeke
 for remedy. S. Ambrose affirmeth, that the cruell and sauage beare, when he findeth himself to be greiued and sicke, searchethe for Emmets or Ants, and eatinge them is presently cured. We see in like sorte, that sensuall men and louers of their bodyes, as soone as they are corporally sicke or wounded, make noe delay to seek out a Phisition or Surgeon to heale the^, and willinglie will endure any hard diet, bitter potions, and painfull incisions, yea cuttinge off somtimes of some principall members of the body, for safetie and health of the rest; seeinge therfore, that the health of the soule, is, and ought to be vnto euery one, farre more pretious then that of the body, and the wounds therof infinitely more dangerous, by reason that they are hidden and secret, and bringe finally to greater danger and ruine, for that which they bringe the soule vnto, is not momentary but euerlastinge paine, what diligence then ought euery poore sinner vse, to find out, and willinglie take the holesome medicine of Pennance, which is the most souueraigne salue for the wounded soule? Were not he worthy to be thought voyde of sense, or rather a mad man, that hauinge a present Remedy in his owne power, to cure the dangerous disease of his body, would so longe delay to take it, vntill the disease, were eyther past cure, or in greate
 danger therof? what doth he then deserue to be accounted, which hath the Remedy of Pennance alwayes ready to cure his soule, and vpon hope of longe life, will delay to vse it, vntill such time that he be sudde^ly preue^ted and called away, and therby perish euerlastinglie, or at the least in emine^t perill so to doe? Or to deferre it so longe, that if then he should doe it, yet no certainty of Saluation would it afford him, as notablie noteth S. AVGVSTINE, saying.S. Aug. If one being in the last extreamitie, would receaue Pennance, I confesse wee deny not vnto him, that which he demandeth, but vvee cannot giue him securitie, that he goeth vvell from hence, Penance may vvee vvell giue him, but securitie can vve giue him none. VVhat shal I say? shall he be damned? no. Shall he be saued? noe. VVilt thou therefore be sure? doe Penance then whilst thou art vvell in health, for that in a vvhole man, Penance is perfect, in a sicke man infirme and imperfect, in a dead man, dead. S. AVGVSTINE saith againe. That Penance in the hovvre of death is very perillous. For that in all the vvhole Scriptures there is found but one, that is the thiefe vvhich in the end did truely repent himselfe; he only, that none should despayre, and hee alone, that none should presume. Our Sauiour, to shew the folly of those which vnder hope of long life, doe deferre their Penance and amendement of life, proposeth in the 12. of S. LVKE a similitude of a certaine richLuk. 12.
 man, which said. O soule, thou hast much goods layd vp for many yeares rest novv, eate, drinke, and make good cheare; but God said vnto him; O foole, this night they vvill take againe thy soule from thee, and the goods vvhich thou hast prepared, vvhose shal they be?
Behold the follie and madnesse of this rich man, which promised vnto himfelfe, a long and happie life, saying. Thou hast great riches for many yeares, when he had not one certaine hower of life. O howe manie are there, which with like folly doe settle all their care and studie, on a long life, and on those things which hereafter they will do, promising vnto themselues most vainly a life at their pleasures! This folly truely, doth at this day cast many a one downe into hell, when procrastinating from day to day their Penance, and deferring their conuersion, they are suddenly preuented by death: for as S. AVGVST. sayeth most notably.S. August. Many are damned for euer, and deteyned finally in their sinnes, vvhich heare the voyce of secret inspirations, but doe not correct and amend their life, saying; Cras, Cras, to morrovv, to morrovv, and suddenly the gate it shut, and the poore miserable soule remaineth vvithout doores, before the Arch of the heauenly Countrey, vvith the voyce of a crovve, because they vvould not in time, vvhen they might, and ought, mourne and lament for their sinnes, vvith the voyce of a Doue, saying,
 Nunc. Nunc, novv, novv: Wherfore (as holy DIONISIVS the Carthusian writeth) the sorrowfull voyce of a certaine man dying,D. Dion. Cart. saide. O, Cras, Cras, how long a delay hast thou made vnto me? and by this procrastinating and deferring from day to day, hast drawen me into the bottomlesse pit of death: thou hast deceiued me and I am deceiued. Doth not this my miserie now surpasse and exceede all the miseries in the world? is not my heart worthily afflicted with this, and my soule wounded? Beh^uld my daies which I ought to haue spente without intermission in the praise of God, and procuring the health of my soule, are now, alas, all spent without any fruit of good workes Thirtie yeares, fortie, fiftie, more or lesse of my age are now gone, lo, and miserably perished and spent so negligently, that I know not if euer I haue spent one day of all this time, in d^ing the will of God, and in the exercise of vertues so landable, as peraduenture I might and ought to haue done: litle doe I know if euer I haue done at any on time, so pleasing gratful, and acceptable seruice vnto my Creator, as my estate did require. Helas woe be vnto me for griefe! this is it wherewithall my bowels and entrails be wounded! O eternal God, how shamfully shal I stand before thee and all thy Saints, at the dreadfull day of Iudgement, when I shall be constrained to render a strict account, of all that I haue committed, or omitted and left vndone? and what shall I say more? beholde my tribulation and incessant paines are at hand.

Note this I beseech you all you louers of the world, and take heede in time whilst ye may, for time stayeth for no man, the time is now ours, lent vnto vs by God, to worke our good here, by imploying it wholly to Gods honour, and to the profite of our soules; and consider therefore, how many houres, which will neuer returne againe, thou hast lost, when for temporal affayres and worldly businesse, thou hast neglected those things, which were most profitable for thy soule, to imploy thy selfe in friuolous actions. O how many good deedes mightest thou haue done in so long a time, either in sicknesse or in health, which thou wouldest wish for hereafter, before all the delights, riches and honours of the world, which in onely seeking for hitherto, hast often endangered thy selfe to loose the inestimable treasures of heauen, and gayned litle or nothing, but eternal torments in hell, or at the least intollerable paines in Purgatorie. If God should call thee in that negligent estate, wherein peraduenture thou hast, or doest spend the greatest part of thy time, I may well call it now thy time, because, if thou wilt, thou mayst vse it to thine owne good now. For al time is Gods, yet notwithstanding God hath made vs lords thereof in this life, that whilst it is ours, we may merit therein life euerlasting; yet after, when this transitorie life is past, God will take his time which he had len^
 vs, when we shal ^e no moreable to merit, or make satisfaction by Penance for our sinnes, but then we shall finde God so strict and seuere, that he will iudge our very best workes, as hee testifyeth himselfe by the mouth of his Prophet DAVID saying.Psal. 74. VVhen I shal take my time, I vvill iudge your righteousnesse. He doth not here speake of theft, murder, adulterie, or such like, but of our owne righteousnesse, that is, hee will weigh our iust and good woorkes, in the ballance of his right iudgement, where will be knowne, whether they were done for the loue of God, or loue of our selues, or feare onely, whereby many workes, that seeme here to be good and vertuous (before the iudgme^t of God) wil be of smal mome^t. To what danger then are those persons incident, which haue deferred to do Penance, or any other good worke, vntill feare of death, or some other extremitie, driueth them vnto it?
But peraduenture some may say, we will doe Penance for what is past, and employ our selues to doe good workes, but there is no such neede that we should presently do it. The perfect paterne and example of worthy and true Penance,Luc. 3 S. IOHN Baptist sheweth how much they are deceiued, when teaching the people that came vnto him, that the way to fly the wrath of God, was by bringing foorth the worthy fruites of Penance with all speede, for that the axe
 is put vnto the tree, yet for the comfort of poore sinners hee saith, that it is onely put vnto the tree, and not that it cutteth: thereby insinuating, that in this life there is time yet by Penance, to fly from the wrath of God, if wee will presently whilst wee may, put our hand to the plough, and do Penance before the axe cut downe the tree: which is so neere and readie to cut it downe, that it is alreadie put to the roote thereof, and litle doe we know, what day, what houre, or how soone it will doe it.
Eccl. 3.The Ecclesiastique therfore, exhorteth vs to make no delay therin, saying: Be not slovv to turne vnto our Lord, and deferre not thy penance from day to day, for that suddenly the vvrath of God vvill come vpon thee, and destroy thee in the day of Reuenge. Woe be vnto those, which when the axe is now put vnto the tree, and their heads full of gray haires, will not see how quickly the day and hower of Penance passeth, nor consider how the day of saluation may passe away: It is a strange thing to see thee so negligent and slouthful, when death is at the doore with his axe readie to cut thee downe, and thou to be cast into hell fire, for deferring so long the amendment of thy life, and doing Penance for what is past, that thereby thou mighst haue made satisfaction for thy sinns, gayned Gods fauour, and euerlasting glorie.



Certaine Reasons, to make more manifest the dangers which proceede from delay and negligence, in doing of Penance. CAP. IIII.
THE long delay of Penance, bringeth such danger vnto thy soule, that there is scant any one thing, whereof either the holy Scripture, auncient Fathers, or moderne writers, haue made more mention, or laboured more carefully to exhort and stir vp all men to auoyde and to flye, by diligently exercising of Penance, then this delay: yet notwithstanding, such is the lamentablenesse of our time, that there is nothing which is now made lesse account of. Wherfore I exhort all such as haue a due care and perfect desire to come to eternall rest, to take some paines in seriously considering these foure reasons here following, and to preuent accordingly in conuenient time, the dangers which hereafter may otherwise befall vnto them.
The first reason therefore is, according to the common saying, That as a man liueth, so will he Die. Wherefore as he which hath liued well, doth seldome dye ill: so of the contrarie side, he which hath spent his life in lewdnesse, hardlie maketh a good ende
 Wee see commonly, that which waies a tree hath continually bended, to that side will he ordinarily fall; for if some great tree doth crooke and bend all his waight and bowes towardes the left side, if this tree be cut downe, without all doubt he wil fal one the left hand; euen so, if thou cast all thy desires, affections, and thoughts vpon worldly things, and imploy all thy carke and care, whilst thy life lasteth, onely to get honour, riches, and pleasure, how should it come to passe, that when death shal cut thee downe, thou canst fall into the right hand of God, and most happie companie of the blessed? Woe therefore be vnto them, which leading their liues in vice and sinne, doe hope to be Citizens of heauen, and haue place in those happie seates, for that lot will happen vnto them which they haue alwaies sought for, and loued in their life. Wherefore the chiefe care of euery one ought to be, so to liue continually, as he would bee found at the hower of death. Wherefore seeing (as I said in the Chapter before) that the axe is put to the roote of the tree, apply thy selfe now in austeritie of Penance, and say not to morrow I will doe this, often repeating to morrow, but now begin to do it, knowing that of euery moment of lost time, thou must render a strict account; and peraduenture when thou wouldest employ it well, thou canst not, for God is not at thy command. Labour therefore with all thy
 forces, whilst time serueth thee, that thou maiest fall on the right side, for in what estate the tree finally falleth, there shal he remaine for euer:Eccl. 11 according to that of the Ecclesiasticus: VVhere the wood shall fall, there shall it remaine, whether it bee to the South, or to the North. Consider well and diligently obserue all the foresaid things, for that thou knowest not for certaine, when or how soone, thou shalt be cut downe, or whether thou shalt be cast into the fire, as most seuerely S. IOHN Baptist threatneth, saying, Euery tree therefore which bringeth foorth not good fruit,Luc. shal be cut downe and cast into the fire. Note I beseech thee that he saith, not euerie tree which hath not, or shall not, bring foorth good fruit, but which doth not, or is not bringing forth at the very present, and not that which hath not heretofore, or will not hereafter: thereby signifying, that it is not enough that thou hast done well once or twice, or that thou wilt hereafter doe, but that without any further delay, thou must presently, do what lyeth in thee, to pacifie by Penance the wrath of God, and so escape the fire, of which by long deferring the amendment of thy life, thou puttest thy selfe in great perill.
Secondly, how much the longer a man remaineth in sinne, so much the more is hee burdened and ouercharged therewith, for that one sinne draweth one another, as testifyeth
 holy S. GREGORIE,S. Greg. saying, That sinne, which is not blotted out by penance, presently with his weight, draweth into another. And thereby when hee would, he is the lesse able to rise, being still more burdened by sinne; for hee that cannot lift vp a burthen when it is litle, how will he be able when it is greater? If thou shouldest see one that had so heauy a load, that hardly could hee beare it, to adde more weight thereunto, thinking thereby to make it the easier to carrie, wouldest thou not think him to be a foole, and laugh him to scorne? Turne the eyes, of thy vnderstanding vpon thy selfe, and behold thine owne follie, and see how thy aduersaries would doe the like vnto thee, if hauing layd one mortall sinne on thy soule (whose weight is such, that without the great mercie of God, would presse thee presently downe to hell) then by deferring thy Penance, and making the burthen the heauier, by adding more sinnes thereunto, shouldest think to rise the more easily: I know thou wouldest be loath that thy aduersaries should deride and mocke thee, take therefore away in time the occasion, and considering in what estate thou standest, deferre not thy Penance. As soone as ADAM had sinned,Gen. 3 God asked him: Adam where art thou? thereby to admonish him and all sinners, prudently to consider* whither sinne hath brought them, that by due consideration of the dangerous state
 they stand in, they may be mooued presently to rise and make satisfaction by Penance therefore: for he which doth otherwise, and sleepes in one mortall sinne,S. Aug. sect de verb. O^. is by the testimony of S. AVGVSTINE more bolde, then hee which fighteth with seuen deadlie enemies at once, which haue all coniured and sworne togeather his death.
Thirdly, hee which long deferreth Penance, many times by the iust iudgement of God, is either suddenly preuented by death, and so falleth into euerlasting damnation, or else is taken vnawares and oppressed with griefe and sicknesse, in such sort, that he forgetteth himselfe quite,S. August. for as S. AVG. saith, The sinner is iustly punished with this punishment, that he which whilst he liued forgot God, in the hower of death shal forget himselfe: Manie times also, besides the terrour of death, which of all terrible things is the most terrible, the extreamitie of the paine is so grieuous, that hee looseth the vse of Reason, which many times falleth and happeneth vnto him, for a iust punishment of his former offences, seeing that, as hee, against all reason, hath offered and employed himselfe (as long as he was able to doe any thing) and all his wit, w^l, strength and force, both of bodie and minde, to serue his pleasures (yea his mortall enemies) hee would then offer and yeeld onely them vnto Gods seruice, and the health of his owne soule,
 when litle meanes remained in them to doe any thing at all. Wherefore, as they haue liued like bruite beasts, following their sensualities without all reason, they doe worthily deserue to die, voyde of all grace, without the Sacraments and Spiritual comforts: which often happeneth vnto them, which would not in time vse their reason in seeking of Gods grace, and their owne saluation, but vsed it rather against God, and iustice in all wickednesse. And though they loose not reason, yet are their paines so great, that they can then hardly thinke on any thing else, as witnesseth S. GREGORY saying.S. Greg. VVhen thou art oppressed with sicknes thou canst scantly think one any thing else, but what thou feelest.S. Hier. Which S. HIEROME affirmeth also saying. For that the intention of the minde is drawen thither where the force of the griefe is. Wherefore he which when he was in health, would not thinke of Penance, much lesse is he able to do it in extreamitie of sicknesse, whereby it commeth to passe, that of a 1000 men that delay it to the last instant, there is hardly one saued: This is the iudgement of S. AVGVSTINE, and S. HIEROME, and so well knowne to other hosie Doctors, and to al men of sound iudgement, that it needeth no further proofe.
Fourthly, although a man should do true Penance in the end, in such sort, that God should forgiue his sinnes, yet notwithstanding
 remaineth a long and hard satisfaction to be made in Purgatorie, for the paine due vnto the same, which easily and in shorte space might, by perfect and liuely Penance, haue here bene accomplished, and the poore sinner freed both of the offences, and fault of sinne, and of a great part of the paine due thereunto. Wherefore whilst we haue time, let our studie be to doe wel, declyning from vice, and willingly and patiently suffering all persecutions, afflictions, and infirmities, that thereby wee may here make satisfaction, and be released of the paines due vnto our sinnes in Purgatorie.S. August. S. AVGVSTINE considering how grieuous is the punishment of sinne after this life, beseeched Almightie God, here to punish him, and to spare him afterwards, saying: Lord burne me, cut me here, that thou mayst pardon mee for euer.
But many there be which doe make litle account to deferre their Penance, and leaue it to be fulfilled and accomplished in Purgatorie; and for that the paine is not eternall, they weigh not greatly how large it be otherwise, or how grieuous, hauing onely regard vnto that which is present, and looke not to that which is to come: which if they did as duely consider as they might, and ought to doe, I make no doubt but that the feare of the greatnesse of the paines of Purgatorie, would cause them willingly to do Penance here. S. AVGVSTINE speaking of
 the greatnesse of the paines of Purgatorie, saith. That although it be not eternal yet doth it far passe all the paines that euer any man suffered or can suffer.S. Aug. A learned and auncient writer affirmeth, that although by any light and easie meanes, a man may presently make satisfaction for a venial sinne, yet if nothing be to be done or suffred for it here, he shall suffer far more greater paine in Purgatorie for one venial sinne not satisfyed for, then S. LAVRENCE did suffer,Decree. distins. 25 when he was broyled on the Grydion, wherefore it is said in the Decrees, that, No temporal paine is to be compared vnto the paines in Purgatorie.
If therefore a man incurreth so great danger by not satisfying here for a veniall sinne, which is so litle, that though it obligeth to paine, yet so small, and so easily may satisfaction be made here for it, that either by compunction, contrition, confession, or other vertuous workes, or holie actions, one may be so cleerely clensed thereof, as though it had neuer bene in him. What danger doth he incurre then, which neglecteth and deferreth to make satisfaction here for the paine due vnto his mortall sinnes in Purgatorie, after that by confession the offence is remitted. For though no man can know assuredly, how long, according to Gods iustice a man is to bee punished in Purgatorie, for the paine of one mortall sinne, yet notwithstanding a learned
 and auncient writer saith, that it is probable enough, that one should be punished there, for the satisfaction of the paine of one mortall sinne, so many yeares as there be dayes in seauen yeares:Decr. 32. qu. hoe sanctu^. Ezech. 4 alleadging for his reasons, that it is said in the Decrees, that. The penance of a mortall sinne, are seuen years. To those which do Penance, our Lord saith, I haue giuen thee a day for a yeare, that is, a day in this present time of grace; and mercy for a yeare in the other life, which will be a time of Iustice: which though it might seeme credible, yet do I leaue it to the iudgment of the discreet. But though this should be most certaine and true, taking it according to the rigour of Gods iustice, yet is his mercie so infinite, and his loue so great, that he offereth meanes daily vnto all sinners, that will in time accept of his grace, and benig sorrowful for their sinnes leaue them, that by good workes, and perfect Penance, we may here not onely make satisfaction for them, but also winne thereby, after a short passage, euerlasting glorie.
Lastly, he which deferreth his Penance vnto the end of his life, which peraduenture may be to morrow, though God should graunt him so much fauour and grace, truly to do it, yet (vnlesse the satisfaction be extraordinarie) can hee not then expect to haue so much glorie in heauen, as if he had done it in like sorte sooner; for it was not without cause that the Ecclesiastick saide:
 It is good for a man when hee hath borne the yoke of our Lord from his youth: For though our Sauiour said in the Parable of the workmen which were hired in the vineyarde.Mat. 20. The last shal be first, and the first shall be last. Yet truely their Penance and good workes must then be extraordinarily, to deserue in so short a space so great a rewarde, which is not often seene, therefore worthely our Sauiour addeth there, That many are called, but few are chosen. Let vs therefore no longer delay the amendment of our life, but spend it so in Penance here dailie, that afterward we may raigne with God eternally.


That Penance is not to be left off, whilest life lasteth. CHAP. V.
MANIE there are, which do much deceaue themselues, in thinking that as soone as they haue obtained Absolution of their sinnes, and the grace of God therewithall, that there remaineth then no more for them to doe, and therefore liue carelesly and vnprofitablie, whereby it commeth to passe, that suddenly they fal into their former offences; wherefore to preserue them from so great a ruine and miserie, which by
 many degrees would be worse then the first, they must be carefull to spend their time in continual Penance and vertuous deedes, for that our Sauiour himselfe declareth that,Luc. 11 The deuil being gone out of a man, walketh vp and downe, and finding no rest, saith, I wil returne vnto my house from whence I came out,Mat. 12 and when he commeth and findeth it swept with broomes (and S. MATHEVV saith emptie) then taketh hee other seuen deuils worse then himselfe, and entring d^^el there, and so the last things of that man, are made farre worse then the first: what gaue the boldnesse vnto the deuil to enter in againe, but that returning, he found onely the dust swept away with broomes, but not the durt scraped away, with the hard iron of strict Penance: not daily labouring by good woorkes, but idle, voyde, and emptie? For some you shall finde (I would to God I had not occasion to saie manie) which as soone as they haue ended their confession, and but newlie gone from the feete of the Priest, it seemeth to them that they nowe haue so attayned all perfection of grace, that they can neuer fall againe, and taking litle care of the conseruation of the health of their soules, they giue scope vnto the deuil to enter again through their idenesse, therefore the Apostle admonishing vs to beware thereof, saith. Giue not place vnto the deuil.Eph. 4 Truely he giueth place to the deuil, which is not studiouslie intentiue to some good thing, for where the
 soule is dailie busied in some holie exercise, the deuil can finde no place of entrance. God would not giue the children of Israel Manna in such sort,Exod. 16. that it should last them for a weeke, or a moneth, but onely for euerie day, except the Sabaoth, for which they gathered the day before: Thereby insinuating and giuing vs to vnderstand, that in this life we should neuer be idle, and that we ought neuer to cease to gather and get by Penance and good workes Gods grace, vntill that long desired Saboth shal come, where then shall be no more need to gather, but to possesse and enioy, that which we haue here before gathered
But for as much as many hauing made their Confession, and receiued heauenly grace, sit with their hands closed vp, forgetting, and neglecting to worke their saluation, the deuill maketh his entry againe, wherby their estate is farre worse then before, as may well be demonstrated and made plainely to appeare, by the sicknesse of the body. For as when a sicke person hath newlie recouered his former health, if hee fall againe afterwards, the sicknesse is more dangerous and greater, because then the forces of nature are weake, and strength decayed, whereby sicknesse taketh greater force, and nature lesse able to resist, bringeth with it oftentimes manie other diseases more perilous then the first. Euen so fareth it with sinne (which is the sicknesse of the
 soule) whereof whosoeuer is cured, and deliuered from the power of Sathan (vnder whose bondage, as long as they were in sinne they liued) if they fall through malice or negligence into their former offences againe, they are far worse then at the first, for the blot of ingratitude towardes God, who had so mercifully dealt with them, in receiuing to his grace againe, those which had deserued hell fire, for offending of him, which causeth him manie times vtterlie to leaue them: wherefore iustly complayning by IEREMIE he saith,Iere. 15 We haue cured Babilon, and she is not healed, behold we will leaue her; and vnto Hierusalem he said, Who will haue pitie on thee, O Hierusalem,Exod. 4 or who wil go to entreat peace for thee? for thou hast left me saith our Lord, and hast returned backward: as though hee would say, I will now apply no more salue vnto thee. Oftentimes did he cure and heale Pharao king of Aegypt, by plagues and tribulations, but he returning againe vnto his sinnes, hee would apply no more medecines, and so the wicked wretch most miserably and vnhappilie perished, God leauing him, for the multitude of his sinnes. O what person then can possibly be in worse estate, then to be left of God? which the returning vnto sinne againe, oftentimes causeth. What vigilant care ought euery one therefore to haue, not to leaue off Penance whilst life lasteth, being a principall meanes to preserue a man
 that is sorrowfull for his former sinnes, not to returne vnto them againe, and giue God iust occasion to leaue him For if a man which hath had a great sicknesse (if he haue any care of his health) will not neglect and soone leaue off the meanes ordayned for the preseruation thereof; should not hee then be thought to be desperate and voyde of all care of his soule, which would neglect and make little account of Penance, ordained both for to cure, and preserue it, from the sicknesse of sinne. For as in a man recouered of a great and long sicknes, there remaineth still a certaine aptnes and pronesse to fall thereinto againe: so in like sorte, though sinne it selfe be cleansed, yet resteth there stil a cetraine inclination and enticement to returne to former offences, against which by the armes of Penance, we must daily fight.
And euen as God deliuered the children of Israel out of Aegypt, and brought them into the land of promise,Exod 54 yet notwithstanding, did he leaue the^ the Philistians neere neighbours, which were a valiant and warlike nation, with whom they were sometimes to fight: so vnto thee, O poore sinner, he leadeth thee out, and deliuereth thee from the darknesse and sinne of Aegypt, yet notwithstanding, he here leaueth thee terrible and cruel enemies, that is, contradiction and rebellion of flesh and blood, against whom, thou must with the weapo^s of
 Penance wage war continually; do not thou then, because thou hast once by Confession ouercome Sathan, and cast away sin, think thy selfe therefore altogether safe, and in securitie, and leaue off thy armes of defence, against the flesh, the world, and the deuill, but rather then stande more vpon thy guarde, and prepare thy selfe to the combate, knowing that then wil the aduersarie be more cruel against thee, and more readie with all maner of temptations, to assault thee. For as S. GREGORIE witnesseth:S. Greg. Hee neglecteth and maketh little account to tempt those, whom he seeth to come headlong vnto him But he bendeth his chiefest forces against those which leaue sinne, and c^me vnto God. Whereof the Ecclesiastike giueth vs warning saying, My Sonne, comming vnto the Seruice of God, stande in feare, and prepare thy self to temptations: and S GREGORIE vpon these wordes sayeth,Lib. 4. mor^. cap. 24. Our enemie whilst we remaine in this life how much the valianter wee encounter him, so much the more doth he bende himselfe and his forces to ouercome vs. Wherfore assure thy self, that in the very first mome^t that thou shalt begin to leaue sin and Sathan, and come vnto the seruice of God, thou shalt find many assaults both of the flesh, and of the world, and the deuill also will not omit to vse presently what subtilitie hee may to ouercome thee, for hee neither feareth the austeritie of the place, or holines of the person,
 but is vigilant to assault whomsoeuer hee seeth to begin to doe Penance: yea he feared not to assault the very Sonne of God,i. 4 for assoone as in the desert he had exercised the acts of Penance, (to teach vs by his example to doe the like) presently Sathan with his subtilities, and vaine temptations, did assaile and set on him; wherefore no great maruaile, if he doe presently assault thee, for weapons are giuen thee to that end, that thou shouldest alwaies fight against him. Let it not therefore any whit dismay thee, if when thou thinkest to doe best, that then thou findest him one way or another, to goe about to assault and supprise thee. A dogge doth not bite his friends, and those of the house, but such as are strangers: So the deuill doth not barke, or make warre against the wicked (which as long as they remaine in their wickednes are Domestiques of hell) but onely he impugneth the iust, the good, and such as seeke to serue God; wherefore though thy life haue bene neuer so good, and thou as high as may be in the fauour God, yet must thou not therefore lay aside the weapons of Penance, but oughtest rather to be more careful to vse them, hauing receaued so great a fauour by holie Penance, as to bee made of a Bondslaue of Sathan, the child of God, and heyre of the kingdome of heauen, yea then principally to stande vpon thy guarde and more carefully to take vnto thee
 the armes of Penance: following therein the example, that our Sauiour did giue vs in the desert, knowing and being well assured, that as Sa han did then principally assayle him, when he had receiued so great fauours from his Father: so in like sort, will he deale with vs, and leaue no meanes vnattempted, to make vs loose the fauour of God, and bring vs by falling into our former offences, into his seruitude and bondage againe. Whereunto, if through our negligence, in omitting our accustomed course of Penance and austeritie of life, and fighting valiantly against sinne, we shall happen to fall, in far worse estate should wee be, then euer before, for then more cruelly doth hee deale with the poore sinner, and keepeth him more vigilantlie. For it happeneth vnto him, as vnto a man helde in prison, whome the keeper thereof, seeing him to be one that is willing to please him, and doe his will, doth not binde him with fetters and chaines, as he doeth the rest; but if this man breake out of prison, it is most certaine, that then with all fury he will vse all rigour, subtilitie, or any other meanes that he can possible, to take him againe, which if he happen to doe, hee will be more vigilant, careful, and seuere, in the keeping of him afterward; and if before hee had but a simple chaine, or none at all, now will hee adde double fetters; and if before, in the quiet of the night, hee did not trouble him
 now euery night wil he come vnto him, to see whether he attempteth to breake his yrons, or to fly out of prison. The selfe same doth Sathan with the poore sinner; for first when he holdeth a man in his power, and vseth so litle care and diligence in the keeping of him, that he flyeth and escapeth out of his power, and laugheth him to scorne: th^n with all fury he seeketh by al meanes to catch him againe. But if thou be so infortunat, as by negligence and want of care, giuing thy self to the pleasures of the world, thou fall into his captiuitie againe, thy second condition will be far worse then the first; for then will he load thee with waightier chaines, and keepe thee more vigilantly and if before he did offer vnto thee someone or other temptations, now will he suggest ten, and carefully close the gates, wherby thou didst first flye away: If he did see that the societie and companie of good and vertuous persons did recall thee, and bring thee out of his captiuitie, he wil be vigilant and waite that thou shalt not enter into familiaritie with such deuout persons; and if he perceiued that by hearing of Sermons, and good exhortations, thou wert auerted and deliuered hee will not omit any meanes to turne and withdraw thy minde from giuing eare vnto any such comfortable matters; and by these and the like meanes, shut vp the doores, whereby thou didst first escape out of his bandes, and so without the
 greater goodnesse and mercie of God, hee will so nonsell, nourish, and accustome thee in sinne, that thou wilt in the end, glorie therein, and not be ashamed therof at all.Ierem. 3. For as holie HIEREMIE speaking of him which is accustomed vnto sinne, sayeth. Thou hast made to thy selfe the forehead of a harlot, thou wouldest not blush or be ashamed.
Behold therefore (o sinner) what negligence, and leauing off thy armour of defence, bringeth thee vnto! for whereas in thy first estate thou wagest war and wert to fight against the flesh, the world and the deuil, if thou shouldest lay thy weapon a side, and fall into sinne againe, then besides these three, thou shouldest haue another enemie to fight against thee, that is, euill custome, which not onely wil make warre with thee, but will leade and draw thee after it, and will bring thee to that miserable and vnhappie estate that thou shalt not feele, or perceiue the malice of sinne, but rather drinke sinnes downe as pleasantlie to thy seeming at the first, as anie sweete wine, and cause in thee that wicked and lamentable habit, that verie hardly and with great force, and difficultie canst thou conuerte and turne vnto God. For as the Prophet IEREMIE saith,Ierem. 13 If the Ethiopian can change his skinne, so canst thou doe well, vvhen thou hast learned to doe ill,

Let these dangers therefore cause thee to beware, and learne, not to leaue whilst life doth last, any meanes to preserue thee from sinne, which would soone cause thee to perish euerlastingly. Wherefore note I beseech you, that when our Sauiour shewed that the necessitie of Penance was such that vnlesse we do penance, we should p^rish all likewise.Luc. 13 He did not prefixe any time when wee should make an end and leaue off doing it, saying, vnlesse you do Penance for three or foure daies, or so manie yeares but saide absolutely, vnlesse you shall doe Penance: as though he would say. If at any time you be without Penance, you shall be in danger to perish.
Wherupon to conclude, it is not enough for a man that is deliuered out of the bondage of sinne, and the hands of his enemies, to begin to doe Penance, please, and serue our Lord thereby, but as holy Zacharie in his Canticle saith: That being deliuered from the hands of our enemies, wee may serue without feare, in holinesse and iustice before him all our daies: that is, wee should not serue him onely for a moneth o^ a yeare, but that without any tarrying, resting, or pausing of time, wee should do it all the dayes of our life.
SAVL did well begin, but forasmuch as he did not perseuer all the daies of his life,1. Reg. 9 1. Reg. 15 his ende was miserable. What would it profit a man to plant a Vineyard, if before it
 bringeth foorth fruite, he leaueth off the labouring and husbanding of it? And what commoditie were it to plowe, and sow the ground, if in time of haruest, one would not take paine to gather in the corne? Or what aduancement would the souldier get (the enemie comming) if of his owne accord, he should take his armour and fight valiantly against him, if afterwards before he had gotten the victorie, he should cast his weapons aside? Or what would it benefit the Saylers to go to sea, hoyse vp sailes to the prosperous windes, to saile and haue a happie course, if afterwardes, through their negligence, the shippe breaking euen in the mouth of the Hauen, all should be lost? So in like sorte would it litle auaile thee, if thou shouldest beginne neuer so happie a course of Penance, and shouldest leaue it off, before thou arriue safely at that happie porte of death, to which a good life, conducted by the way of Penance, bringeth thee with speedie securitie. All would litle auaile thee, if thou doest not perseuer vnto the end: For that as the Apostle S. PAVL affirmeth. Nemo Coronabitur, etc. No man shall be crowned, but he which shal lawfully fight. And our Sauiour also saith. Hee which perseuereth vnto the end, shal be saued. Let vs therefore embrace the counsell of S. PAVL, Let vs not faile or faint in doing good, for that vve shall reape the rewarde thereof in
 his time, that is, for small paines, euerlasting happinesse.


That the Austeritie of Penance, is made easie by the due consideration of the sweetnesse which is in it, and profit which commeth thereof. CHAP. VI.
THE precursor of our Sauiour, holie S. IOHN Baptist, sharply reprehending the people for their enormious crimes, (wherby they had incurred the wrath and indignation of God, said, Ye vipers brood, vvho vvill teach you to flie from the future vvrath?Luc. 3.) did presentlie teach them the way and said. Doe therefore the vvorthy fruits of Penance: as though he would say, if you will auoide and flie from the indignation of God, which is readie to come hereafter vpon you, the onely meanes which is left vnto you is, to doe the worthy fruits of Penance: For such is the profi^, force, and vertue thereof, that it stayeth the hand of God from inflicting iust punishments, for your manifold offences, and wicked sinnes; wherof we haue a most manifest example in the Niniuites, whose wickednesse was so great, and their sinnes so heynous and displeasing
 vnto God, that his wrath was stirred vp, so much against them, and he was so readie to punish them, that he said within fourtie daies he would destroy the Citie of Niniuie But such (behold) was the benefit and vtilitie of Penance, and the force thereof so great, that the Prophet IONAS h d no sooner declared vnto the Niniuites, in what eminent danger they did all stand, and that the seuere punishment of God was read^e to fall vpon them; but they all presently had recourse vnto Penance, euen from the highest vnto the lowest, yea, in such feruent sort, that they caused the verie beasts to fast. And such wonderfull profite did their Penance br^ng, that they thereby pac^fyed the wrath of God, stayed his hande of Reuenge, saued themselues and their Citie, from vtter ruine and destruction  But some may peraduenture say, if Penance be so soueraigne a salue for all sores, and that so great profit proceedeth from it, how happeneth it that so manie perish?  If ye well consider the forementioned sentence of S. IOHN, yo^ may easilie see the cause, when he said, that for to flie from the future wrath, they must doe the worthy fruits of Penance.
But there be manie which bring foorth onelie the buds and flowers thereof, and are l ke vnto the children of Israel, which hearing of the fertilitie of the land of promise, did prepare themselues to the battaile,
 and to possesse it, but when they did heare there were strong Gyants, against whome they must fight, they would returne againe into Egypt, and for the difficultie of the way, they began to grow weary: so, manie hearing of the great profit and vtilitie which proceedeth from Penance, and of the great glorie which is promised in the end to a man that perseuereth therein, will with great ioy and alacritie hearken thereunto, and begin their iourney, to possesse their promised glorie, with prayer, fastings, and other austerities of Penance, but through too much fragilitie and weaknesse of minde, being terrifyed with the hardnesse, which seemeth to be therein, returne vnto their former vices and pleasures, and leaue Penance in the budde, and expect not to bring the worthy fruits thereof to maturitie, thereby depriuing themselues of the profite which Pena^ce bringeth in the end, and take a co^trary course, and so fall into eternal perdition, as we haue a lamentable example of ACHAB,3. Reg. 22 which proceeded so far, as to bring foorth the buddes of Penance, and did turne vnto our Lord, but fayled in the middest of the way, and therefore dying in his vices and former sinnes, perished euerlastingly.
Some also bring foorth onely leaues of Penance, that is, good motions, and holy intentions, saying that they haue a good will to doe Penance, and make satisfaction for their sinnes past before they die, yet deferre
 so long the amendment of life, that being by death preuented before they goe about to accomplish and prosecute their good intentions, are the more seuerely punished in the life to come, for that according to our Sauiours owne wordes; The childe that knoweth the vvill of the Father (as the good intentions they had doe shew they did) and doth it not, shall bee beaten vvith manie stripes, and goe laden into hell with manie good motions, for neglecting and putting of them in execution in due time. Wherefore it is neither the leaues of colde intentions, nor the buddes of vnripe purposes, which saue a man from hell and perdition, but it is the worthy fruites of Penance which doth deliuer from those dangers, and bring and yeeld vnto vs profite and comfort, both here and euerlastingly; happy therefore are they which walke deuourlie and perseuerantly by this holy path of Penance, which leadeth to so great consolation,Psal. 127 for that as the Prophet DAVID saith, Blessed are they vvhich feare the Lord, and vvalke in his waies Worthelie truely may Pennance bee called the way of our Lord, for that it was the perfect way wherin our louing Lord and maister walked continually, from his first entrance into this world, vntill he went out of it againe. It was the course which he taught vs both by worde and example to follow; and whereas this way seemed before so hard, that fewe in
 comparison (but such as the necessitie of their sinnes caused to vndertake it) spent their daies therein, yet now hee both by his holy example, and by the profite and rewarde which he hath promised thereunto, hath made it so plaine, easie and pleasant, that innumerable persons, yea of holy innocent and tender virgins, haue ioyfully passed their whole life therein.
The Royall King DAVID, in the forementioned Psalme, amongst many benefits and vtilities; which they shal reape which walke in the way of our Lord,Psal. 127 reckoneth for the first, that, Thou shalt eate the labours of thy hands, thou shalt be blessed, and it shall be well with thee. Behold and attentiuely consider how DAVID doth not onely call those blessed, which did enioy the eternall felicitie in heauen, but those also which walked here in earth in the way of our Lord, for the sweetnesse and comfort that they finde therein: and therefore did not say, Thou shalt eate the fruites of thy labour, but thou shalt eate thy labours. The husbandman doth not eate his labour, but the fruits thereof, he planteth and soweth his seede in winter, that he may reape and enioy the corne therof in Somer. It is the labour to digge the vineyard, the fruite is the vendage and gathering of grapes; euen so in the seruice of God, the labour is fasting, but the fruit of the labour, is to be filled and fed in heauen, the labour in this life is teares, the
 fruite thereof is euerlasting ioy. But the holie Prophet DAVID, considered the loue of God to be such towards his seruants that walke in his waies, that not onely they shal enioy the fruits of their labours in heauen, their fasting and Pennance, but also in this life, the same to be a sweete foode, and pleasant meate, which maketh them fat and strong, and therefore he saith, that they should eate their labours: for that the vertuous and iust persons, haue more spiritual consolations in their labours and Penance in this life, then the wicked in their pleasures and delights, from whence S. AVGVSTINE expounding this place of the Psalmist, saith,S. Aug. in Psal. 127 The teares in prayer of those which pray, are sweeter then the ioyes and pleasures of the Theaters. Plaine is the way of heauen, and more sweete and pleasanter, then all the flowers and delights of the vvorld. What is the cause therefore that this way seemeth vnto many to be so hard and paineful, and that so few will passe therby? The same S AVG. alleadgeth the cause to be,S. Au. ibid for want of triall, and taking that happie way in hand, for they which neuer begun the entrance of this iourney, affirme it to be rugged and harde. But sith we rather beleeue and giue credit vnto those which haue ofte^ passed vnto the Indies, what the way is, then vnto those which neuer sayled thither: much more ought we to beleeue the holie Saints, which haue walked this way of our Lord and passed
 through those pathes, hauing left behind them in their writings and monuments, that to serue our Lord, and walke in his pathes, is both sweet and pleasant.
The Couetous man thinketh it to be hard to giue almes;Examples. and he which followeth his fleshlie lusts, iudgeth it impossible to liue chaste; to the ambitious man also, it seemeth no lesse difficultie to be made subiect: to those and such like persons, the way of heauen seemeth to be sharpe, paineful and vneasie, because they haue neuer entred into it, neither doe they know what it is to serue our Sauiour, but if they had or would but consecrate and giue themselues wholly vnto his seruice, they should certainly see by experience it selfe, that it were more pleasant, easie and delectable, to follow our Sauiour in this way of Penance, which he himselfe taught, then to giue themselues to their vices and voluptuous pleasures.
Doth it not happen sometimes vnto thee, that assoone as thou art risen from the feete of thy Ghostly Father, to be so content and ioyful, that thou seemest alreadie altogether to be placed in heauen it selfe, being vnloaden of the great burthen of thy sinnes? Oh if thou wouldest proceed and goe forward in the way of Penance, howe soone shouldest thou finde great sweetnes therin! seeing that in the very beginning of thy iourney, that is, leauing thy fore passed life and sinns, thou hast found so great consolatio^
 in thy soule. What sweetnes the Royall Prophet DAVID did finde in the holie waie of Penance, he himselfe did declare saying, I did vvalke in largenes,Psal. 118 because I haue sought out thy Commaundementes: For though so strict was the course of Penance, that he said that he cloathed himselfe with Hayre clothe, and that hee did eate ashes as bread, and that hee mingled his drinke with teares, and washing his Couch euerie night with them, did rise in the midst of night to praise God, yet notwithstanding such ioy and sweetnesse did he finde in this strict course of Penance, that hee said, I walke in largenesse, that is, though the way which leadeth to life be straite, yet I did walke it in largenesse and ioy of my heart, for though my bodie be contracted and drawne neere together, afflicted and punished by labours, yet such ioy and comforte doth it bring vnto my heart, that, It is dilated and extended, that thy iustifications vvere most commendable and pleasant vnto mee in this place of my Pilgrimage. Our Lord dea^eth with his seruants in this life, as manie great men doe, which hauing inuited some worthy friend to a banquet, which comming thither accordinglie at the accustomed time of dinner, if the meate be not ful^ie readie, presently the maister of the feast commandeth some daintie wine to bee brought foorth to stay their stomackes in the meane while, that they may not be altogether
 fasting: euen so truelie doth on Lord deale with the iust, and his friendes, whom he hath inuited to a great and worthy banquet in heaue^; yet in the meane time, that they may not altogether fast, and that they should not faint in the expectation thereof, he sendeth them here some pleasant wine, of Spiritual Consolations, and ioyes of the soule. The cause wherefore many do not tast here of these Spiritual comforts, and diuine consolations, proceedeth from themselues only in that their care being wholly bent to seeke for temporal ioyes and commodities, no place is there left for his heauenly graces. Wherefore euen as our Lord did not sende vnto the Children of Israel Manna from heauen, vntill there remained no more of the flower and meale of Aegypt; so in like sorte,Exhortation. our Lord doth neuer sende his sweet and heauenly ioyes, as long as the vaine desire of earthly pleasures remaineth in their hearts: fly therfore, and relinquish (o poore sinner) the way of pleasure which leadeth to hell and perdition, that thou ha^^ heretofore followed, and seeke carefully the path of Penance, and walke perseuera^tl^ therein, pulling downe the rockes of th^ passions, and breaking the flinty stones o^ thy heard heart, and ouerthrowing the walle^ of thy auncient costomes and maners, an^ thou shalt presently find, that most pleasan^ and easie is the way of Penance, which leadeth soone to euerlasting ioyes.



How great the profit is vvhich proceedeth from Penance. CHAP. VII.
THe sweetnesse of Penance did so long detaine me in the declaration and consideration thereof, that if I should haue returned againe to the demonstration of the great profit which it bringeth vnto the true Penitents, the precedent Chapter would haue bene of that length, that it might peraduenture haue bene tedious to the Reader, Wherefore knowing that profit draweth manie persons, sooner then sweetnesse or pleasure, I will now returne againe to declare more at large the vtilitie and benefite which proceedeth from it, The holie Abbot Pynusius speaking thereof saith,Cas. Colla. Pr. Col. 20 that After the general grace of Baptisme, and that most pretious gift of Martyrdome, vvhich is gotten by shedding of our blood, the most excellent are the fruits of Penance, vvhereby is gotten and attayned the purifying and cleansing of our sinnes. Wherefore S. PETER sayeth, Be penitent and conuerte,Act. 3 that your sinnes may be put out.
Holie Dionisius the Carthusian, doth in like sort declare, that great is the profit,Dionis. Carthus. and many are the benefits, which the soul receiueth fro^ pena^ce, for that true penance (saith he)
 doth deliuer the soule from the bondage of Sathan, and doth sanctifie it, doth adorneit vvit vertues and gifts of the holy Ghost, placeth it in Paradise, presenteth it to be crowned, and is a Mediatour for it.
God himselfe speaking by the mouth of his Prophet Ezechiel saith: If the vvicked shal doe Penance for all the sinnes vvhich hee hath done,Ezech. 18 and s^all keepe my precepts, and shal doe iudgement and iustice, he shal liue the life, and shal not die. Yea, moreouer he addeth in the same place, that Penance blotteth out the verie memory of sinne, saying, that. Hee vvill not so much as remember the iniquities that the penitent sinner hath done, but he shal liue in the Iustice vvhich he hath vvrought. Especially if hee exercise true iustice vpon himselfe, which requireth that according to the greatnesse of the sinne, so should the Penance be correspondent therunto. Therefore must hee first iudge of the offence, and then vse condigne iustice vpon the offender, that is, himselfe, poore sinner, whose Penance ought not to be smal, when the offence is great, which Penance is a thing so pleasing vnto God, that by the foresaid Prophet he saith, VVhen the vvicked man shal turne himselfe from his impiety and vvickednesse vvhich he hath done,Ezech. 18 and shall doe iudgement and iustice, he shal giue life vnto his soule. Therfore he saith againe, I vvill iudge euery one (o house of Israel) according to his vvaies. Conuert ye, therefore and
 doe Penance for all your iniquities, and your iniquities shal not be to your ruine. Beholde, here what God requireth of euerie poore sinner, that hee should doe condigne Penance; behold of the other side the profite that proceedeth from Penannce is verie great, whereas it saueth from eternal death, blotteth out not onely the sinnes, but the verie memorie thereof also, giueth life to the soule, and preserueth it from ruine and eternal paines, which wee take in doing thereof,S. Greg. doth deliuer and preserue vs from the endlesse paines of hell, as witnesseth S. GREGORIE saying, VVhilest we are wasted and spoyled vvith transitorie labour and paines, vve are deliuered from euerlasting torments.
Yea,Note diligently. such benefite commeth vnto vs fro^ labour, paines, and afflictions, that if wee do but patientlie suffer them in this life, for the loue of God, by their meanes wee shal be freed from the paines in the life to come, either in hell, or in Purgatorie.S. Greg. Therefore S. GREGORIE noting howe mercifullie God dealeth with those whom he loueth, saith. God doth here most mercifully apply temporal seueritie, to the intent hee may not hereafter inflict euerlasting reuenge, therefore he spareth some here, that hee may punish them for euer, and some he striketh here not any waies pardoning them, that hee may spare the^ in the life to come And though that all, we can doe or suffer here, is but litle in
 in respect of the punishment which our dailie imperfections, and ordinarie sinnes doe deserue, yet such is the goodnes of God, that hee doth more accept of a little punishment and satisfaction made here, then of much more which should be done elsewhere,Eccles. 29. whereof the Ecclesiastike beareth witnesse saying. The least thing doth please thee for a great: that is, the least punishment, either voluntarie done or suffred here, doth more please and pacifie thee, then a greater suffred elsewhere of necessitie, and though the paines were neuer so great which wee suffer in this life, yet are they little in respect of the future punishment and torments,S. August. as S. AVGVSTINE most notably noteth, saying. No griefe or vexation of temporall paines, may be compared to the euerlasting torments of the vvicked. But the sinner cannot auoyde one of these two, for that he must of necessitie be punished, either hereafter, or here in this present life, for that no euill remaineth vnpunished. Wherfore to the intent ye may the more plainely see the profit which proceedeth from present Penance, and that all that yee haue done or can doe, is but litle, in respect of the future paines from whence it deliuereth vs, marke I beseech you, how great and intollerable are the future paines of Purgatorie, and of hell, which of necessitie on of the two, the poore sinner must suffer, if through Gods mercie, penance here doth not preserue him from
 those intollerable pains there. S. AVG. speaking of the paines of Purgatorie saith:S Aug. li, de vera and falsa poeni^, This fire truely, although it be not euerlasting, yet notwithstanding it is most grieuous, for certainly it doth far excel al the paines, that euer any man suffered in this life. There vvas neuer founde in flesh so great and intollerable paine, although the holy Martyrs haue suffred merueilous torments. Let euery one therefore (saith he) studie so to correct his offences,Exhortation. and do such penance for his sinnes here, that after this life he be not forced to suffer such and so manie intollerable paines of Purgatorie.
Though the paines of Purgatorie do far exceede all the torments of the worlde, and if it were possible they should bee tenne thousand times more, yet were they all little or nothing in comparison of the least of the torments of hell, which shal be inflicted for any mortall sinne, that the sinner doth desperately and voluntarilie die in.S. Anselm So infinite and inexplicable are the paines of hell, that holie S. ANSELME saith, that If all the men that euer vvere borne since the time of Adam, vntill this present daye vvere novv aliue, and great Preachers, and that all of them should endeauour to speake but of the least paine in hell; yet vvere they not able altogeather to declare the verye least parte, of the smallest torment there. So in like sorte doeth hee saye, that noe lesse innarrable and vnpossible, by all those to be declared, is the greatnesse
 of the ioyes of heauen which the sinner dying but in one mortall sinne, looseth for euer,
S. Aug.S. AVGVSTINE is nothing inferiour vnto him in declaring of the torments of hell, but saith after the same maner, that, If all the men that euer were from the beginning of the world; or shal be to the vvorlds end, and also all the graines of corne that euer sprong vp were men and if they all should suffer but one paine which the soule endureth for a mortall sinne, euerie one for his parte should suffer more paine, then all the blessed Martyrs, and all the vvicked malefactors euer suffred.
S. Greg.S. GREGORIE also briefely declaring howe great are the paines of hell, sayeth, That things cannot be thought of paines, which is not giuen them there for torment.
Isidor. in Sino.ISIDORVS therefore exhorting the poore sinner to weigh attentiuely the greatnes of the foresaid torments, saith. Bend and enforce thy minde earnestly to consider vvhat paines soeuer of the world,Note this consideration.what griefes soeuer of torments, and what bitternesse soeuer of griefe, and compare all those togeather to the paines of hel, and then shalt thou see that light is all that thou sufferest.
Penance bringeth vnto the soule, when not onely by Gods grace (which it procureth vnto man) it deliuereth him from all those aforesaid paines, but also bringeth it to as inenarable glorie and ioyes in heauen, Wherefore the Apostle S. PAVL saith, The
 eyes haue not seene, neither the eares haue heard, nor the heart of man can thinke, what God hath prepared for those which loue him. Wherefore S. AVGVSTINE affirmeth that,S. August. exhortatio^ The ioye of eternal light is so great, that although a man might remaine therein but one houre, yet for to obtaine this onely, innumerable yeares of this life, full of delight and all temporal goods, are rightlie and vvorthily to be contemned. Holie DIONISIVS reciteth, that a certaine deuil being demanded (in a possessed person) how great was the ioyes of heauen, answered,Dionis. Carthus. Number the starres, who answered againe that he could not, so also said he, no man can number the ioyes of heauen; and being demanded of returning againe vnto heauen, answered: If there were a fierie burning yron piller, reaching from earth vnto heauen, set with sharpe Rasors (if I were cladde with humaine flesh, wherein I could suffer) I would continually draw my selfe vp and downe vpon it euen vnto the day of Iudgement, so that I might then finde fauour at Gods hands, and come vnto his glorie:Note that the deuil did not see the essence of God, but onely had some euident vndersta^ding thereof. being demanded how long he did see God before he was cast out of heaue^, he answered, Litle more then the twinckli^g of an eye: but that I might see but so long againe, that most glorious face, I would willingly my selfe alone endure all the paines of the damned, aswel of the deuils, as of men, vnto the worldes end. Hitherto holy Dionisius.

S. BERNARD speaking of the beauty of God (which the holie Saints hauing passed their times here in Penance, do now co^tinually behold) saith. Al do reioyce there in God, because in sight he is most vvorthy to be desired, in face most beautiful and sweete to enioy, by himselfe he pleaseth, by himselfe he is sufficient for reward, nothing is sought for out of him, and in him alone is all things that can be desired. This holie Saint, hauing declared the beautie of God himselfe, sheweth in like sort the excellencie of his kingdome and saith: There is true ioy, full knowledge, al beautie and blisse, there is peace, goodnesse, light, vertue and honestie, ioy, mirth, sweetnesse, true loue, and vvhat good and pleasant thing soeuer can be thought, is there superabundantlie found.
The Royal Prophet Dauid, considering how pleasant aboue measure are the ioyes of the house of God,Psal. 83 saith. One day is better in thy gates, aboue a thousand (vid. in the world) and therefore said that hee made a choyce to bee an outcast in the house of God,Psal. 83 rather then to dwel in the Tabernacle of sinners. Wherefore knowing that Pennance was the way that leadeth thereunto, did giue himselfe vnto the austeritie of Penance, as you heard before in such sorte, that he said, Teares were my bread both daye and night,Psal. 41 whilst it is said vnto me, where is thy God: as though he would say; so great griefe is it vnto my soule, to be so far separated by
 sinne fro^ the house of God, that a man may say vnto me. VVhere is thy God? Wherefore I wil endeuor to shed dailie such plenty of teares, to wash away my sinnes which haue made this separation, that my teares shalbe vnto me my bread both day and night, vntill such time as I may come to the presence of my God, and dwel in his house, for that our Lord wil giue grace and glorie,Psal. 83 and wil not depriue those of his goods which walke in innocencie: We were first created in Innocencie; by sinne we lost that happie estate, the meanes to cleanse vs of our sinnes, and bring vs to our former happines, is Penance,Ezec. 18 as God himselfe by his Prophet Ezechiel declareth. To conclude therefore with this last and chiefest profit proceding fro^ Penance, that they which being cleansed from their sinn, by it, do walk in innocencie. God (as you see DAVID testifyeth) vvil giue them grace and glorie, and vvil not depriue them of his goods.Psal. 83 Wherfore as wee desire to enioy with this penitent king, all those aforesaid happines, let vs endeuour in this transitorie life, to imitate him in penance, so doing wee may assure our selues to be partakers with him in glorie.Psal. 83 For that (as he saith) God loueth mercie and veritie: through his infinite mercie, he wil accept of our penance, and by his louing veritie, he will performe what hee hath promised for it: that is, his grace here, and after euerlasting glorie in heauen.



That Penance ought chiefely to be done for the loue of God. CHAP. VIII.
EVEN as it is not the death or paine which maketh a Martyr,S. Cyprian in diuers. loc. but the cause wherefore it is suffred; so in like sort it is not the Penance, but the intentions and chiefe motions thereunto, which maketh it meritorious. For as COSDRAS the king of the Athenians, though he offered himselfe vnto death, and also that stout CVRTIVS, though he cast himselfe downe into the gaping gulfe of the earth, yet notwithstanding they, nor any other Romaines, or auncient Gentiles were Martires, because their intentions, and ends of their death, were not for the loue of God, but for their owne vanity: so manie, though they haue vsed great austerities to themselues, and done great Penance, yet forasmuch as vaine glorie, or some other fonde or foolish matter, hath bene the ende thereof, their Penance hath litle profited them. Wherefore as God being the chiefe cause and onely end of Martyrdome, maketh the death of Martyrs to be glorious: so in like maner commeth it to passe, that thy penance is then most meritorious, when the chiefe intention and end-thereof,
 is onely for the loue of God. For otherwise if thou shouldst haue neuer so great griefe and repentance, and shouldest doe thy penance according for thy sinnes, and for their sakes, shouldest shedde as manie teares, as there are droppes of water in the sea, if thou shouldest doe all this for feare of going to hell, and not chiefly for the loue of God; know thou for certaine, that this would profite thee litle, in respect of that profit which thou shouldst haue, if it were done meerely for the loue of God; Notwithstanding, that such penance called imperfect contrition, commonly conceiued either by the consideration of the turpitude of sinne, or by feare of hell, or seuere punishment, if it exclude the effect of sinne, and include hope of remission, by a speciall gift of God, and a diuine impulsion of the holie Ghost; yet of it self it is not sufficient to iustifie or expell the spot of sinne, but is a disposition and operation, for the obtayning of iustification, in the sacrament of Pennance: but the other conceiued by the consideration of the goodnesse of God, and for his sake embraced, called perfect contrition, is not onely a speciall gift of God, and a diuine inspiration of the holie Ghost, but of it selfe is sufficient to iustifie and blot out all deadlie offences, before the penitent be actually absolued. Yet this iustification and reconciliation, must be ascribed precisely to contrition, but in as much as it
 includes the desire of the sacrament of Penance, which the penitent is bounde to receaue finding oportunitie, notwithstanding any precedent contrition neuer so perfect. For in sinne thou must consider two things, the one is the offence which thou hast committed against thy Lord: the other is the onely hurt which thou hast thereby brought vnto thy selfe; for thereby thou hast made thee a bondslaue to eternal paine in hell. If therefore thou art rather sorry, and do more repent thy self, for feare of the torments of hel, then for that thou hast offended God; it is most manifest, that thy penance is more to flye and auoide that, which is against thy selfe, then that which is against God. Whereby it commeth to passe, that thou doest more loue thy selfe, then God. And therefore thy sinnes, without the sacrament of penance, shall neuer be remitted, although thou shouldest haue the greatest sorrow and griefe that might be, vnlesse thou repent thy selfe and be sorrowful also, that thou hast offended God, for God doth more respect the cause of the griefe, then the greatnesse thereof, and doth chiefly behold the end, that the sinner hath in doing of Penance; whereof we haue manifest examples in the holie Scriptures.1. Reg. 15 Reg. 12 SAVL and DAVID were both kings of Israel, and both of them also offended, and were in like sorte both of them reprehended by two Prophets, and to conclude, both
 of them did penance, and said, peccaui, I haue offended. Wherefore then did God pardon DAVID, and not SAVL? what is God an acceptor of persons?Act. 10. God forbid wee should so thinke. In veritie (saith S. PETER) God is not so. The cause wherfore that the Penance of DAVID did please our Lord, and not that of SAVL, was in that, DAVIDS chiefest and greatest griefe was, for that hee had offended God, but the sorrow of SAVL was not principally for his sinne, but for that thereby he lost his kingdome of Israel, wherefore hee said vnto SAMVEL,1. Reg. 15 Honour me before the elders of the people, and before Israel; he said all this, that he might not be contemned by his people, and that he might remaine safe in his, kingdome, if it might be. For this cause likewise God did not heare ESAY,Heb. 12. although (as witnesseth S. PAVL, he sought for mercy with teares.
So also ANTIOCHVS.2. Mac. 6. did not obteyne mercie of God, for that his griefe and teares did not proceed from the roote of the loue of God; For as no man could enter into the court of Assuerus, that was clothed with sack-cloath, so neither can anie man enter into the Royall Court of Almightie God, that is cloathed onely with this feare, which is attrition, but must be adorned with the Nuptiall garments of the loue of God. For although Penance which is done for feare is not bad, yet notwithstanding, it is not so good, as to bee meritorious
 of the life euerlasting, vnlesse it proceed further, that is, vnlesse it passe from feare, to loue,
Although thou dost not worship strange gods, if thou doest not take the name of God in vaine, if thou doest not violate and breake the holie daies, if also thou keepest all the rest of the commandements, and Euangelicall counsels, if thou shouldest doe al these things, I say, without the loue of God; know thou, that it will come to passe, that thou shalt scarce enter into his kingdome.
The reason truely is, for that in euery good worke whatsoeuer, there are two things; the one is, the honour and glorie which is due vnto GOD; the other is, the vtilitie and profite which hee, which doth that good worke, is to reape thereby, that is, the euerlasting ioy which our Lord giueth vnto them for the same. If thou therfore, when thou doest exercise any holie action, or vertuous deedes, doest more attende vnto thy profite, then vnto the honour of God, it is most manifest that thou louest more thy selfe then God, and euen as the worke wanteth the loue of God, so also shall it be not so meritorious: and for such workes that doe not enclude formally, or virtually the loue of God, thou shalt neuer enter into his kingdome, neither will our Lord giue vnto thee his glorie for them.
Leuit. 27The loue of God is the ballance wherein was weighed all that was offered in the
 Sanctuary, for if thou shalt pray, or giue almes, or doe any other good worke whatsoeuer, weigh it in the ballance and scales of the Sanctuarie: loue ought to weigh it, according to the saying of S. Augustine: My loue is my weight, vvith this I am caried, whither soeuer I am caried; and so much merit shal the good worke haue, as it hath in it of the loue of God, and the worthines of the deed: and therfore if thou shalt keep all the other commandements and Euangelical Counsels exactly, and shal do many other good works, vnlesse they shall proceed from the diuine charitie and loue, and vnlesse God himselfe shal be the final end of them, as I said before, they wil not be worthy of heauen: For in the sight of God, the Supreame Iudge, the end and intention of the worke is more regarded, then the greatnesse or excellency thereof; Wherefore, though it seeme vnto thee, to be a most excellent worke to serue God, yet wanting the loue of God, as hath bene said, thy intention being chiefly that he should therefore giue thee glorie, thou shalt loose it truely: but if thou shalt serue him onely for himselfe and his loue, thou shalt assuredlie gaine a great crowne of glorie; where seeking thine owne gaine, thou shalt not: and forgetting thine owne, thou shalt reape infinite profite. By a little labour, thou maist gaine much, if thou wilt, but such is the folly of manie, that they wil not, but vexe and torment themselues with
 thousand labours, and get litle.
This therefore ought to be thy studie, whatsoeuer thou shalt doe, that alwaies thou maiest direct and bende thine intentions therein to God, and that thou mayest doe it onely for his loue: and because hee will haue it so, and that it pleaseth him, and that this is his will. If therefore either through frailtie, or the suggestions of the deuill, (thy wicked inclinations inclyning thereunto) thou hast fallen into sinne, be sorrowful, repent thee, and do thy Penance, chiefly, for that thou hast offended so holie, so iust and so great a Lord, whom thou oughtest with all Reuerence and loue rather to haue serued, hauing receiued daily and hourely so many benefits of him.
A similitude.If thou hadst a friend whom thou louedst deerely, though thou didst expect nothing from him but onely louedst him, for that he was a wise, good, and vertuous person, in whose companie thou didst delight: thou wouldest (I know if any spa^ke of vertue did remaine in thee) be sorrowful if that through thy offence, thou hadst lost his companie and loue, and wouldest with diligence ^eeke to winne it againe. Much more then oughtest thou to be sorrowful, when through sinne and offence thou hast lost the familiaritie and loue of God, which is so good and prudent, and so mercifull. If thou wouldest do so much for man (which is full of a thousand imperfections) in whom thou
 seest onely the signe and shaddow of diuine beautie; what shouldest thou then do to recouer againe his loue and friendship, which is the continual and euerlasting fountaine of all goodnes, beautie and vertue it selfe. Wherefore whensoeuer thou hast committed any crime, let thy chiefe griefe and sorrow of thy soule be, that thou hast lost thy familiaritie of God, and also his diuine presence; in whom al the ioy, comfort, and delight ought to be. Bend therfore al thy study, and endeuour with al diligence, that by Pennance, thou maist recouer his loue againe, which ought to be the only end of al whatsoeuer thou doest; apply al thine whole care to root out of thy hart, the loue of thy selfe, and to plant the loue of God therein, in such maner (that if that might be which is impossible) that by offending God thou mightest enter into the eternal beatitude and happines and enioy the heauenly co^forts with the blessed Saints; An exhortatio^. or for that thou wouldest not loose his loue and fauour, thou shouldest goe to hel, and suffer al the torments of the damned, thou oughtest rather to be in hel, and not offend God, then to go to heaue^ by displeasing him. Therfore that most blessed Father, S Anselme in his bis book of similituds, said I had rather being pure fro^ sinn and innocent, to enter into hel,Ansel lib. de Simil. Cap. 190 the^ being polluted with the filth of sin, to enioy heauen: words truly worthy of so great and holy a ma^, speaking as a ma^ most perfect, and long accustomed in the seruice of God.

Let thy hell therefore be, the displeasure and breach of the loue of God, and thy glorie, in carke and care, humblie to begge at the handes of God, that thou maist loue him, and neuer offend him, and that he will send thee whither soeuer he please, for as long as this is his holy wil, thou oughtest euery where to be glad and content, and thou shouldest rather feare hell for that end, because thou knowest all which dwell there, are the enemies of God, then for the auoyding of thine owne paine; So desire euerlasting glorie, but rather in that thou knowest that all which are there are Gods friendes, then wishing thine owne rest, quiet and happinesse. The chiefe cause therefore which ought to mooue thee to desire the eternall beatitude and blisse, is, because they which are in heaue^ are confirmed in grace, and sure neuer to offend God; so on the other side, thou oughtest to hate this present life, because it is reddie and prompt to giue thee occasion to that, wherein thou maiest offend God.
Finally to conclude. Penance, austeritie of life, or any other vertuous action, or good deede whatsoeuer, the onely meanes to make them worthelie meritorious of heauen, is to direct thine intention to doe all meerely for the loue of God. And to this end we read a notable example in the liue^ of the holie Fathers, of two deuout persons, the one being a yong man, the other verie
 olde,Herom. in vita Pat. whom the younge brother verie diligentlie serued, as a true seruant of God, whereat the deuil greatlie enuying, appearing vnto the old Father said: I am the Angel of God, by whose Commandement I am to tell thee some things vvhereof I am greatlie sorrie; knovv therefore that thy young brother, is the childe of perdition, and eternal damnation, and all the seruice vvhich he doth vnto God, doth profite him nothing towards the life euerlasting: and hauing said these vvordes departed. The old Father afterwardes whensoeuer he did see this young brother, did alvvaies presentlie sigh and mourne, which hee considering said: Good Father, what is the cause that you do thus grieue at the sight of me? VVho answered, vvhat the wicked angel had said vnto him, he replyed againe; be not sad, if it be Gods holie pleasure, that I should be damned, his will be fulfilled, and if he please, I shal be saued, I shal be saued. For I do not serue God for hope of the kingdome of heauen, or for feare of hell: but I serue him onely, for the exceeding great charitie and bountie vvhich he shewed towards me, and for the bitter paines which he suffred in his passion for me. If he vvill giue me the kingdome of heauen, hee can; if he will throwe me downe to hell, it is in his power also. The next night, the Angel of God came vnto the old Father, and made manifest vnto him that the other vvas the deuil, and said, that the yong brother had more merited by this his constancie in his loue, then by all the other good
 deedes which he had done in his life before. For that the foundation of all our merits is, that all our workes be done for the loue of God; For though thou shouldest endure neuer so manie labours, or shouldest do the most strict and harde Penance that might be, or exercise thy selfe in all other vertuous workes and good deeds, if thou shouldest not doe them, chiefely for the loue of God, they would all be of little value or moment, seeing that in the loue of God consisteth principally the merit of thy labours. Our sweete Sauiour to make this most manifest, alwaies when he made mention of labours, persecutions; or mortifications, commonly did adde the cause of merit to be, for his loue. As when he saide of the persecutions which were to be suffred of his Apostles, he added. Blessed are ye when they shal curse and persecute you for my sake.Mat. 5 Also of the contempt of the world, Euerie one that shal leaue Father and Mother,Mat. 19 house, or lands, for me, etc. And in like sort of Martirdome.Luc 9. He vvhich shal loose his life for me, etc. So in like maner in the 10. of S MATTHEVV, and in the 18. in the 18. againe of LVKE, and in the 21. and 15. of S. IOHN. In all those places, he sheweth, that the paines which we suffer, or the good deedes which wee doe, must be done for the loue of God himselfe chiefely, and not for hope of our owne commoditie or profit. But you may peraduenture obiect, that DAVID being a
 iust and holy man said,Psal. 118. I haue inclyned my heart to keepe thy iustifications for euer, for retribution and revvard. This reward was no other thing principally, then God himselfe, for whose loue DAVID did all his vertuous actions, and good workes, for in times past, God said vnto ABRAHAM,Gen. 15. I wil be thy great reward. Let vs therefore set this for our dailie principal end in our Penance, and all other good actions: and no doubt but he himselfe will be our reward in like maner, and place vs after this life, in his heauenlie kingdome with him for euer.


That the best, and most in Gods fauour haue not neglected to do Penamce. CHAP. IX.
THe wickednesse of this our miserable age, but specially in this our poore desolate and lamentable Countrey is such, that though sinne is now growne euerie where to the vttermost height of his pride, that possible almost can be, or euer was, yet notwithstanding, the chiefe remedie (next vnto Baptisme, vid. Penance) which God of his great mercie and loue, and desire of the saluation of poore sinners, had ordained, both for the cleansing of our sinnes, and obtayning his grace, and preseruation from sinn, is now either altogether conte^ned, or made
 so base account of, as though none did Penance, or exercised any austeritie, or holinesse of life, but onely such as had bene, or were notorious malefactors and wicked sinners, taking their special grounds from this, that whereas in manie places of the holie Scripture, where mention is made of grieuous sinnes, penance is ordayned there as a special remedie, both to purge sinne, and pacifie Gods wrath, and to win his fauour againe; as in S. Luk. 13. Eze. 18. Isa. 55 Ioel. 2. Eccl. 2. Actor. 3. and in the 18. also and 2. of the Apocalips. Yet as there are manie places declaring that Penance worketh the aforesaid effects, so is there no small number of testimonies, as well in the olde and new Testament, as also in the writings of auncient and holie Fathers of all ages, to prooue that not onely sinners, but such also as were the friendes of God, and cleane from any notorious crime, yea some that had but smal sinnes, haue notwithstanding bene careful to do penance. As first for example, the holie paterne of patience, blessed IOB, although his perfection and sanctitie was such, that God himselfe gaue testimonie thereof, saying, that There is not the like vnto him vpon earth, a man simple and right, and fearing God, and going from all euil. Yet notwithstanding this holy man, considering with himselfe,Iob. 7. that A mans life is but a vvarfare vpon earth, dailie fighting agains^ vice, vvhereunto from his youth he is prone and
 readie to runne vnto: said,Iob. 9 I did feare all my vvorkes, knowing that thou vvouldst not spare the offender. Wherefore the better to preserue himselfe from sinne, and to continue in the loue of God, he did not neglect or was slouthful in doing of Penance, but did exercise it with all austeritie, as he giueth testimonie thereof himselfe saying:Iob. 42 I knovve o Lord, that thou canst doe all thinges, and that there is nothing that lyeth hidden from thee, therefore I doe reprooue and reprehend my selfe, and do penance in embers and ashes.Ier. 1.
IEREMIE also, though in his mothers wombe, hee was sanctified and preserued from great sinne, yet was he so far from passing his life in pleasures, and casting away of Penance, that he did euen for other mens offences, shed such plentie of teares, that he said, VVho vvil giue vnto my head water, and vnto mine eyes a fountaine of teares, I vvil vveepe day and night, and bevvaile the slaine persons of the daughters of my people? If he did penance for to winne fauour for others, no man can iustlie thinke, that hee would be negligent to do the like for himselfe.
Likewise holie S. Iohn Baptist, who was so great in the fauour of God, that as you haue heard before, by the testimonie of our Sauiour, Amongst those that vvere borne of vvomen, there hath not risen a greater. Being a Prophet, yea more then a Prophett, who was not onely sanctifyed as
 IEREMIE, but so replenished with the holy Ghost, in his mothers wombe, at the comming of our blessed Ladie, newlie conceiued with the Sonne of God, that hee leapt for ioy therein: and though as he did grow in yeares, so did he encrease in grace, and was comforted in spirit, yet neuerthelesse did he fly the pleasures of the worlde, and retyring himselfe into the desert, did spend his time in such seuere penance, that as the Scripture recordeth,Mat. 3 His garments vvere Camels hayre, his food locusts and vvild honey.
Behold the flower of al Virgins, our most blessed Ladie, who though by the spiritual fauour and grace of God, being chosen to be the worthy mother of his onely begotten Sonne, was preserued both in her conception, birth, and in all her life, from all spots of any kinde of sinne, in such sort, that holy S. Augustine said,Aug. li. de natur. and gra. ca. 36 Theoph. and Euth. in 19. can. S Io. 5. that VVhen he vvas to speake of sinne, hee vvould not haue any mention of the boly Virgin. Yet notwithstanding, from the time that shee was three yeares olde, shee liued a most retyred life in the Temple, vntill the age of 14. where her life was a true paterne of religion and pietie, and no lesse example of perfect penance. For as SABELLI.Lib. 2. exempl. 1. 4. and l. 18 4. writeth, she deuided the day in this maner. In ihe morning for three hovvres togeather, she gaue her selfe to prayer and deuotion, from thencefoorth till Midday shee did reade the holy Scriptures. She contemned
 riches and wealth,S. Brig. lib. 1. Reue. 10. and Gal. lib. 11. de Archa. Catho. virt. c. 5. in so much that what she could get, she gaue to the poore, she tooke delight in nothing but in God, she withdrew her selfe wholly from idle discourses, and her bodie (of which the Angels had care) was obedient in all things to the soule.
S. ELIZABETH also, daughter of the king of Hungarie, and wife of the Lantgraue of Thuring,Surius in vita. though from her very cradle she began to feare and serue God, yet as she grew in yeares, so did shee continually encrease in deuotion, giuing her selfe dailie to all kinde of pietie and exercise of Penance: in such sorte, that though in her husbands time, she liued most holilie in the order of Penance, wearing hayre-cloath vnder her Regal apparrel, yet after his death, she tooke a stricter course of life, and casting away all secular glorie, clad her selfe exteriorly also with the humble habit of Penance; and she which was most noble of parentage, made her selfe most ignoble to the worlde, that she might be made noble in heauen: neither was she any whit defrauded of her expectation there, and in the meane time so highlie here in the fauour of God, that one day being in an Extasy (as mention is made in her life) shee did see heauen open, and sweete IESVS the Sonne of God, inclyning himselfe vnto her, saying. If thou wilt be vvith me, I vvill be with thee, and at no hand will be separated from thee.

Manie examples could I produce, to shew that such as were high in Gods fauour, did giue themselues neuerthelesse here to great austeritie of life, and dailie penance, which for breuity sake I omit, nothing doubting, but that those aforesaid, wil be sufficient to mooue any such as haue any loue to God, and desire to continue in his fauour, to imitate the maner of life, which the Saints and chiefe friends of God did lead in holie penance; and also plainely to see, how those are greatlie deceiued, which thinke that none doe Penance, or take the vertuous course of Religion, but such as had committed some heynous offences in the worlde.
Although one of the chiefe effects of Penance is, to cleanse vs of our sinnes and offences; yet God forbid that any man should haue so base a conceit of this so excellent a vertue, as to iudge that it were not exercised for any other purpose, which if it had bene so, these holy persons, which neuer offended grieuously, would not haue bene so careful to vse it; but they being singularlie illuminated by Gods holy grace, considering diuers other benefites to proceede from it, most carefully vsed it as a medicine and meanes, both to preserue them in Gods friendship, and to winne thereby greater fauour with him. Some also (though the friends of God) falling into some small offence, did make here satisfaction by Penance,
 for the paines due vnto those sinnes in Purgatorie, that thereby they might the sooner come vnto euerlasting glorie, knowing that God so hateth sinne, that hee leaueth not so much as a venial sinne (yea in his friends) vnpunished. How seueerly hee dealt with the Angels which were, in a certaine maner of his Court. S. PETER declareth, shewing that He spared not them,2. Pet. 2 but left them to be tormented in euerlasting fire. ADAM being the first man created to his owne image and likenesse,Gen, 3. and a most holie person, yet did he not leaue his offences vnpunished. Neither yet did he suffer the sinne of DAVID (though bound vnto him with so strict a bonde of friendship, that he said of him. I haue found a man according to mine owne heart.) to be without punishment. Most seuerely did hee punish in like sort the offences of MOYSES,Num. 24 though he dearely loued him. Yea such is his iustice, that though ZACHARIE, the father of IOHN Baptist, was so iust and careful in keeping all the Commandements of God, that S. LVKE giueth testimonie of him in his Gospel, that hee and his wife S. ELIZABETH, were both iust before God, and obserued his Commandements; yet God did not leaue his sinne (though it were bu^ venial) vnpunished. Who is he therfore, that can rightlie thinke his life to be so perfect and pure, that he needeth not to vse the best meanes that he can, to auoyde punishment
 hereafter, at the least in Purgatorie, by making some satisfaction here by Penance, especially if he duely ponder withall, that this present life is no other, but a vale of miserie, and time of penance, wherein whosoeuer hath well employed himselfe during this life, the hower of death (which vnto worldlings and louers of the world, of all terrible things is the most terrible) will be vnto him most ioyful, being the ende of all paines; and beginning of all felicitie; whereas if thou doest otherwise, thou must of necessitie make a longer delay, before thou come to that place of rest:Apoc. 9 for that, Nothing vvhich is defyled, shall enter into the kingdome of heauen. And though perhaps there may be manie, which haue not occasion, or so great need to spend their whole life in Penance for their mortal sinnes (from which by Gods grace they haue preserued themselues from their infancie) yet notwithstanding, few there are, or none at all, which haue not still occasion to doe some penance for their ordinarie offences,Prou. 14. wherunto, as the Wiseman saith, The iust man falleth seuen times in the day. For whosoeuer looketh well into all his actions, and dailie infirmities, shall soone finde, that hee seldome passeth manie howres, but that hee doth some waies offend, either wittingly, or not so vnaduisedly, either by culpable ignorance, or forgetfulnesse, or by thought or worde, or participating with others. For
 as the Prophet DAVID saith,Psal. 18. VVho doth know his offences? and therefore prayeth vnto our Lord to cleanse him from his hidden faults, and to spare him from other mens. The Apostle S. PAVL also, though he were confirmed in grace, yet notwithstanding did finde so great difficultie to do wel, and such promptnes and prones to do euill, that with great lamentation he said, The good vvhich I vvould I doe it not, but the euil vvhich I hate, this I doe: and therefore cryeth out: O I vnhappie man, vvho vvill deliuer mee from the bodie of this death? The meanes therefore that he vsed was, as he declared himselfe, to punish his bodie by penance, saying. I chastice my bodie, and bring it into subiection, for feare least whilst I preach vnto others, I become my selfe a Reprobate. If this holie Apostle, and vessel of election did, acknowledging his imperfections, and for his small offences, and suppressing of sinne, thinke such penance and punishment to be necessarie; who is hee that can thinke himselfe to be cleane, that he needeth not to doe penance, that hath any grace at all? For as S. GREGORIE saith.Greg. lib. 31. Mor. How much more light of grace any man hath, so much the more doth he know himselfe to be reprehensible and faultie. Let euerie one therefore, looke diligentlie into his owne life, and consider what he hath done, and if peraduenture thy sinnes should be but smal or venial, yet do not thou neglect to make satisfaction, and do
 Penance for them also, knowing that as the Ecclesiastike saith;Eccle. 19 S. Hierom. in Epist. Hee vvhich contemneth small things, by little and little falleth into greater. Wherefore Holie S. HIEROM saith, that A minde dedicated vnto Christ, ought aswel to take heede of little sinnes, as of greater. For an enormious sinne, doth seldome draw vs into hell, because the greatnesse thereof doth terrifie vs in such sorte, that it bringeth vs to the knowledge thereof, whereby it commeth to passe, that with great repentance, and amendment of life, we do penance for it; but other sinnes wherinto we doe slide often, and do not regarde them, those are they, I say, which with a swift course, do carrie vs to destruction, as detraction, murmuration, defamation, and vaine pleasures, of which forasmuch as they seeme vnto vs often but smal, therefore doing no Penance for them, by little and litle they drawe vs verie often into deadly offences, and consequentlie into hell: Wherfore though thy fault be so litle, that it is onely a venial sinne, yet must thou not therefore neglect by penance, to cleanse it, whereupon, worthelie saith S. AVGVST. Doe not thou contemne venial sinnes,Aug. lib. de decen. Cherd. for that they are litle, but feare them, for that they ar^ manie, and manie litle beasts may kill a man. The graines of the sand, are they not litle, yet if ouermuch sand be put into the ship, it will sincke her? How litle are the drop^ of water, doe not they neuerthelesse fill the
 riuers and courses of water, and cast downe houses? the destruction and ruine therefore comming by the multitude, is to be feared, though not the greatnesse.
Wherefore to conclude, for as much as little and venial sinnes (from whom none in these our daies are altogeather free) doe breed (as thou maiest plainely see, by the sentence of S. Augustine) so great danger, seeing that wee do fall dailie into them, as long as we carrie this corruptible bodie about vs, let vs be careful to make satisfaction and doe Penance for them: for if these aforesaid Saincts, which were so innocent, did notwithstanding, lead their liues in such sorte as you haue heard, in continuall Penance, much more then ought we, being defiled with sinne, to do it.
He therefore that is desirous to flye the paines of Purgatorie, and come with speede to enioy the happie sight of God, ought to passe here his life howe^lie in Penance, vntill the soule doth seperate it selfe from the bodie, to reape the fruits of her labour, and enioy for his small and momentarie paines, ^he great and inestimable ioyes in heauen: which I beseech God to graunt vnto vs ^ll, Amen.



An Epilogue vnto the Order of the Brethren and Sisters, of Penance.
EVEN as the goodnesse of almightie God is so infinite, that he turneth all things to the good of mankinde; so on the contrarie side, the malice of Sathan is so great, that there is not any thing so good, but that hee will bende all his forces to turne it into euill. Therefore as God by almes deedes bringeth foorth pietie; by Prayer, deuotion; by fasting, continency, etc. so quite contrarie, of all those doth the deuill draw foorth, Arrogancie, pride, and a kinde of slouthfulnesse to all other vertues. And as God, and the deuil are of contrarie willes, so do they bring foorth contrarie effects; For what is more opposite, then Arrogancie and Humility, but the deuil bringeth foorth Arrogancy of vertue, and God produceth Humilitie of sinne, and Penance from Humilitie, and from perfect penance grace and euerlasting glorie. The deuil on the other side, seeketh to procure from penance a contrarie ende, for by perswading a man, that penance soone purgeth sinne, and winneth heauen, allureth him to all kinde of vnlawful pleasures, vnder hope that he shal haue time sufficient to do penance, in the end, that so being led away with
 this vaine pretence, hee may defer his conuersion and amendment of life, so long, till at the last, by the iust iudgement of God, hee is preuented, and findeth now no place for Penance. And hauing vainely spent the pretious time, that God had lent him to gaine eternall glorie, falleth suddenly into euerlasting ignominie. But if a mans zeale be such, that the deuill seeth that he cannot hinder him from beginning to do timely and true Penance, then doeth he bende all his forces to incite and allure him to take such violent and accustomed courses therein, that following either obstinatlie, or indiscreetly his owne will, he looseth therby, both the greatest parte of his merit, and also manie times, growing wearie of the vertue of Penance, through his owne fault, returneth againe to his former vices and pleasures, in worse sort for the most part, then euer before.
Wherefore our holy Patron, humble S. FRANCIS, to preuent through his sincere zeale and charitie, the malice and enuy of Sathan, and to giue helpe, comfort, ayde, and direction to all, which thirsting after the saluation of their soules, haue an earnest desire to attaine to all the perfection, that their strength and estate will permit them, did by the inspiration of the holie Ghost, ordaine an order of Penance, setting downe therein instructions and rules, fit and conuenient for any estate, degree, or sexes that would
 vndertake it,S. Bona. ch. 3. in vita S. Franc. as the Seraphicall Doctor of the Church, S. BONAVENTVRE testifyeth; in the 3. chap. of the life of S. FRANCIS, saying that, Many of both sexes enflamed with the zeale of his preaching, seruing our Lord in the puritie of vvedlock, according to the forme receiued of the seruant of God did binde themselues with new lawes of Penance vvhose maner of liuing, the said humble seruant of Christ decreed to be named, the order of the Brethren and Sisters of Penance. For as the vvay of Ponance is common to all men that desire to ^ome to heauen, so in like sorte is this Order, admitting both the Cleargie and La^e people, Virgins and maried folke of both sexes; of how great merit it is in the sight of God, doth manifestly appeare by many miracles, vvhich some of them haue vvrought hitherto S. BONAVENTVRE.
Wherefore hauing set downe the necessitie and vtilitie of Penance, as it belongeth to all persons in generall, so now by the grace and assistance of almightie God, for the comfort and helpe of all those which haue vndertaken this Order; and for the encouragement of all such, as bending their mindes to the perfection of Penance, haue any desire to be admitted into this Holie Congregation, I wil endeuuor to set downe at large, the Rule of Penance, with the maner of the Institution, the Priuiledges, obligations; and perfections of it.



THE RVLE AND maner of liuing, of the Brethren and Sisters, of the third order of S. FRANCIS commonly called, of the Order of PENANCE, ordayned for those vvhich vvill liue holily, and doe Penance in their ovvne houses.
NICOLAS Bishop, Seruant of the Seruants of God, to his louing Sonnes, the Brethren, and welbeloued Daughters in Christ, the Sisters of the Order of Penance, as wel present, as to come, health, and Apostolical Benediction.

THe firme foundation of Christian Religion, is knowne to be placed vpon the mountaine of the Catholike faith, which the sincere Deuotion of the Disciples of Christ, burning with the fire of Charitie, did teach by the worde of careful preaching vnto the people of these Nations, which walked in darknes Which faith the Romaine Church doth hold and keep, whose foundation is not to be at any time mooued with any whirlewindes, nor waues of Tempests: For this is the right and true faith, without whose companie, no man is acceptable, and gratious in the sight of the highest. It is this faith, which prepareth the way of Saluation, and promiseth the rewardes and ioyes of eternal felicitie. And therefore the glorious Confessor of Christ S. FRANCIS, Institutor of this holy Order, shewing both by vvordes and example, the vvay to ascende vnto our Lord, did instruct
 his Children in the sinceritie of this faith, and would they should professe it, constantlie keepe it, and also fulfill it in workes, to the end, that they walking healthfully by the pathes thereof, might merit after the prison of this present life, to be made possessors and hayres, of eternal beatitude.



Of the Institution of this Order of Penance.
OVr holie and blessed Patrone, S. FRANCIS, being by a special fauour of God, called from the pleasures of the world, vnto a perfect holie life, and strict course of Penance, did not at the first, and presentlie after his renouncing of the worlde, institute any of his three orders, that is,In legend. trium Socior. in principio. of the Fryer Minors, otherwise called Gray Fryers, of S. CLAKE, and this of Penance, but did at the first take vnto himselfe a meane course of Heremetical habit: but not of any religious order, but onely an habit of Penance, which for his first two yeares he did weare: But in the second year, after his conuersion, from the worlde to God, taking vpon himselfe the forme of habit, which he gaue afterwards vnto his brethren, did in the yeare of our Lord 1206. begin his order of the Fryer Minors, and within the 6. yeare after, instituted the order of the Sisters of S. CLARE; and not long after,Specul. Minor. tract. 1. fol. 60 did ordaine for an order of life, for all persons, the forme and life of Penance, which he himselfe had exercised in his first beginning, though after a far more milde and easie maner.
S. BONAVENTVRE declaring the cause and meanes of the institution of this holie
 order of Penance, saith,Bon. in 4. part. legend maior. that After S. Francis had gotten his Religion to be approoued by Innocentius 3. he began to treat and reason vvith his brethren, vvhether it were better for them to conuerse amongst men, or to re^yre themselues to solitarie places. And whereby earnest diligence and feruent prayer, he had sought the good pleasure of Gods holy wil, and being illuminated and enlightned by Oracle of Super^al and diuine Reuelation, did vnderstand that he was sent by God to this end, that he should winne vnto Christ the soules, which the deuil did endeuour and go about to draw from him. Yet notwithstanding, such was his great humilitie, that he which had learned great things from his supreame maister, IESVS CHRIST, was not ashamed to seeke the knowledge of little things, from those which were inferiour vnto himselfe.
Wherefore Brother SILVESTER being a man of great sanctitie, and highlie in the fauour of God, S. FRANCIS hauing a great hope and trust in him, did sende Brother MASSEVS vnto him, to desire him, that hee would humblie beseech Almightie God, that he would vouchsafe to reueale and shew vnto him, whether it should more please his diuine Maiestie, that he should goe abroad and preach vnto others, or that hee should giue himselfe continually to prayer; hee sent him with the like message vnto blessed S. CLARE also; Brother MASSEVS
 going therefore presentlie vnto them both, and hauing declared what S. FRANCIS desired; brother SILVESTER, betaking himselfe presentlie vnto his prayers, and hauing receiued therein the diuine answere, signified the same with all speede vnto Brother MASSEVS, and said.. Tell Brother FRANCIS, that God hath not called him for himselfe, but that he should worke the good of manie soules. The like answere holy S. Clare did sende, whereby (as witnesseth the holy and Reuerend Father BERNARDINVS DE BVSTIS) doth appeare; that blessed S. Farcis,Ser. super illud exe nos reliq. omne. was induced to preach penance, by diuine inspiration (yea rather commandement) and so co^sequently to institute this holy order of Penance: for hauing receiued that answere, he was so inflamed with the zeale of charitie, that he rising vp presently, girded and prepared himselfe with so great feruour, to fulfill this new receiued commandement, that hee went his iourney so speedely, as if he had bene touched with the hand of God, and had bene indued with some extraordinary vertue and strength fro^ heauen, and walked with so great force of spirit, that he looked not, or premeditated whither, out by cha^ce, and as God would haue it, came vnto a certaine towne or Castle, called Canarij, in the vale of Spoleta, where he preached with so great zeale, the contempt of the world, and the dangers to liue therein, that all of that place, both men and
 women were so mooued with his preaching, that they were ready to leaue al, and desirous to follow him; but our holie Patrone S. FRANCIS said vnto them, you shall not so doe, but I will ordaine for your comfort and soules health, what you shall take in hand: and then presently he determined to institute this third ORDER, which is called Of the Brethren and Sisters of Penance: for his only intent in instituting this Order was, to incite all sorts of people, so to follow the examples of Penance, which our Lord and Maister did giue vs, both by word and example, that following him here in earth, they might raigne with him in heauen, whereunto S. FRANCIS desiring as much as lay in him, to bring al indifferently, without exception of Sexes, or persons: did prescribe this forme and order of Penance, as a singuler helpe to the attaining thereof; and forasmuch as his loue being equal vnto al, seeing that it was a thing impossible for him to set downe a Rule precisely for euery one, did ordayne it in such sort, that it should be made fit and co^uenient for al such, as with feruent zeal and affectio^ wold vndertak it; for, such is the loue of out Redeemer towards al persons, that he doth not require great matters at our hands,Matth. 11 or any thing aboue our power, but saith, My yoke is sweete and my burden light. Therfore S. Francis, as a true Imitator and follower of our Sauior, doth not here lay any heauy burthe^, or require any hard maters, aboue the power
 of the meanest, or least able, but setting downe, and ordeyning a forme and maner of life for the strongest, taketh such order for the weakest, that the Superiours may make it fit, and conuenient for their strength and calling, leauing onely for them, what with feruent loue to God, and alacritie both of bodie and minde, they may accomplish, whereof our Holie Father NICOLAVS 4. which liued and was assumpted to the gouernement of the whole Church of God, within 55. yeares, after the death of S. FRANCIS,1288. of whose orders being the General, and gouerned them fiue yeares together, had good meanes to vnderstand perfectly the Rule, giueth sufficient testimonie, when in the 18. Chapter of the Rule, which he collected together, and co^firmed it with his Apostolical letters; he saith. The Ordinaries of the places,Reg. c. 18 or the visitor, may for any lawful cause (vvhen they shal see expedient) dispence vvith all t e Brethren and Sisters, in abstinences, fastings, and other austerities.
The or e^y and chiefe Obligation, which remaineth vndispensed is, the Obseruation of the Commandements of God, which the Brethren and Sisters, by their vowe at their Profession, doe binde themselues a newe to obserue, though not vnder the paine of a double mortall sinne, if they should after transgresse any of them, as by Gods assistance, I will declare in the ende of this Rule more at large.

And in all other matters, S. FRANCIS requireth no more here in Gods behalfe, but what our heauenly Father requireth, saying; My sonne giue me thy heart.Prou. 23 What request could be more reasonable and easie to be performed? If God had required any thing which had not bene in our power, or aboue our possibilitie, wee might haue had some reason to say, O Lord how willingly would I fulfill thy demaund and desire, especially knowing that it is altogether for my good, but alas my infirmitie and weakenesse is so great, and my strength so little, that though my heart is good, and my desire not inferiour, yet wanting force to doe what thou wouldest, I am not able to fulfil what thou commandest.
But all occasion of such excuse is taken away, by this that he requireth, no more but our heart, wholly to be giuen vnto him, and not either lent or solde, They lend God their hearts, which serue him for temporall prosperitie, and when it is taken away from them, then do they with-draw their hearts againe, which before they had giuen vnto him, and of those did the Psalmist speake when he said, Hee vvill praise thee,Psal. 51. vvhen thou shalt doe well vnto him.
They sell their heart, which onely serue him for eternal rewarde, and are rather called Mercinarie persons, then louing children: For he which serueth onely for hope of rewarde, deserueth no other title, and
 looseth a great parte of his reward, for as S. Chrysostome saith most notably. Thy recompence shal be the greater, when thou labourest not for hope of gaine, but onely with loue, and a desire to please God aboue all.
They onely therefore giue their hearts to God, which out of their meere loue and affection to himselfe, do serue him; and this is the seruice which God requireth, when he said,Prouer. 23 My sonne giue me thy heart. Beholde the benignity and prudence of our tender Father, which knowing that loue is the loadstone of loue, seeketh by louing words to draw thy heart and loue to him, by shewing his particular affection towardes thee, saying: My sonne, my sonne, for whome I haue created heauen and earth and al things that are therein; my sonne, whom I haue made to mine owne image and likenesse; my sonne, vpon whom I haue appoynted one of my heauenly Court to attend; my sonne, vnder whose feete I haue made the beasts of the fields, the fowles of the ayre, the fishes of the sea, and al things subiect; my sonne, whom I haue preserued and fed fro^ the very first conception, vntill this present day. My sonne, I say for whose Redemption I haue giuen my onely begotten Sonne, and my selfe with all; my sonne, for whom the inheritance of the kingdome is prepared: Giue mee thy whole hearte therefore as freely, without any other more principall hopes. This doth our Sauiour teach and
 exhorte vs vnto, when he saith:Matth. 22 Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God with all thy heart.
He therefore which will haue God for his Father, and raigne with him in his heauenly kingdome, must shew himselfe here to be his true sonne, in giuing his whole heart, loue and affection vnto him, seeing that this is the onely thing which he demandeth for all that, which he hath already giuen, or hereafter promised in heauen, which hee sheweth himselfe to be most willing to giue, in that he asketh nothing for it, but what euerie one may easilie giue, of what degree, estate, or condition soeuer he be.
For the poorest man that hath not a penny, may giue his heart as wholly (and loue God as entirely) as the most rich and mightest king: So the foolish person that knoweth not a letter, may as well as the wise and learned, the weake and lame, no lesse then the strongest Gyant; and to conclude, the poore Sheepheard which feedeth his sheede, may giue his heart as freelie, and loue God, as deuoutlie, as the Pope or Emperour. For that it is a thing of such great necessitie, to giue thy heart wholly to God, and to loue him entirely that without charitie none can come vnto heauen. There are many in heauen, which were very poore, which were weake and ignorant, which could not fast or giue themselues to much prayer, yet notwithstanding,
 there is none there which want the nuptial garment of charitie.
But if peraduenture this demaund may seeme to be so hard, that it cannot be fulfilled, for that God demanding our whole heart, demandeth there withall our will, in such sort, that there is nothing left to our owne other affaires. Note I pray you, to the intent you may the more plainely see, that this demand is so easie and sweet, that any man may yeeld to the fulfilling thereof. This Commandement is affirmatiue, which bindeth alwaies, but not for all times, but in time of necessitie: Euen as the Precept of reuerencing our Parents, doeth not binde for alwaies, or at al times, but as occasion recuireth; so likewise thou art not bounde alwaies to loue God, but as time and place shal require. For God commandeth that when the world, the flesh, and the deuil, doe set any thing before thine eyes to be loued, then oughtest thou rather to loose any such thing, then thou shouldest neglect thy duety, or displease thy God. He therefore loueth God truely, which wil not for the loue of any Creature displease God, but in the meane space, whilst no occasion of sinne is offred, thou maist loue all other things ordinatly, as Parents, wife and children; yet notwithstanding, with this implyed condition, that thou hast thy soule alwaies readie to suffer any torture, torment, or damage, were
 it neuer so grieuous, rather then for any of them, it should offend mortally. Wherby thou maist easily see, the wordes of our Sauiour to be most true, when he saith,Matth. 11 My yoke is svveete, and my burden light. Whe^ he giueth thee leaue to loue all creatures, as much as thou wilt, so that for their loue, thou doest not aduenture to offend him.
I haue a little willingly digressed, and bene the longer vpon this point, for that the chiefest obligation, and most principal part of the Vowe of this holie order, is, to obserue the Commandements of God, which burden (if it may be so called) being light, there is no other point heauie; especially seeing that NICOLAS the 4. (which gathered, as I said, this Rule together) setteth downe in his Breue and Apostolical letters, that no poynt thereof bindeth, vnder the paine of a mortal sinne, vnlesse it be otherwise against the Commandements of God, or Ordinance of his Church, saying, in the last Chapter of the Rule. In all these aforsaid things, whereunto the Brethren of your order are not bounde by the Commandements of God, or Ordinance of the Church, we wil that ^one of them be bounde vnder mortal sinne to keepe them. What can be therefore more comfortable or easie then this Rule, where the obligations, labours and austerities are ^mall, and the benefits, priuiledges and perfections, are very great.



Of the benefits and Priuiledges of this holy Order of Penance.
THE great vtilitie and profite which procede from any labour or paines, make for the most parte the time to seeme short, and the labour litle, as appereth in IACOB,Gen. 29 who serued LABAM seuen yeares for his daughter RACHEL, which time seemed short, and to be but few daies, as the Scripture saith, for the greatnesse of the reward.
Wherefore whosoeuer doth duely consider the inestimable benefits, which the true obseruers of this order do get thereby; if will and strength concurring togeather, he should keepe all the fasting dayes, and austerities contained in this Rule, in as strict a maner as euer any hath, or may keepe them, yet notwithstanding he^ should haue iust cause to thinke, that they were litle and easie, in respect of the grea^ vtilitie and profite thereof. What greate^ benefite can any man expect or desire (remaining in this mortal life) then to b^ cleansed both from all his sinnes and paine due thereunto in Purgatorie, and to be restored to that state as it were of innocencie, wherin he was when he was first baptized?
 This inestimable benefite is granted in most ample maner at the first entrance of any deuout person (if it chance not that he himselfe putteth hinderance vnto the grace of God, which is then offred him) as appeareth plainely in the forme of Absolution, at the entrance into this holy Order, graunted by manie Supreame Bishops, as here followeth.




OVr Lord Iesus Christ, by the merits of his most holie Passion, absolue thee, and powre his grace aboundantlie in thee, and by his authoritie, and of the blessed Apostles, S. PETER and S. PAVL, and of the Supreame Bishops, committed vnto mee herein, and graunted vnto thee, do absolue thee from all excommunication, greater or lesser, from all sentence of suspention, and dispence with thee in all irrigularities, that thou hast any vvaies Contracted, and restore thee to the vnion and participation of all the faithful, and also to the holie Sacraments of the Church:
 and by the same authoritie, doe absolue thee from all vovves (if thou hast made anie) except of some approoued Religion, and from all sinnes, vvherevvith thou hast offended and trespassed against God, either by humaine frailtie, ignorance or malice, graunting vnto thee Remission of al thy sinnes, confessed, and of all other vvhich thou canst not remember, or hast forgotten, so far foorth, as the keyes of the Church doe extende in this matter: and by the said authoritie, I doe absolue thee of all the paines of Purgatorie, vvhich for thy sinnes hitherto done, thou hast deserued, restoring thee to the state of Innocencie, wherein thou vvast first baptized. In nomine Patris, etc.




Wherfore to obtaine this great benefit they which will vndertake this happie estate of Penance, must at their first entrance, make a General confession, which is the last that euer they neede to make
 for as daily experience teacheth vs,Gabriell Maria, Ord. Minor. in Reg. Annunciat. and also the Reuerend Father, GABRIEL MARIA, which composed the rule of the Annunciats, and was all his life time, after the confirmatio^ of that order, Confessor thereof; witnesseth that, The often general confession of a mans whole life, doth hinder more deuotion, then augment it. Therfore in religion, such general Confession ought to be made but once, vnles it should happen, that that which one had made before, should for some defects be not vaileable: yet notwithstanding forasmuch as it doth greatly helpe, both for the ouercomming of our daily imperfections, and increase in vertue, to make euery halfe yeare a General Confession, of al such notable things as may chance to happen in that time; it is counselled, though not commanded, aswell by the Fathers which haue had, and haue charge of this Order, as also in that deuout booke intituled, The Rules of good life, that euery one should make a general confessio^ of euerie halfe yeare, to the intent that hee which taketh the charge of their whole life, may see what victorie they haue made of vice, and daily imperfections, or how they haue proceeded in vertue, and vertuous actions, that their good deedes being as well knowne, as their euill, they may receaue encouragement to proceede, if they haue done them well, or if otherwise, they may be admonished how
 to doe them better, to the good of their soules; for it is not enough to doe a good deede, vnlesse it be well done, which assuredly will be the more meritorious and pleasing to God, if it be taken in hand by the aduice of a prudent Ghostly Father: especially seeing that in this our poore Countrey, the Brethren and Sisters cannot come vnto those monthlie Assemblies, which by the Rule is desired, where both by the vertuous examples of the whole Congregatio^, good admonitions of the Ministers of this order; with the pious and zealous exhortations, which ought to be then made, to encourage them in their happie course of Penance, they should be stirred vp to vertue, and withdrawen from vice.
The Visitor for these causes, is enforced the oftner to make his visitations, that thereby (to the vttermost of his power) he may endeauour, by the helpe of this halfe yeares continual general confession, to supply the place of all those aforesaid motiues, and persons, may be al way ready either by himselfe, or by the meanes and authoritie, which he had receiued from the Supreame Pastors of the Church, and his Superiours, to giue himselfe (if he may conueniently) or graunt his power vnto the Ordinarie Ghostly Fathers to giue (if neede require) vnto the Brethren or Sisters at the houre of their death, the generall absolution
 againe, both from their sinnes, and paines due thereunto in Purgatorie: which benefite and Priuiledge, though for diuers good considerations, manie Supreame Bishops haue graunted, yet specially for this that euery night before they take themselues to rest, by the Rule they are bound, not onely to make a diligent examination of their consciences, but satisfaction in like sort to their abilitie and oportunitie for the imperfections and offences of that day, if they chance to fall into any, either great or small.
For seeing that the vncertainty of mans life is such, that no man of whatsoeuer state, condition, yeares, or sexes, is assured of one halfe hower of Penance, our Holie Father S. FRANCIS, by the inspiration of the Holie Ghost, did for the great good,How wee ought to make this examination, see chap. 12. and comfort of the Brethren and Sisters, ordaine this dailie satisfaction to be made, to the intent that euerie one hauing done Penance, according to the qualitie of his offence, either in act or will, he might rest and sleepe in securitie; which otherwise, with assured repose of Conscience hee could not doe, not knowing in what dangerous estate he standeth, being assured that God will not forgiue sinnes, and the paines due thereunto, vnlesse the sinner ^hall first doe penance for them, by hearty contrition, and full purpose of confession, when he may conueniently, with satisfaction
 in like sort.Iob. 19 Wherfore holy IOB, considering how seuerely God punisheth sinners, said. I did feare al my works, knowing that thou wilt not spare the offender. That is, leaue his sinne vnpunished; for God neuer leaueth the offence without reuenge and punishment, for either the sinner must punish his owne offence in himself, by doing Penance, or else God in his wrath wil chastice it. Let euery one therfore choose one of the two, that is, either make choise to punish himselfe presently, or expect the seuere punishment of God, and when he is in the middest of his choyse, or ready to make it, let him remember wel the sentence of S. PAVL,Heb. 10 saying. It is a horrible thing to fal into the hands of the liuing God, whose mercie and goodnes is such now, that whosoeuer doth with sorrow for his sinnes, but meanly punish himselfe, God wil not inflict any other punishment for his former offences, as the Apostle S PAVL doth insinuate saying,1. Cor. 11. If we did iudge our selues, wee should not be iudged. In which words the Apostle doth manifestly shew, that the cause wherfore we are iudged and punished by God is, for that we neither iudge or punish our selues.
Worthily therefore doth S. Francis co^maund, that the Brethren and Sisters of this order of Penance, should euery night examine and iudge themselues, and being sory for their sinnes, doe some penance for them, knowing that God our most louing Father
 as one which is benigne and mercifull, doth not punish twice the same thing. For if thou wilt correct thy fault thy selfe, God will not punish it againe. Therefore holie DAVID being a man according to Gods owne heart, and rightlie knowing his diuine disposition and minde, said,Psal. 11 I haue done iudgement and iustice, therefore thou vvilt not deliuer me ouer, to those vvhich calumniate me. Wherefore if the Brethren and Sisters in examining duely euerie night their conscience do iudgement, and in making satisfaction, as the Rule requireth for their daily imperfections, do iustice whensoeuer they finde that any way they haue offended, they may assure themselues with the Prophet DAVID, that God will not deliuer them ouer, into the hands of those which shall calumniate them, that is, torment or punish them any more, after this life in Purgatorie. Wherby you may plainly see, how great is the benefite of this holie Order of Penance, and vpon what iust grounds it is freelie bestowed. As all men are, and would be glad, to enioy assuredly this great benefite; so must they be as diligent in the examination of their conscience dailie, and as willing to performe, that paine and pennance which (equitie and reason being placed as iudge) shall thinke the imperfections of that daye to haue deserued: Which labour wil seeme but small, if it bee compared vvith
 the greatnesse of the paines, which otherwise they must suffer; or with the excellency of the reward, which this little labour doth soone bring them vnto, after this transitorie life. Vnto this labour may be applyed the wordes of the Psalmist, saying, They shal labour alwaies, but yet they shall liue in the end.Psal.
See therefore and consider wel, how necessary for the good of our soule, is this daily examination of our conscience, and punishing in our selues our offences and imperfections; for though the paine be but small, yet is it great in the sight of God, who is so willing to accept of any good that we doe; that he doth accept of little things for great: as the Ecclesiastike most notably remarketh,Eccle. 29. and saith. The least thing doeth please thee for great: Which wee must needes confesse to be true, if we well weigh the greatnesse of the future paines, due vnto our sinnes, from which here litle labour deliuereth vs.
That great piller of the Church, holie S. AVGVSTINE,S. August. comparing the greatnesse of all the paines and torments of this life, with those that are after it, That no torment of temporal paine, can be compared vnto the euerlasting torments of the vvicked. But the sinner cannot auoide punishment, but that either he must be punished here, or in the worlde to come; for no sinne saith he, is left vnpunished. If therefote the
 poore sinner doe well consider, either the cruel and euerlasting torments of hell, or the intollerable paines of Purgatorie, though he should labour much in the examining of his conscience, and indure great paines in making satisfaction for his sinnes and imperfections: yet would al this seeme to be verie smal and light;Isodor. in Sin^. as ISIDORE plainely declareth saying; VVaigh vvell in thy minde vvhat paines soeuer of the world, vvhat griefes soeuer of torments, and all the bitternesse of griefes, and compare all this vnto hell, and all that thou shalt suffer vvill seeme but light, especially if thou adde hereunto, the greatnesse of the reward which thou hopest for hereafter.S. Chrys. For as CHRYSOSTOME saith: If the Tempests of the seaes seeme light to Marriners, if woundes vnto Souldiers, if colde vnto the husbandman, for hope of temporall revvarde, hovv much more then ought all labours and paines seeme light through hope of eternal happines? Which S. Gregorie affirmeth to be of that force, that it will make all labours seeme so light, that a man shall not feele them at all: For hope, saith he, of the eternitie doth so eleuate the minde, that it feeleth no euill which exteriorly it suffereth. Not without cause therefore doeth ISODORE say,Isidor. de sum. bon. that He vvhich doeth diligently meditate and thinke of the rewardes of the life to come, doeth ioyfully beare all the euils of this present life, for that the sweetnesse of the one
 doth temperate the bitternesse of the other: worthely therefore saith S. PAVL: The passions and sufferings of this time,m. 8. are not condigne to the glorie to come, that shall be reuealed in vs.
O howe miserable are they which will suffer nothing for the life euerlasting: and againe, how happie are the Brethren and Sisters of this order of Penance, which by that little paines, in examining, being contrite, and punishing their owne faultes; doe obtaine assuredly so great a benefite, as to be freed from future paines, and be absolued, both at their entrance, and hower of death also, from all their sinnes and paines due thereunto in Purgatorie, and be restored againe at their last hower, to that estate as it were of innocency, wherein they were, when they were first baptized, and after this transitorie life, to passe securely by Gods grace, to eternal glorie.
Note that I haue added in the end of euery chapter of the Rule, the Annotations and Ordinances, vvhich the Reuerend Father F. PETER GONZALES of Mendoza, Commissarie general in this our familie, of Cismo^tana, let be made for the Prouince of Spaine, that euery one may see, how this holy order is obserued now in Catholike Countries.



Of the maner of examining of those which will vndertake this forme of life. CHAP. I.




WE therefore prosecuting this Order vvith conuenient fauours, intending beninglie to the augmentation and encrease thereof, do ordaine, that vvhosoeuer is desirous to be admitted to keep this forme of life, must be diligently examined before their admission, of the Catholike faith, and obedience to the aforesaid Church, and if they shal firmely professe, and truely beleeue it, they may be safely admitted thereunto; yet diligent care is to be taken, that no heretike, or suspected of heresie, or yet defamed, be in any wise admitted
 to the obseruation of this Order of life. And if it should happen to be found out, that any such haue bene receiued, hee is to be assigned ouer vvith all speede, vnto the Inquisitors of heresie to be punished.

Commissarie Generall. Sismontanae.





CONCERNING this first Chapter, it is to be noted about the reception of any into this order, that they which are to be admitted, must be Catholikes and not suspected of Heresie: whose Fathers and Grandfathers haue not bene punished by the holie office of the inquisition for it, neither haue bene vitious scandelos people, nor infamous, or of bad life and opinion.
This information which is to be taken of such persons, must be committed to some graue religious person, of good iudgment, or to some of the Brothers of the said Congregation, (if the superiour thinke it conuenient) and this information must be made with all secrecie, hauing alwaies respect vnto the honour and good credit of those persons.

Although blessed S. FRANCIS, our holy Patrone, and paterne of al perfection, imitating in all things as neere as he could, the example of our most louing Lord and Redeemer, which was not an acceptor of persons, but offred mercie to all and euerie one a like: so he in like sorte desiring the good of all Christian soules, of what estate, degree or qualitie soeuer, did ordeyne this Rule for all sorts of people (as testifyeth S. BONAVENTVRE) without any exception, whether young or old, rich or poore,S. Bonav. in vita S. Fran. weake or stronge, of high degree or meane estate, whether Virgin, or Widow, maryed or vnmaried, Priest or Lay man, of what lawful trade or calling soeuer, yet notwithstanding he had, a diligent care, that a speciall regard should be had both of the firme faith and laudable commendations, and maner of life, of any person that was desirous to be admitted into this holy order of Penance. For considering that the first ground, and firme foundation of all happinesse, both in this life, and in the other to come, is the true beliefe and constant profession of the Catholike faith, the first thing which hee requireth, that with all diligence should be looked vnto, was the sinceritie of the faith of him which desired to be receiued into this Congregation, which ought to be such, that not onely he should firmely beleeue all such things, as our holy Mother the Catholike Church
 beleeueth, but seeing that the Apostle saith, that vvith the heart a man beleeueth vnto iustice, but vvith the mouth, Confession is made vnto saluation: He willeth that hee must also constantly professe the same faith, and with true humilitie, reiecting all obstinacie, and selfe will opinions, be obedient vnto the Catholike Church.
Moreouer, hee had so great a care for the conseruation of integritie in faith, that if any hidde^ or secret heretick, should haue bene receiued, or that any one of the^ should fall into heresie; that though in his first Order of Fryer Minors, he gaue a general Rule for his two others, that the loue betweene all his children should be such, that it should excel the very loue of the tender Mother towardes her naturall childe, saying: If the mother did loue and nourish her naturall childe,Reg. Min. 6. cap. hovv much more then ought euery one to loue and nourish his spirituall brother. Yet notwithstanding he did so much detest heresie, that if any of the brethren admitted, were but suspected of heresie, he willed that the other setting al particular loue aside, should for the loue of God, and preseruation of the members of his Church, with all speede assigne ouer the said partie vnto the Inquisitor of heresie to be punished. For seeing that the Brethren and Sisters of this order were in Catholike Countries exempted (in respect of their persons) from seculer Iurisdiction, by
 diuers supreame Bishops, as by Honorius 3 Gregorius 9. and Sixtus 4. Bonifacius 8.Ioh. Baptist. Confect. in Colle. Priuil. mend. fol. 460. Paul. 2. Constit. 1 Clem. 4. const. 9. Benedict. 11. Nicholaus 4. as appeareth by their Apostolicall Breues, they must therefore themselues be most diligent to see their particular offences amongst them condignely punished, but specially heresie, or the least suspition thereof, seeing that one of the principal things which is required in those which are desirous to be admitted, is sincerity and constancy in the Catholike faith. So in like sort, no person that is defamed, or hath bene iustly reprehended or punished by publike iustice, can be admitted; for that the Reception of any such person (though now penitent) which is but priuate, yet his offence hauing bene publike, would breed scandal to the whole order, and discouragement vnto such as might be desirous to be thereof, thinking that if the Congregation were so perfect as they ought to be, they would not admit so vnperfect a person, which hath bene defamed, into their company. It was not therefore without iust cause, that in the olde law it was strictly forbidden, that he which had any defect or spot, should not offer bread vnto God, neither might come vnto his Ministerie, if he were blind or lame, or had any other notable marke or defecte. But if that euery one which shal haue any filth or spot, may not offer bread vnto his God; much lesse then ought he to be dedicated
 vnto the seruice of God in this holy Congregation, which is defiled and spotted with heresie, or any notable infamie.
But if any person that had bene anie waies infamous in the world, and being demanded thereof, by him which receiueth him, either to probation or profession, should fraudulently hide it, notwithstanding that he should be thereby receiued and professed, yet by Apostolical authoritie, he may be lawfully expelled, least that an infected sheepe, should corrupt the good fame of the whole flock of our Lord, and be an example vnto others.


Artic. 2.Hovv they are to be receiued, vvhich vvill enter into this Order. CHAP. II.




WHen any would enter into this Fraternitie, let the Ministers, deputed for the Reception of such persons, search diligently and consider his office, state and condition, and plainely declare vnto him
 the burden of this fraternitie, and chiefly concerning the restitution of other mens goods, which being first done, if he please, let him be cloathed after this maner; and as for other mens goods (if there shal be any in his custodie) let him endeauour to make satisfaction in readie money, or giuing sufficient securitie, and notwithstanding let him take heede to reconcile himselfe to his neighbours. Al which things being accomplished, after a yeares space (if he seeme to them to be fit) let him (by the aduise of some discreete Brethren) bee receiued in this maner, that is. That he promise that he will obserue and keepe all the Diuine Precepts, and also that he vvill make satisfaction (as is conuenient) for the transgressions and faults, vvhich hee shall commit against this maner of liuing; vvhen, and according
 vnto the Visitors vvill, hee shall be called thereunto; and let this promise there made by him, be set downe in vvriting by a publike hand. Let no man be otherwise receiued by the said Ministers, vnlesse it should seeme fit vnto them: the Condition of the person, and his instancie being discussed vvith iudiciall consideration. Moreouer we defyning doe decree, that no man after his entrance into this fraternitie, may be able to go out againe to returne to the vvorlde: yet not vvithstanding, he may haue free passage to any other approoued Religion, But vvomen hauing husbandes, may not (vvithout their leaue and consent) be admitted to the companie of this aforesaid fraternitie.

Commissar General. Cismon.






If Carpenters and Masons, which are to build a house for a Prince, will not accept of all maner of wood and stone, but are carefull to make choyse of such as is fit for their worke; farre greater reason then haue they which are to build a house and holy Congregation for the Prince of all Princes,Prouerb. 8 our Sauiour Christ (whose delight is to be with the sonnes of men) to make choise of such persons as are fit for that building: wherefore the auncient Fathers in times past, would not receiue all into Monasteries, but onely such as were fit and endued with good maners and sanctitie of life. For as one scabbed sheep, may infect a whole flocke, so one of euill maners and life, may trouble the whole company, and confraternitie, for that one IONAS alone was cause that all the Mariners in the shippe, were in great danger of drowning. Not without iust cause therefore did S. FRANCIS ordayne, that great care ought to be taken to make choyse of such onely as were both for faith, fame, conscience, and charitie, fit for this Order: wherefore hauing in the former Chapter declared, that none but such as are of firme faith, and good fame, can be receaued; so now in this chapter, he sheweth plainely that such are only to be receiued, which through a good conscience, are ready to restore vnto euery one his owne, and with perfect charitie to reconcile himselfe vnto his neighbours.
 And to that end, giueth a speciall charge vnto the Ministers deputed for the Reception of such persons, that they should search diligently, and consider his office, state and condition: likewise, according vnto the forme of the Rule, he must examine him of those conditions following, that is, First of the Catholike faith, if he be a faithful Catholike, suspected of no error. Also of his obedie^ce to our holy Mother the Church. In like sort, if no suspitio^ of heresie, if he be not infamous, or noted with any notable infamy. Also whether he be not in debt, or haue other mens goods in his handes, which he is not able to make present restitution of, or make satisfaction for in ready money, or giuing sufficient pledge; or whether he be in perfect charitie with all men; and reconciled vnto his neighbours: For in whomsoeuer any of these defects are found, he cannot by the Rule be receiued or admitted vnto this Holie Order.

Concerning the second Chapter.
IT is to be noted, that after the yeare of Probation is past,Co^miss. Gen. they must make a new information and examination of the same Religious person; of his good and holie conuersation in this maner of liuing, and of his good proceedings, and finding him capable, and that there be hope that he wil
 serue our Lord in this Religion, then by the councel of some Fathers of the Conuent, and Brothers of the Order, they may admit him to make his profession, all the Conuent being assembled together in the Chapter house (or in the Church if it be a woman) the Prelate or Superiour hauing made first a profitable and pious exhortation to that purpose, of what he is to promise, and what is promised him And to what hee is bound by his profession, then shal he which is to make his vowe saye. (the Superiour helping of him thus)




I Brother N. do promise to God, and our blessed Ladie, and to our holie Father S. FRANCIS, and to all the Saincts in heauen, that all my life I wil keepe the Commandements of God, and liue in chastitie as long as I change not my estate (and if he be married) that he will liue in coniugall chastitie, and that I will be obedient to receaue the penance which shall be giuen me, by the minister and superiour of this Order, for the transgressions comitted against this maner of life.






Article. 2
LEt the Minister plainely declare vnto him, the burdens of this Fraternitie.

If after diligent examinatio^, the Minister do finde a hinderance to this Reception, then must he make some declaration vnto him (before he receaue him vnto Probation) of the benefits which he is to reape by his admission into this holy Order, and the burde^s which he is to vndergoe therein. Many persons heareing mention to be made in the Rule, of burdens of the Fraternitie, and not seeing any one point of such weight and difficultie to be plainely set downe therein: may thinke those burdens here mentioned, to be some secret constitution, and heauy yoke, which euery one is not able to beare. I thought it therefore not amisse, before I proceed any further, in the declaration of the benefites of this Congregasion, here to set downe a summarie of all the burdens, and obligations of the Rule, and constitution of this Order; to the intent that whosoeuer are desirous to enter into this Faterternitie, may plainely perceiue, how easie they may beare the burdens thereof, and performe al such things, as any maner of waies they are bound to accomplish and obserue.



Here followeth a summary of all the burdens and constitutions of this Order, wherein the whole effect of all the Chapters of the Rule is briefly expressed.
FIrst they are bound firmely to belieue and professe also the Catholike faith and obedience to the said Church,Reg. 1. ch. and to expell out of the Fraternitie all heretikes, or suspected of heresie, or defamed persons.
Secondly, they must vse all diligence,Chap. 2 in the due obseruation of all the diuine precepts, and to make restitution of other mens goods, if they chance to haue any in their custodie, and be in charitie with all persons, to reconcile themselues to their neighbours, and must not (after their profession) goe out of this Order, vnlesse it be to ascend to some other of higher perfection.
Thirdly,Chap. 3 to weare either their apparrell of grey colour, or else vnder their accustomed attyre, a white habite, or thinne Petticote of linnen or wollen, but therein no rigor must be vsed, but that the Superiors dispose it according to the qualitie of the persons: and must (if they may conueniently)
 be buried in their habits, in the Churches of the Fryer Minors, that as in their life they were as members conioyned to the said Order, communicating with them in all spirituall graces and fauours, that now their bodies should not be separated from them in their death.
Chap. 4Fourthly, they must absteyne from vnhonest banquets, Courts and daunces, or from giuing any thing vnto Stage-players, and sights of vanitie. If the time or place were such, that it were publikely knowne, that though they liue abroad in the world, yet were retyred from the vanitie and pleasures thereof, then were they bound to shew how much they contemne the vanities, not to giue so vainely any thing, and to hinder in what they might, their seruants also, of whom they ought to haue a speciall care: but now the case being otherwise, they are not bound to doe but as they shall finde it conuenient. So likewise for wearing of weapons: For the sword is as it were a common ornament, and is permitted vnto those with whome is dispensed in the habit.
Chap. 5Fiftly, they are bound to absteyne from flesh the Wednesdaies, Frydaies and Saturdaies (and they which liue in the Monasteries the Mondaies also) except infirmitie, weaknesse, or some other reasonable cause doe otherwise require. They must (the sicke, languishing, trauellers, and laborers
 excepted) content themselues with dinner and supper, and before each refection, say one Pater noster, if no other Catholike grace be said, and must repeate the same againe with Deo gratius, after both repasts, and if they forget so to do, either before or after their meals, they are bound to say three Pater nosters for that fault. In the Lent of S. MRRTIN, they must fast both Moundaies, Wednesdaies, Fridaies and Saturdaies, and from the first Sunday in Aduent, vntil Christmas, the Tuesdaies and Thursdaies in like sorte, and must keepe Shrouesunday and Tuesday with one Refection, according to the diet of the companie, eating onely of one or two dishes, the least curious or daintie. They must fast all the Frydaies of the year, vnlesse Christmas day doe happen thereon, which is excepted. From Allhollowtide vntill Easter, they must fast the Wednesday also, and all other fasting daies obserued by the Church, and in all those last aforesaide daies, they are to abstaine from egges and cheese, if they may conueniently. But the Minister or Visitor, may for any reasonable cause (when they shall see it expedient) dispence with all the Brethren and Sisters in al these fasts, abstine^ces, or other austerities, and insteed thereof, to enioyne them to say some other prayers, either the Litanies, or 15. Pater nosters and Aues, on those dayes wheron they cannot conueniently
 fast. Euery one also according to his strength, condition and calling, must labour dailie and doe something to auoide idlenesse.
Chap. 6Sixtly, at the Feasts of the Natiuitie of our Sauiour, of his Resurrection, and Pentecost, they must make euen, as much as they may, with God and the world, and at these three times, they are bound by the Rule to receaue, but by the custome and constitutions of the Order, they must receaue once in fifteene dayes at the least, if they may conueniently.
Chap. 8Seuenthly, they must (vnlesse that sicknesse excuse them, saye daily the 7. Canonical howres (Mattins, Prime, third, sixt, ninth, Euensong and Compliue) either of the Breuiarie, or of our blessed Ladie, or at the least to say for Mattins, 12. Pater Nosters, and for each other 7. with Gloria Patri, and in the end of Prime and Compline, to say the Apostles Creede, in profession of their faith, the Psalme Miserere, for the whole state of Gods Church, and De profundis, with the prayer, Deus venia largitor, for al Christian soules: particularly for those of this Congregation. Moreouer the Comissarie of the whole Order, by authoritie receiued from the Generall Chapter A.D. 1606. doth charge euery one of the^ to say euerie daie, the Corone of our blessed Ladie, or the third part of the Rosary, quietly and deuoutly, fixing their minde
 vpon some of those misteries, which the deuout serua^ts of the blessed Virgin do vse to meditate vpon in the Church. In Aduent and Lent, to heare Mattins also in their own Church or Chappel, if conueniently they may: and if through negligence they omit to say their houres in due time, they must say three Pater nosters for that fault.
Eightly,Chap. 9 they must alwaies stand as well prouided for death as they may, both by making their willes within three moneths after their entrance, and setting in order their goods.Chap. 1 And also by making co^tinually, present satisfactio^ for al such faults as by the nightly examination of their consciences (which they are specially bounde to make verie diligentlie) they shall finde they haue committed that day, and must be careful to abstaine from all oathes, except in cases of necessitie; and if they perceaue that in the day time they haue (by vsing manie wordes) vnaduisedly sworne, or in any other thing else, done otherwise then they ought to haue done, they must foorthwith say, three Pater nosters, or do some other penance, according to the greatnesse of the fault.
Ninthly, In the time of health,Chap. 13. they must euerie one heare Masse dailie (if with conueniencie they may) and though they cannot now make here these monethly publike assemblies, which the Rule requireth; yet must euery one exercise and
 doe as well as he can, most parte of those things for which the Assemblies were instituted, that is, euery moneth to read or heare the Rule read, to get some exhortation vnto Penance to be made or otherwise to be read some Sermon or Treatise of Penance, to get a Masse to be said for the comfort of all the Brethren and Sisters, liuing; or for the soules of them departed, and to giue them some small almes, or allot something out, to be reserued for the reliefe of the sicke, or poore Brethren and Sisters.
Chap. 14.Tenthly, they must needes exercise the workes of mercie, by visiting the sick brethren and sisters, relieuing their wants, assisting at the burial, if they may conueniently, and praying for their soules departed; saying within eight daies after the departure of any of them (if they haue notice thereof) euery Priest a Masse, the learned the whole Dirige; the vnlearnnd 50. Pater nosters, adding to the end of euery Pater noster, requiem aeternam. And the selfesame is to be said of euery one of them, for the comfort of the Brethren and Sisters, liuing and dead, at three seueral times in the yeare, that is, immediatly before Ashwednesday, within the Octaues of the blessed Sacrament, and a little before the feast of our holie Patrone, S. FRANCIS.
Eleuenthly. Though our Countrey now not being Catholike, the Brethren and
 Sisters cannot assemble all together at the common visitation, yet notwithstanding for reformation of whatsoeuer might be amisse in this fraternitie, and to yeeld vnto euery one of the Brethren and Sisters, what comfort and helpe may be conuenient, the Visitor must now visit euery particular place and person twice in the yeare, at which times euery one ought to renewe the promise which they haue formerlie made, and is bound to informe him what helpes he himselfe desireth, and what in his conscience,Chap. 19. he thinketh to be worthy of Reformation in any one whatsoeuer, that the incorrigible persons after their admonition, may be iustly expelled.
Twelfthly,Chap. 17. All the Brethren and Sisters are bound to auoyde,Chap. 10. to the vttermost of their power, all strifes among themselues, and by the helpe of the Ministers of the Fraternitie, endeauour to keepe peace both amongst themselues, and with all other persons besides.
These are the chiefe bonds and obligations which our Holy Father (as you haue heard in the Rule) called Burdens. Wherfore out of a tender care that he had of these his children, he ordained that the Visitors,Chap. 18. or their Ordinarie Ghostly Fathers by him appoynted, may for any reasonable cause (when they shal see it expedient) dispence with all the Brethren and Sisters, in all these aforesaid abstinences, fastings,
 and other austetities; and at the first entrance, or at any time after, ordeyne all these things in such sorte as shall be most fitting for the strength, qualitie, and condition of the partie, which either is, or hath a desire to be of this Fraternitie. And for the greater comfort of all persons, and to take away all occasion of any maner of scruples, he declareth, that it is not his wil to binde them to obserue any thing conteyned in this Rule, vnder the paine of a mortall sinne, vnlesse they are otherwise bound thereunto, by the Commandements of God, and Ordinances of his Church, but bindeth them only to obserue these things vnder such temporal paine, as the Visitor shall enioyne them in penance, for their transgressions, which they are bound with prompt humilitie to accept of; and to study to accomplish and fulfill it effectually. In which words, he sheweth plainely in conclusion of the Rule; how prompt, ready and humble their obedience ought to be vnto the visitor, in all such things, as co^cerne the Rule, and good of the Congregation, repeating here againe in the end,Chap. 2. that which he had set downe, in the begining of the Rule: where declaring the maner of the receptio^, vnto profession, after the year of their probation, sheweth that they must promise (by vow) (for that this promise is the vowe, which they make at their profession) to obserue al the diuine precepts, and to make co^uenient
 satisfaction, for their transgressions and faults, against this maner of life, whe^ according vnto the Visitors wil, they shall be called thereunto. He had this Obedie^ce in such Recommendatio^, and held it to be so necessary for the confirmation of the Order and Congregation in all holines, fame, and good name, that whosoeuer should goe against it, and be incorrigible and disobedient, he commandeth in the 16. Chap. of the Rule: and for the better confirmation thereof, repeateth againe in the 19. that after thrice admonition, the Visitor should cast him out of the companie of this Fraternitie, and publish it afterwardes in the Congregation, thereby shewing that euery one ought so to bende all his endeauours, to the obtaining of that heauenly reward, which is promised for their labours, that they should not suffer any one amongst them, which either by worde, or example, should be any hinderance vnto them.
But it happeneth many times, that euen as the Explorators or Spies (which the children of Israel, sent to discouer the lande of promise, which by Almightie God was promised vnto them) being timotous and feareful persons, seing some thing that seemed through their cowardlines, to be matter of difficultie; did endeauour to discourage the Israelites, from attempting that iourney, by telling them that the
 difficulty of the way was great, the enemies stronge Gyants, their fight hard, and doubtfull, so many indeuout persons, and some inexperienced Ghostly Fathers also in matters of perfection, doe no lesse goe about sometimes to discourage many vertuous persons, and deuout children of God, from vndertaking this happy course of Penance, which leadeth to that heauenly Countrey, and happie home of endlesse happinesse, alleadging many supposed difficulties; as the breeding of scruples in their timerous consciences, the endangering thereby of their health, and hinderance from other necessary affaires, and want of strength and abilitie to goe forward, in such sort, and such a course of life, where they may see so many burdens, obligations, and paineful bondes; as to fast, pray, rise earlie, often to goe to Confession, and as oft to receaue that most holie Sacrament of the Aultar, to visite the fick, relieue the poore, bury the dead, auoyde strife, seeke peace, depriue themselues of sensual delights, refraine from oathes and vaine wordes, make dailie satisfaction for their offences, and doe such other acts of Penance, as are of themselues painefull. But little do they see or consider as men altogether in expert, either of the inwarde feruent affection, of deuout seruants of God, where with all their hearts being wholly enflamed, doe little feele and easily
 beare these light burdens, or the manifolde benefites, which proceeding from these burdens themselues, doe render all these actions, most sweete and pleasant to be done, nor yet the greatnesse of the rewarde, promised for the accomplishing of them, which being no lesse then the life euerlasting, doe make the deuout Brethren and Sisters, not onely to be most prompt, ready and diligent in keeping of all Gods Commandements, as by vow they binde themselues thereunto, but also it prouoketh them with ioy and delight to doe al maner of good workes, not onely in those which are commanded by Gods lawes, but such also as are onely commended vnto their free will by his Counselles, being incited thereunto, by these holy ordinances of S. FEANCIS, which by the inspiration of the holie Ghost, did ordeyne them for their comfort, both here and euerlastinglie.
Wherefore as IOSVA and CALER did giue encouragement vnto the children of Israel to goe forwarde to the lande of promise by protesting, not onely that the Countrey was beautiful and fruitfull, but also that the winning and possession thereof, would be both easie and agreeable to their wishes. So by Gods grace, and holie assistance, I will (imitating the example of IOSVA) endeauour to giue encouragement, vnto deuout soules, and
 vertuous persons (the louing children of God) to go forward vnto that land of promise, and holie Order of Penance, by declaring, that not onely it promiseth and yeeldeth great profit in this life, to those which vndertake it; and far greater afterwardes, vnto those which obserue it, and perseuer therein, but also that the possessio^ and keeping thereof, will in like sort be easie, and agreeable vnto their wishes, seeing the great benefite, which proceedeth from euerie one of these bandes, which seeme to be burdens.
As concerning therefore the profite which is promised vnto this holy Congregation, and reaped therein; it is so exceeding great, that hardly can their estate and calling, expect greater, either for this present momentarie life, or for that other, which neuer shall haue ende, as appeareth plainely, in that most auncient forme of their Profession, where the Prelate or Visitor, which receaueth them thereunto, giuing that General Absolution (which the Supreame Pastors of the Church haue granted vnto them, at their first entrance) doth absolue them, not onely from their sinnes, but from the paines also of Purgatorie, due vnto all those, which vntil that time they may haue committed, restoring them (if they themselues do not put a barre and let vnto grace) vnto that state of Innocency, wherein they were first baptized,
 that being freed and cleansed from al sinne and paines due thereunto, they may with al alacritie serue God continually, in all holinesse and sanctitie; for to this end is that great grace imparted vnto them, that being th^ough the merits of Christs passion, and power which he left vnto his Church, deliuered from the Tiranny of Sathan, which raigneth ouer sinne, now (according to that worthy sentence of holy ZACHARIE) Being deliuered from the handes of our enemies,Luc. 1. should vvithout feare serue our Lord in Holinesse, and Iustice before him, all the daies of our life: Euen as in this sentence, holie ZACHARIE dooth declare three speciall great benefits, which the comming of our sweete Sauiour, brought vnto vs, which are, first, That vvee might be deliuered from our enemies; secondly, that we might serue God in Iustice and Sanctitie: and thirdly, that vve might serue him all the daies of our life: So by these three benefits may be gathered, and plainely perceiued, what profite this Order yeeldeth vnto the obseruers thereof: when as concerning the firste benefite, that is, Deliuerance from our enemies: You see a little before, howe at their entrance, they are deliuered, not onely from sinne (the greatest enemie of the soule) but also from the paines due thereunto.
And as touching the second: that is,
 To serue God in Iustice and holinesse. All the constitutions of the Rule, tende onely to yeelde them that profite, aswel by forbidding all such pleasures and actions, as might be any hinderance thereunto, as by exhorting them to practize all such vertues, as may any waies h^lpe therein, and commanding in like sorte, iustice to be exercised, in punishing in them selues, their dailie offences, that satisfaction being made for what they haue offended, they may the better serue God in all holinesse. Neither is the third benefite here left out, of Perseuerance in Gods seruice, but for that ende is ordeyned, that they may not leaue this Order, to returne vnto the world againe, but to stirre them vp the more to Perseuerance therein, all the daies of their life, vpon hope of greater reward: he which doth receiue them to Profession, promiseth them in Gods behalfe, and vpon his firme Ordination (if they obserue those things) the life euerlasting.
And for the better obteyning thereof, are not onely ayded all their life time, in all their pyous actions, by the merits, prayers and good deedes, of all the deuout persons of their owne Order, and pertakers in like sorte, of all those of the Fryer Minors, and of their spiritual graces, fauours and indulgences also, but at the houre of death, receaue most singular comfort, being then by priuiledge of the Order, to receaue
 the same absolution againe, which they did at their entrance, to the ende, that as they did begin their spirituall life in innocencie, so likewise they may passe out of this rransitorie life, in the same state, that being clad with that garme^t they may haue free entrance into the Court of heauen, to receaue their euerlasting ioy, for those their transitorie paines.
But for asmuch as manie persons doe more looke vnto that which is present, the^ what is to come hereafter, for the comforte and satisfaction of all partes; I will here by Gods holy assistance, set downe, what benefite proceedeth from euery one of those bondes, of the Rule, which may seeme to some to be burdens.
And first to beginne with Obedience, the companion of Humilitie, the groundworke and foundation of all vertue, which is the first and last Ordinance of the Rule and burden thereof (if it may bee so vnproperly called) from this vertue proceedeth so great a benefite, that it addeth both double merit vnto their Pennance, and workes of pietie (which otherwise they ought to exercise of themselues) and maketh them also to be more acceptable to God, being cloathed with double beautie: the one, taken from the goodnesse of the worke it selfe, the other from the vertue of Obedience, whereby it is done. Therefore, in the chiefe ground and firme foundation
 of this holy Order, that is, firme beliefe, and constant profession of the Catholike Faith.Chap. 1. S. FRANCIS requireth this holy obedience vnto the saide Church: whereby, as by the constant profession of the Catholike faith, they doe so much please our Sauiour Christ, that he will acknowledge them for his children, before his Father; and therefore saith himselfe: He that shall confesse me before men, I will confesse him before my Father, which is in heauen So by their obedience vnto the Cathol^ke Church, they rest in great securitie, to remaine alwaies in true faith, for that our Sauiour did promise, to sende the Holie Ghost, to teach his Church all veritie, and to remaine with her, vnto the worldes end.
Secondly, they which fulfill this Obligation, wherein they binde themselues by vowe, to obserue the Commandements of God, stand thereby, in assured hope of the kingdome of heauen:Fulg. de fid ad Pet. cap. 3. for that as FVLGENTIVS saieth: To euery one that vovveth vnto God, and rendereth that vvhich he hath vowed, God himselfe vvill giue the revvardes of his heauenly kingdome, which he hath promised.
Matt. 19.Wherefore they which keepe Gods Commandements (seeing, that hee hath promised vnto such as keepe them, the kingdome of heauen) may demaund it at his handes, and God (according as holy
 S. AVGVSTINE defyneth it) is bound to giue it to a due debter.Aug. epist. 105. and lib. de gra. and l arbit C. 8. and lib. 4. contra Iuli. C. 3. 2. Tim. 4. Wherefore S. PAVL calleth it the Crowne of Iustice, for that it is due, by the rigor of Iustice, vnto them which keepe the Commandements of God, because he of his meere liberallitie, hath promised euerlasting blisse vnto those which keepe them, and do deserue it worthelie. That restitution also which they are bound to make, deliuereth them from that sinne, which otherwise would not be remitted: For as S. AVGVSTINE saith, The sinne is not forgiuen, vnlesse that vvhich is taken avvay, be restored.
Thirdly, The ashe colour, or graynes of apparell, is to put them in minde, that as from earth they came, so to durt and ashes they must returne: and that hauing alway that colour of death before their eyes, they may thereby be mooued to dye vnto the vanities of the worlde, that they may liue vnto God; or by the whitenes of their habits, (or petticotes) they may be stirred vp to be mindefull of that brightnes, and innocencie of life, which their calling requireth, that their conuersation may be according vnto that which their habit signifieth: for this more mortifyed, and certaine kinde of Religious Habite, ought to seeme as as a bridle, to pull them backe from doing any vnciuil or vndecent deed; and by their burial in their Churches
 of the Fryer Minors, they reape so great a benefite, as to be for euer partakers of all the Suffrages and prayers, which are made for all those which are buried in their Monasteries.
Fourthly, by abstaining from banquets, Courts, daunces, and other vanities, they are made the more apt to receaue diuine comforts, and heauenly consolations, which God doth neuer impart vnto those which giue themselue vnto worldly pastimes and pleasures: God did not giue his Manna from heauen, vnto the children of Israel, as long as there remained any of the meale of Aegypt amongst them.
When God would speake with Moyses, he lead him to the high mountaine of Sinay.Exod. 19. Neither did the Angel of God appeare vnto ELIAS, but when he was out of the Cittie, and free from humane conuersation: Wherfore the auncient Monkes heretofore knowing,Sulpi. Sene dial. 1. ca. 12. that hee which was much frequented of men, could not be of Angels also; their studie was alwaies to withdraw themselues from the familiaritie of the world, that they might the more freelie attende vnto God and themselues: When our Lord findeth our heart free, and our soule separated from worldly pleasures, then doeth he reueale vnto it, his diuine secrets, whosoeuer therefore did rightly know what great losse he suffereth, when he giueth himselfe vnto these vaine
 affayres, would without all doubt thinke it no burden, but finde it to be a great benefite to flye them, that he may ioyne vnto God alone. And seeing that silence and solitude, are the strongest walles of deuotion, they therefore which will either get comforte in their deuotions, or not loose that feruour, which they haue gotten, must loue silence, and flye vaine company, and sighes of vanitie.
Fiftly, The benefite which proceedeth from Fasting, doeth plainely appeare in this, that as by the forbidden meate which our first Parents did eate, death entred into the world. So did the Reparer of our life by Fasting, beginne our Saluation and Redemption; the holie men, and blessed Saints,Luke. 4. both of the olde and new Testament, haue by the meanes of abstinence, and fasting, obteyned great matters: What ouercame and ouerthrewe the army of the Assirians? The fasting of IVDITH.Iudith. 9. What did deliuer the people of Irael, from the sentence of death,Hestor. 5 which was giuen against them? HESTORS fasting. The NINIVITES, though Infidels,Ion. 3. yet by fasting did mitigate Gods wrath and iustice. S. PAVL, by fasting, did begin his Spiritual life,Act. 9. whe^ as in Damasco, for three daies togeather, he did neither eate or drinke; wherby it came to passe, that he was afterward rauished vp into the third heauen.S. Bernard S. BERNARD calleth it a great Martyrdome, and saith:
 VVhat is a greater Martyrdome, then to fast, and endure hunger in banquets? to shake and shrille for colde, amongst garments? To endure pouertie amongst wealth? For, to see delectable things, and not to taste the^, when a man may, is a thing of great difficultie, for that nature is there ouercome, vvhich seeketh alvvaies delectable things. Therefore,Hug. de Sancto Victo. an auncient learned Father sayeth, Happie is he that can liue sparingly, for a spare dyet killeth vice, extinguisheth luste, nourisheth vertue, strengtheneth the soule, and eleuateth the minde to heauenly things. And their transitory labour, deliuereth them (as testifieth S. GRRGORIE) from euerlasting paines.
Sixtly, by often frequenting the holie Sacraments, they cleanse their soules from sinne, and replenish it as ofte with Gods heauenly grace, receauing therein in like sort, the Author of all grace, our Sauiour himselfe.
Seuenthly, Euen as the iust man doeth fall seuen times in the daye, so by saying dailie, the seuen Canonicall houres, they endeauour to rise as oft againe, that they may iustlie with DAVID say vnto God,Psal. 118 at the day of Iudgement. Seuen times in the daye, I haue song prayses vnto thee. Vnto this often praying, Christ doeth exhort vs, when he said, That wee must alwaie praie,Luke. 18. and neuer cease: For that prayer (as saieth S. CHRYSOSTOME)
 is as necessarie vnto man, and all men haue no lesse neede thereof,Lib. 1. de Orand. Deo. Ibid. lib. 2 1. Thes. 5. Gloria super illud. thes. then the Trees of moisture: and as water is life to the Fishe, so is Prayer vnto man. For as this bodie of ours, if the soule be not present vvith it, it is dead and stincketh, so the soule vnlesse it doe stirre vp it selfe vnto prayer, is dead and miserable, and stinketh greatly. Therefore the Apostle warneth vs to praye without intermission; hee prayeth continually, which doeth alwaies well, the iust man neuer cea^eth to praye, vnlesse he leaue to do good, and for their timely saying of them, they shal be the sooner heard:Psal. 5. Wherefore Holie DAVID said, In the morning, O Lord, thou vvilt heare the voyce of my prayer, and thereby fulfill the Commandement of our Sauiour, which willeth to seeke fi^st, the kingdome of God and his iustice, and for the rewarde of their labour, promiseth that all thinges necessary shall be giuen vnto them.
Eightlie, By making their will, and setling their goods in time, they reape great quietnesse and tranquillitie of conscience all their life after, and in time of sicknesse, great comfort for their soules, which being by that meanes, ridde of that great trouble and care, which otherwise, they must haue had, to dispose of their Temporall goods and liuings, may nowe the more deuoutly attende, to seeke the life euerlastinge, giuing
 themselues and their minds wholly thereunto, and to frequent the holy Sacraments, that through the strength and grace which is giuen therein, they may with more ease, valiantly ouercome their cruel aduersary, which is alwaies then most busie, and soone passe with all alacritie, to endlesse ioy, receiuing great ayde and helpe for that end, by the paines which they haue taken in making satisfaction for those offences, which vpon diligent examination of their consciences, euery night they shal finde themselues any waies to haue committed, whereby they are freed from farre greater punishment, which otherwise, they should haue suffered elsewhere:Num. 2 for that as God doth leaue no sinne vnpunished, so wil he not punish one sinne twice.
Ninthly, How great benefite they receaue by taking paines to heare Masse dailie,S. Chriso. may easilie be gathered out of S. IOHN CHRYSOSTOMES wordes, where he saith, that, The Angels of heauen be alwaies present in great number, to honour this sacred mysterie: And we being present with them, and assisting with the same intention, cannot but receiue many excellent influences, by such a Societie, two quiers of the triumphant and militant Church, ioyning themselues to our Lord, in this diuine action, to obtaine mercie and grace for vs.
By reading also, or hearing the Rule
 read once euery moneth, they gaine as often an 100, yeares of pardon, graunted by diuers Supreame Bishops, vnto all those which shal either reade the Rule, or heare it read at these times. And by their monthly almes-giuing, not onely doe they endeauour thereby, according vnto the counsell of the Prophet DANIEL, to redeeme their sinnes; and lay vp (as our Sauiour himselfe teacheth) treasure in heauen for themselues, but in earth also. For as the Emperour OCTAVIAN, would that his daughter should learne to worke, to the intent, that if he should chance to fall into pouertie, they might themselues be able to relieue their wants, by their owne worke: So doe the Brethren and Sisters, giuing almes to be kept, for the reliefe of the poore (but especially of their Brethren) prouid meanes to be relieued themselues, if they should chance to fall into wante hereafter. In causing in like sort a Masse to be said euery Moneth, for the comforte of the rest of the Brethren and Sisters, as well liuing as dead, they are made pertakers thereby, of many holy Sacrifices, which the rest of the Brethren and Sisters cause in like sorte to be offred for them.
Tenthly, For the works of mercy which the Rule bindeth them to keepe and exercise, in visiting the sick, relieuing the poore, burying the dead, praying for the soules of
 their Brethren and Sisters, both at their death, and afterwardes, not onely shall they hereby heare, at the dreadfull day of iudgement, that comfortable voyce of our Sauiour, saying vnto them, for these their labours:Matth, 7 Luc. 6 Come ye blessed of my Father, receaue the kingdome that is prepared for you from the beginning of the worlde: but also be assured by the Testimony of our Sauiour, To receaue the same measure that they haue measured vnto others. And praying for the comfort of all the Brethren and Sisters, liuing and dead, at three seuerall times in the yeare, not only those prayers redound also to their owne benefits (as testifyeth S. BONAVENTVRE) saying. He that prayeth for another, laboureth for himselfe: but also their prayers, are more meritorious, and often sooner heard, then if they prayed for themselues.
Eleuenthly, From the Visitations, which are made once euerie yeare, at the least, or twice at the most, they receaue this benefite, that by renewing their vowes, their workes are made more meritorious, and helpe and comfort, is there then specially to be had, and graunted, vnto all those which hauing neede of any, shall desire it. And seeing God hath commanded euerie one, to haue a care of his neighbour, they may then fulfill this precept, by informing the Visitor, and seeking Reformation, of any of the Brethren, or
 Sisters, that hath done amisse, when, according vnto the Commandement of our Sauiour, After the first and second admonition, they should tell the Church, that is,Matth. 7. The Prelates and Pastors thereof, whose place the Visitor doth hold in this Congregatio^, whose admonition is most like to do good, for that much better wil one accept of fraternal correction of him which hath authoritie, then of an olde ordinarie Brother. And for as much as our Sauiour saith: He vvhich will not heare the Church, (that is, obey the Prelates thereof) let him be vnto thee, as a Publicane and Ethnicke; The Visitor, both for the benefite of the whole Congregetion, and of himselfe also, must after their admonition giuen, expell the incorrigible person, whose companie, tolerated in that holy confraternitie, might breede both scandal and infamie to the whole societie, and great hurte vnto himselfe, for his silence and negligence, for as S. GREGORIE saith: VVe kill so manie persons, as we see goe dailie to the deuill, and through slouthfulnesse holde our peace. And how seuerely shal they be punished, that so do, for their conniuence and silence, God himselfe sheweth, when hee said, by the mouth of EZECHIEL,Ezec. That if they speake not, that the vvicked may leaue his bad vvaies and liue: the vvicked shall die in his wickednesse, but GOD vvill require his blood, at their handes.
 For all the sinnes that the Prelates may correct, and doe not, shall be imputed vnto them, and they damned for it.
Twelfthly, The auoyding of strife, and conseruing of peace, bringeth this benefite vnto them, that as by taking vpon them this holy estate of life, tending to all perfection, they enter presently into warfare and combate against Sathan, the sower and stirrer vp of all hatred and discorde, so by this bonde of concorde and charitie, whereby they are bound in two Chapters of the Rule, to auoyde all strifes amongst themselues, and keepe to the vttermost of their power, peace and vnitie with al persons, they receaue such strength and force, that all their enemies (though neuer so strong and potent) cannot preuaile against them. For what was it, that gaue such strength and power, vnto the Christians of the Primitiue Church, to ouercome in such sorte, and plant the faith of Christ, throughout the whole world, but concord, peace and vnitie? whereby they were so vnited togeather, that, The vvhole multitude of the beleeuert vvere (as testifyeth S. Luke) but one heart and one soule,Act. 4 by which means, Christ dwelling in them here, now they raigne with him euerlastingly. God gtaunt vs all his grace, so to liue here, that wee may doe the like there in his heauenlie kingdome. Though those benefits here mentioned, be equiualent vnto the burdens
 of the Rule, and sufficient to shewe how easie the rule and burdens thereof are to be borne, by any deuout person, and willing minde; yet are there many other vtilities, profites, and spiritual graces, annexed vnto the obseruation thereof, proceeding from the fauours and Priuiledges, which many Supreame Pastors of the Church, through the singuler affection, and great loue which they haue alwaies borne vnto this holy order of Penance, these 400. yeares, haue graunted thereunto: but for as much as I may haue fitter occasion, to declare both them, and diuers other benefites besides, more at large in their owne places, I will now leaue the declaration of them: and refer the Gentle Reader, to the due consideration, of euery one of them, as hee shall happen to reade them; hauing taken occasion, to speake of all these aforesaide, by reason that the Rule commandeth, that he which shall receaue any one into this Order of Penance, must first declare vnto him, the burdens of the Fraternitie.

ARTICLE III. And chiefly concerning Restitutio^.
AS this Order, tendeth vnto the good of all persons, so in no sorte to the
 preiudice of any, wherefore none may be receiued, but such as are either out of debt, or else able and willing with all speede to discharge it by paiment, pledge, or securitie conuenient, to the ende that before their Profession, they may be according to that auncient saying, Free from debt and deadlie sinne:In 4. dist. 15, For that according vnto all Diuines, whosoeuer doeth vniustlie possesse anie thing, or hath against Iustice damnifyed any man, and will not make restitution, and Satisfaction, being able, liueth in mortall sinne, for that the sinne is not remitted, vnlesse that thing which was taken away, be restored. Wherefore, no Bankeroute, vniust person, or any that is in debt, more then he is able, or willing presently to paye, can be admitted, least that the Reception of any such person, might be a discredit, or burden to the order, which is bound, with all charitable meanes, to relieue the necessities of the Brethren and Sisters, which doe not fal in to it, by their owne default, for if any shall goe about so to doe, after thrice admonition giuen by the Minister, if they will not leaue off such courses, as may soone draw them into great want, they are by the advise of some discreete brethren, to be expelled by the Visitor.



ARTICLE IIII. And to reconcile himselfe to his neighbour.
FOR, as much as the greatest gift and present, that a man can present of his owne vnto God, is to giue and dedicate him selfe wholly, vnto his diuine will and seruice, at his first entrance into any vertuous and religious approoued course of life, to the intent that his gift may be acceptable vnto God, and his vertuous enterprise profitable vnto himselfe, he must endeauour to be in perfect charitie with all men, which is attained vnto, by his humble reconciliation, vnto all those whome he may suppose to haue any way offended: For that God doth so highly esteeme of reconciliation, whereby perfect charitie is gotten and preserued, that he commandeth vs first to reconcile vs vnto our brethren, before we offer our present and gift vnto him, and therefore saith, If thou offer thy offering at the Aultar, and shalt there remember that thy brother doeth any thing against thee, goe first and reconcile thy selfe to thy brother, and then come, and offer thy gifte. Wherefore, to the intent that this great gifte, which a man at his first entrance, in to this Holie Order of Pennance, offereth vnto God, may be more pleasing vnto him, and better accepted of,
 here is required, that before any be admitted into this Congregation, hee must first reconcile himselfe to his neighbours and friends.S. Greg. For as S. GREGORIE saith, that, The gift is not accepted of, vnlesse discord be first expelled out of the minde.S. Aug. S. AVGVSTINE vpon these wordes (if thou offer) saith in like sorte, If thou art so farre off, that thou canst not go vnto him, with the feete of thy bodie, then prostrate thy soule before God, vnto whom thou art to offer, if thou art nigh, or present, seeke to winne his loue, humblie demanding pardon, if thou hast hurt him, or if he hath endamaged thee, remit first the rancor and hatred of heart. Hereunto doth S. PAVL exhort all men, saying, Doe you vvhat lyeth in you,Rom. 12 1. Ioh. 1. and heb. 12 to haue peace vvith all men, for this is the meanes to haue God to dwell in vs. For God is Charitie, and hee vvhich remaineth in Charitie, remaineth in God, and God in him.


ARTICLE V. After a yeares space.
ALTHOVGH, the zeale of manie is such, that seeing in a short space, they haue made sufficient tryall, of all the Austerities and difficulties, that may be found in this Order, are therefore desirous not to expect, so long before they make their
 profession, that they may with all speede, enioy all the Priuiledges, Graces, Indulgences, and remission of sinnes, which the professed doe enioy; yet notwithstanding, to the intent, that the Brethren by longer continuance of time, may haue better experience of their former liues, and present natures, and conditions; and whether that hotte feruour, will not soone grow colde, they are not to be admitted vnto profession, vntill a yeares triall, vnlesse it should chance, that they falling so sicke, that by the aduise of the Phisition, they could expect for little other then present death: for then may they be admitted to profession, and receaue then,Pius 5. bul. sum. sacerd. and also giue at their departure, that most comfortable general absolution, before rehearsed.


ARTICLE VI. That he promise, that he will obserue all the diuine Precepts.
S. FRANCIS, Hauing declared in the former parte of this present chapter, what conditions are required to be in them, which are desirous to be of this Order, and what diligent inquisition is to be made of them, before their Reception. now doeth he proceede to the forme of the vowe which they are to make at their
 profession, saying: That he must promise that he vvill obserue all the diuine precepts: For as one estate doeth exceede another in perfection, so ought the liues of the Professors thereof, to be the like: wherefore this estate, exceeding farre the ordinarie secular calling, more perfection is therein required. For this cause therefore, seeing that al Christians, are bound to obserue the Commaundements of GOD; here is required a more speciall care to be had, in the delight and perfect obseruing of them, wherein consisteth such perfection, that thereby, easilie we shall come to heauen. Wherefore, the Brethren and Sisters, doe here renew, in this second (as it were) Baptisme, that promise which they had made at their first, which, for as much as it is the chiefest obligation of the Rule, and principal parte of this order, I did first beginne to declare it, in the Proeme, and Preface to this Rule, wherefore, referring the Reader, to that declaration thereof there, I will omit to speake of it here.



ARTICLE VII. And that he will make satisfaction (as is conuenient) for the transgressions and faults, which hee shall commit, against this maner of liuing.
THIS is the second parte of the vow, which our Holie Father NICHOLAVS 4. which before was General of the whole order of S, FRANCIS, did in this his Breue set downe, for those which liuing in their owne houses, or kinsfolks and friendes, doe make at their profession, wherein, although they doe not all generally make heere withall, so expresse a vowe of obedience, as they doe which now liue in Monasteries: yet blessed S, ELIZARETH, daughter of the King of Hungarie, and wife vnto Prince LEVVES the Lantgraue of Theuring, though from her infancie she liued in all holinesse, and sanctitie: yet to the intent that all her workes, by the vertue of obedience, might be made more meritorious, she did by the consent of the Prince, her husbande, promise obedience vnto Father CONRADVS. a Fryer Minor, her Ghostly Father, in all things that were not preiudiciall, vnto the duetie
 of mariage, the like no doubt many others haue done, though not so much noted o^ the world: For that it hath bene alwaies the custome of all S. FRANCIS children to doe much, but to make little mention thereof, vnlesse the deede hath bene so eminent and manifest, that it could not be hidde from the world, especially in this matter of obedience, though their chiefest vertue in estimation; For that (as S. AVGVSTINE testifyeth) Amongst all vowes,Aug. fo. 9. Ser. de obed. and humil. Obedience is the chiefest and onely vertue, if thou shalt fast day and night and shalt pray, if thou shalt cloath thy selfe in sackcloath and ashes, if thou s^alt doe no other thing, but vvhat is commanded in the lavve, and shalt seeme to t^y self, to be as it vvere wise, and not obeying thy Father thou hast lost all thy vertues. The Scripture it selfe affirmeth as much,1. Reg. 15 when it saith. Obedience is better then Sacrifice: He therefore (saith S. BERNARD) vvhich is obedient, both eating fasteth, sl^eping vvatcheth, and in rest and quiet,Genes. 22 laboureth Although ABRAHAM, neither had the example of Obedience, nor exhortations thereunto, which wee haue had dailie, yet notwithstanding, so prompt and readie, was he to obey, that although the thing commaunded, seemed to be altogeather contrarie, vnto that God had promised, yet hee without reply or delay, or respect to the loue of his sonne, whose seede, God had promised to
 multiplie; went with all speede, to fulfill what was commanded him; being thereby, an example of perfect obedience vnto all posteritie. For as S. BERNARD saith: A true obedient person,De precept. and Dispens. Gre mag. in Cap. 3. 1. Reg. doeth not attende and regarde, vvhat it is vvhich is commanded, but is contented onely vvith this, because it is commanded. VVhosoeuer hath learned perfectly to obey, neuer iudgeth of his Superiours Commandements, for that he thinketh onely this to be good, if he obey vvhat is commanded.
Blessed S. FRANCIS said vnto his Brethren, that they should not iudge any impossibilitie to be in his Precepts: for that (saith he) Although I should commaund you any thing* aboue your strength, yet holy obedience vvill not want strength. S BASIL therefore addeth, That he vvhich detracteth the Precepts of his superiour, and striueth vvith vvordes against his commandements, it is a great signe, that he vvhich so doeth, aboundeth and is infected vvith many vices, as debiliti^ of Faith, doubtfulnes in hope, arrogancie of maners, and pride of life.
In the auncient Testament, and lawe of MOYSES, God was so strict in this matter of Obedience, that in Deutronomy,Deutro. 17 hee threatneth the disobedient persons with death, saying, Hee vvhich shal be proude, and will not obey the commandement of the Priest, he shall die the death. He shewed an example thereof, in CHORE, DATHAN, and
 ABIRON, whom for their rebellion, and disobedience vnto MOYSES and AARON, the earth opened, and swallowed them downe aliue.
In the new Testament also, he had obdience vnto Priests and Prelates, in no lesse recommendation, when he had said vnto his Apostles,Luc. 10 S. Basil. const. Monasti. c. 23. He that heareth you, heareth me, and he which contemneth you, despiseth me. Which wordes of our Sauiour, spoken vnto his Apostles, S. BASIL doeth most worthely affirme them to be vnderstood, to be giuen as a law in common afterwardes, for those which were to be the Rulers and Gouernours of others: wherefore their precepts and ordinances, are not to be contemned, for though they doe not intende to binde thee, or that the thing which they shall command thee, be but small, yet if through contempt, thou leaue it vndone, for this cause alone thou shalt offend therein, by reason of thy contempt. To them therefore must thou obey (by reason that their authoritie proceedeth from God) and for that cause doeth he no lesse esteeme it,Rom. 13 then if it were done vnto himselfe, yea, a certaine learned and deuout Father,Barth. Pisa, 117. did esteeme it to be a thing of so great merit, that he said. I doe repute it more to obey a Prelate, for the loue of God, then to obey vnto the Creator, giuing any Commandement by himselfe: And addeth the cause saying; He which obeyeth the Vicar,
 of our Lord for his Loue,Sulpi Sen. l. diale. 1. cap. 5 vvill vvell obeye our Lord himselfe, commanding him any thing. The first vertue therefore of a religious person, is to obey anothers mans commandement.Aug. 14. de Ciuit. Dei. c. 12. vitas Patr, part. 1. cap. 131. S. AVGVSTINE did so much esteeme of Obedience, that he said, that, This vertue in a reasonable Creature, is after a certaine maner, the Mother and conseruer of all vertues. Obedience is therefore, of that merit and excellencie, that it is helde to be, The health of all persons, and finder out of the kingdome of heauen, obedience openeth the heauens, and eleuateth a man from the earth: obedience, is the companion of Angels, it is the meate of the Saints, by this they are nourished, and thereby did they come to perfection.
The foundation of this vertue, is the holy Scriptures, and example of our Sauiour, of whom S. PAVL writeth, that,Phil. 2.8 He did humble himselfe, being made obedient euen vnto death, yea, the death of the Crosse, wherfore God did exalt him, and giue him a name, that is aboue all names: by which wordes, the Apostle did set before our eyes, an example of most notable obedience, and the merit thereof withall. Consider therefore (o man) saith S. AMBROSE,Amb. Ser. 20 in Psa. 118. what thou doost read. The Apostle did not labour to prooue the povver of Christ, but to Preach his obedience, but to shew how great the grace of Humilitie is, and what is the profit therof.
 The Apostle therefore, to mooue vs the more said: First feele this in your selues, what was in Christ Iesu. Thereby, exhorting vs to imitate him therein,Bernard. de grad. Humil. in those things, which he being God and man, did suffer for vs. Let vs (saith S. BARNARD) learne, what we being pure men, ought to suffer for obedience, for which, he which was God also did not doubt to die. The Apostles were called by our Lord, and without any delay, they left all, and followed him,Matth 4 and when they heard him say, Behold, I sende you as lambes, amongst the middest of wolues, and that which was more bitter, saying, They vvill deliuer you into the Counsels, and they vvill vvhippe you in their Sinagoges, and you shall be led before Kings and Presidents for my sake. They neither gaine-saide, or repined at any thing: (But as S. BASIL saith) VVith humble meeknesse of heart and minde, did subiect themselues to the yoke of obedience,S. Basil. const. mo. c. 23. and with all alacritie of heart, went forward, into all dangers, reproaches, ignomies, Crosses, and diuers kindes of deaths, and did with such willingnesse and ioy, suffer all things, that they did wounderderfully reioyce, when they vvere thought worthy to suffer reproaches for his sake.
Seeing therefore that our Sauiour himselfe, being God and man, did by his owne example, so highly commend vnto vs this vertue of obedience, and made choyce also of such Disciples, which though poore
 men,Basil. const mon. c. 13 Act. 5.42 yet for obedience sake (as worthely noteth S. BASILE) did with all alacritie and ioy, embrace al ignomines, reproches, and crosses, yea, diuers kindes of deathes, leauing this forme of vertue to be imitated, by all future posteritie. It would be a great shame, for the Brethren and Sisters, of this holy Order of Pennance, if they should not bende their forces, to doe euery one something, according to his abilitie and calling, to shew their desire and affection, to the obtaining of the benefite and merit, of this most meritorious vertue of obedience. Wherefore (as I said before) though liuing abroad, they neither doe, or are bound to make so expresse a vow of obedience in all things, as those which liue in Monasteries are: yet, notwithstanding, considering these things aforesaid, but especially, seeing that our Sauiuor requireth such obedience of all persons (of what degree soeuer) vnto their Prelats and Superiours, that whatsoeuer is done vnto them, he reputeth it,Luc. 10. as done vnto himselfe. The Brethren and Sisters therefore of this Congregation, seeing that they haue taken vpon them, a course of higher perfection, then other ordinarie Christians haue, are bound in like sorte to embrace this vertue of obedience, in a more eminent maner. Wherefore seeing that obedience, is so necessarie also for the good of all congregations, that without it (at the least
 in all spirituall affaires, and such as shall concerne, the credit and benefite of the whole Fraternitie) it would soone fal out to be rather a confusion, then a Spirituall Congregation; they doe therefore vnder the vowe of making conuenient satisfaction, for such faults as they shal commit against this maner of liuing, when according to the Visitors will, they shall be called thereunto, shew the great affection and regarde which they haue, vnto the obedience, which is due vnto their Superiours, in respect of their Rule, and forme of life.
Cap. 20. Regul. 11Neither was it without iust cause, that this kinde of obedience, was here ordeyned, for that seeing by the declaration of our holie Father, they are bound to obserue any point of the rule it selfe, vnder the paine of a mortal sinne. If they were not bounde by obedience, to make such conuenient satisfaction, for their transgressions, against the rule, as the Visitor or Superiour, should enioyne them for their faultes, some indeuout persons, would make little account, to make any satisfaction at all: And of the otherside, other scrupelous persons, considering that the greatest benefite which can be wished for, or desired (which is, the kingdome of heauen) is assuredly promised, vnto those which duelie obserue the Rule, would, if they should chaunce
 to transgresse the same) thinke that they themselues, could hardly make satisfaction for their fault. Wherefore, both for the good of the one, and of the other, our Holie Father did ordeyne, both in the Vowe, and in the last chapter of the rule also, this forme of obedience, vnto the Superiours, that the Brethren and Sisters, should with prompt humilitie, receaue the Penance, enioyned for their faults, and studie to effect it effectuallie; when, and according vnto the Visitors will, they shall be called thereunto. Which forme of Obedience, amongst manie true comfortes of the rule, is not the least, for that seeing euerie one is, or may be, too partial vnto himselfe, in making satisfaction, and thereby some might doe too little, and others rest still doubtfull, whether they had done enough; now, being done by the aduise and commandement, of the Superiours, he which otherwise would haue done too little heere, and thereby left more satisfaction to be done in Purgatorie, may bee induced to doe such Penance heere, that he may be freede, from all other there, and the doubtfull and scrupulous person, rest fully satisfied, in doing what the Superiour shall thinke, most fit, and conuenient, to enioyne and commaund him, and though it should be farre lesse, then otherwise hee
 wo^ld haue done himselfe, yet is it better pleasing vnto God, and more meritoous vnto themselues, by renouncing therein their owne willes: whereby they stande also the freer, from all danger of hell, as worthelie witnesseth S. BERNARD, saying,Bern. Ser 3. de Resur dom. Euseb. in Epist. Take away our owne will, and there shall be no hell, for nothing shall burne in hell, but our ovvne vvill. Therefore, EVSEBIVS, willeth thee to thinke, that thou hast onely liued well that daye, wherein thou hast denied, and renounced thine owne will, and resisted thy desires. The fountaine of all goodnesse and wisdome, christ Iesu did testifie, that he came not to do his owne wil,Ioh. 5. but the wil of him that sent him. If the onely begotten Sonne of God, saith, that he came not to fulfill his owne will, but anothers commandement, how iustly then shal we deserue to be punished, if wee seeke dailie to follow our owne? our Sauiour Christ, euen from the beginning of his life, to the last end thereof, did by all his actions and examples, teach vs to contemne, our owne willes, and to execute the will of God, of our Parents and Prelates. S. BERNARD, to this end doeth exhorte vs, To consider vvhat the Angel of the great Counsell did, hovv he did make little account of his ovvne counsell,Ser. 3. de Resur. ^o^. but did preferre before it the counsell, yea rather the vvill of one vvoman (I say, the blessed Virgin) and of the poore Carpenter, that is IOSEPH,
 for being found in the midst of the Doctors,Luc. 2 hearing them, and asking of them questions, he vvas in a maner, blamed by his mother, saying, My Sonne, vvherefore did you so vnto vs? he answered and said, vvhat vvas it that you did seeke me?A rhethorical exageration. did you not know that in these things vvhich are my Fathers, I must be? but they did not vnderstand the vvorde, and vvhat did the vvorde? he did not rely on himselfe, but did descende vvith them in such sorte, that he vvas subiect vnto them: vvho vvill not then be ashamed to be obstinate in his ovvne vvill and counsell, vvhen the diuine vvisdome it selfe, did leaue his ovvne vvill? he did change his Counsell in such sorte, that vvhat he had novv begunne from thence forvvarde, he left it altogether, vntill the thirtie yeare of his age, for that from this 12. yeare, you finde nothing of his doctrine or vvorke, vntill the thirtie yeare thereof S. BASIL, therefore saith, that, The true and perfect obedience,Basil. Ser. de fest. nouua. Chor. of the subiects tovvardes the ruler of the order, is perceiued in this, If any one by his Counsel, do abstaine not onely from vvicked and vnlawful things, but if he vvill not doe these things truely, vvhich are laudable vvithout his sentence. It is good therefore, saieth S. HIEROM. To obey vnto our Prelates and Rulers, and after the rules of the holie Scriptures,Hiero. Epist. 5. ad Demetr. to learne the vvay of our life from others, and not to vse that most wicked maister, that is, our own presumptio^ and vvill.

But there are some, which, like as ANNANIAS and ZAPHIRA,Act. 5. made shew vnto the Apostles, of the whole price of the fielde, which they had solde, yet secretly, reteyning parte thereof vnto themselues, were punished with suddaine death: so they making shew, to giue vnto their Superiours, their whole will, giue onely parte thereof, fulfilling their commaund, in matters of small moment, but in such affayres sometimes, as they ought chiefely to renounce wholly their will, they will reteyne parte, if not all, to pleasure their owne taste, and themselues; and thereby, not onely depriue themselues of great merit, but also endanger their soules health and saluation. What I pray thee, would it profite thee, if thou shouldest shut all the gates of the Cittie, and leaue but one place open, whereby the enemie may enter, and taking the Cittie, spoyle the Cittizens, both of goods and life? So in like sorte, what would it auaile thee, shutting vp all the gates which are directlie, for the conseruation of thy soule, thou shouldest by reteyning thine owne will, in a matter of moment, leaue a gappe open for the enemie, to enter and spoyle thee of thy good, of thy merits, and life of thy soule.
The merit and perfection of thy soule, consisteth more in denying thine owne wil,
 and in an humble and constant heart, ready to do, that which the Superiour commanded, then in feeling, a tendernesse of heart, or sweetnesse in deuotion, because, in the one is declared, the sincere loue which we beare vnto God, when for his sake, we renounce our owne willes, and those things which seemed most pleasant to our selues, (wherein consisteth al true perfection) but in the other, there may be often hidden selfe-loue, which so defileth our actions, that soone wee loose all deuotion.
Wee may take example hereof, in a deuout Brother,Apolog. Sedulii. lib. 2. c. 5. de obed. of the Order of S. FRANCIS, which feeling great sweetnesse in prayer, desyred to be freede from his office in the Kitchin, that he might giue himselfe wholly vnto prayer; but hauing obteyned his will and desire, hee presently lost that pietie and deuotion, wherefore being restored to his former office, he recouered that grace againe.
Be not thou therefore, any whit at all dismayed, though thou findest at the first (by leauing thine owne wil, and accustomed maner of liuing) a kinde of drynesse, or wearisomnesse of heart, but walke with all patience, ioyfully therein, and thou shalt soone finde, either the former sweetnesse, or greater merit, for thy perseuerance.
Wherefore, though it should seme vnto thee,
 at any time, that in thy prayers, thou neither findest profite or taste, yet do thou not desist or turne thy heart, any moment from God, but read a little, and in reading meditate something agreeable thereunto, and then returning to thy vocal prayers againe, offer thy selfe, and thine owne will wholly to Gods holie disposition,Luc. 11 and most assuredly he will accept thereof, seeing that he hath commanded it so to be done, when he teaching his Disciples to pray, and what petitions to make, ioyned this next vnto that of his heauenly kingdome, as a meane to attaine thereunto, for that the first and chiefest thing, whereby we may get that euerlasting life, is to conforme our selues to the diuine will of God: wherefore not onlie in our prayers and deuotions, must wee say dailie with our Sauiour;Matth. 26 Not my vvill, but thine be done: but in all our actions whatsoeuer, to saye still the verie same from our heart, and not with our lippes onely, as many a one doth, little thinking what they say, as appeareth manifestly by their great discontentment, at such things, as by Gods holie permission, doeth happen sometimes vnto them. If therefore thou wilt either gaine heauen, or enioye here all happie quietnesse, thou must make a perfect and entire resignation,Note all this diligently. of thy will vnto God, and vnto his seruants; for as by seeking and reteyning thy will, thou shalt finde no rest, so by renouncing and leauing
 of it, thou shalt liue as it were in Paradise vpon earth. The slaues in the Gallies doe eate and drinke, and haue sometimes rest, but he which maketh himselfe a slaue to follow his owne will, shall neuer haue repose, rest, or perfect comfort; our owne wil is like vnto a Rauen, which wil picke out the eyes of such a one that feedeth him: euen so doeth selfe-will, make those blinde which nourish it most, and that which is worst of all, putteth out their eyes in such sorte, that they cannot behold their blindnesse and destruction. The Prophet ESAY declared vnto those, which complayning that they had fasted, and God had not beheld them, they had humbled their soules, and God had not regarded them, that their owne selfe-will was the cause, saying, that In the day of your fasts,Esay. 58 is found your ovvne vvill.
Seeing therefore that our owne will, bringeth such hurte and hinderance to all vertue and goodnesse, let vs bende all our endeauours to renounce it, that wee may ioyfully follow the will of our Sauiour, and of his seruants, who haue rule ouer vs, and though their precepts should seeme some times to be contrarie vnto our skill, yet knowing that our Sauiour is the chiefe Gouernour, let vs for his sake renounce wholly our will, in respect of the great rewarde, which wee assuredly obtaine by so doing, whereof our Sauiour gaue vs a little
 taste and token, in the rewarde which he bestowed vpon S. PETER, before hee was called to be an Apostle, for renouncing his owne will,Luc. 5 to obey and fulfill, the will and commandement, of our Sauiour which willed him, to launch out into the deepe sea, and cast foorth his nets in the daye time, for to take some Fishe. S. PETER did know right well, (as one cunning in the arte of fishing) that in the night, the fishes doe swimme aloft in the water, and in the day time, goe downe to the deapth thereof, yet hauing laboured all the whole night, could take no Fishe: and though that which CHRIST commaunded him to doe, seemed to be against reason, yet neuerthelesse, did hee cast his nettes foorth, and by that meanes, hee which had laboured all night (which was the fittest time for fishing) and could take nothing, now in the daye, which was altogeather vnfit for it, did merite, to take a greate multitude of Fishes, for the rewarde of his obedience; he had lost a great time in the night, and did take nothing, following his owne will and skill, nowe by renouncing them both, to fulfill our Sauiours command, he recouered all the time lost: so thou maist also labour much and long, and get little merit, and maist in like sorte, with a little labour, deserue and get a great reward. If thou labourest neuer
 so much, if it be against thy obedience, thou shalt reape no benefite at all; and if thou labour onely, according to t^ine owne will, thou shalt gaine little: but if renouncing thine owne will, thou labourest by Obedience, though the labour be but little, yet assure thy selfe, thy merit will be great; for that both thy pennance, good workes, and all vertuous actions, which thou shouldest, as an ordinarie Christian, exercise of thy selfe, to auoyde eternall damnation, if in doing of those verie deedes, thou renounce thine owne wil, and doest them, by the aduise and ordinance of thy Superiour, or ordinary Ghostlie Father, thou maist be most assured, that they will be much better pleasing to God, and more meritorious to thy selfe, in regarde that thine intention, in doing of them by obedience, addeth merit to the goodnesse of the action, and withall, maketh thee to liue in more securitie; for that God will neuer suffer them to goe astray, who haue submitted their owne willes, to the disposition of his seruants. Therefore, regarde not thy Superiour simplie as a man, neither trust in him, nor in his humane prudence, but in the prouidence of Almightie God, who will no doubt, fauour thine endeauours, and speake vnto thee, by the meanes and interposition of this man, putting into his minde, and into his mouth, that
 which shall be most expedient for thy spiritual aduancement, so that thou oughtest to hearken vnto him, as vnto an Angel descended from heauen, to conduct and lead thee thither. Treat with him freely, and with an open heart, manifesting without all dissimulation, or fayning the good and euill, which thou findest in thy soule, and by this meanes, thy good shal be more excellent and assured, and the euil corrected and amended, thou shalt be both easied and fortified in thine afflictions, and moderated and ordered in thy consolations; place then an exceeding confidence in him, ioyned with a religious and a respectiue reuerence, yet so, that the reuerence diminish not thy confidence in him, nor thy confidence hinder the reuerence due vnto him; both which laudable respects, to a Ghostly Father, were most eminent, in that thrice noble,Queene Katherine the first wife of K. Henry 8. and vertuous Princesse, Queene KATHERINE (a Saintlike member of this holie order of Penance) as doeth appeare, in that most religious Epistle, which she did write vnto F. FORREST, a little before his Martyrdome, where, in respect of the confidence, which she alwaies had in him, shee wrote, that hee was the onely man, vpon whom she wholly had relyed in all diuine affaires, and how greatly she reuerenced him, the whole Epistle maketh manifest proofe: wherfore hoping that no man, which shall see also the great
 pietie and prudence, which that most worthy, and magnanimous Matrone, hath shewed therein, will not thinke his labour lost to read it, I haue set it downe here at large, as it is Registred in the Cronicles of our Order.

MY Reuerend Father,Gensog. histo. seraph. relig. de prouincia Angli. vvhich was alwaies vvont to be readie vvith your counsell, for others in their sorrowfull, and doubtful cases, doe know right vvell, vvhat is most conuenient to counsel and comforte your selfe in like: I doubt not therefore (considering the great pietie, and also learning, vvhere withal you are indued) but that you vvill (if neede require) most vvillingly suffer death for the name of Christ, and do knowe that for this cause, it is not to be feared, Goe forvvard therefore, and be of good courage, for though you may suffer short paines in these torments, yet (as you cannot be ignorant thereof) you shal receaue eternall
 and euerlasting rewarde, which vvho so neglecteth, and suffereth himselfe to be depriued thereof, I thinke him to be most grieuouslie madde, and out of his vvittes. But yet (alas for griefe) in the meane vvhile, you shal leaue me, your poore Daughter (gotten in the vvoundes of Christ) for a short time (I saye) sad, heauie, and swallowed vp in the greatest griefe that may be, vvhilest I loose that man, on vvhom I did onely relie, in all Diuine affaires, for that he vvas vvounderfully armed, and endued vvith the knowledge of them, and pietie towardes God, and truely, if vvhat I vvish, may be freely expressed, I had rather to goe before, by a thousand torme^ts, then to follow after. But certainly, if that should happen vnto euerie one, vvhich he vvisheth for, vvho, I beseech you, vvould vvillingly liue long in hope? Wherfore, renouncing
 mine owne vvill, I resigne it into his handes, vvhich (giuing vs also an example) did rather choose vtterly to denie his owne vvill, then to follow it, saying vnto his father, Not vvhat I vvill, but vvhat thou vvilt: thy vvill be done. You therefore shall goe before, you shall teach the vvay, that by your prayers, you may obtaine, that I may follovv you, by the same vvay, with a corragious (I hope) and constant minde; Goe on therefore, and knowe for certaine, that how grieuous and great soeuer the torments are, which you may suffer, that I am pertaker of the same, for vvhich God doubtlesse, vvill render vnto you, that incorruptible Crowne, vvhich is prepared for you and al others, which suffer for Christs name, if, vvith a strong and vndaunted minde, you passe through those torme^ts, which ar heaped on you. Be mindfull of your noble
 and auncient familie, which doubtlesse, vvill animate and encourage you to suffer, that most grieuous and vvorthie death, for Christs name, least that you vvhich being honorable by nobilitie of birth, should basely dishonour the same, by subscribing vnto the vvicked petition, of the King, although I know vvell, that you beare so great a respect vnto the dignitie of your O^der, that you make little account, of this nobilitie of vvordly things, if it be not ioyned vvith vertue, you shal render vvith glorie this bodie, vnto his Creator, vvhich hath so long led a holie life, vnder this poore vaile of the institutions of S. Francis, which you haue hitherto obserued. But neuerthelesse, vvhilst I your obedient Daughter, consider and reflect in my minde, vvhat great sorrow I shall haue for your sake, I know not what to say, chiefely, for this cause, that
 you vvill leaue mee without any Consolation, in such sorte, that this habitation in this worid, and my expectatio^, can be no other the^ miserie, and meere death in this mortal life. But notwithstanding, I truste in the goodnesse of Almightie God, to whom I haue saide, My parte and portion, is in the lande of the liuing: vvherein I hope you shal see me, not long after you, vvhere the tempest of this cruell vvorlde, towardes me ceasing, I may be taken to that quiet life, of the blessed. So farewel (my honorable Father) commending my selfe to your prayers, here in earth, with vvhich, I do firmely hope that I shall also be chiefely comforted, vvhen you shal haue obtained those supernal seates in heauen.

Your daughter ful of sorrow, KATHERINE.



BY this present Epistle, sent with so great pietie, by the worthy childe of S. FRANCIS, vnto her auncient Ghostly Father, thou may most euidently see, not onely vertue, pietie, and desire of Martirdome, but also her exceeding great loue, reuerence, confidence, and obedience, which she had alwaies borne vnto him, that the example, of so great and worthy a Princesse, may animate thee, to doe the like vnto thy guide and Superiour, considering the great merit and benefite, which this little foregoing discourse doeth shewe, to redound vnto thee for it. To the intent therefore, that thou cause thy obedience to be more meritorious, thou must endeuour, to renounce wholly thine owne will, and obey thy Superiour sweetly, without reply, promptly without delay, cheerefully without repyning; and aboue all, louingly, for the loue of him, who for our loue, made himselfe obedient, euen vnto the death of the CROSSE, and who (as S. BERNARD saith) chose rather to loose his life, then to loose obedience.




Let this promise made by him there, be set downe, etc.
FOR as much as they of this Order, did enioye in Catholike Countries, diuers temporall priuiledges, and exemptions,
 to the intent therefore, that none might fraudulently challenge them, but they only take the benefite thereof, which are truly professed, their profession ought to be publikely set downe, vnlesse the qualitie of the person, and conueniencie of the time and place considered, the Visitor should thinke it meete otherwise to be done.






ARTICLE VIII. Moreouer, vve defyning, do decree, that no man after his entrance, into this Fraternitie, may returne vnto the vvorlde.
OVR holie Father, NICHOLAVS the 4. hauing declared, by his Apostolicall letters, the promise and Vowe, which those of the third Order should make at their profession, dooth now here binde them in such sorte, by his decree to obserue that which they haue promised, that it is not lawful for the^ to leaue it, to returne againe vnto the world, but had not any intention thereby to binde them, which liue abroad in the world, not to deale in worldly affaires, but onely that hauing taken vpon them this maner of life, tending to all perfection, that they should not leaue it, vnlesse it were to ascend vnto a state of higher perfection, considering
 that our Sauiour saith. No man putting his hand to the plough, and looking back, is apt for the kingdome of heauen. For to such may be applyed,2. Pet. 2 that saying of S. PETER, that, It is better for them not to haue knowne the waye of Iustice, then after the knovvledge thereof, to returne backe from the holy commandement vvhich vvas giuen them. To pious vowes,Ps. 15.22 the Scripture it selfe doeth exhorre vs, saying: Vowe and render your vovves vnto your Lord God. But no man constrayneth thee to vow any thing, for a vowe is a matter of counsel, and not of precept. A counsel is one thing (saith S. AVGVSTINE:Aug. serm 61. de Tempore. and a precept is another. A Counsell is giuen to keepe Virginitie, to absteyne from wine and flesh, to sell al, and giue it to the poore; A precept truely is giuen, that iustice should be conserued, that euery man should diuers from euil, and doe good Moreouer of Virginitie it is said. He that can take it, let him take it. But of Iustice it is not said,Matt. 19. Euerie one that can doe it, let him doe it; but, Euerie tree vvhich bringeth not foorth good fruite, shall be cut dovvne, and cast into the fire: He vvhich heareth a Counsell and doeth it, shal receaue a great reward for his labour but he vvhich shall not fulfill a precept (vnlesse Penance helpe him) he cannot auoyde and escape punishment.
The vowe therefore, which they of the order, are to make at their Profession, though it be but first a cou^sel to perfectio^,
 yet after it is made, ^s is a precept of obligation, by which our holy Father, bindeth the^ in such sorte,August. Epist. 45. that they may not returne againe vnto the world. For as S. AVGVST. saith. Before thou wert bound by vo^e, thou wert free, wherby thou wert inferior, although such liberty, is not greatly to be reioyced at, wher^y thou art free fro^ owing that whisch is gaine for thee to paie, but now, because thy promise doth bind thee before God, I do inuite thee (saith he) to great iustice, but terrifie thee fro^ iniquitie, for if thou dost not performe that which thou hast vowed, thou shalt not be such a one as thou hadst remained, if thou hadst not vowed any such thing, for then thou shouldest haue bene lesse, and not worse, but now if that thou shalt break thy faith to God, thou shalt be so much the more miserable, by how much the more blessed thou hadst bene, if thou hadst kept it; wherfore,Eccles. 5.3 according to the counsel of the Ecclesiast. If thou hast vowed any thing vnto God, make no delaye to render it vnto him, for that an vnfaithful and foolish promise, doth greatly displease him, but render vnto him what good thing soeuer thou shalt vowe. It is much better not to vowe at all, then after thy vow, not to fulfil thy promise; for it is the^ iustly exacted of thee, to pay, and fulfil it.Tertullia^ aduersus Psychicos cap. 11. For as Tertul. saith A vow when it is accepted of God, it maketh by the authority of the acceptor, a law for the time after, for that he which approued the deed, he^ceforth hath co^ma^ded it to be don.
They therfore which do vow, must endeuour
 that they may performe their vowes, vnlesse they will,Genes. 19 by the example of LOTS wife, looking backe, be seuerly punished, for returning (according to the olde true prouerbe) as a dogge to his vomit:August in Psal 83. 2. Pet. 2. For that their consciences, being loaden with sinne, which did oppresse their breastes, hauing receiued those great indulgences (which I spake of before) at their entrance, they did then, as it were vomit out their sinnes, and of a bad conscience, was made an exceeding good: wherefore shouldest thou returne againe, to thy olde maner of life, and vomit? If a dogge should doe it, thy eyes would abhorre it, thinke then, what thou shalt be in the eyes of God, in breaking thy vowe to doe it. Of those which should so doe,1. Tim. 5. the Apostle saith, that, They haue their damnation, because they haue made their first faith voide, and vvithout force. VVhat is it (saith S. AVGVSTINE) they haue made their first faith without force?August. in Psal. 75. They haue vowed, and not rendred their vowes. This most learned and holie Doctor, seeing that men loue libertie in such sorte, that by a little terrour and feare, they will be soone drawne from vndertaking any thing that may any waies hinder it, hauing shewed howe farre by vowes they had lost their libertie,Aug. epist. 45. ad Armentar et Paulin. to encourage them againe in so good a purpose, said: Let it therefore not repent thee, that thou hast vowed, yea rather reioyce, that it is
 not novv lawful to doe, that vvhich vvith thine owne detriment and losse, vvas lawfull before: aduenture therfore, without feare, and fulfill thy vvordes and promises by deedes, he vvill helpe thee, vvhich requireth and coueteth thy vowes. Happie is that necessisitie, vvhich compelleth thee to doe better. No lesse encouragement doth FVLGENTIVS giue, when he saith.Fulg. de fide ad Pet. c. 3. Euery one vowing vnto God, and rendring that vvhich hee vovveth, God himselfe vvill render also the rewardes of his heauenly kingdome, which he hath promised.


ARTICLE IX. No married vvoman may be admitted, vvithout the leaue of her husbande.
VVHHREAS, in the thirteenth Chapter of this Rule, is made mention, that in Catholike Countries, where they may conueniently. They must euerie moneth assemble themselues, for all accidents that may happen, but especially, that they may be instructed, in that most healthful, and necessarie way of Penance, hearing not onely an exhortation to that ende, but also to heare the Rule. And the more to animate them so to doe, diuers Supreame Bishops, sucsessors
 of S. PETER, haue granted many indulgences to those which shal heare the Rule read once in the moneth, but chiefly CLEMENS the 5. which did graunt 14. Quarantines of Indulgences, which are 190. daies of pardon therunto, as appearreth in his Breue. In the 14. chapter likewise is declared, that they must assist at the Funerals of the Brethren and Sisters. And in the 16, Chapter also, they are commanded to come vnto Visitations, vnto all which meetings, a maried woman may not conueniently come, without the leaue of her husbande: for these causes therfore, when and where these exercises and meetings must be vsed, not onely by the Brethren, but also by the Sisters, when with conueniencie they may, no maried woman may be admitted without her husbandes leaue. But nowe here in this our Countrey no such meetings are, or can be made conueniently, neither any thing else required or exercised, but what is so farre from any maner of preiudice to the husbands in any sorte, but rather tend greatlie to their good, by with-drawing them from the pompes and vanities of the worlde, as much as their condition, and estate will permit; and thereby ioyning them the neerer vnto God, and not only a meanes to keepe them from vaine comcompanie and idle expences, but also an introduction to perfection, and to haue a
 greater care of her husbandes good, and his familie also: Wherefore though wee may iustlie presuppose, that no Cathotholike, will be against his wiues good, and his owne also, yet neuerthelesse, seeing that manie deuoute women, are marryed vnto such persons, which bee so concontrarie vnto them in religion, that they are so farre from giuing their consent to any vertuous course of life, that they rather seeke all meanes possible, to with draw them from that Religion, wherin they were first baptized, or by Gods holie inspiration, called vnto. God forbid, that such deuout soules, which haue so great neede of all ayde and consolation, should for want of their husbandes consent, be depriued of so many and so great comforts* as this Holie order of Pennance, doeth affoord vnto all such as are admitted thereunto.





Of the forme of the Habit, and qualitie of the Apparrell. CHAP. III.
MOreouer, let the Brethren of this Fraternitie, be commonlye cloathed, with meane simple cloath, both in price and colour, neither altogeather vvhite, nor black, vnlesse the Visitor (with the aduise of the Minister) should for some lawful and manifest cause, dispence with some one for a time, in the price. Let the foresaid Brethren haue cloakes also and furres, without falling collers, cut or vvhole, yet buttened or open, as agreeth to decencie, and the sleeues close. Let the Sisters also be cloathed, vvith a cloake or coate, made of the like meane and simple cloath, or at the least, let them haue
 vvith the cloake, a sauegarde or petticote of vvhite or blacke collour, or a large veile of cloth of hempe, or of flexe, sowed togeather, vvithout plaits: as concernning the meanesse and simplenesse of the cloath and garments of the said Sisters, it may be dispensed vvithall, according to the condition and qualitie of euerie one of them, and ordinarie custome of the place. Let them not vse Ribandes, and silke bindings. and let asvvell the Brethren and Sisters, haue govvnes furred onely vvith Lambe, purses of leather, and the stringes simplie made, vvithout any silke, and not otherwise, casting aside (according to the healthfull Counsell of the Prince of the Apostles, S. Peter) all other vaine ornaments of the world.


As Concerning the third Chapter.
IT is to be noted also, that about the garments and habits, which they are to weare; the Superior ought to obserue that maner of habite, which they shall thinke conueniente in these Kingdomes of Castile, according to the deuotion of euerie one, dispensing with the persons, according to the qualitie and office of them. And if any, but especially the Priests, will not weare it publickely, let them weare vnder their Cassocke, an other of Flanel, or cloath, with the guirdle. And at the least, they must shew themselues to be of this order, by eschewing all kinde of superfluitie, curiositie, and high prices in their garments. The women also, in dressing of their heades, in their apparrel and Iewels, must keepe great moderation, for it is most iuste and requisite, that there be a change in all things, aswell of the bodie, as the soule, for their owne good, and profite of their neighbours.
The rest, which desire no dispensation, may vse their ordinarie habite, of the cullor and cloath, which the Fryer Minors do vse: Finally, in their habite, there must no rigour be vsed, but that the Superiour dispose of it, according to the qualitie of the person.



Let the Brethren be Cloathed, etc.
ALthough it is not the Habite which maketh a religious person,Commis-general. Cismon. but their Profession, and due obseruation, of their approoued order, yet not withstanding, for as much as the religious habit doth truely admonish them, of a holier and purer life, aboue the common people; all Religious persons, doe weare a distinct habite. Wherefore, NICHOLVAS the 4 in the collection, which hee hath made of this Rule of this order of S FRANCIS, which hath remained approoued almost this 400. yeares, seeing that though it was ordeyned, chiefely for such deuout persons, as had a desire to exercise themselues in the workes of Pietie, and Pennauce, at home in their owne houses, or in their Parents, Kinsfolkes or friendes houses, yet notwithsta^ding, for that diuers vertuous persons, out of a great zeale and loue to God, hauing an earnest desire to attaine vnto some higher perfection, and finding themselues to want abilitie, as wel for yeares, as otherwise, to vndertake those other strict courses of religion, did proceed from this maner of liuing abroad, to build Monasteries of their owne, that leauing the world in a more eminent manner, they might there make their essential vowes of religion: did ordeyne here this mentioned forme of habit for the^, leauing as
 it is most probable, the other Brethren and Sisters, which remained still abroad, to their accustomed maner of Habite, permitted by S FRANCIS, their first founder, and Instructor; for that as concerning the Habite of these persons, a learned Doctor doth will vs here to obserue, that although in this rule, set downe by NICOLAVS the 4.Ioh. Bap. Confect. summ. li. 20. ca. 14. here is not determined, or mention made expressely of any other habit, but of those which liue in Monasteries: yet notwithstanding, by the custome Canonically prescribed in diuers partes, but especially in Italy; they which liue abroad, weare an habit more decent and proper, both vnto reason, and vnto their estate, because, in respect of the forme, they weare their apparrel like vnto other Seculers, but in regard of the colour, like vnto the Fryer Minors, (otherwise called here, the Gray-fryers, by reason of the the greynes of their Habite) And (that aforesaid Doctor saith) it is most like that S. FRANCIS would that the forementioned, Brethren and Sisters, should weare that kinde of Habite, for that from auncient time, in those parts, where he did first institute this first Order, and where he himselfe for the most parte conuersed and liued,Cord. An. super priuil. Fra^c. Minoruil. 1539. did weare, and vnto this present day, vse this forme of Habit, as testifyeth, the Reuerend F. Fryer ANTHONIE DE CORDVBA, in his Annotations, vpon the Compendium of the
 Priuiledges of the Fryer Minors, vpon this worde, Tertiarij: where at length, he declareth, that when after the Reception, they chance to die,Clem. 4. Const. 9. Their bodies are to be brought cloathed vvith their Habits, openly vnto the Churches of the Fryer Minors, and there be buried, although they had chosen some other place of burial, as is declared in the Priuiledges of SIXTVS the 4. which seemeth to be most agreeable vnto reason; for seeing that the foresaid persons, are made as members of the Order and religion, by receauing the Habite, and by their profession, made in the Chappel of the Church, of the said Order, where also hauing an Altar erected, they come togeather to heare the diuine seruice, and institutions of the Rule; the Superiour in like sorte, called by the name of Visitor, by whom they are chiefely gouerned, being of the forementioned order, it is most equall and iust, that seeing by reason of the Habite and Profession, they are conioyned vnto the Order, and did Communicate in all Spiritual graces, fauours, and Indulgences, with the other Brethren of the Order, in their life time, that now their bodies, should not be separated from them in their death, but should be buried in any conuenient maner, in their Churches. Whereunto is added, that if they which did ordeyne at the hower of death (as many doe) to be buryed in a religious Habite, ought
 to be buryed in the Churches of the saide order, although they had chose^ to be buried elsewhere, much more then ought the bobies of those of the third order to be buried there, least otherwise, iniurie should be offered, vnto the order, and Brethren. Wherefore, though the election of the place of buriall, may sufficiently be iudged to be chosen by them, in receauing of the Habite; yet to take away all occasion of strife, such as may hereafter receaue any, ought to declare thus much vnto them, for that it is not expressed in the Rule, to the intent, that they may perfectly vnderstand what is required in their estate, and forme of liuing, before their profession.

ARTICLE II. At the least, let them haue a Sauegarde, or Petticote of white or blacke colour.
BY these wordes, and the other following, in this Chapter, NICHOLAS the 4 doeth infin^ate, not onely that hee doth not binde precisely the Brerhren and Sisters, which liue abroad, to weare that kinde of habite, which he hath set downe in this Chapter: but also as it were, foreseeing that all persons, cannot conueniently
 weare, so much as their ordinarie apparrell, of that meane and simple graye collour, saieth that, Concerning the meanesse and simplenes of the cloath, it may be dispensed vvith al, according to the Condition and qualitie of euerie one, and ordinarie custome of the place. For where the custome of the place, is to weare their ordinarie outward apparrell of Grey, yet euery one (their states well considered) cannot conueniently doe it. They therefore, whose condition, estate, time, and place, doe permit it, doe weare either their habite, according to the forme here set downe, or otherwise their apparrel, as other Seculers doe, onely obseruing, the collours of the Grey Freyers, but otherwise, whose qualitie and condition, doeth not permit them so to weare, they flying as much as they may, all vanitie, and superfluitie, in their ordinarie apparrel, doe weare vnder it some kinde of white habite, either a wastcoate, or petticoate, of linnen or wollen, or else haire-cloath, whereof wee haue manie notable examples, in the liues of many holie Saints, and blessed persons, both men and women, of this holy order of Penance, as well Canonized, as others; but especially, in the life of that holy King of Fraunce, S. LEVVES, which did not onely obserue this institution of S. FRANCIS, in the humilitie of his outward garments, but did (as the Church of God maketh
 mention) weare Haire-cloath vnder them also.
The like mention doeth the Church make of that Princely Confessour,In vita ipsius. S. ELZEARIVS, Count of Alsatia, and that hee added to the Haire-cloath, which hee did weare in the day, a Corde full with knottes in the night, whereby, hee did so chasten his bodie, that liuing twentie sixe yeares, in mariage, without separating in bedde from his Spouse. S. DELPHINE, at his departure, out of this life saide. I render God humble thankes, that I leaue my Spouse DELPHINE a virgin, both in bodie and mind.Pet. Rodulph. seraph. lib. 1. in fine. Blessed GALLOTVS also, fro^ his youth, wearing co^tinually hair-cloath, kept perpetual chastitie with his wife, and ended his life in all holinesse and sanctitie.
The Sisters also of this order, though weaker in Sexe, yet haue not bene inferiour in vertue or diligence, to obserue the holie institutions herein, of our Patrone S. FRANCIS, as for example, that worthy Princesse, S. ELIZABETH did, of whom the Church of God maketh mention, that shee being daughter vnto the King of Hungarie, and wife vnto the Lantgraue of Thuring, though outwardly she was cloathed with royal apparrel, that shee might not displease her earthly husbandes eyes, yet vnder that most decent apparrell, she did weare haire-cloath, that she might
 be acceptable, in the sight of her heauenly Espouse, whole example, blessed SALOMEA Queene, daughter vnto the Duke of Craconia, and wife vnto COLOMAN, King of Galatia; for the better conseruation of her chastitie, which by mutuall consent, the King and shee, for the space of twentie eight yeares, kept in such sort, that after his death, she remayned a pure Virgin, did weare three sortes of haire-cloath; the one made of Horse-haire with hard knots, another more fine, of the like haire; the third of horse-hair and hemp, wouen togeather; which though, in her life time, to auoyd vaine glorie, she kept so secreet, that onlie her Confessor, F. Adelberte a Franciscan, did obtaine to see the sleeue of one of her coates; yet after her death, were they kept with great veneration, in the Castle of Sandamer.
Manie other examples might be produced, of great personages of this order, which haue done the like in times past, but these fewe may suffice, to shew that some haue worne Haire-cloath, for their Habite of Penance; so in like sorte, of latter times, there hath not bene wanting, many notable personages, which haue vnder their Princely attire, borne that poore Habite of Pennance, of S. FRAVNCIS, amongst whome was that Sainctlie Princesse, of our age, and in our Countrey, that moste
 vertuous Queene KATHERINE, of whose vertue and pietie, her forementioned Epistle, to her Ghostly Father, doeth giue testimonie.
This noble personage, which was the daughter of Ferdinando, King of Spaine, Aunt vnto the Emperour Charles, and wife vnto King Henry the 8. with whom lyuing here, 20. yeares in mariage, being Mother vnto our most worthie Princesse, of happie memorie,Sander. de Schi. Ang. Queene MARIE, did weare vnder her Princely robes, the habit of S. FRANCIS, to whose third order, (as testifieth Doctor Saunders) she had dedicated her selfe, endeauoring to adorne the interiour parts of her soule, with the pretious golde, of the loue of God, little esteeming, of her exteriour and outwarde ornaments, but onely to please the eyes of her earthly husband and king, hauing learned by by the instruction, of her holy Patrone and ours, S. FRANCIS: how much the pompe of the worlde was to be despised, when he taught and ordeyned, that the Brethren and Sisters, of this order of Pennance, should weare, either their exteriour garments, of the collour of ashes, or their inwarde apparrel, of such stuffe and colour of humilitie, as might put them in minde of the mortalitie in this life, that they may be thereby mooued the more to seeke with all diligence, after that life where is all glorie without ende.

The Apostle S, PAVL plainely sheweth, that the garmenss of the Saints, of the old Testament, were but poore and simple,Heb. 11. when hee said, that, They vvhich the vvorlde, vvas not vvorthy of, vvent about, in fells and goates skinnes. They were men as we are, and might haue therefore as great cause to desire pretious garments, as we can imagine to haue; but they knowing, that naked they came out of their mothers wombe, into this vale of miserie, and that they must returne againe naked, out of this world, did walke here like vnto Pilgrimes, that they might obtaine the riches of heauen. Before sinne came into the world, man needed no garments, for as the Sunne was cloathed with light, so was man with grace, and was (as the white Lillie) adorned with innocencie, but after that hee had lost the garment of innocencie, hee was ashamed to be naked; wherefore the diuine handes, made a garment of beastes skinnes, wherewithall, our first Parents were cloathed, for that man being wounded with sinne, wanted wherewithall to couer his bodie, and hide his wounds: whereby it commeth to passe, that hee which glorieth in his apparrel, may be said to be like vnto him, which braggeth and boasteth himselfe, of those ragges and cloutes, wherwith his soares weare bound vp, which were a great shame so to do, for that he would be thought to be madde and
 out of his wits, which should vaunt himselfe of his imperfections and woundes.Iob. 16 Holie IOB, was farre from glorying in riche ornaments, when hee declareth his apparrel to be so meane, that he saide, I haue sovved Sackcloath vpon my skinne, and haue couered my flesh with ashes;Psal. 68. neither were the garments of holie DAVID, any richer, which said, I haue put on haire cloath for apparrell. Vnto those which glorie in their rich and vaine ornaments, God saith by the mouth of the Prophet ESAY.Esai. 14 Thy couering shall be vvormes: and not without iust cause, for that their vaine and gorgeous apparrell, maketh them hateful vnto God, and voide of his grace, for that it seldome happeneth, that they which haue such care of this corruptible carcase, but they leaue their poore soules naked for Gods grace, and despoyled of all vertues. For which cause S. PETER declareth that, The ornaments of a Christian vvoman,1. Pet. 3 is not the outvvarde frifled haires, or the deckings vvith golde, or finenesse in apparrell, but in incorruptible quietnesse and modestie of spirite, in chaste and pure conuersation, and feare of God. But they which adorne themselues otherwise, let them vnderstande, howe much they doe displease God, by the heauie threatning, which he pronounceth against them, saying.Esai. 3. For that the daughters of Sion are puffed vp vvith pride, and vvith a neck stretched out.

The Romaines, which weare the richest of all the Gentiles, and commanded the whole worlde, did publikely ordeyne, that no married woman, should vse more then halfe an ounce of golde, for the adorning of her apparrel.
To conclude, beholde IESVS CHRIST the Lorde and Emperour of the whole worlde, hanging for thee naked vpon the CROSSE, that by consideration thereof, if thou art a true Christian, thou shouldest banish out of thy thoughts and minde, all pride of apparrel, and humaine foolishnes, seeing that hee which, whilest hee liued was most rich, hauing heauen and earth at his commaundement; dying, carryed nothing awaie with him, but a poore shroude, wherein he was buryed: Neither shalt thou carrie awaie any more with thee, out of this world, whensoeuer thou departest (which peraduenture shall be to morrow, or farre sooner then thou thinkest) but a winding sheete, or a poore Grey habite, wherein (as I saide before) al those of this third order ought to be buried, if they may conueniently, to the end, that as in al humility they liued, so with al humilitie, they may be buried, that by perseuering therein, they may attaine to that happie place, fro^ which by pride, al mankind was banished, and bound with the ba^ds of sin; which the girdle wherwith they bind the^selues withal, ought to put the^ in mind of,
 as also of the cordes and chaynes, which the Sonne of God himselfe, was bounde withall, to free vs of those bandes, and make vs coheyres, of the kingdome of Heauen.




That they ought not to goe vnto vnhonest banquets, sights, or playes, and that they ought not to giue ought vnto stage-plaiers. CHAP. IIII.
LEt all accesses, or comming vnto vnhonest banquets, or fights, or Courts, or daunsings, be altogeather forbidden them. Let them giue nothing to Stage players, or sightes of vanitie; Let them be wary to forbid that not any thing be giuen vnto them, by their owne familie.
Commis-general. Cismon.NOTE, that in the 14. Chapter, the going to the marriages of their kinsfolkes
 and friendes, is not prohibited, (where they be celebrated with due grauitie and modestie) but that they abstaine from pastimes, and entertainments, if not vnlawful, yet at the least, dangerous, and that they doe not conuerse with people of bad fame, nor enter into their houses. And in their behauiour and ordinarie speeches, they must be moderate, milde, and humble, chaste and religious; and aboue all, let them be attentiue to the exteteriour and interiour gouernement of themselues, and that they goe abroad, when the necessitie, or charitie of their Brethren requireth. And it is demanded therefore at their hands, that they giue and apply themselues to Christian pietie, visiting and comforting the sicke, making their beddes, and all other offices of humilitie, according to each mans necessitie, and their possibilitie, with conueniencie, by which exercise, they shal reape great and worthy fruits of merits, before our Lorde and Sauiour, and shal be confirmed in the fauour and loue of God, according vnto the saying of the Wiseman. Be not vvanting vnto those that crie for helpe, and assist the afflicted. Bee not slouthfull to visite the sicke, for by this thou shalt encrease in charitie, and establish thy selfe in the same. And these are the exercises which doe not hinder prayer, but rather helpe it, and make it more acceptable, and
 bringeth foorth manie vertues; for that from true prayer, commeth spirit, loue, and mercie to our neighbours: therefore the Apostlee sayeth: Orationi instantes necessitatibus sanctos communicantes.

Let all accesse vnto vnhonest banquets, Courts, etc.
THE intention of our holie Father here, is not to binde the Brethren and Sisters, to any such inconueniency, that they might not come at Courts, when necessarie businesse requireth, as all other Religious doe; but that they should not, without necessitie, often frequent and long remaine in those places; wher for the most part, all vaine delights, wanton pleasures, and lasciuious companie is, but to co^monly found: therfore vnder the name of courts, all such places are forbidden, where the like vanities are vsed. Wherefore seeing that by this course of life, which they haue taken in hand, they seeke to flye the vaine pleasures of the worlde, they must also endeauour, as much as lyeth in their power, to flye all occasions, and companie, that may either hinder them, or draw them from their good purpose, seeing that such is the frailtie, or rather corruptnesse of our narure, since the fall of our first Parents, that it is more prone vnto euil, then
 vnto good, whereby it falleth out manie times, that the good are sooner and oftner corrupted, by euil companie, then the wicked are corrupted or amended by the good.
The law of God therefore commanded,Exod. 34 Gen. 6. that the Israelites should not contracte martiage with the Gentiles, least by their euill maner and custome, they should be corrupted. The children of SETH, were excellent good truely, before they matched with the daughters of CAINE, but afterwarde by their companie, they ranne into so great wickednesse, that it was cause of the general deluge, and floud, wherein all the whole worlde was drowned, except those few persons, which were in the arke of NOE. The Hebrewes which were the onely beloued people of God, aboue all nations,Esai. 1 were shartly reprehended by the Prophet ESAIE, for conuersing and keeping companie with the Gentiles, saying vnto them: Your wine is mingled vvith vvater. For euen as wine which is mingled with water, looseth a great parte of his force, so in like sorte the good, which mingle themselues, and conuerse with the badde, by little and little, loose their vertue, and diminish the feruour of their deuotion: Wherof we haue a manifest exa^ple in the Prince of the Apostles, S Peter, who being amongst the good Disciples; did co^fes our Sauior Christ, to be the true Son of
 the liuing God, but afterwardes in the Hall of the high Priest, amongst the wicked, he did forsweare his Maister. If the companie of the wicked,Luke, 9 Matth. 16 Mar. 14. brought so great hurte vnto so worthie an Apostle, which so fewe howres before, being in the companie of Christ, made so constant a promise vnto him, that although all should be scandalized, yet would he neuer be, yea though he should die for it, yet would hee not denie him; how greatly ought we then to shun and flye the companie of the wicked, for feare, least the like inconuenience and hurt may happen vnto vs.
The iust man in the Scriptures is compared vnto a tree, that is planted by the riuersside, and the wicked vnto thornes; Of the iust man, which hath not entred into the counsel of the wicked, neither hath stood in the way of sinners;Psal. 1. the Prophet testifyeth, Hee is blessed, and shal be like vnto the tree, that is planted neere the courses of the vvaters, vvhich vvill yeelde his fruite in time, that his leaues shal not decay, and all things vvhatsoeuer hee dooth, shal prosper, but not so the vvicked (saith the Prophet) for hee shall be like the duste, vvhich the vvinde blovveth avvay, from the face of the earth. And as the duste is verie hurtful vnto the eyes of those, which shal walke therein, vnlesse they make some prouision to keepe it from them; so no lesse hurtfull is the bad examples of the wicked, vnto
 the eyes of those, which shal conuerse with them, vnlesse the greater grace of God preserue them from it; whereof the Prophet DAVID hauing had experience, beseeched God to turne his eyes, that hee might not so much as behold vanitie: the dust in like sorte defileth our apparrel and ornaments, so doeth the conuersation and companie of the wicked, defile the ornaments of thy good name and fame. The wicked therefore (as I said) are compared to thornes, according vnto that speech of the great Prophet of Israel, saying: All the false dealers, as thornes shal be rooted vp,2. Reg. 23. Manie trauellers in the heate of the day, in Sommer, will flie to the shade of good trees, but the snakes, adders, vipers and venemous beastes, flye vnto thornes and bushes, to lurke and hide themselues: so the iust and ciuil persons, doe flye vnto good and vertuous men, and doe associate themselues with the iust, as good and fruitful trees, whereas the wicked flye vnto their like, and seeke to hide their wickednesse, vnder the thornes and bushes, as vipers and serpents. If thou therefore frequentest often the companie of bad liuers, and conuersest dailie with those which are noted with some infamie, and ignomie, what doest thou thinke that any wil iudge of thee, but that thou art some bad person, Viper, and Serpent, seeing that thou ioynest and flyest vnto the thornes, neither can
 thy innocencie, saue thee from this suspition of ignominie: For as a looking glasse, though of it selfe it be pure, and shining bright, yet is it blotted and infected by the breath of the standers by; euen so he which is cleane, and endued with honesty and vertue, is blotted and defiled with the conuersation of the wicked. For as the Ecclesiastike saieth:Eccles. 13. He vvhich toucheth pitch, shall be defyled by it: So hee vvhich communicateth, and conuerseth vvith a proude man, vvill put on pride. For as a man can hardly runne among thorns, and escape pricking; so it is no lesse difficultie, to runne with wicked persons, and not to be hurte thereby: And as the pricke of a thorne, if it be not soone cured, is helde verie dangerous, so is the hurt which is taken from the euil, by reason, that what a man doeth, by example of another, that doeth hee thinke hee may lawfully doe: and so as the Apostle saieth, A little leauen,2. Cor. 3 corrupteth the vvhole paste: that is, a little bad example, may corrupt the whole life: Worthelie therefore doth the Ecclesiasticke (exhorting thee to flye from all euill companie) saye, Flye from the vvicked, and euils vvill leaue thee. SAVL the King of Israel,Eccles. 7 among his owne companie was madde, but leauing them, and comming vnto the Prophets, did prophecie: So on the contrarie side, S. PETER amongst the Apostles, did confesse Christ
 to be the Sonne of God, but in the house of CAYPHAS, amongst the Iewes, he did denie him. Thou canst not haue greater strength and courage, then he shewed to haue; yet thou seest, what hurt the euill company brought vnto him: let this example cause thee to follow that old prouerb, Happie is he whom other mens harms do make to bevvare. Little trust or confidence is there to be put to thy owne strength or goodnes, without Gods special ayde and assistance; for we see that some Planet, which of it selfe is benigne and healthfull, if it happen that it conioyne with some euil disposed constellations, and hurtfull signes, it sendeth foorth, and produceth euill influences; euen so a man, which of himselfe is vertuous and good, if hee ioyne in great familiaritie, with euill disposed persons, hee will soone become like vnto them in manners, and bring foorth euill actions, for that euerie one for the most parte will imitate the maners and customes of those, with whom they doe daily conuerse, wherof we haue exa^ple of the Iews, which conuersing with the Gentiles, did adore their Idols, as witnesseth the Prophet DAVID saying: They are mingled with the Gentiles,Psal. 15 they haue learned their deedes and actions, and haue serued their Idols. Neither let thy vertuous life heretofore, make thee presume so much as to aduentur thy self to so emine^t danger. For eue^ as that pleasa^t and
 profitable land of Iourdane,Aspholtites. when it entreth into that wholesome lake of Palestine, becommeth vnsauorie, and looseth his vertue: euen so he, which in his owne course of life, before was sweete, pleasant, profitable, and delectable, when hee runneth out of it, into the companie and vnholsome lake, of seculer conuersation, with the wicked; his sweetnesse of deuotion, is rendred vnsauorie, and his accustomed good actions, and maner of life, looseth the vertue thereof, he being defiled with vice. Iust cause therfore had S. FRANCIS, out of his fatherlie loue, to exhorte all his children, to auoyde all such occasions, and companie, by auoyding Courts, banquets, dances, and sightes of vanitie.


Daunces.
THOVGH honest exercises, and recreations are not forbidden,In decretde Cons. Di. 2. in Relig. yet seeing that many abuses are oftentimes committed in vnciuile daunces, they must avoyde them specially, seeing that that most famous light of the Church, S. AVGVSTINE, considering the danger and hurte to the soule, which cometh of dauncing, to be so great, saith, It is better for a man to goe vnto the plough on the Sonday, then to dance, and better for a vvoman to spin and card her vvel, then to daunce vnciuilly vpon fest daies.



Let them giue nothing vnto sightes of vanitie.
IF the time and place were such, that the Brethren and Sisters were publikely knowne to be such persons, that though they liue abroad in the world, yet were retyred from the vanities and pleasures thereof, then were they bound to shewe how much they contemne, what others esteeme and seeke after; not to giue so vainely, that thing to friuolous sightes and pastimes, which many poore persons (of whome they ought to haue a special care to their abilitie) stand in great want of: and ought to be careful in like sorte, that their seruants vnder their charge, by their example and exhortation, may be hindred from spending their money vainely, that they may imploy it profitably, but now as all things are in this sort, in our Countrey, they are not otherwise bound to doe, but as they shall finde it conuenient.




Of Abstinence, and Fasting. CHAP. V.
LEt them abstaine from eating of flesh, the Mondaies, Wednesdaies, Frydaies, and Saturdaies, except the necessitie of infirmitie, or weakenesse do otherwise require, but let flesh be giuen vnto those which are let blood, for three daies after, neither let it be with-drawen from them which trauaile in Iourney; let also the eating of flesh be lawful vnto euerie of them, when there happeneth any principal solemnitie to come, wherein all other Christians of auncient time are accustomed to eate flesh. But all other daies in which fastinge is not kept, let not egges and cheese be denyed them. And also they may lawfully eate with other religious persons in their Monasteries, of such meates as are, by those persons set before them, and let them be contented with the refection
 of dinner and supper (except the languishing, way-faring, and sicke persons) let the meate and drink of the healthful, be moderate, seeing that the Text of the Gospel saieth, Take heede that your heartes be not ouer-loaden, vvith surfetting and drunckennesse. But let neither supper or dinner be taken without one Pater noster, which is to be iterated with Deo gratias, to either of the^, which if it chance to be omitted, let three Pater nosters be said: but let euerie fridaie, through the whole yeare be fasted, vnlesse peraduenture, through sicknesse, or some other lawful cause they may be excused, except also the feast of the Natiuitie of our Sauiour should happen to be kept the same Ferie. But from the Feast of al Saints vntil Easter, they shal fast both Wednesdaies and Fryedaies, and are to keepe neuerthelesse the other fasts
 which are appointed by the Church, or vppon occasion commaunded, commonly by the Ordinaries. Also, let them see they faste in all daies (except Sondaies) in the Lent of S. MARTIN, vntil Christmas: and from the Sonday of Quinquagisma, vntil Easter, vnlesse sicknes peraduenture, or some other necessitie should constraine them the contrarie. The Sisters, great with childe may (if they wil) abstaine fro^ all corporal exercises (onely prayer excepted) vntil the day of their Purification. But the Labourers, in regard of their wearisomnes of their labour, may from the feast of the Resurrection of our Sauiour, vntill the Feast of S. FRANCIS, lawfully eate three times in the day, wherein they labour. But when it happeneth, that they are imployed in other mens worke, then it is lawful for them to eate of al things that are set before
 them any daie, vnlesse it be Fridaie, or some other daye, in which it is knowne to be appoynted to fast generally by the Church of God.

Concerning the 15. Chapter.
NOTE that in the keeping the Fastes,Commis. general, Cismon. and the daies of Abstinence, wee command, that they keep the chap. of the rule, dispensing with those who haue necessity, the which the Prelats, Guardians, and Confessors of the order may doe: And where there is no Conuent, the Confessor of the Noones may do it, or any other ghostly Father. And marke, that concerning the order of not eating flesh on Mondaies, wednesdaies, nor the fat or intrals, on Saterdaies. They who are vnder their fathers care, are not bound to abstaine from it, nor seruants, if their superiours giue them not sufficient of other meats, to passe that daye co^uenie^tly. And in this maner are they also reckoned, who are occupied and employed, about healing the sicke; and they who by reason of pouertie, can not prouide otherwise, because fauours must be extended, and interpreted to the best, they may change their fastings and abstinences, into other workes of charitie, and into prayer for the dead. And finally, let their ghostly father haue full power, for disposing al these abstinences and fasts.



Let them abstaine from eating flesh Mondaies, Wednesdaies, etc.
OVR Holie Father, NICHOLAVS the 4. although as chiefe Pastor of the Church, he had a general care ouer his whole charge, yet hauing bene a religious man and General (as I said before) of our whole order; reteyning still his auncient loue thereunto, doeth shew a particular affection, vnto this holy Order of Pennance: Whereof seeing that manie of them were entred into Monasteries of their owne, and had made three essential vowes of Religion, to the intent, that as true Religious, persons, they might haue a perfect forme of religio^, hauing in the 3. cha. of this Rule set downe, a religious forme of their habits; doeth now here in the beginning of this Chapter, prescribe for them most specially, a most perfect maner of religious diet, both for their abstinence and fasting. Wherefore in religious houses, of this order, and also such persons as liue either so priuately to themselues, or in such places, as no man noting them with so much singularitie, in their diet, be scandalized thereat, doe strictly keepe this abstinence, yet notwithstanding, in this Countreye nowe, where the keeping of Mondaies and Wednesdaies, in this sorte might breede some scandal, the deuout Brethren and
 Sisters, are freede from keeping them here in this manner, by the leaue, which this foresaid NICOLAAS the 4. giueth in the 18. chapter of the Rule, vnto the Ordinaries of the places, or Visitors, to dispense vpon any lawful cause (when they shall see it expedient) with all the Brethren and Sisters, in abstinence, fastings, and other austerities. Yet neuerthelesse, I counsell houshoulders (where they may conueniently keepe the Wednesdaies) with abstinence, and the Mondaies, also to vse some restraints in their diet, either abstayning from those meates which are most pleasing to their taste, or at the least (setting scrupulositie aside) to take a more sparing dyet then on other daies: and insteede of strict fasting, to redeeme it with almes deedes or prayer, saying at the least (if sicknesse doe not hinder them) fiue Pater nosters and Aues, in all such daies as they cannot conueniently fast: for although it was not the intention of S. FRAVNCIS, to found this rule so strictly, vpon the exercises of Fasting, abstinence, discipline, and other austerities, or paineful corporal afflictions, as his former Orders; yet notwithstanding his will and desire was, that they should no lesse employ themselues in deuout exercises and workes of mercie, both spirituall and corporal, according to their power and calling, then the other Orders doe. And as for abstinence and fasting, to vse them
 in such sort, that thereby the body may be kept able to go forward, with that alacritie in the seruice of God, but not so nourished and pampered, as to rebel against the Spirit, whereunto of it selfe, it is most prone, as witnesseth the Apostle, saying: The flesh coueteth against the spirit,Rom. 8. and the spirit against the flesh: and in the ayde which thou giuest to either of these, consisteth the life or death of thy soule: For as the same Apostle saith: If thou liue according to the flesh, thou shalt die, but if by the Spirit, thou shalt mortifie the acts of the flesh, thou shalt liue. That is, haue the life of grace here, and after, in glorie for euer. Wherfore, whosoeuer is a faithful friend vnto God, and his owne soule, must by abstinence, fasting and prayer, so macerate and weaken his flesh, that it may not rebel, but be obedient and subiect vnto the spirit. For if by these aforesaid meanes, we giue aide vnto the Spirit, and subiect the flesh vnto it, and sensuality vnto reason, the soule certainely shal ouercome, and hauing the victorie, shal enioy together, with the bodie, the eternall blisse, and be most gratious in heauen: Whereas by pampering and ouercharging of thy bodie, thou makest both sincke downe to hell. For as a shippe which is loaden aboue measure, must needes of necessitie, sincke to the bottome, so in like sorte, if thou ouerchargest thy bodie with too much, or too manie kindes of dainty
 meates, thou wilt cause thy bodie to sinke to the gulfe of sinne, and from thence to the bottomlesse pit of hell.
The deuil ouercame our first Parents by meate, so the chiefest weapons wherewith he fighteth and seeketh to ouerthrowe, and spoyle thee, is thy owne flesh pampered vp with daintie and superfluous meates, Wherefore, if thou wilt ouercome thy enemie, and be without danger hereafter, breake first the force of his strength and weapons, and by abstinence and fasting, chasten and pull downe the fleshly inclynatio^s of thy bodie. For as there is nothing which doth so much terrifie and ouerthrow the deuil, as austeritie of life: so on the other side, there is not any thing which maketh him boulder to tempte and assault men, then riotousnesse and excesse in meate and drinke, and delights of the bodie: wherefore, he that giueth his minde to delicattenesse, and fauoureth ouermuch his owne flesh, falleth soone into the power of Sathan. Wherefore as DANIEL did first destry the Idol of BAAL,Dani. 14. and afterwardes the Dragon, which lay hidden therein, so must thou afflict and ouercome the Idole of the flesh, by abstinence, fasting, and praier, and then thou shalt triumph afterwardes easilie ouer the dragon, the enemy of mankinde.


ARTICLE II. Except the necessitie of infirmitie or sicknesse, etc.
EVEN as in the wordes immediatly going before, was set downe a general rule for those of this Oder, which did either liue in Monasteries, or such as had conueniencie and strength, to keepe the rule in the strictest maner: so now here is a fauourable course taken for the weaker sorte, setting downe for what cause the Rule it selfe, doeth exempte them from that general forementioned abstinence, without any further leaue, or dispensation, as debilitie, sicknesse, infirmitie, letting blood, trauaile, high feasts, and solemnities, companie of religious persons, in their houses, labourers in other mens houses (vnder which name, may be comprehenped all seruants, and also children in their parents houses, or Surggeners in other mens houses, which for breuitie sake hee omitted) for making his Rule for al manner of persons, of all ages and degrees, endeuouring to auoyde ouermuch teadiousnesse therein, and studying breuitie, as much as he might, could hardly set downe a course of life for euerie one, according to his abilitie, therefore declaring in briefe,
 what fastes the strongest, and such as had best oportunitie should keepe; left the ordinarie Prelates (as you haue heard) to appoynt vnto the others, what abstinence and fastings, should be conuenient for their estate and abilitie. Wherfore though amongst the obligations, and bondes of the Rule, I haue set downe a forme of abstinence and fasting generall to be kept in this our Countrey, by those which may conuenientlie, yet would I aduise euerie one in all those fasts, to follow the aduise of the Visitor, or his owne prudent Ghostly Father, which duely considering what the Rule requireth, and what his Penitent may wel performe, to appoynt vnto him in particular, what is conuenient for him to doe, whose deuise, if they deuoutly follow, shal be a sufficient discharge for them, especially, seeing that the rule, not onely doth giue authoritie to their Rulers and Superiours, to dispence with them in all such things, as shall be conuenient; but doeth in a maner it selfe, free and exempt them from all such obligations in fasting, as might breede any inconueniency, declaring, that the infirme, the sicke, the weake, the languishing, the trauellers, and labourers, are exempted from the abstinences and fastes of the rule, and withall, giueth leaue vnto euerie one, both weake and strong, to eate flesh, in high solemnities, wherein all other Christians of auncient,
 or accustomed to eate it, and with Religious persons in like sorte in their Monasteries and houses; whereby we may gather that S. FRANCIS would not but that his children should sometimes reioyce and feast, as iust occasions should fall out, and that in ciuill and vertuous companie, they may eate as the companie doth: wherefore it is not to be attributed vnto them as a vice, to feast and reioyce sometimes, because that they liuing abroad in the worlde, may not altogeather renounce humanitie and ciuilitie, but to feast, banquet, and make merrie euery day, can hardly be without sinne. Therefore hee exhorteth them at other times (the languishing, wayfaring, laborers and sicke persons excepted) that onely they should vse abstinence some dayes, Mundaies and Wednesdaies, but that other daies also, they should content themselues with the Refections of Dinner and Supper onely, wherein also hee requireth great moderation in their diet, alleadging to moue them the more vnto it, that saying of the Gospel, Take heede that your hearts be not ouerloaden vvith surfetting and drunk^nnesse.



ARTICLE III. But let neither Dinner or Supper be take^ without one Pater noster, etc.
IT is a thing vsually practised, to distinguish three degrees of thankefulnesse; one is to acknowledge in heart the benefite receiued; the second is to praise the same, and confesse it in wordes; the thirde is, to recompence it in deeds, according to the abilitie of him which hath receaued it; and seeing that our abilitie is so small, that it is not able to requite the least parte of the great goodnesse, and infinite benefits, which God doeth dailie bestow one vs, we should be much too blame, if wee did not bende all our forces, and endeuour with heart, woorde, and deede, to requite them in what wee may, which our louing Father, S. FRANCIS wel considering, and knowing in like sorte, that amongst the dailie benefits, which God so liberally imparteth vnto vs for our bodies, one is the food wherby we liue, and nature is susteined To the intent therefore that the Brethren, and Sisters, of this holie order of Penance, which endeauour thereby, to make satisfaction for all former negligences, should not now by vnthankfulnesse, commit any newe offence, ordeyneth that for thanksgiuing vnto God, for that which through his goodnesse, they are then to receaue, they should both before Dinner and
 Supper, say one Pater noster, at the least: For if no other Catholike Grace be saide, and that they themselues cannot saye one, then must they in priuate and heartie maner, repeate one Pater noster, as wel to shew themselues thankfull vnto God, as also to inuocate his diuine grace and fatherlie benediction, from whence proceedeth our chiefest susteynca^e:Luc. 4. wherfore our Sauior obiected vnto Satha^ which tempted him, to turne stones into bread, that man did not liue onely by bread, but in the worde and vertue,Exod. 16 Num. 20. which proceedeth from God. He susteyned the Children of Israel 40. yeares, without any temporall foode. Our life truely doeth not depende vpon the common vse of naturall things, but vpon the benediction, and will of God, For if it please him (although naturall things doe neuer so much repugne) he wil sustaine and feede his seruants. He brought out of the harde stone,Exod. 15. plentie of water to refresh the Children of Israel, which were readie to die for thirste. The life therefore of spiritual me^, doth not so much depende vpon the natural order of temporal things, as it dooth vpon Gods will and blessing. Whensoeuer therfore thou shalt see thy selfe, in neuer so great distresse, either without bread, or any thing else, wherein thou maiest haue any hope, call to minde, and firmely beleeue, that God is so potent, that hee can as well without
 bread, as with it susteyne and nourish thee. Cast therefore thy care vpon God, and seeke him, and he will feede thee: yea faire greater care hath our Sauiour of those which seeke him and followe him, then they haue of themselues, whereof we haue a manifest exa^ple in that great multitude, which without care of themselues, followed him for three daies togeather, so farre into the desert, that they were so farre in danger and distresse, for want of food, that our Sauiour himselfe said, that,Marc. 8. If they should returne fasting, they vvould faint by the vvay. Wherefore (to shew how readie hee is alwaies to ayde and nourish those which seeke him) he fed the whole multitude, being 4000. so plentifully, that after they were all satisfyed, there remayned seuen basketsful of the fragments, which were left, so bountifully doeth God deale with all those, that relie sincerely vpon him, and implore with all humilitie his grace and blessing, which as the Prophet DAVID testifyeth, Openeth his hand, and filleth euerie liuing creature, vvith Benediction: Wherby thou mayst see, how necessary and profitable it is for thee to giue both thankes vnto God for his benefits, and also to craue his blessing before thy Refections, saying at the least, one Pater Noster, and Aue.



ARTICLE IIII. Which is to be iterated with Deo gratias.
AS benefites do encrease, so must wee doe in like sorte, in loue and thankfulnesse for them. Wherefore as the Brethren and Sisters were bound to say before each refection, a Pater noster, at the least, so now is required, that they must not be vnmindfull of God, and his benefits, after they haue receaued them, but rather shew themselues more thankfull, and not onely deuoutly to repeate the former Pater noster againe, but to adde also thereunto, Deo gratias, for that forgetfulnesse of a benefite, deserueth so great punishment, that amongst the auncient Romaines a bondslaue that was set at libertie, might afterwardes for that vice be recalled into bondage againe. The first thing that God commanded the Prophet ESAY to preach, was the accusation of the vngrateful persons, which when hee might haue reprehended the people for manie other vices, yet did he make choyse rather to beginne with this, as the chiefe roote and fountaine of all other vices, saying: Heare o heauens what I speake, and o earth, vnderstand vvith teares, because our Lord hath spoken and said, I haue brought
 vp children, and haue exalted them, but they haue despised me. The Oxe hath knowen his Possesser, and the Asse the stable of his Maister, but Israel hath not knowne me. The Prophet calleth the heauen and earth to witnesse, that they may heare him most iustly complaining, that for ingratitude men are made worse then bruite beasts. Many are found, which the more benefits they haue receiued, they become worse then before, and giuing themselues to all licentiousnes and drunkennesse, forget quite both the gift and the giuer:Psal. 75. of whom the Royall Prophet DAVID saith; They haue forgotten his benefites, and the vvonderfull things which he hath done for them.
To preuent therefore this great forgetfulnesse and negligence, S. FRANCIS not onely exhorteth them,Col. 3 1. Thes. 3. with the Apostle S. PAVL, to be thankful, and, In all things, that they should giue thankes to God, but also to make them to be more mindfull thereof, and to draw them to vse all diligence therein, setteth downe here a Penance for those which should neglect it; ordeyning, that if they chance to omit to say one Pater noster at the least, before or after any of their refections, that then they must say before they goe to their rest, three Pater nosters, for that negligence and offence, esteeming it no little fault to forget or omit to shew themselues thankfull for the goodnesse of God, which hath so
 bountifully bestowed on them those dailie benefites, which many one perhaps that hath better deserued it, doe want it, and which they themselues may also hereafter doe, if they should be vnthankfull for what they haue alreadie receaued, for that he is not worthy of a second benefite, which is not thankful for that which was bestowed before.


ARTICLE V. The Sisters great with childe, may ahstaine from corporall exercises.
AS S. FRANCIS doth exempt by these wordes Women, in this case from corporal exercise, so by the same sentence, he sheweth that married women though they make not that expresse vowe of Chastitie, which manie of this Congregation doe, yet are they not exempted and debarred from being admitted into this holie order, but may (if they haue all other conditions requisite, and do earnestly desire it) be admitted, and may neuerthelesse, after mature deliberation, vowe that kinde of Chastitie, whereof that auncient and learned Doctor ORIGEN maketh mention, when he exhorteth married women to propose and vowe chastitie of widdow-hood, in case their husbandes should die before them, that in wedlocke
 they may enioy the merit, of chaste widdowhood, by this promise and vow made before hand. Of this kinde of Castitie doth S, AVGVSTINE seeme to speake,Aug. in Psal. 75 id. in psal. 83. whe^ he saith that Some vow vnto God matrimoniall Chastitie, that besides his wife, hee vvill not knovve any other, so likevvise, the vvoman that besides her husband, she vvil not knovv any other, Some in like maner, though they haue assayed and tryed such acts of marriage, do vovve to suffer no such thing any more, and not to desire or susteyne any such thing, and they haue vovved, something more then the first: others do euen from their tender yeares, vovv virginitie it selfe, in such sort, that they vvill not so much as assaie vvhat others haue tryed and left, those truely haue vovved very much: hitherto S. August.
An example of the first maner of vowe of chastitie, we haue in that worthy Princesse, S. ELIZABETH, before mentioned, which hauing, by the consent of her husband, vowed obedience in all things that were not preiudicial, vnto the duetie of marriage, did after his death, performe this which in her tender yeares, she had made, (if it happened that she ouerliued her husband) of neuer knowing any other man: obserue that chastitie of widdowhood, in which happie estate, she remained and performed, most Holielie, all such thinges as are requyred, to bee in a true chaste Widdowe, both in bodie and heart also,
 with such an immutable purpose, to keepe her selfe in that estate, that being vehemently vrged by her friendes, after the death of her husband, to marrie againe, most constantly resisted them, making choyse rather to leade a poore holy professed widowes life, then to accept of great preferments by a second marriage: For those which are widdowes, but only while they expect marriage, are not separated from husbandes, but onely in respect of bodilie pleasure, for they be alreadie ioyned to them in heart and will; but if the true widdowe, with good deliberation, to confirme her selfe in the state of widdowhood, will offer vnto God her body, and chastitie, by vowe, as this blessed Saint did, shee shal adde a great outward ornament to her widdowhood: and make her resolution secure, for since, that after her vowe, she is no more in her owne power, and cannot leaue her chastitie, without forgoing her parte in Paradise; she wil be more zealous of her owne designement, and suffer not so much as one little thought of marriage, to stay in her hart, no not the space of one only moment, so that this sacred vowe, will put a strong bullwoorke, betweene her soule, and all manner of thoughts, that are contrarie to her holie resolution. And for this cause, that great Piller of the Church, holie S. AVGVSTINE, did counsell this vowe verie
 earnestly to a Christian Widdowe.
Of the second maner of vowe of chastity in mariage, to abstaine from the acte or desire of former pleasures, by mutual consent, the dailie commendable practise thereof, is a sufficient example for it, and though oftentimes, both parties doe enter into diuers religious Orders, notwithstanding, if both of them haue made the vowe of continencie, and giue free leaue vnto each other, the one may by the consent of the Bishoppe of the Diocesse, enter into Religion, though the other (being of that age, that no euil suspition may rise thereby) doe liue still abroad. The auncient writer TERTVLLIAN,Tertul. li. 1. ad vxor. c. 6 doeth with these wordes confirme it, that, In times past married persons, did by mutual consent vowe chastitie saying: When any thing seemeth difficile and heard, let vs declare and shewe others, to haue vndergone far harder: howe manie are there, which euen from their Baptisme, doe shut and seale vp their flesh? howe manie also, which vvith mutual consent, doe abolish and repeale the debt of Matrimonie? the abstinence thereof, is mantained and allowed in those, vvhich voluntarily haue gelded themselues, for the desire of heauen, their matrimonie remaining safe and sound; howe much more then, it being remooued. These things do appertaine vnto the continency of Wedlocke, which as with mutuall consent, they did vow it in the Primitiue
 Church amongst themselues, so by the like, did they mutually remit the debt of Matrimoney, vnto each other, their marriage notwithstanding safe, and the Church of God doth acknowledge among such to be true Matrimonie, as was that most sacred marriage,Aug. de Ser. Dom. in mont. cap. 14. Tom. 4. betweene the Blessed Virgin MARIE, and IOSEPH: yea, S. AVGVST. affirmeth, that those marriages are to bee helde more blessed, vvhich either hauing childre^, of contemning their earthly of-spring, could vvith mutual consent, keepe continency betvveene them, for (saith he) it is not against that precept, vvherein our Lord forbiddeth a man to dismisse his vvife, for he doth not dismisse her, because he liueth not carnally, but spiritually vvith her, and fulfilleth that vvhich is said by the Apostle,1. Cor. 7.29. The rest is, that they vvich haue vviues, be as though they had none.
Of the third kinde of Vowe, which was of Virginial chastitie, euen in Matrimonie, diuers holy persons of the third order of S. FRANCIS,Cap. 3. huius Regul. taking the Virgin of all Virgins, the blessed Mother of God for their Patrone and example therein, haue obserued this happie vowe from their infancy, in such sorte, that S. ELZEARIVS, aforementioned, liuing 26. yeares in marriage, without separating in bed from his Spouse S. DELPHINA at his death,Ibid. said, I render God humble thankes, that I leaue my Spouse Delphine a virgin, both in bodie and minde:
 B. GALEATVS in like sort kept perpetual chastity with his wife, in al sanctity and holines. So in like ma^er, that blessed Queene SALOMEA, with mutuall consent of her husband. COLOMANVS king of Galatia, liuing 15. yeares with him in marriage, remained after his death, so pure a virgin, that PRANDOTHA, the Bishod of Craconia,Pet. Rodul hist. scrip. Relig. li. 1 in fine. gaue vnto her in token thereof, The veile that belongeth onely vnto Virgins, They vvhich vovve this (saith S. AVGVSTINE in the forementioned place) vowe verie much.
But all, saith our Sauiour, doe not take this worde, but they vnto whom it is giuen: vpon which wordes of our Sauiour,Chrys. op. imp. hom. 33. S CHRYSOST. saith: Our Lord did not say, al cannot, that al do not take it, that is, al may truely take it, but notwithstanding al wil not. The Palme and Crowne is proposed: he vvhich seeketh for glory, doth not thinke of the labour, no man should be victorious, if al men should feare the danger of the fight. In that vve see some cannot, and doe fal from their purpose of chastitie, vvee ought not therefore to be the more negligent, about the vertue of chastitie, for if some follovving in the battaile, doe not discourage the others, but say it vas his chance, they doe not applye it vnto the battaile, but vnto the man: hovv much more then, ought we to impute the fal of any to the neglige^ce of such as fal, and not vnto the difficultie of virginity: wherfore S. Greg. Nazia:
 saieth; VVhen thou hearest but to vvhome it is giuen, adde thou, that it is giuen vnto those vvhich vvill, and vnto those vvhich inclyne their minde thereunto.
That it is a thing lawful for married persons, by mutual consent, to vowe chastity: the example, of many holy and blessed Saints, which haue so vowed and wrought manie miracles, both in their life, and after, doe make it so manifest, that no man can iustlie denie it. S. AVGVSTINE alleageth, the acte of the glorious Virgin, and Ioseph her husband for an example; that married persons, though by mutual consent, they keepe perpetual continencie: yet doe their Matrimonie remaine perfect. He declareth this matter more plainelie in his Epistle to S. PAVLINVS, which with his wife THERASIA,Aug. Epist 32. ad Pa. by mutual consent, vowed perpetual chastitie. Also of our happie King of England, S. EDVVARD, SVRIVS writeth, that liuing in perpetuall chastitie with his wife, remaining a virgin, did many miracles, and an 100: yeares after his death, his bodie was found altogether whole, in such sorte, that his beard being long and white, nothing thereof was fallen away,
The onely and chiefest reason wherefore it may not be lawful for a man to professe and vowe continencie is, because being married, hee hath not power of his owne bodie, and no man can giue that which is anothers, against his will, but
 this cause ceaseth, and is taken away, when the vowe is made by mutual consent.
Of these three sortes,Amb de vid. of continencie and chastitie, speaketh S. AMBROSE, saying: VVee are taught, that the vertue of chastitie is triple, the one of married persons, the seconde of VViddowes, the third of Virgins, for vve do not so much extoll the one, as to exclude the others. We praise therefore virginitie in such sorte, that vve doe not reiect vviddovves, and vvee reuerence vviddovves in such maner, that due honour is reserued vnto marriage.Chrysost. de virg. Chap. 11. Therefore worthelie saith S. CHRYSO. Marriage is good, but for the same case virginitie is admirable, in that it is better then marriage, vvhich is good, and is so much more better as the Gouernour of the Shippe and Gallye, doeth excell the Ores: or the Captaine is more noble then the Souldiers, but euen as if you take the Ores from the Galley, you shall soone make Spipvvracke, and if you remooue the Souldiers from the battaile, you vvill deliuer the Captaine into the handes of his enemies. So if you throw downe Matrimony out of his place, you shal bereaue virginitie of her glorie. Virginitie, say you is good, that doe I likevvise confesse, and also that it is better then marriage, and vnto this in like maner vvill I agree, but I vvill adde this, that it doeth so much excell marriage, as heauen doeth surpasse the earth, and as much as Angels doe exceede men: for marriage (saith S. HIEROM) doeth fill the earth,
 virginitie Paradise.Hiero. li. 1 aduers. Io c. 9. Ansel lib. de virg. ext. Aug. lib de virg. Abdius in vita eius. S. ANSELME affirmeth, virginitie to be the ioye of the Prophets, the glory of the Apostles, the life of the Angels, and crowne of Saints. Let not man (saith S. AMBROSE) maruaile, if they are co^pared vnto Angels, vvhich are espoused vnto their Lord.
Wherefore the blessed Apostles, and holie Fathers, haue alwaies laboured, to enduce chaste Virgins, to dedicate their virginitie vnto God. S. MATTHEVV perswaded IPHIGONEA to vowe virginitie: S. PAVL did in like sort, that holy virgin TECLA, as witnesseth S. AMBROSE, and S. CLEMENT induced the holy Virgin,Lib. 2. de virg. Bed. in Mar. Mart. Epist. ad Telos, c. 8. DOMITILLA, to make the like vowe. S. MARTIAL also saith, that he perswaded the holy Virgin VALERIA, to vowe her virginitie vnto God. S. AVGVSTINE was not inferiour to any, in exhorting virgins to make this holy vowe, but exhorted all that could and had not made that vowe, to make it.Li. de vir. cap. 30 He helde that vowe to be worthy of such honour, that although he said, that, No fecunditie, or fulnesse of the flesh, is to be co^pared vnto virginitie: yet he affirmeth, that virginitie is not honoured of it selfe, but for that it is dedicated vnto God. To doe any good thing by vowe, is bettet and mote pleasing vnto God, then that which is done without it. For howe much greater the vertue is, from whence the worke proceedeth, so much the more is it meritorious and pleasing vnto God:
 wherefore, seeing that virginitie, which is kept without vow, proceedeth only from continency, which is an acte of Te^perance, wheras that which is obserued by vow, is both an act therof, and of religion also, which act of religio^, is far more noble and greater the^ te^perance. Virginity therfore which is kept thereby, must needes be more honorable before God: for eue^ as a sinne which proceedeth fro^ a wil setled vnto euil, is far worse then that which co^meth from frailty only, so is that deed much better which is done with a minde, and wil, confirmed in good, then that which wanteth that firmenes and stabilitie. They therfore which vow virginitie, not only doe gaine (as wee haue said) that their act is more excellent and pleasing vnto God, but also do arme themselues against the assaults of the deuil, and humaine frailty and mutability: for men in those things wherunto they are bound, by the bo^ds of the law, although they be good and profitable, yet doe they easily change their purpose, aswel by the instigation of the deuil, as by their owne mutability and inconstancy; wherefore we see that in humaine affaires, oathes are oftentimes required, wherby the will and mind may be so tied, that they may not easily be changed; happy therfore is that band which keepeth mans wil stable and constant; and maketh the^ more gratious in the sight of God, then other deuout persons which are not bound.

Wherefore, though all in general of this third order of Penance, doe enioy all the Spiritual fauours, priuiledges, and indulgences, of all the Orders of S. FRANCIS, yet such regarde is and alwaies hath bene had, of these which doe solemnely vowe chastitie, virginal, or single life, that all men with one consent doe agree, that though they doe not solemnely vowe or professe any other Religion, or other vowes, whether they liue in their owne houses, or kinsfolkes, or friendes, yet ought they to enioy, al and singuler priuiledges and immunities, of all the Orders of S. FRANCIS, that are conuenient vnto their estate and calling.


ARTICLE VI. The Sisters great with childe may abstaine if they wil from al Corporall exercises.
SO pretious is the time that God hath lent vs, in this transitorie life, to worke our saluation therein, that there is hardly any one thing, whereof hee will exact a more strict account, then how and wherein we haue imployed it. For this momentarie time, is not lent vs in this vale of miserie, to spende it in our vaine pleasures
 and delights, as manie most imprudentlie doe, but as holie ZACHARY saith, That vve should serue God all our daies,Luc, 1 because the time of this mortal life, which is graunted vnto vs, is giuen to that ende, that by our deedes, wee may get the life euerlasting, for death will soone come, and then there will be no place to worke our saluation, or to doe Penance, Therefore our louing Redeemer, exhorteth vs himselfe, To vvorke whilest the daye lasteth, for that the night vvill come, vvhen no man shall be able to vvorke. Wherefore, his worthie Apostle and vessel of election, S. PAVL exhorteth vs thereunto in like sorte, saying: Behold novv is the time,2. Cor. 6 novve is the daye of our saluation, let vs shevv our selues in all things, as the Ministers and Seruants of God: whose profitable counsell, our holie Patrone, S, FRANCIS, did not only follow himselfe, but endeauoured to drawe all his children and followers to doe the like, inducing them thereunto, both by worde and example, for though he himselfe had obtayned vnto that height of perfection, that his heart and minde were as it were, in all places and times wholly employed in prayer and contemplation, yet notwithstanding to giue example vnto his Spiritual children and followers, to auoide with all their power idlenesse, did giue himselfe vnto bodilie labour, as is made mention, and plainely
 appeareth in his last will and Testament, where he saith: I haue laboured with my handes, and will labour, and firmely commaund that all my other Brethren doe worke in that labour, which belongeth vnto honesty, and they which know not how, let them learne, not for Couetousnesse, to receaue the rewarde, and hire of the labour, but for good example sake, and to chase awaie idlenesse: which hee did know to be hurtful vnto the soule, that one of his principall Chapters of his first Rule,Chap. 5. Reg. was to preuent it, giuing their strict commandement, that, All his Brethren vnto whom our Lord, had giuen grace and strength to labour, should labour faithfully and deuoutly, but yet in such sort, that idlenes being excluded, they should not extinguish the Spirit of holy Prayer and deuotion, whereunto all other Temporal thinges should giue place. Wherefore, though he giueth here leaue vnto women great with childe, that they may if they wil, abstaine from corporal exercises, and labour vntil the day of their Purification, yet doth he except praier onely, wherein they ought then principally to employ themselues, vntil such time as they haue recouered both health and strength, whereby they may betake themselues againe, to their vertuous corporall exercises, to auoide idlenesse, which hee calleth the enemie of the soule, for that no sooner doth our deadly enemie finde vs idle, but presently doth assault vs with his
 wicked temptations. Wherfore one of the principal caueats, which the holie Fathers gaue vnto vs is,S. Hirom. ad Rusti. Monarch. To doe alwaies some good thing, that our aduersary may not find vs idle.
Behould, our Sauiour himselfe, was so careful for our example, in spending of his whole time in holy exercises, that he spent the whole nights in continual prayer, and the day in preaching, and seeking the good of all persons, both in body and soule. The glorious virgin, his blessed Mother,C. 4. and li. 8. C. 4. vsed much diligence therein. For (Sabellicus writeth) She deuided the day time in this maner. In the morning for three houres space, shee gaue her selfe to prayer and deuotion, from thenceforth till midday, she sat at her woorke, and after dinner, she did reade the holy Scriptures.
Our happie forementioned Queene KATHERINE,Doct. Sand lib. de schi imitating to the vttermost of her power this glorious Queene of Angels, was most careful to spend her whole life, in the seruice of God, and good of her soule, in such sort, that, At midnight shee did rise out of her bedde, to be present at the Mattins of Religious people by fiue of the clock in the morning, she apparrelled her selfe in a verie short space, saying, that she lost no time but vvhat vvas bestovved in that manner: vpon euerie VVednesdaie and Frydaie, shee confessed her sinnes vnto her Ghostly Father, and euery Sunday, she receiued the B. Sacrame^t of the altar. Euery day in the weeke she saide the office of our B. Lady, and bestowed 6. houres
 in the morning at the Church in prayer: After dinner, she did read something dailie of the liues of Saincts (her maydens standing about her) for the space of two houres. Then returning againe vnto the Church, she bestowed all her time there, till nigh supper vvas readie, vvhich shee did alvvaies take vvith great moderation: shee prayed alvvaies vpon her knees without cushion, or any thing else put betweene them, and the colde pauement,
Manie other examples could I here alleadge to this purpose, as of S. CLARE, which though for manie yeares, through weakence, shee was enforced to keepe her bed, wherein though shee spent the greatest parte of her time in prayer, yet causing her selfe to bee boulstred vp with pillowes, did sitting, labour so much in spinning fine cloath, that she made thereof 50. payre of Corporalles, which she enclosing in Cassis of silke, bestowed vpon the Altars of the Churches, neere vnto the Cittie Assisium. S. LEVVES also King of France, a most worthy member of this third order, though with a wounderful care, he administred Iustice, and managed his affairs of state, yet did so spend the rest of his time, in such sorte in prayer, and vertuous exercises, that he was wont to heare two Masses euerie daie, to say Euen-song and Complaine with his Chaplaines, and besides, kept duely euerie day his prefixed time of Meditations, and visited often
 the Hospitals, euery Wednesday went vnto Confession, hard holy Sermons, and vsed Spiritual Conference; yet for al these Spiritual exercises, was he so careful of his temporal affaires, belonging to his charge, that he did not omit the least occasion of the Publike weale, exteriorlie offered, which hee did most diligently put in execution.
Infinite in a maner are the examples which the Holie Saints haue left behinde them, to induce vs to be careful in labouring, and spending wel our time, which for breuitie sake omitting, I did make choyse of these fewe particuler, to the intent that such as may conueniently, and haue health and oportunitie, should endeauour to follow them as neere as they may, for seeing that great indulgences and graces are granted vnto al persons, of what degree or sexe soeuer, of this holy order of Penance, euery one may wel thinke, that so great benefits are not graunted for small trifles, for though the perfection and excellency of the Order, consisteth in that, it requireth no matter of such difficultie, but what euerie one of any degree, be hee neuer so weake or feeble, may easily fulfill, as much as is required of him, his state and strength considered: yet notwithstanding, euery one must endeauour to do something dailie, what hee may conueniently; so doing, though his abilitie be able to do little, yet
 is it esteemed much in respect of his goodwill; For it is not the greatnesse of the seruice, but the feruent affection of the heart, which is most regarded.
Our Sauiour himselfe, did most manifestly declare as much, in the gift of the poore widdow, whose pouerty, though it were such, that she was not able to offer, either golde or siluer, but onely a little peece of brasse, valewing about a farthing, yet he (which being both God and man, doth more regarde the minde and intention in all our actions, then the worke it selfe) said* Truely, I say vnto you, this poore widdow hath giuen more then all the rest. More I say, not in respect of the greatnesse of the thing it selfe, that was offered, but in regarde of the feruent deuotion, of the promptitude of the minde, of the diuine acceptation and qualitie of the gift, which was to the vttermost of her power, and more then she could well spare, which deserued therefore to be thus rewarded by our Sauiour:Luc. 21. So in like sort, if euery one of this third order, will (with hearty loue and earnest desire to please God) euerie daie and hower thereof doe something, though his power be little, yet assuredly his rewarde shal be great, if he labour according to the talent and grace which God hath giuen him, which thing our Sauiour dooth insinuate, in the Parable of those which hyred to labour in the Vineyarde,
 where euery one that did worke, whether he were weake or strong, did receaue all the like rewarde: Neither doe we reade for what work euery one was hyred, whether to dig and delue, or to prune the veines, but onely that all which did worke, receiued their hyre, and no others, whereby he admonisheth vs, That euery one must labour according to his strength, conditio^ and qualitie, if he will in the ende of the daye, that is, after this life, receaue his penny, and euerlasting glorie: Whilest therefore the day lasteth, and we haue time and space, let euery one employ himselfe, continually in prayer, meditation, or some other good workes, according to his vocation, that thereby vpon good groundes, he may assuredly hope for a great reward in heauen. For our bodies are giuen vnto vs by God, to this end, that therwith we should be doing alwaies some good thing, so serue him in this transitory life, that in this heauenly kingdome, he may iustly in the ende, recompence our momentary labours, with euerlasting glory: which after the honour of God, ought to be the chiefe marke wherunto all actions should tende, seeing that from the rightnesse of our intention, proceedeth the greatnesse of our Recompence;Mat, 20. For though the intention seemeth to be last in the worke, yet it is the greatest in merit.

Let euery one therefore, not onely be careful to do wel, but also, be as wary to direct his intention in all his actions, principally to the glory of God, seeking of him for rewarde of his worke, more the health of his soule, then the good of his bodie: whereby he shal merit, a hundred folde more, then he which in his labours intendeth neither good or euil, but laboureth onely for temporal rewarde, like an oxe:Ecclesp 4. of such persons, the Ecclesiastick saith, A man hath nothing more then a beast, whereas otherwise, they might make the fruits of their labours glorious, as the wise man noteth saying:Sapient. 4 The fruit of good labours, and vvorkes is glorious.
Neither ought any mans greatnesse to make him the lesse carefull herein, for no man hath any certaintie of the continuance of his wealth, which thing, the Emperour Octauian well considering, would not suffer his daughters, to be brought vp without some arte of labouring, saying, I may become poore, for all my great wealth now, and then may my daughters by their owne labour maintaine themselues.Iob. 5 Holie IOB affirmeth, that it is as naturall for a man to worke, as birdes for to flye, saying, A man is borne to labour, as Birds to flie. The Apostle S. PAVLE is so earnest herein,2. Thes. 3. that he saith, He that vvil not worke, let him not eate: and he for his owne parte did not onely labour for himselfe, but for those
 which were with him.S. Hiero. S. HIEROME also holdeth, that there is no almes more pleasing to God, then what is giuen out of the labour of thy owne handes, and saieth, Though thou shouldest distribute al thy rents and reuenewes among the poore, yet notwithstanding there is nothing more pretious and aceeptable vnto our Sauiour, then what thou hast gotten with thine owne hands. In this sentence, S. HIEROM doeth preuent the obiection which some rich idle persons might make, saying: I neede not to labour, for I haue enough otherwise: behould he telleth thee, that though thou hast neuer so much to giue, yet is there nothing more pretious then what thou hast gained with thine owne handes to bestowe. S. ELIZABETH was a kings daughter, and left rich by the Prince her husbend, both in possessions, and otherwise, yet did she with her Handmaides spinne, and make therewith cloath to cloath the poore, for rewarde whereof she is now cloathed with glorie; wherefore as all persons are desirous to bee clad in like maner, so let euery one according to his calling and degree, endeauour to imitate therin, this their holie Patronesse, that following the examples of her life here in earth, they may enioy with her the endlesse ioyes of heauen.



ARTICLE VII. The labourers in regard of their wearisomnesse of their labour, may from the feast of the Resurrection, eate three times in the day. etc.
Act. 10.S. PETER considering, how iustlie God dooth deale with all his Creatures, saieth, In veritie I haue found, that God is not an acceptor of persons; So our holie Father S. FRANCIS, imitating the example of our Sauiour, sheweth here that his care is no lesse of the poore labourer, then of the rich Potentate: wherefore considering that the wearisomnesse of his labour, requireth more sustenance and food then they which rest, graunteth him free leaue to eate, three times in the day, when he laboureth from Easter, vntill October: For hee would not that any whosoeuer should so indiscreetly fast, that he should hurte himselfe, falling thereby into weakenes and sicknes; but is most careful that euerie one should so liue, as to conserue the health both of bodie and soule, directing his intentions therein, and in all other actions whatsoeuer, onely to the honour and glorie of God; for otherwise, how good and
 right Christian soeuer thou seemest to be, and to keepe the rest of the diuine Commandements, yet if thou failest in the first principle, that is, the loue of God, when thy good Angel shal present all thy good workes before the Tribunal seate of God, presently the Aduersarie the deuil, will seeke to make them nothing, and say as he saide of IOB, Serue God freelie? and the like will he saie of thee,Iob. 1. Did he those good deedes, freelie for the loue of God, without hope of other recompence: For the good workes truely shall be waighed by the ende it selfe, which thou hadst in doing of them.
Therefore the poore labourer or seruant may as much merite, and winne heauen as soone by his labour, and faithfull seruice, as his Maister, by his prayers and almes deedes: if all his intentions be (in whatsoeuer hee doeth) chiefely for the loue and honour of God, which will most assuredlie reward him for it, with his heauenly kingdome.



ARTICLE VIII. But when it happeneth, that they are employed in other mens work, then it is lawful for them to eate. etc.
SO prouident and careful was S. FRANCIS, for the comfort of all persons, that might haue any desire to this order of Penance, that hee doeth preuent and take awaie all inconueniences, that might discourage them: Wherefore seeing that it would be a great trouble for labourers and seruants, if they should be tyed vnto such a dyet, that special preparation must be made for the^, he giueth them free leaue to eate all such meates, as the other Catholikes, where they remaine, may lawfullie doe: Neither is it to be supposed, but that his intention was to graunt that leaue both vnto children in their parents houses, and soiourners in like sorte: But though in qualitie of diet, they doe conforme themselues vnto the deuout Catholike companie: yet notwithstanding to shew, that they are not vnmindfull of what they should doe, if they might conueniently, they ought to vse in all those daies and times of abstinences (if health
 permit them) some austeritie in their diet, thereby to keepe the bodie obedient vnto the soule, and themselues the more free from the bondage of Sathan, which as by the forbidden meate, and gluttonnie,Genes. 3. did ouercome our first Parents, so by the same doeth he seeke to ouerthrow vs dailie, for that manie euils proceeding from the vice of gluttonie, the deuil not being ignorant thereof, seeketh continually to draw vs into that filthie vice. Wherefore our sweete Sauiour and louing Redeemer, giueth vs special warning thereof, in the Gospel of S. LVKE, saying,Luc. 21. Take heede that your hearts be not ouerloaden with surfetting and drunkennesse: Thereby insinuating that it hurteth, not onely the bodie, but the soule also. If he had said, take heed that your bodies be not ouerloaden, it had bene then manifest, that he had spoken of the infirmities of the bodie, which proceed from inordinate feeding, and too much meate, according to that saying of the Ecclesiastick:Eccles* 37 From such meate pro^eedeth infirmities and sicknesse: But he said, take heed that your hearts be not ouerloaden, for by gluttonie, man is not onely subiect vnto the death of the bodie, but of the soule it selfe also, as may be plainely seene by a manifest example of the Iewes which sat them downe to eate and drinke, and rose vp to playe and daunce before the Idole, saying: Those are thy gods (o Israel) vvhich
 did bring thee out of the land of Aegypt. The Philistins also banquetting and making merrie,Iud. 16. 1. Reg. 2. death fell suddainly vpon them. The children of HELIE, would not take of the offering of sodden flesh, but rawe, that they might prepare it for themselues more delicately, which for their labour were killed and perished most miserably in the warres.1. Rig. 14. IONATHAS also for that he did but eate a little Honie, against the commandement of his Father, he had killed him, if the people had not hindred it: Wherefore holy IOB, knowing that in banquetting and gluttonie,Iob. 1. many sinnes are committed, did therefore after that his sonnes had banquetted, rising very earlie, offer euerie day Sacrifice, saying, Least peraduenture my children haue offended herein If riotuousnesse and gluttonie had not bene much displeasing vnto God, our Sauiour himselfe would neuer haue giuen it so heauie a curse in the Gospell, saying: VVoe be vnto you,Luc. 6. vvhich shall be filled, because you shal suffer hungar. Euery good Christian therefore ought to make a great account of abstinence and Temperance, as a thing most profitable and healthfull for man, both for bodie and soule, and as a Preseruatiue against that filthie vice of Gluttonie, which bringeth euerlasting death vnto both; much more then ought the Brethren and Sisters, of this Order of Penance, be careful to vse what abstinence
 they may, or at the least to obserue Temperance in their diet, seeing that their Rule and Profession of Penance, doeth binde them thereunto.




How oft they ought to goe to Confession in the yeare, and receaue. CHAP. VI.
LEt not any of the Brethren and Sisters, omitte to confesse their owne sinnes, and deuoutly receaue the pretious Sacrament of the Altar, thrice in the yeare, that is, in the Feastes, of the Natiuitie of our Sauiour, of his Resurrection, and Pentecoste, rec^nciling themselues to their neighbours, and also restoring what they haue of other mens.


Concerning the 16. Chapter.
NOTE, that because by often confession and receauing of the B. Sacrame^t,Co^mif. Genaral. Cismon, they receaue so many spiritual fruits, being done with due preparation, and good dispositio^, in the Church of God: the vse of the Sacraments is more frequent, then it was in the time, when this maner of life was instituted: We do ordaine, that on the saide daies of the Natiuitie, Resurrection, and Pentecost; and on the rest of the Feasts of our Sauiour, and of our blessed Ladie, and of the Apostles, of our blessed Father S. FRANCIS, and Saintes of his order, they must communicate, both Brothers and Sisters, and oftner if their Confessors and Ghostly fathers, will giue them leaue: to which we charge them, to looke how they giue the said licence, attending alwaies the profite and increase in vertue, and the spirite of those which are to haue licence. Let them heare Masse euery daye, if they haue not some iust cause of excuse, and also let them heare the Sermon of the Fryers of the Order, or other Preachers, and especially of those, whose doctrine is moste fruitful and perfite for them, and doe animate them most to the keeping of the Commandements of God, and the obseruation of their Rule,

SEEING that the deuotion of manie was growen so colde, and so far from the example of the Primitiue Church, wherein the faithfull Christians did then frequent the Sacraments once euery weeke at the least; now some would hardly doe it once in the yeare, were it not for the strict commandement of the Church: our Holie Father, would not therefore binde the Brethren and Sisters, to receaue any oftner vpon obligation of the Rule, but onely thrice in the yeare to frequent them. For being desirous by this order, to draw all persons that he might, from the snares of sinne, and place them in the way of vertue, would not tye them to any thing that might seeme burdensome, for knowing by experience, that hauing once enflamed the hearts of any with desire of vertue, and led them into the way thereof, that they would themselues runne with all alacrity, vnto all perfection. He would not therefore goe about to drawe them by force to receaue the Sacrament often, knowing that a generous minde, is rather induced and led by faire meanes, then drawen by force, as the euent in these affaires doth make manifest; where now see for example, that the deuotion of the Brethren and Sisters, is such, that it is growne vnto a common custome amongst them, to receaue euery where (when they may conueniently) once in fifteene daies at the
 least, and when they want oportunitie, by making due examination of their consciences, with like preparation, and feruent desire, to receaue spiritually their sweete Sauiour, in the holy Sacrament of the Altar, doe in this Spiritual receauing, sometimes gaine almost as much merit, by their contrition and charitie, as if they had receaued corporally: Wherefore seeing that this long practized feruour, of often receauing is growne to so common and auncient a custome, euerie one that may conueniently, ought deuoutly and carefully to keepe it, but such is the deuotion of many (and most highly to be commended) which doe not content themselues herewithal, but out of a singular affection, vnto their most louing redeemer, vse al reuere^ce and dilige^ce to feed their soules euerie Sunday at the least, at this most admirable and heauenlie banquet; resting both certaine and assured that such are not a little pleasing vnto God* which out of their feruent loue, doe so often vnite themselues vnto his best beloued Sonne, which is also a manifest token, that in requital of his loue, they shall obtaine the loue of their heauenly Father againe, according vnto the wordes of our Sauiour, which said: My Father loueth you, because you haue loued me. For the obteyning therefore of this loue. S. ELZEARIVS and S.Sur. in vita S. Elzear. DELPHINE his wife (both of them being of this holy order of Pennance)
 did not onely receaue their Sauiour euery Sunday themselues, but caused their whole family, to seeke euery weeke for encrease of his grace, by the holy Sacrament of Pennance, and once euery moneth, at the least, to receaue the Author of all grace, in the most admirable Sacrament of the Altar.
So in like sort, our most holy and worthie Queene KATHERINE, had so great and feruent loue vnto our Sauiour, and to the abundance of grace which hee giueth in the Sacrament, that not onely shee did receaue her selfe, euery Sundaie, but did endeauour by cleansing her sinnes, thrice in the weeke, by Sacramental confession, to be as often partaker of his heauenly grace giuen therein.


Reconciling themselues vnto their Neighbours, and restoring other mens goods, etc.
THOVGH at all times of the yeare, prudent persons, are careful to prouide things necessarie for their house-keeping; yet against these three feasts, they are diligent to furnish and adorne their houses more aboundantly; so in like sorte, though the Brethren and Sisters, ought to be careful, continually to prouide for the good
 of their soules, yet in respect of the highnesse of these feasts, and greatnesse of the benefites receaued therein, they ought to make a great preparation to cloath themselues with nuptial garments of charitie, and by reconciling themselues to their neighbours, and restoring what they haue of other mens, to the intent that if they haue not, or could not, at other times, make euen with God and the world, at the least against those high solemnities, and great feasts, they should endeauour to do it, and to make at those three times a general Confession of all the chiefe matters, that may happen, from the one feast vnto the other. The like counsel that learned and worthie Bishope,Franc. Lola. fol. 397. FRANCIS ZALER giueth thee saying: Change not lightlie nor easily thy Confessor, but hauing made choise of a sufficient one, continue constantly, rendring him an account of thy Conscience, on the daies and times appoynted, opening vnto him freely and plainely the sinnes thou hast committed from time to time, and monethly: or from two moneths to two moneths: Tell him likewise the state of thy inclynation, though thou haue not sinned by them, as vvhether thou be tormented with sadnes, or with peeuishnes, whether thou be giuen to ouermuch mirth, or desirous of gaine, and such like inclynations.




That they ought not to weare weapons of offence. CHAP. VII.
LEt not the Brethren beare with them weapons of offence, exeept it be for the defence of the Romaine Church of the Christian faith, or else of their owne lande, or by the leaue of the Ministers.

Concerning the seuenth Chapter.
NOte,Co^mif. Genaral. Cismon, that the same meanes which is ordayned and counselled about the Habite, they must keepe concerning the Armes and weapons, for the sworde is as it were a common ornament, and ought to be permitted, to those with whom is dispensed in the Habite.
HEERE is shewed, that they ought not to be any quarrellers, or reuengers of other mens, or their owne quarrelles,
 or iniuries? Wherefore they haue no neede at all, to weare weapons of offence, but onely in these cases set downe here, or for such causes as the Ministers shal thinke fit to giue them a general leaue. Our chiefest vveapons (saith Bless. EGIDIVS) against all iniuries and tribulations, is Patience, wherby hovv much the more any is readie to suffer them,Hist. Seraph Rel. de B. Agid 3. S^c. S. Franc. so much, is he greater before God, and no more: If any one therefore, saith he, do saye any euill vnto thee, helpe him, if he say any good vnto thee, render it vnto God, If thou vvilt rightly make thy owne part good, do thou thy selfe make it euil and the others good, and vvhen any doth str^ue vvith thee if thou wilt ouercome loose Doe not offer iniurie to any, and vvhosoeuer doth thee vvrong suffer it patiently, for the loue of God, and for the remission of thy sinnes. It is much better to suffer a great iniurie, for the loue of God, vvithout murmuring, then to feede dailie a hundred poore people, and to fast thy selfe for manie daies togeather; blessed is he vvhich hath alvvaies his sinnes before his eyes, and the benefites vvhich God hath bestowed one him, and doeth suffer patiently all tribulations and afflictions, for hereby he ought to take great consolation, for he vvhich alvvaies hath in his sight, his ovvne offences, shal not faile in any tribulation. If our Lord should rayne stones from heauen, they should not hurte vs, if vvee vvere suc^, as vvee ought to be: If thou ouercommest thy selfe, thou shalt ouercome
 all thine enemies: It is a great vertue, if one should permit himselfe, to bee ouercome of all men, for that such a one should be Lorde of this vvorlde. If thou wilt be saued, endeauour to despise all the Consolations, that any mortall creature can yeelde thee, because greater ruine and hurte come from consolations, then from tribulations: noble, saith he, is the nature of a horse, vvhich though he be in a most swift course, yet notwithstanding, hee which rideth on him, may turne and bende him into any other way: Euen so ought a man permit himselfe to be ruled by him which correcteth him, seeing that for the only loue of God, a ma^ ought to desire as much as lyeth in him, to giue a reward vnto others, to vexe him and pull him by the haires: A certaine person therefore murmuring before him, he said vnto him: My brother, how much more thou murmurest, so much more thou dost vexe and burden thy selfe, and the more humblie thou dost submit thy head vnto holy obedie^ce, so much more light and sweete, will it be vnto thee. Thou wilt not be reprehended and reproached in this world, and wilt be honoured in the other? thou wilt not be euil spoken vnto, and wilt be blessed? thou vvilt not labour, and yet wouldst haue rest? This is not the way, but by patience and well doing, thou shalt ouercome, and reuenge thy selfe best of thine enemies. Though in doing well, thou hast many enemies, it is noe great maruaile, Seeing, that our Sauioure him selfe,
 which was the Author and fountaine of all goodnesse, was not without them, but it doth not belong vnto the modestie of a Christian, and much lesse vnto his calling, which tendeth vnto perfection, to reuenge himselfe, in any other maner, then as Diogines said vnto a certaine person,Diogines. which asked him* how he might best reuenge himselfe of his enemies. If thou (saith he) shalt shew thy selfe to be a good and honest man:Laert. lib. 6. meaning thereby that thy continuall good life, and vertuous deedes, will make all men to condemne him, that offered thee those iniuries, or spake so euill of thee; or otherwise, euen as we cast a crust of bread to the dogges that barke against vs, so against euil disposed persons, let vs cast our prayers, that they may be cured and deliuered fro^ this euil, because the fountaine of al wisdom, Christ himself did teach it vnto vs, both by worde and deed, saying in the Gospel: Loue your enemies, and doe well vnto those which hate you, and praye for those which calumniate you and persecute you, that you may be the children of your fathers vvhi^h is in heauen. And by his deeds he taught no lesse, when praying for those which crucified him said, O Father pardon and forgiue them this offence, for they knovv not vvhat they doe. Holie S. STEVEN, which now raigneth with him in glorie, did here intreate his holy example in earth, praying with such feruour for those
 which stoned him to death, that bowing his knees, he cryed out with a loud voyce, saying, O Lord,Act. 7. impute not this sinne vnto them: Wherefore all such as desire to raigne with Christ in glorie, must endeauour to imitate his holy maner, in reuenging vs of our enemies, that is, with perfect patience and charitie, to pray for them. And if in so doing, we shew our selues according to the wordes of our Sauiour, to be true children of our heauenly Father, hee will reuenge our quarrell,Rom. 2. and therefore willeth vs, as S. PAVLE testifyeth: To leaue the reuenge vnto him.



Of saying the Canonicall houres. CHAP. VIII.
LEt euerie one of them say daylie, the seuen Canonical houres (that is to say) Mattins, Prime, third, sixt, ninth, Euensong, and Compline; The Clarkes (that is, they which can reade) the Psalter, let them saye for Prime, Deus in nomine tuo,
 Beati immaculati, vntil Legem pone, and the other Psalmes of the howres, after the vse of the Cleargie, with Gloria Patri, etc. But when they shall not come to the Church, let them be carefull to say for their Mattins, the Psalmes which the cleargie, or Cathedral Church doe say, or at the least, let them not omit to saye as the other vnlearned doe, for Mattins, twelue times Pater noster, and for each other hower, seuen times with Gloria patri. And in the howres of Prime and Compline, let the^ which do know it: adde the Apostles Creede, and the Psalme, Miserere mei Deus: But if they shall hrppen not to saye them, at the appoynted howres, let them say, three times Pater noster, for that default. But the sicke persons, are not bound to saye these aforesaid howres, vnlesse they will. But in the Lent, let them be careful to goe personally
 to Mattins, to the Parish Churches, where they dwel, vnlesse for some reasonable cause they be excused.

Concerning the eight Chapter.
NOTE, that for the diuine office,Co^mis. Genaral. Cismon* Priests and other, who are in Holie order, doe fulfil it, in saying the Romaine Breuiarie, as other Ecclesiastical persons doe, although it be moreouer commanded, them, th^t in the Euensong and Mattins, and amongst other Commemorations, to make commemoration of our holy Father S. FRANCIS, both how, when, and in the same maner and forme as the Religious of his Order doe; and hauing ended these two houres of Mattins, and Euensong, and said, Diuinum auxilium maneat semper nobiscum, they must adde, Deprofundis for the soules of their Brethren, departed out of this life, with the prayere, Deus veniae largi, etc.
And moreouer, it is to be noted, that they must saye the Office of the Saincts of this third order, and of the rest of which the Frior Minors say.
They who can saye, the Office of our Ladie, and will say it, being not in Holie
 Orders, shall fulfill their obligation, by saying of it, adding some prayers for the dead, and particularlie, for those of this Congregation.
Moreouer, wee charge euerie one of them, that they say euerie daie the Crowne of our B. Ladie, or the third parte of the Rosary, quietly and deuoutlie, fixing their minde vpon some of those mysteries, which the deuout seruants of the blessed Virgin, doe vse to meditate vpon in the Church.
EVEN as the body of ours, if the soule be not present therewith, is truelie dead, and soone smelleth, so in like sorte, the soule which giueth it selfe not vnto prayer,Chrysost. lib. 1. de Orand. Deo. is dead, miserable, and stinketh before the face of God: wherefore S. CHRYSOST. saieth: Certainely all men haue no lesse neede of this holy vvorke of prayer, then trees of mo^stnesse of the vvater: And as the vvater, saith he, is the life of the fish, so is prayer vnto thee: Which thing our holie Patrone did so profoundly and deuoutly consider, that he did giue his heart and intention so wholly thereunto,S. Bonauent. c. 10. vitae, S. Fran. that both walking and sitting, labouring and resting, both within and abroad, he was intentiue vnto prayer, with all the force of his mind, in such sort, that it seemed, he had not onely dedicated therunto, whatsoeuer was in him, either of heart or body, but also of worke and time:
 Wherefore, finding that prayer was his comfort, refuge and ayde in al things whatsoeuer he went about, desiring to enflame and stir vp the hearts of all his children, to the continual practise of that holy exercise, he ordayneth here this particuler forme of prayer, which all the Brethren and Sisters, which professe this Rule, should binde themselues to obserue, as well the learned, as vnlearned (that could conuenientlie) ordaining them to say dailie, the 7. Canonicall houres, that is, Mattins, Prime, Third, Sixt, Ninth, Euensong, and Compleine, as before I said.

ARTICLE I. They which can reade the Psalter, let them say for Prime, Deus in nomine tuo.
NOTE that all sortes of people, being admitted into this holy order of Penance, some of them are learned, and in holy Orders, others are learned, and not in holy Orders: there are also certaine which are not learned at all: The first, when they haue no lawful impediment, are bounde to say now the Mattins of the Breuiarie, according vnto the vse of the Romaine


 Church: For although in the beginning of this Chapter, there is nothing set downe for Mattins, but onely beginneth with Prime, and so consequently with the other houres; yet immediatly after it is saide, that, VVhen they shal come vnto the Church, they must be carefull to say for Mattins, the Psalmes vvhich the Cleargie, or Cathedrall Church do saye: Which is to be vnderstood, that they must say their Mattins, as well when they come to Church, as when they come not. And in like sort, all the rest of their houres, whi^h obligation, doth only belong vnto the Clarkes, that is, vnto the Priests, with those which are in holie orders, and must in like sorte serue the Saints of the order of S. FRANCIS, and to adde his name vnto their Confiteor. But as for others, though they are learned and can reade, yet may they, and doe for the most parte, as well women liuing in Monasteries, as also the other Brethren and Sisters, which liue abroad, say either the Breuiary, or our Blessed Ladies Mattins: Or at the least, say as the vnlearned doe, for Mattins, 12. Pater nosters, and for each other seuen, with adding to each one, a Gloria Patri: and in the ende of Prime and Compline, to saye the Apostles Creede, in profession of their faith, the Psalme Miserere, for the whole state of Gods Church, and the common custome is to adde also, for all Christian soules, departed in the state of Grace, the
 Psalme, De prosundis, with the prayers, Deus venia largitor; And to say the commemorations of our holie Patione,Spec. Minore Tract 1. fol. 3. S. FRANCIS, both at Mattins, Euensong, and Compline: To the intent, that the Brethren and Sisters, may the better accomplish, this holy exercise of prayer, the Supreame Pastors, GREGORIVS 9. INNOCENTIVS 4. and NICHOL. 4. graunted that in time of general interdiction, the Brethren and Sisters (if they themselues, be in no parte cause of the interdiction) may (the interdicted and excommunicated persons, being shut out, and the doores shut vp) both heare and say, with a loud voice, the diuine Seruice, in their owne Churches, or other priuiledged places, for that time: NICHOL. the 4. doeth adde moreouer, that they may not onely reade the diuine Office, and celebrate the Masse, but also in the ordinarie times, according to the custome of the order, receaue both the Sacraments of the Altar,Ibid tract 1. fol. 3. and of extreame Vnction: GREGORIVS the 9. his affection was such, and so great vnto this holy Order, that he graunted them a special Bul for this intent.



ARTICLE II. But if they shal happen not to say them at the appoynted howers, ande.
THOVGH the appoynted hower of Mattins, is most commonly at Midnight, at which time most religious persons do rise, following therein the example of the Royal Prophet DAVID,Psal. 118. which although in the day time, hee did employe himselfe in kingly affaires, yet in the midst of the night did he rise to praise God, as testifyeth himselfe, saying: In the midst of the night I did ryse to confesse vnto thee, and prayse thee. The like did S. ELIZABETH: our blessed Queene KATHERINE, and diuets other holie persons of this Order. yet the most common custome of all such as liue priuately in their owne houses, is onely to rise as earlie in the morning as they may conueniently, taking it for no small shame, that the little birdes of the ayre, should be more carefull to praise God, after their maner, then, they should be, for that we see, the little birdes verie timely in the morning, before they goe to seeke their foode, praise God with melodious tunes, and that they for whom God hath created all things, and bestowed so manie benefites vpon them, amongst
 which, this is none of the least that hee hath called them, though not altogeather out of the world, yet from the thraldome of sinnes and vanities thereof, to be his particuler seruants aboue manie, that nowe they should giue themselues to sluggishnesse, and not fulfill in due time that particuler seruice, which by their profession they haue bound themselues to performe at appoynted houres, that is, as early in the morning, as conueniency and health may petmit them,S. Amb. lib. de offic. specially seeing that holie S* AMBROSE holdeth it for so great a fault to loose the morning, that he saith. VVhat Christian vvill not be ashamed to let the morning passe, vvithout singing praise vnto God, when the smallest birdes do preuent the dawning and breaking of the day, vvith solemne deuotion. S. AVGVSTIAE also affirming that,S. August. It is a thing very vndecent, that the Sunne should finde a Christian in his bedde, that is, the Sunne should be risen, and he in bedde. S. BERNARD saith, Such sluggards, and a man that is giuen thus to sleep,S. Bernard is an image of death, and that too much sleepe, hurteth both bodie and soule.
But to rise earlie, hath bene alwaies helde to be not onely profitable for the soule, but also singuler good, for the health both of bodie and minde, as the very Pagan Philosophers did acknowledge. The Royal Prophet DAVID, right wel knewe how acceptable and conuenient a time the
 morning was for prayers*Psal. 5. when he said, In the morning, o Lord, thou wilt heare the voyce of my prayer, in the morning, I will attende on thee. For that the morning is the principal time, to get the diuine consolations and foode of the soule, in signe whereof, the Manna,Exod. 6 where with the children of Istael were fedde in the desert, was to be gathered in the morning. In the morning also God is sooner found; for a man is soonest found in his house in the morning, so is God in the heart of man: For the soule hath more puritie and cleannesse, and consequently* is more fit for contemplation, in that houre, also a man is more apt to eleuate his heart vnto God, before the soule and minde be withdtawen from him, and imployed in diuers occupations, and vaine thoughts, or hindred by many Phantasies, gathered together, and for that cause it is said of the iust man. He hath giuen his heart to be vigilant and vvatch betimes vnto God; vvhich hath created him.Eccles. 39 Ber* sup. Cant. S. BERNARD exhorteth vs thereunto, shewing that, The morning and the Euenings are the aptest times to pray, and therefore saith, that these times are not to be permitted, but that vvee should alvvaies pray in them. This cause did our Sauiour himselfe take, to prouoke vs by his example to doe the like; of his praying in the morning,Marc. 1. saith S. MARKE; That rising very earlie, he vvent out into the Desert, and there prayed. And of his prayer in the night,
 S. LVKE saith,Luc. 6. Matt. 14. That he passed the nights in feruent prayer. And S. MATTHEVV declareth, that he passed both day and night in prayer, saying, that Hee went out into the mountaine alone to praye, and the night being come, he vvas there alone.
S. CLEMENT, shewing the reason of these seuen Canonical howers, saith*Lib 8. const. Aplic* c. 40. For Prime, Make your prayers earlie in the morning, to giue thankes that our Lord hath illuminated, and giuen vs light, the night being passed, and the day comming in. The third, Because, that hower our Lord receaued PILATE his sentence: The sixt houre, for that our Redeemer vvas then for vs crucified. The ninth, because all things were mooued, when our Lord vvas crucifyed, abhorring the audacitie and bouldnesse of the vvicked, and not able to beare the ignomie and cruelty which vvas done vnto our Lord Euensong and Compline, to giue thanks for that God hath giuen vs the night to rest in, after the vvearisome labour^ of the day, and the Cock cro^ing, because at that time, the day is denounced vnto vs, to exercise the workes of light therein.
Touching the distinct and set time of publike prayer, the continual practise by Tradition teacheth vs, that Mattins, with Laudes, were said in the night, about the first cocke crowing, Prime, earlie in the morning, the other howers in the daye time, at Euening, Euensong, and last of all,
 Compline: Let the example therefore of Christ, and custome of the Church, moue thee to praye, both morning and euening. In the morning for thy Direction in all thy actions, which thou art that daye to doe, in the Euening to giue thanks, for that which is past. S. HIEROME exhorteth vs to haue a special care at these two times, that is, Morning and Euening, of these thinges which we are to do, and what we haue done. Therefore, saith he, vve must pray in the morning, that all things to come, may be well done. And in the Euening, that vvherein vvee haue done amisse may be remitted. And though we ought to be careful to dedicate vnto God our whole time in prayer, as much as lyeth in vs possiblie to doe, yet more speciall heede and diligence is to be vsed in these two times, as beginning and ending of all our actions, offering vnto him which is Alpha and Omega, that is, the beginning and ende, the due fruits of our beginning, and the tenthes of the Consummation of all our workes: wherefore S. FRANCIS, knowing that time and Order, cause euerie good thing, to be much the better, here requireth, that such diligence should be vsed in the seruice of God, that euerie office should be said at his appovnted hower, for that accursed is that man that dooth the seruice of GOD negligently. Wherefore to draw the Brethren and Sisters, to haue a special care to performe
 their seruice in the due time, doeth enioyne a particular penance, for such as should be negligent therein, ordayning that if through sloughtfulnesse, or negligence, they should omit to say their seruice, at the appointed houres, that they must saye, three Pater nosters for that fault.


ARTICLE III. But the sicke persons are not bound to say those aforesaid howres, vnlesse they will.
BEHOVLD, how S. FRANCIS, by the instruction of his Lord and Maister (whose Secretarie hee was onely in penning of his Rules) hath a most vigilant care of the health, both of bodie and soule, and therefore would not tye the Brethren and Sisters, to say any thing that might preiudice the health of their bodies, but leaue it to their owne free choyse, as they are able to say it, or not at all.



ARTICLE IIII. In the Lent of S. Martin, and also in the greater Lent, let them be careful to go to Mattins in their Parish Churches.
THE parish of euerie one now in this Countrey, is the Oratorie, or proper Chappel in their owne houses, in which place, in the Holie time of Aduent and Lent, they must not onely heare Masse euerie day, if they may, but also be present there at Mattins, if they can conueniently, and haue oportunitie; that their prayers thereby may be the sooner heard, for that a multitude doth often obtaine, that which one alone cannot, for that according vnto the saying of S. HIEROM, It is impossible that the prayers of many should not be heard. And S. AVGVSTINE doeth confesse of himselfe, That when hee assisted at the Church seruice, in the beginning of his conuersion, his heart did melt in sweete content, and his eyes ouerflowed with teares of deuotion. And to say the veritie (all things alike considered) there is euer more comfort and merit to be gained at the publik seruice of christ, the^ in other particular actio^s, God hauing so ordained, that
 the Communitie, be preferred before all singularitie: Wherefore, seeing that S. FRANCIS here, doeth exhorte the Brethren and Sisters, to goe vnto the Diuine Seruice at the Church, in these two Lents euerie day, all men may iustly presuppose that his desire was no lesse, that they should performe their dueties therein on Sundaies and Holidaies, and be there continually on all those daies, both at Mattins and Euen-song, so far foorth as their state and oportunitie will permit them. For those dayes be dedicated vnto God particularlie, therfore in them, euerie one ought to performe manie more acts, of his honour and worshippe, then vpon other daies, seeing that God by his expresse Commandement, and the Catholike Church, bindeth them thereunto, saying, Remember that thou sanctifie the Saboath day, wherein is not onely commanded thee, vnder the paine of his heauie displeasure, to abstaine from handie labours and seruile workes, but also to employ thy self in holy exercises of vertue and deuotion, and in such things as tende to his honour and glorie, and health of thy soule.





That all they which may by right, ought to make a will.
MOreouer, let all those which haue abilitie of right, frame or make a Will, and within three moneths, immediatly after their entrance, let them order and dispose of their goods, least any of them should happen to dye without a will.

Concerning the ninth Chapter.
Co^mis. Genaral. Cismon,NOTE, that for the better keeping of what is contained of the Rule, there, in seeing that death can not be escaped, and the hower so vncertaine, and to hope to make their wil, when they are oppressed with sicknesse, is so dangerous, by reason of the griefe and haste, wherewith many times we are commanded to leaue all, and goe meete the spouse. Wee ordaine that
 they which haue power to make a wil, they finish in time, following in the making thereof, the counsel of his Ghostly Father, or some other learned person, of good and sincere conscience, attending first of all, to make restitution of that which shal happen to be owing, aswel of goods as honour. And that they may the more purely and pyously enter into this forme of life, it is ordained, that presently, as soone as anie one shall be admitted thereunto, or at the farthest, at his profession, that he shal make a general confession, wherein hee making vp his accounts with the world, may serue God with more freedome: and hauing made his will, if hee hath any thing to dispose of, let him doe it with the counsel of men of learning and zeale, which himselfe may choose. And perchance he aske councell of any of our Religion, let that religigious person, make much account of the precepte of our Rule, which although it concerneth the Nouices, who take habite in our Religion, yet wee will haue it kept with these aforesaid persons also. And wee command, in vertue of holie obedience, and vnder paine of priuation, of the lawfull acts, those which are subiect vnto vs, that they neither meddle directly or indirectly in the disposition of the goods of the foresaid persons, nor perswade them to leaue parte thereof, vnto our Order, but that freelie they may dispose, euerie one of
 his owne goods, as almightie God shall inspire him, and they themselues vnderstande, for according to the doctrine of the Apostle S. PAVL, VVee seeke not their goods, but their saluation. Non querimus vestra, sed vos.
VNTO the state of perfection, is required an abstraction and alienation of the minde, from all those things, whereby a man is hindred, that hee cannot wholly giue himselfe to the seruice of God. And for as much as in this vale of miserie, amongst all other things, there is no greater impediment, then the care of worldly goods; wherefore to the intent, that by a prouident fore-sight, this dailie carefull care, and the great hinderance, which commeth thereby, may be auoyded. S. FRANCIS doth here ordeyne, that they which may conueniently, ought with speed, to setle their estate, and make their wil, and though he doth not require such haste herein, that they must do it before their entrance into this Order of Pennance, yet notwithstanding, considering the hinderance and dangers, which come by lo^g deferring, he doth exhorte the^ to make it within three moneths after, at the furthest, least he should die (saith he) intestate or without will. S. FRANCIS did presuppose, that whosoeuer did enter into this third order, if he were then sicke and did
 it to enioy the greate benefites which are to bee obtained herein, at the hower of death, would make presentlie all preparation for it, knowing that sicknesse is the speedie messenger of God, to inuite all persons to make present repayre vnto him: But if otherwise they were at their admission into this holie Order, in perfect health, he did know by dailie experience, that such is the feruour of all persons, at the abandoning of worldlie pleasures, and returning vnto God by true loue, and sincere pennance, that if any sicknesse or danger should soone happen after, they would as quickly make themselues ready for whatsoeuer God should please to despose of them, but as time groweth on, so deuotion oftentimes waxeth colde, therefore whilest feruour lasteth, hee requireth that they should despose of their goods, and settle their estate, and not to deferre the making of their will any longer then three moneths at the moste, yeelding this reason for it, Leaste they should dye intestate, and thereby, not onelie depriue their poore soule of that comforte which it expected, and otherwise might haue had, but insteede thereof, heape thereon great paines, and manie heauie curses. For such is nowe, the greedy desire of worldly goods, that a great many seeke to catch what they can, wherby it ofte^ hapneth, that not only the soul of the
 departed, is forgotten in such sorte, that the memorie thereof perisheth with the sound. But therewithall, brotherlie loue and true friendship is so broken, that hatred and couetuousnesse possesseth in such sorte the hearts of manie, that charitable and good dealing, hath no place therein, when extreamitie of law, yea if forgerie and periurie may sometimes preuaile: And whereas, if the diseased, had well disposed in time of his estate, not onely should haue reaped the benefite of the good deedes which he had done, but also haue bene partaker of all which should be done hereafter, by his good example vnto the worlds ende. Nowe for his negligence, not onely is he depriued of that great benefite, which by his diligence he might haue obtained, but seeing that it is a Maxime, that hee which giueth the cause of sinne, is partaker of the offence. And he which gaue the occasion of the hurt, seemeth to haue giuen the hurt it selfe. Wherefore without the greater mercie of God, he shal be punished for all the offences, which his negligence, in desposing of his estate in time, gaue occasions vnto his heyres, or possessors of his goods to doe, and worthely dooth deserue to be forgotten of others, which had so little care of himselfe, as to dye intestate and without a will, and not setled his goods in some sort, for the good of his soule, which must render a most strict account for the
 good deedes, which he omitted to doe, when he might haue performed them.
Iust cause therefore, had our prudent Father, to admonish his children and followers, not to prefer the setling of their affaires, but to dispose of all their businesse, in such sorte, that they may alwaies liue in that state of life, wherein they may bee readie and willing, to render their soule vnto God, and not to deferre a matter of so great importance, least by suddaine and vnsuspected, or at least vnprouided death, which by diuers waies doe happen, often those aforesaid hurts and hinderances doe fall to their lot: For though there is nothing more certaine then death, yet notwithstanding, nothing more vncertaine then the hower thereof, as witnesseth S. BERNARD, saying, In humaine affaires,S. Bern. what is there more certaine then death, and vvhat can be found more vncertaine, then the hower thereof. For as the Ecclesiastick saith: A man knoweth not his ende,Eccles 6. but as the fish is taken vvith the hooke, and the birds vvith the snare, so are men taken in an euill time, vvhich commeth vpon them vpon a suddaine. Wherefore our Lord doth exhort vs to watch, for that we know not the day or the hower, Neither were the verie Ethnicks ignorant hereof. For SENECA faith:Seneca in Thieste. Ciccer. lib de Senec. No man had euer the gods so fauourable vnto him, that he could promise the next daye vnto himselfe. CICERO also a saith: VVho
 is so foolish, though hee be a young man, can saye that he shall liue vntil night. S. IAMES helde the life of man to be so vncertaine, that hee comparde it vnto a vapour, saying:Iac. 4. VVhat is your life? it is a vapour appearing for a little vvhile: It is also compared by IOBE vnto the winde, saying: Remember that your life is but a winde: Vncertaine also is the place of death, for they which thinke to take their last farewel in their owne Countrey, in their owne proper and domestike houses, and amongst the Troupes of their friendes and kindred, oftentimes departed this life in a strange Countrey, either taking their iourney forwardes, or in the middest of their iourney, or returning homewardes, or deuoured by wilde beastes, or killed by theeues, for no man can coniecture what the kinde or manner of his death may be, for that this man perisheth, by dangerous falling, another by hanging, this man by the sword, the other by poyson, some gluttonie killeth, others famine, the earth ouerwhelmeth some, the water drowneth others.
And although, verie vncertaine is both the hower, place, and kinde of death, yet no lesse vncertaine, is the estate wherein the poore soule standeth, which is not prepared for death, when it is called from this pilgrimage, to appeare before the dreadful iudgme^t seate, for that (as the Ecclesiastick
 saieth) A man knovveth not,Eccles. 9. vvhet^er hee bee vvorthie of loue or hatred, which sentence, though it may be ordinarilie verified of all men, yet much more, of those which haue bene negligent, to prepare and settle themselues, and their affaires in a readinesse, for that hower, which is so fearefull vnto them, that that they seeke nothing more, but how to auoyde it. For that as Holie IOB sayeth,Iob. 27. A man vvill giue skinne for skinne, and all that he hath for his life. From hence proceedeth the willing suffering and enduring, of so manie bitter potions, sharpe medicines, and great labours, for the conseruation thereof. Wherefore, Saint FRANCIS, to take the greatest occasions of feare awaie, exhorteth the Brethren and Sisteres, to stande so well prouided for Death, that as it is fearefull vnto others which are vnprouided, so it may be most comfortable vnto those, which haue made due preparation for it.
If the safe arriuing of a Shippe vnto a happie Porte, after cruell Tempestes of the Sea, is most gratefull vnto those which haue sayled therin: If the returning home into a mans owne Countrey, bee most pleasant vnto Pilgrimes, and if vnto such as haue bene banished, it is a thing most wished for, after a long exile, to returne vnto his natiue soyle, how ioyfull
 and acceptable, then ought death to be vnto those which are prepared for it, seeing that it bringeth a man to all these aforesaid happinesse: For death truely conduceth and deliuereth vs from dangerous and troublesome sea of the worlde, vnto the quiet state and rest of life euerlasting. And after our long Pilgrimage, reduceth vs into our owne house, which we haue long sought for. For as S. PAVL testifyeth, vvee haue not a permanent citie,Heb. 13. but vve seeke after another to come. And by the benefite of death, we are recalled also from banishment, into our owne celestial Countrey: There is no cause therefore, if we be well prouided for death, to feare it, but rather to wish for it,Phil. 1. and say with the Apostle For vnto me to liue is Christ, and gaine to dye.
Let worldlings then, and louers of the world, feare death, but let vs reioyce to dye, which passe by death to immortalitie. For as S. CYPRIAN saith, It is for him to desire to liue in the worlde, vvhom the vvorld doth delight, and vvhom flattering and deceiuing it dooth inuite to the snares of earthly pleasures. But seeing that the world hateth a religious and vertuous person, why should be loue that which hateth him? And not rather follow Christ which loueth him, and hath redeemed him; how great a desire S. PAVL had to doe so, he sheweth, saying, vnhappie man am I, vvho vvill deliuer mee
 from the bodie of this death, I desire to be dissolued and be vvith Christ. Happie therefore, yea thrice happie is he which standeth alwaies readie, I do not say to die, but to liue in our Lord For though Sathan doth at the hower of death, diuers waies tempt and seeke to trouble the minde, by reducing into memorie all worldly affayres, yet against such, as following the counsell of S. FRANCIS, haue disposed of them prudently before, he cannot preuaile, for that our Sauiour, is most readie to helpe alwaies his seruants in their greatest distres, and that soule which deuoutly hath serued him, he will neuer leaue it, without comfort in his agony, but is most like to vse, then vnto him, this most comfortable speech, and say, I am the life vvhich for thee haue ouercome death, vvhy fearest thou it? I am the light, vvherefore art thou afrayde of darknesse? I am the port of health, vvhy doest not thou (o my Sonne) hauing passed the tempestuous Seas of this transitorie life, make haste to come vnto mee, vvhich haue deliuered and redeemed thee, and haue bene alvvaies vvith thee. Let the soule therefore comfort it selfe, and say with DAVID.Psal. 22. If I shall vvalke in the middest of the shaddow of death, I vvill not feare any euil, for that thou art vvith me. And the soule thus prepared and armed, departing from this corruptible bodie, the Celestial spirits will meete it, that they may carrie it vnto the Tabernacles,
 where it shal be for euer the companion of the Angels, of the Patriarches, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors* and holy Virgins, where I say it shal truely sing the song of our Lord, not in a strange Countrey, but in its owne: where a man shall most assuredly finde all the good deedes, which by the careful and prudent diligence, which he hath vsed in disposing in due time, his wealth and substance, and all his affaires, for the good of his bodie and soule, he hath sent thither before him.Matt. 5. That is the place where our Sauiour exhorteth vs, to heap vp treasure. Let vs sende therefore, to that Treasure-house, gifts from our hearts, by holy meditations, and pious affections, gifts from our mouth, by deuout prayers, and feruent thanksgiuing. From our feet, by directing al our steps towards heauen, from our hands, by almes-giuing.Galat. 6. For according to S. PAVL, VVhat a man hath sowed, that shal he reape. But for as much, as many begin then to sowe, when time is come, that they should reape, that is, in the agonie of death, they will beginne to set their goods, and giue almes, when the time is now come, that they should reape the fruits of their charitie and liberalitie, if they had desposed and made their will in time, which now peraduenture shall neuer be fulfilled: wherefore to preuent this great inconuenience, and eminent danger. S. Francis most earnestly
 exhorteth his chilhren and followers, which haue power to make a will, to make it in such time, that they may, partly, if not wholy, see the performing therof the^selues, and not to leaue the kingdome of heauen to be purchased by others for the^, but to do their best endeauours to purchase it the^selues in this life, which is the time of meriting, as the other is, the place of rewarding. Now is the time that the kingdome of heauen is to be bought, wherefore some to purchase it, giue al their goods for it, as many religious perso^s do, but specially the two first orders of our holy Patrone, S. Francis, which imitating the example of the Apostles, which said, Behold we haue left al things, and haue followed thee: do so freely renou^ce and giue al temporal things, that they neither doe, or may retaine any te^poral goods or possessions, either in proper or co^mon. Others do buy that vnpretiable and heauenly kingdom, for halfe their goods, as many deuout persons haue done in times past, but specially those of this 3. order, which imitating Zacheus (our Sauiours happy host) doe as hee did first make restitution of other mens goods, and as hee said,Matt. 19. Behold I giue the one halfe of my goods to the poore: so in like sorte may it be said of them that gaue halfe their goods away: For that prudentlie disposing of them in time, for the good both of bodie and soule, the best parte is reputed to be giuen vnto God, for to purchase
 his heauenly Paradise. Neither are the poorest left without meanes to buy it, seeing that our louing redeemer hath faithfully promised that, Hee vvhich shal giue but a cuppe of colde vvater in his name, shal not be vnrewarded. Yea our Sauiour is so willing to bestow it on them which deuoutlie desire it, that he which is depriued of all other meanes to get it, may onely by feruent good wil obtaine it, as holie S. AVGVST. witnesseth, saying: If thou canst giue any thing giue it, if thou canst not, shewe thy selfe affable and vvilling to giue, if thou hadst it, for God crowneth the vvill vvithin, where he findeth not meanes to doe otherwise. But such as haue facultie and meanes,August. and may conueniently, must (as I haue said before) dispose in time their goods to buy it, making their last will, chiefly for that intent; and not onely must they endeauour to do this within the three first moneth after their entrance, but also if they may conueniently to doe it, euerie halfe yeare, or once euerie yeare at the least, that euery one may see, how faithful a dispensor and steward he hath bene, of the goods which God hath lent him, to purchase heauen withall: whether he hath encreased or diminished them, and how he hath employed them, for fewe there are, whose estate doth not alter euery yeare, wherefore, if in like sorte, he should not accordingly alter his will, many inconueniences might
 thereby arise and be defrauded, of that benefite which S. FRANCIS much desireth that he should haue, that is, by making oft his will, it should cause in him, a perpetual memorie of death, whose dailie Recordation, S. HIEROM witnesseth, not only doth preserue a man from sinne, but inciteth him to vertue also, and therefore saith, Remember the daye of death, and thou shalt neuer offende, For he which alwaies remembreth that he must die, contemneth what is here present, and hasteneth vnto that which is to come hereafter: whereunto the often making of his Will, doeth greatly helpe, by setling thereby dailie his temporal affaires, in such readinesse in his health, that when extreamitie of sicknesse happeneth to come, his worldly businesse being alreadie set in good order, he may freelie attende vnto all spiritual comforts, and expect with ioy, to goe vnto his louing Lord, whose faithful Steward he hath shewed himselfe, in disposing of his substance, to that vse, for which hee receaued it.



Of making of peace betweene the Brethren and other strangers.
AS concerning the making of peace, betweene the Brethren and Sisters, as also strangers that be at discorde, to let it be done as shall seeme good to the Ministers, vsing the counsel (if it be to be had) of the Bishops of the Diocesse in this behalfe.



CHAP. X.
Phil. 4.THE Apostle S. PAVLE, considering, that so worthy and excellent a thing is true and perfect peace, that it excelleth and surpasseth all sence, therefore writing vnto the Ephesians,Ephes. 4. dooth carefully admonish them to keepe the vnitie of Spirite, in the bonde of peace: For euen as the soule and spirit doth not giue life vnto the body, vnlesse the members be vnited and conioyned togeather, so the holy Ghost, doeth not reuiue and powre his grace into the members of the Church, vnlesse they be conioyned togeather, with concorde and peace. Our Sauiour himselfe, to the intent,
 that wee should haue this peace in ^igh estimation, did shew how highlie hee did esteeme of it, when he vsed it for the first salutation which hee gaue vnto his disciples, after his Resurrection saying,Iohn. 20 Peace be vnto you. It was one of the first things which the Angels did denounce, and declare when Christ came into the worlde,Luc. 2. saying Glory be vnto God in the highest, and peace vnto men of goodvvill. Christ also in his last Super, when hee was to depart from his Disciples, did giue this peace vnto them, as a singular gift, saying: I leaue you my peace. I giue my peace vnto you.Iohn. 14 As hee brought it into the world with him, so did he leaue it vnto vs, at his departure, and whilest he remained here, did so greatly loue it, that he suffered his most bitter death and passion, to set peace betweene God his Father and vs. Behold I beseech you, how much he loued it, and with what great affection he did prosecute it, when he did not disdaine to suffer death for it, and to shew how we should keepe it, did most benignely and freely forgiue all iniuries done or offered vnto him: And exhorting vs to doe the like, if wee wil haue peace with God, said,Mat. 6. If you forgiue men their offences, done against you your heauenly Father vvill forgiue you, and if you forgiue not them, neither vvil your Father forgiue you your offences, which he prooueth notably by the Parable of the king, which at the
 humble sute of his seruant, which was indebted vnto him,Matt. 18. forgaue him al his debts, but for as much as this seruant would not do the like afterwardes vnto a fellow seruant of his, which did owe him but litle, and with violence required it. The king forthwith sendeth for this cruel wretch, and said vnto him: O vvicked seruant, I forgaue thee thy vvhole debt at thy suite,Matt. 18. it should therefore haue beseemed thee, to haue shewed the like compassion vnto thy fellow. And the king sore displeased with his crueltie, committed him vnto tormentors, that should strictly holde him in prison, vntil he had payde the vvhole debt: vpon this parable, Christ inferreth and saith, Euen so wil your heaue^ly Father do with you, if you forgiue not euerie one of you his brother euen from the heart: Whereby it doth plainely appeare, that if we will haue peace with God, and be forgiuen, wee must endeauour also to haue peace with al men, and put out of our heart, al rancour and malice, and wil to reuenge, patiently suffring all iniuries: Yet notwithstanding, though Christ commandeth vs, and charitie bindeth vs, for the conseruation of peace and concord, to remit and forgiue all iniuries and trespasses against vs, yet hee which hath done the iniurie or trespasse, is neuerthelesse bound to acknowledge his fault, and to aske forgiuenes, not onely of God, but of him also whom he hath offended, and to make satisfaction therfore, according to his
 power and abilitie, as the grieuousnes of his offence required* and in case that he which hath committed the offence, and broken the bandes of peace and concorde, be obstinate, and will not of himselfe doe these things aforesaid: S. FRANCIS, hath so great a desire, that peace may be made, and discorde auoided, that though the offence be only particular, yet if it be great, ordaineth, that they should seeke to haue all parties to be righted, by the aduise of the Ministers, or the parties Ghostly father, and if their authoritie cannot here preuaile, the^ to vse the counsel of the Bishop of the d^oces in this behalfe (whe^ it may co^ueniently be had) that by this meanes, peace and concord may be made and kept, between the brethre^ and sisters: and also other stra^gers with them, before they proceed, to further triall by law: which thing, S. FRAN. seemeth to giue the^ free leaue to do, in seeking iustly of their own right: whe^ in the 17 chap. of this rule, speaking of according, and pacifying of strifes, saith: Otherwise let them answere of right before him with vvhom power of iudgement remaineth. For when the brethren and sisters, which finde the^selues much oppressed, haue sought al peaceable meanes and courses, and cannot preuaile to haue any amendme^t, the^ may they without breach of the commandements of God, or counsel of this Rule, aske and seeke recompence of such iniuries and wrongs, as haue bene
 done vnto them, according vnto the order and prouision of the lawes of the realme, made in this behalfe: So that they alwaies haue respecte vnto peace and charitie, doing nothing for rancour, hatred, or reuenge, remembring alwaies that hee exceede not this general Rule, taught by our Sauiour, that is, As you would that other men should do vnto you, euen so doe you vnto them, for this is the law and the Prophets.


VVhen they are molested against their constitutions or their Priuiledges. CHAP. XI.

BVt if the Brethren or Sisters, be assailed with vexations, by the Commanders or Gouernours of the places where they dwel, contrarie to their right and ^riuiledges: Let the Ministers of the place be carefull to haue recourse to the Bishops and other Ordinaries of the places, and proceede in such cases, according to their counsel and order.


EVEN as in this corporall bodie of ours, wee see it so to come to passe, that though it be but one, yet are the members thereof many, which notwithstanding haue not euerie one the same acte, but all are gouerned by the head: So in like sorte, in this little body, of this holy order of Penance, though the members thereof are manie, yet euerie one hath not the same power, but by the general consent, hauing made choyse of one to be head and Ruler thereof, who for his time, is to gouerne the members in such sorte, that if any of them be molested and wronged, hee as head, is to haue care to see them easied: For S. FRANCIS being desirous, that all his children and followers, should keepe peace, concorde, and loue with al persons, to the vttermost of their power, would not (for feare of breach thereof) that euery one that was molested by any one, should seeke presently to right himselfe, with the same partie, but ordained that they hauing recourse vnto the Minister (as head of that Congregation) he according to his office, should and might with greater charitie, being peraduenture nothing interessed in the molestation) seeke with all peaceable meanes redresse, by the help of the Bishop of the Diocesse, and other Ordinaries of the Place, who by the Apostolical letters, of diuers of the holy Fathers, are commanded to ayde them, as appeareth at large in
 the Breues of HONOR. 3. GREGOR. 9. and SIXTVS 4.Speculum Minor. Tract. 1. fol. 3. Our holie Father GREGOR. 9. writing in their behalfe, vnto the Bishops and Archbishops of Italy, for that this order being then but newlie founded, was scantly as then planted else where, declared, that, It came vnto the eares of HONORIVS 3. his Predecessor of happie memorie, that many of those parts, remembring most prudently their last things, leauing the vanities of the vvorlde, did determine vvith a contrite hart, and humble spirit, to do penance in their own houses, or els where, and that restoring vnto that miserable daughter of Babilo^, the retribution and reward, which she had reco^penced the^ withal, did desire to chaste^ their ovvne proper bodies, and to bring the^ into seruitude. But the Magistrates and rulers of the citties, vvherein such Seruants of God did dvvel, not attending that no man vvarfaring vnder God, may intangle himselfe in the affaires of seculer persons, and that the Spouse of God doth denie and refuse to defile her washed feete, do striue to exhort and dravv oathes fro^ the^, to follovv the^, and be exercised in armes* and endeauour to compel the^ to execute publike offices, calling backe againe into their ovvne houses, these vvhich had retyred themselues to secret and priuie places to doe Penance, laying on them nevv exactions and burdens, and other vvise dishonouring those, vvhom they ought by al maner of vvaies to honour, as the true seruants and friends of God, for as much as it
 doth appertaine vnto vs to comfort and nourish the friends of God in their religious purposes: therefore follovving the example of our Predecessor* vve do commend vnto our fraternitie, by this our Apostolical vvrit, that you suffer not these Penitents (whilst not^ithsta^ding, they do acknowledge and pay the duties and burdens, vvhich by reason of their temporall goods they are bound vnto) to be rashly molested in the^, or in any thing els, vvherby their good purposes may be hindred, compelling and keeping vnder their molesters, by Ecclesiastical censurs, all appellations set aside, 3. Pontif. A. D 1229. The second yeare of his Popedome, he had giuen a Breue to this effect which beginneth. Detestanda humani Generis hostis:Specul. Minor. Tract 1. fol. 2. but seeing that, that first did not take the effect which he desired, he granted this last recited here, to see the former executed.
O^r holie Father SIXTVS the 4. aboue 200. yeares after,A. D. 1471 ibid. tract. 1. fol. 33. and 52. seeing that the Brethren and Sisters, of this third order of Penance, were molested in his time, gaue his Apostolical letters in their behalfe, in like sorte, but more seuere against their molesters, for that he by his Apostolical authoritie, did prohibite al Gouernours, men in authoritie, and Seculer officers, vnder the paine of exco^munication, latae sententiae ipso facto to be incurred by them, if they presume any waies to molest these brethre^, and co^mandeth al archbishpos, bishops cano^s,
 Ecclesiastical perso^s in dignitie, not to permit the Brethren and Sisters to be molested by any of what authoritie soeuer they be.


They ought to beware as much as may be, of solemne oathes. CHAP. XII.

BVt let them all abstaine from solemne oathes, vnlesse constrained by necessitie in cases, except by the indult and permission of the sea Apostolike, that is to saye, for peace, credit, calumniation, and in giuing testimonie, and also in contractes of buying, selling, and giuing, where it shal seeme to be expedient: let them also in common talke, auoyde oathes as much as they can; and hee which shall in the day time, vnaduisedlie by the slippe of the tongue sweare (as
 it often happeneth in many wordes) let him the selfe same day in the euening (when they ought to recounte what they haue done) say three times Pater noster, for such oathes made vnaduisedly: Let euery one also be mindefull to exhorte his familie to Deuotion, and to frequent the Diuine seruice.

OVR holy Patrone, S. FRANCIS, considering that our Sauiour, to induce men to auoyde all kinde of vaine oathes, counselleth them that all their affirmations and speeche, be no otherwise then, It is, it is, and not, no* Wherefore he desiring that all his louing children, should beare that affection, vnto our benigne Lord, and sweete Redeemer, that all his counsell, which they may conueniently followe, should serue them for Commandements, doeth here with all paternall benignitie, binde them from all solemne oathes, that is, from solemne protestations, and calling God to witnesse, where no vrgent necessitie is, which who so doeth, cannot be altogeather excused, from the breach of the second Commandement of God, wher he forbideth to take his name in vaine:
 For as by this Precept, wee be commanded, to vse the name of God, to all goodnes and trueth, as necessitie requireth. So contrariwise, we are forbidden in the same, to vse his name in any maner of euill, as lying, deceauing, in any vntrueth, or in vaine. But when necessitie requireth, the rule giueth them leaue to sweare, but being no necessitie, though the thing they sweare be true, yet doe they take the name of God in vaine, against the Commandements.

ARTICLE II. Let them also in common talke, auoide oathes, etc.
THIS wicked custome of swearing, hath taken in this our miserable times, such roote in manie persons of most nations, that al their co^mon talke is mingled with oathes, though many times they little regarde, or thinke what they sweare, whether it be true or false, putting themselues in danger of periurie, vpon euerie light phantasie: wherfore S Frauncis, to preuent it, or the like mischiefe in his children, doth admonish them here to bee careful to auoyde so great an imperfectio^,Sur. in vita S. El- as to vtter any oathes in their co^mon talk: S. ELZEARIVS, that blessed Prince, and true obseruer of al poin^s of this order, did so greatly detest these kind of oathes, that he
 did set downe a law in the Court, amongst his seruants, that whosoeuer of the^ should chance to sweare in his house, that either he should be locked vp all day in his cha^ber, or els to dine with bread and water only. S Francis did esteeme vaine oathes to be so great an offence, that he would not that any of the brethren and Sisters, should presume to go to their rest, vntil they had diligently examined their conscience, and if they did find, that through many wordes, they had vnaduisedly sworne, that by praier they should make present satisfaction* and say, 3. Pater nosters. Although this Penance here set downe, seemeth to be much lesse then that which S. Elzearius did impose on his serua^ts, yet is this no lesse meritorious, for that the other was to be done of necessitie, and their temporall good: now this being voluntarily performed, a mans owne conscience enioyning it him, ca^not but be much acceptable in the sight of God: For that a little Penance here voluntarilie done, maketh better satisfaction then a far greater, which of necessitie must be done, here, or else where: and vpon this ground, doth he exhort them, that vpon due examination of their conscience, euerie night with hearty sorrow, for any offence co^mitted, that they should say three times the Pater noster, for any such oath vnad^isedly made by the slip of the tong, as it often happeneth in manie wordes.
 How dangerous, vaine, and idle oathes are, you haue alreadie heard; nowe here doth he set downe the cause of such oathes to proceede from many wordes; whereof there is no one thing, whereof a man ought to be more careful the^ of his words, for which he must render a strict account, for that they are the beginning and cause of many sinnes and offences: wherefore S. FRANCIS, shewing that idle oathes proceede oftentimes from multiplicity of wordes, doeth giue therewithal warning to beware of such vnprofitable speeches.
In his two former rules, he doeth giue expresse commandement, to vse fewe wordes and often silence: now here in this third Rule, for as much as the Brethren and Sisters, conuersing abroad in the world, though they cannot at all times, vse that sparingnes in their speech, as the other Orders may, yet notwithstanding doth he admonish them also to slye much speech, shewing the danger thereof to be such, that by many wordes they fall into oathes. The Ecclesiastick therefore, to preuent this inconueniencie, exhorteth vs to ponder wel our wordes before wee speake them, saying: The wordes of the wiseman (which euerie one thi^keth himselfe to be) shal bee vvaighed in the payre of golden ballance:Eccles. 21 where the weight of euery graine is regardal* the rich man doth consider and recken his money before he layeth it out, or giueth
 it vnto others. So oughtest thou to weigh wel, and ponder they words before thou pronounce them, and giue them to others hearing. The wise-man would haue a young man to be so sparing of his words, that scantly should he speake, when necessitie requireth saying: O young man,Eccles. 32 speake scantlie in thy cause, vvhen neede requireth, but vvhen thou art tvvice demanded, let thy head then haue an ansvveare. For hee which vseth many wordes, shal seldome come to true perfection: Wherefore Saint IAMES saieth: He vvhich thinketh himselfe to be religious, and doth not bridle his tongue, vaine is his religion.Gregor. in mor. lib. Therefore S. GREGORIE saieth: VVhosoeuer giueth himselfe to much speech, cannot keepe rightnes of Iustice. For according vnto the saying of the Psalmist, A man full of tongue,Psal. cannot be directed in earth: yea, nature it selfe induceth vs to be moderate in our speech, in this, that a man hath from nature, but one mouth to speake, and two eares to heare, in token, that euerie one ought to heare much, and to speake little, according vnto the counsel of S. IAMES,Iacoh. 1. Let euery man be swift to heare, and slow to speake: But you shal finde many persons, which take such delight to heare themselues speake, that with one mouth, they will vtter so many wordes, that others hauing two eares, yet are wearyed to heare them, and sorrie to see them to goe against nature, which moueth
 him vnto taciturnitie, and to keepe his tongue.Proue. 21 SALAMON in his Prouerbs saith, that* He vvhich keepeth his mouth and his tongue, keepeth his soule from sorrow and danger,lib. de offic. 2. and of the contrarie side, he which vseth manie wordes, hurteth his soule. S. AMBROSE saith, I haue seene many by speaking to fall into sinne, but scarce any by holding their peace. The verie Heathens did acknowledge as much, as for example, CATO which said,Cato. It hurteth none to haue held their peace, but it hurteth many to haue spoken. The forementioned S. AMBROSE affirmeth in like maner,Amb. sup. psal. beati immaculati. that it is very hard that he vvhich speaketh much, should not lye. Wherby we see, that from multiplicitie of wordes, proceede many dangers, amongst which S. FRANCIS reckoneth here vaine oathes, saying, that by many wordes it often falleth out, that by slippe of the tonge, they sweare vnaduisedly.
And by the same meanes, manie doe shewe their owne follie to be great, for he which vseth manie wordes, sheweth but to plainely, that there is no true ground and foundation of wisdome in him, seeing that euerie one thereby, may certainely know, whether he hath any sparke of wisdome, or not. The Scripture witnesseth, that hee is a foole, saying that a foole doeth multiplie wordes. SALAMON also saith, that Dreames do follow many cares, and foolishnesse is found out in many wordes. SALAMON
 also saith: Dreames do follow manie cares,Eccles. 10 and foolishnesse is found out in manie vvordes: Where as, on the contrarie side, Taciturnitie and fewe words, is a signe of wisdome, as witnesseth most prudently that wise SENECA, saying, Taciturnitie and few wordes, is reputed euen in a foole, for vvisdome.
But if the folly of any, should be such, that all these aforesaid sentences, will not sufficie to draw him to be hereafter more wise, and vse fewer wordes, let him but waigh the seuere sentence of our Sauiour, which saith, that of euery idle vvorde,Mat. 12. lib. moral. men must render a strict account: What an idle worde is, S. GREGORIE doth shew saying: An idle vvorde is that vvhich wanteth, either the iust cause and reason of necessitie, or the pyous intention of vtilitie and profit. S. HIEROM also saith, that an idle vvorde is that vvhich is vtttred vvithout the profite of the hearer or speaker:Hier. in Ser. quoda^ he addeth moreouer, that, vvhatsoeuer doth not edifie the hearers, turneth vnto the hurt of the Speakers.
But least that any man might say, though he vsed manie, yet not idle wordes, and for that cause, not to be bound to render an account of them, S. GREGORIE, to preuent all such excuses, saith, If so strict an account is required of euerie idle vvorde, it is verie deepely and profoundly to be waighed and thought of, vvhat paine may follow many
 vvordes wherein a man offendeth by pride also. Great care therefore ought euerie one to haue to make satisfaction, of vnnecessarie wordes, aswel as for idle and vaine and vnaduised oathes, seeing that by the sentence of these Holie Fathers, more paine is due vnto many words, then vnto idle: For which notwithsta^ding our Sauior himselfe saith, wee must make an account of euerie one:Cass* coll. 14, 19. Wherefore CASSIANVS saith: That silence is the first beginning and entrance to all good discipline. So of the other side CLYMACHVS saith,Clym. gr: 11. that much speech and manie vvordes, is an assured argument of ignorance, it is the gate of detraction, the Captaine of scurrilitie, the vvorker of lies, the desolation of compunction, the Author of slouth, the Precursor of sleepe, the dissipation of intestine, and good fixed thoughts, and the extermination of all true Custodie: whereas of the contrarie, Taciturnitie and silence, is the mother of prayer in our thought, it is a diligent obseruation of the fire of the diuine loue, a secret going forwarde towards God, and a hidden ascending vnto him. He which knoweth his sinnes, will conteine his tongue, but he which vseth many wordes, hath not yet knowne himselfe as he ought.Matt. 27. Mar. 15. The silence which our Sauiour vsed before Pilate, made him to be admired and reuerenced. Let vs therefore so imitate his holy examples in earth, that we may raigne with him in heauen.



ARTICLE III. Let him the selfe-same day, in the Euening, when hee ought to recount what he hath done, saye three Pater nosters, for such oathes, etc.
SO good an estimation and opinion had S. FRANCIS of all those which did flye the vanitie and pompes of the world, as much as their estate would permit them to doe penance, and liue holie in their owne houses, attending vnto the workes of mercie, that euen as LYCVR^VS the law-maker of the Lacedemonians, did not make any law against the Parricides, esteeming that none would be so vnnatural, as to kill his owne Father: So in like sorte, S. FRANCIS iudging, that all such as did bende their whole course to perfection, and vertuous life, would not be so vnnaturall vnto their heauenly Father, as by sinne and euill deedes, to goe about to kill, his onely begotten Sonne, their redeemer again. Therfore he did not set downe any punishment or Pennance here, for il actions and wicked deeds expresly, but only for words, that is, vaine oathes, wherein he was so strict, that though they were vttered vnaduisedly, or hapned by the slip of the tonge, as it often cha^ceth (saith
 he) in many words, yet notwithstanding, he ordaineth, for so small an offence (as that seemeth to be) that they should make present satisfaction, for feare least any being preuented by suddaine death, should be enforced to make a farre more paineful satisfaction elsewhere; for that no offence, be it neuer so small, can escape vnpunished, but must of necessitie be purged, seeing that as holie S. IOHN the Euangelist testifyeth, Nothing vvhich is defiyled, shal enter into the kingdome of heauen:Apoc. 9 which is the cause that mooued S. FRANCIS to require such present satisfaction to bee made here by Penance and prayer, for the cleansing and purging of the poore soule, which (as you haue heard) must by the testimony of our Sauiour, render an account of euerie idle worde, which if it be so, as most true it is, what reckoning then must euerie one make of his deedes, seeing that he which is now a most mercifull Redeemer, and faithful Aduocate, will be then so seuere a iudge, that for the verie sinnes of omission onely, he will pronounce that dreadful and doleful sentence: Go ye cursed of my Father, into euerlasting fire, and sheweth in the Gospel of S. MATTHEVV, the cause thereof to be: For that (saith he) I vvas hungry,Matt. 25. and you did not giue me to eate, I vvas naked, and you did not cloath me: by which wordes of our Sauiour, we see that in that general and dreadful iudgement,
 the sinnes of omission are discussed, and diligently examined, and layde against the wicked: For there shal they be appeached and condemned, for that they omitted to doe good, when they might: whereby wee may plainely perceaue, that a man may commit a mortal sinne, and thereby hee condemned to euerlasting fire, for onely omitting and neglecting to doe good, when hee might and should haue done it: Because our Sauiour here in S. MATTHEVV speaketh onely of the sinnes of omission: wherefore, not onely he which doth euil, shal be condemned, but also he which omitteth to do that good, which he was bound to performe, whereof our Sauiour giueth vs an example in that vnprofitable seruant, whereof he said in S. MATTHEVV:Matt. 25. Cast the vnprofitable seruant into extreame darknesse: What heynous offence had he committed to be thus punished? truely his offence was, that he was slouthful, and had not well employed the talent which was giuen him. How strict our most iust iudge is in this matter, the Precursor of our Sauiour, holy IOHN BAPTIST doeth declare, in the 3. of S. LVKE, when he exhorting the people not to deferre their Penance and good workes, for that the axe was alreadie sat vnto the roote of the tree, added presentlie, that euerie tree vvhich is not bringing foorth good fruite,Luk. 3. should be cut dovvne
 and cast into the fire. Wherefore S. GREGORIE saith, that it is not enough for a man to do no euil, vnlesse he studie also to employe himselfe in good vvorkes. For S. IOHN did not say* that euery tree vvhich bringeth forth bad fruite,Hom. 13. in Euag. as theft, murther, adultery, and such like, but saith only, Euery one which is not bringing foorth, that is, which omitteth and doth not dailie bring foorth good fruite, shal be cast into the fire: Seeing therfore so strict an account, will be exacted at our handes, for omitting to do good workes, let euerie one now in time diligently examine himselfe, what he hath done euerie day, and as oportunitie shall serue, to consider what in al his life time he hath done, to the intent that if he finde that either he hath done euil, or bene negligent, in doing good, he may now endeauour with al his forces, to follow the counsel of holie DAVID, saying, Declyne from euil, and do good, For if God wil vse such seueritie, for onely omission and negligence, what fauour can be expected, where wicked deedes are found, and no good to counteruaile them? Most prudently therefore and most profitablie, for the soules of the Brethren and Sisters, doth S. FRANCIS ordaine, that euerie one of them should, euery night make an account, betweene God and his conscience, what he hath done that daye, that is, how he hath employed the talents and gifts, which our Lord hath bestowed
 on him. For whatsoeuer we haue, are the gifts of God, giuen by him vnto vs, to purchase and get the kingdome of heauen, by employing our selues, and all that is within our power, to his honour and glorie, and our owne saluation: wherefore we ought to make a most strict account euery night, whether we haue wel vsed, or else abused Gods benefits, to his dishonour, scandal of our neighbours, and our owne destruction. As concerning the gifts wherwith he hath adorned our soule, diligently ought we to consider, before we giue rest vnto our bodie, whether we haue emploied the sharpnes of our wit, the industrie of our minde, the perfectnesse of our memorie, the freenes of our thoughts, and our whole arte and science, and whatsoeuer wee haue spoken or done chiefly, if not onely for the loue of God, or otherwise to our owne vaine desires, or prepared them to commit sinne and wickednesse.
In like sorte, no lesse account is to be made of his benefites, bestowed vpon the corruptible bodie, but seriously ought we to cal to minde, if by and with them, no abuse hath bene committed, either by exercising our strength, to vse violence and force in doing wrong vnto others, or our health to filthinesse, and our beauty to vanitie, and lasciuious allurements, exhibiting by these and the like, armes of iniquitie vnto sinnes, we must also vse no lesse
 diligence in our nightly examinations, about temporal goods, which our bountiful Creator, hath bestowed vpon his Creatures, not onely for the consuming of them vnlawfully and riotously, in banquetting and drunkennesse, in pompes and vanities, in gorgious apparrel, and friuolous buildings, in carding and dicing, and such like follie, but also whether they haue bene gotten by fraude and deceit, by rapine and vsurie, or any other vniust meanes, or consumed them vainely.
Moreouer, in this that S. FRANCIS doth here require, that his childre^ should euery night make this exact account, hee doth prudently admonish them, that they should stand alwaies prepared, to render a good account at the hower of death. If thou wert Cofferer or Steward, to some great Prince, which would command thee to render an account the next night of certaine thousands of poundes, which he had giuen thee to bestow and employ, wouldest thou not before thou didst shew him thy reckonings, first looke ouer thy bookes, that thou mightest render a iust and readie account of all thy actions; For though thou haddest desposed, and layde out all exceeding well: yet notwithstanding, for feare least, that rendring thy account before thy Lord and Prince, thou shouldest stutter and stammer, not hauing foreseene or premeditated the matter before,
 thou wouldest diligently looke ouer thy bookes, and consider euerie thing exactly, that thou mayst render a iust and ioyful account for thy credit. Were it not a thing very strange then, if that for thy Creator, Redeemer, and most iust iudge, thou wouldest not vse that diligence which thou wouldest, for thy temporall Lord, seeing that thy credit and euerlasting health of thy soule doe depende so much therupo^? note wel therfore, that thou must re^der an account, whether thou wilt or no, not before an earthly Prince, but before the Prince of Princes, and Iudge of the whole world, not of smal ^oies, but of the greatest of al, that is, of thy goods, of thy soule and bodie, with the Corporal riches and gifts which were granted vnto thee, from that omnipote^t and Almightie Prince, thy creator, thy God, and thy most iust Iudge, which will without faile, say vnto thee, Render an account of thy Stewardship, and peraduenture this verie night, will take his stricte accounte. How needfull therefore doest thou see, it is to examine thy selfe* and make thy accounts readie euerie day, yea twice or thrice in the daye, if thou couldest conuenie^tly, being assured that after death, thou must make it very strictly? Who is he then that is, or would be estemed a perfect Christian, which will not diligentlie endeauour, to make himselfe and his accounts readie, by examining his
 conscience daily, and what he findeth therin to haue bene amisse, to make satisfaction for it; and despisi^g his former euil customes, turne his wicked and peruerse maners, into good and holy exercises, preparing himselfe dailie, for al euents that may happen: for when we least think of death, then many times are wee soonest taken awaie thereby; For such is the vncertainty of mans life, that no man can assure himself one day, yea one hower: let euery one therfore bend al his endeauours so to liue this day, as tho^gh he were to dye to morrow, and if he be wise, let him be no lesse readie for his accounts, then if he were to render them presently. Take therefore to thy selfe alone, some conuenient times in the daye, or at least euery night, and leaue the businesse of the worlde, and the verie thoughts therof, leaue all temporal things whatsoeuer, and search diligently the secrets of thy conscience within thy selfe, for from it (which is thy chiefe accuser) if thou wilt obey and giue eare vnto it, thou shalt heare what thou must doe; With thy conscience alone haue care of the health of thy soule, for there are fewe other such true friendes, for that as the Apostle saith:Phil. 2. Euerie one seeketh his ovvne profite, and not the health of thy soule, but rather follow and seeke after thy temporal goods: therefore leauing all such frinds, and all exteriour affayres for that time,
 enter into thy selfe, and consider what hitherto thou hast done for to morrow, peraduenture thou shalt die, when al thy honours, riches, and friends, wil then nothing profit thee. Scarcelie shal thy soule be departed from thy body, whe^ thou shalt be left of all persons, and fewe or none will remember to do thee any good: but although al the world did remember, yea, if all the Saincts, and Queene of heauen, would praye for thee, yet if thou shouldest departe this life, but in one mortall sinne, all would little profite thee, when thy soule at the instant, appearing before the dreadfull throne of God, is to heare of thy most iust iudge, his particuler iudgement, of euerlasting damnation, for thine offence, which here in time through the merits of Christs passion, and his holie grace, by the intercession of the Holie Saints, and thy selfe cooperating thereunto, mightest easilie haue auoided, by heartie contrition, and true satisfaction, for those sinnes and offences, which by due examination of thy conscience alone, thou shouldest finde thy selfe to haue offended therein. Iustly therefore, and with a most pious care, doth our holy S. Francis exhort thee to examine thy conscience, and by satisfaction, to make eue^ thy reckonings; in the morning, and at noone, or at the least in the Euening, well considdering, howe hitherto thou hast
 liued, doest then make an new resolution, to satisfie for that which is past, and endeauour to liue better hereafter, and in thy heart, to dispise and make little account of all those things, which thou art assured thou canst not cary with thee. For seeing that thy soule is to remaine alone, without the company of whatsoeuer it did take so much paines for, saue only the merit of those good workes, which she here did, leaue therefore in time al transitorie trash, and vanities of the world, before they leaue thee, and consider now what thou shalt be, and what thou desirest to bee, which easily thou maiest performe, if retyring thy self from external things, which hinder the internal quiet of thy co^science, thou lookest and examinest diligently what thou art nowe, or what thou hast done, and vpon this due consideration correct and amende thy selfe, wherein it hath bene faulty, and make a stedfast resolution, not to returne vnto the like againe, and now to change all thy olde manners and customes of sinne, or tending thereunto, and blot out what hath bene euil heretofore, by sighes, teares, or other due satisfactio^s, according to the greatnesse of thy foresaid offences; and consider that S. FRANCIS (instructed by our Sauiour) ordeyning that for euerie vaine and vnaduised oath, thou shouldest do penance, and for satisfaction by prayer, to say presently three Pater nosters:
 doeth thereby insinuate, that farre greater penance, ought euerie one to doe, if in his nightly examinations, he do finde that he hath offended that daye, either by by lasciuious and vaine thoughts, idle and wicked wordes, or vnprofitable and hurtefull deedes, of all which not onely S. Francis, but also manie other holy Saints,Chrys. in serm. doe exhorte vs diligentlie, to examine our selues before we goe to our rest, S, Chrysostome saieth. VVhen thou art readie to goe to bed, or layde therein, and no bodie to trouble thee, before thou settle thy selfe to sleepe, brining foorth the booke of thy conscie^ce,Gregor. lib. mora. remember thy sinnes, if thou hast any vvayes offended, in thought, vvorde or deede. S. GREGORIE in like maner saieth, The iust men vvhen they consider the straitnes of the iudgment to come, they call their sinnes to memory, and do deplore them, vveepe and lament, and are sorie, for vvhat they haue committed, and doe seuerely and strictly iudge themselues, that they may not be iudged. Let euery one therefore, which will finde fauour before the great iudge of the whole worlde, exercise the office of a iust iudge vnto himselfe, not onely by examining dailie his offences, but also punishing them so seuerely in himselfe, that by paines purging them, and making here amendes for them, he may without delay afterwards, possesse the eternal ioyes in heauen.



ARTICLE IIII. Let euery one also be mindful to exhorte his familie to deuotion, and to frequent the diuine seruice.
S. FRANCIS here in the Conclusion and ende of this Chapter, doeth shew his great care ouer poore seruants, for knowing that in the kingdome of heauen, there is no difference of persons, but they onely are highest in fauour and glory, which haue with a sincere conscience, serued their maisters duly and truly for the loue of God, happeneth many times to be much preferred before his maister, which hath spent his time idly. Many one doeth complaine of the badnes of their seruants, but doe little regard that their owne negligence and euil examples, are the chiefe cause thereof. Wherefore S. FRANCIS, to take away the occasion of euil in both, perswadeth the Maisters to be mindfull to exhort his familie and seruants to deuotion, not by wordes onely, but by example, for that his wordes will little preuaile, whose examples teach farre the contrarie: For as children doe looke vnto
 the actions of their parents, to imitate them, so do seruants the l^ke vnto their Maisters: wherefore the Maisters must endeauour to bee such themselues, as they would haue their seruants to be, if they therefore, through the great loue they beare vnto God, and desire to haue him serued, do not onely shew their owne diligence therein, but by their example induce and cause their Seruants to doe the like, not onely shall they receaue rewarde for their owne deedes, but also be partakers of all the good, which their seruants shall doe by their good example, and their seruants thereby being brought to be true seruants vnto God, will be most careful without doubt to doe them faithful seruice. ABRAHAM,Gen. 18 (which is called the Father of the faithfull) being good and diligent himselfe, in receauing of Pilgrims, his seruants, imitating his example, did shewe their goodnesse and diligence, when the Scripture maketh mention, that one of them did runne vvith all speede, vnto the flocke to fetch something for the entertainement of the Angels, vvhich vnder the forme of Pilgrimes, came vnto their maisters house. LOTH also which was brought vp in ABRAHAMS house, was likewise mercifull and charitable: On the contrary side* ABSOLON being wicked, his seruants were as badde, which committed a
 most heynous offence, in killing AMON their Lord and Maisters brother, and no maruaile, hauing so badde a maister, by whose wicked examples, they were instructed.
In times past, manie were carefull to pla^e their children in great mens seruices, that thereby they might learne vertue, ciuilitie, and good maners, but nowe insteede thereof, in many places they learne nothing, either at home or abroad, but drunckennes, playe, and idlenesse: From whence commeth it to passe, that the worlde is so ful of euil seruants, but from carelesnesse of euil Maisters, which as the Pharises sent their seruants to betray and apprehend our Sauiour,Iohn. 7 so not much vnlike do they, which send their serua^ts, to do vnhonest offices and wicked deeds, yea though they do not send the^, yet can they not be excused, which doe not hinder the^ from it, when they may conueniently, or are greatly negligent in seeking to amende them. The Apostle S. PAVL, holdeth it to be so great a fault for a maister to be carelesse of his family, that he saith. If any haue not a care of his Domestiques and houshold, he hath denyed his faith, and is vvorse then an Infidel. It is not sufficient for a man to haue a care of his children onely, but must be vigilant also, ouer his Seruants, and whole familie, and as time, place, and conueniencie doe serue, ought to know howe
 they liue, whether they be blaspheamers, brablers, drunkards or Adulterers, or giuen to any other notorious crime: wherefore seeing that such vices doe oftentimes creepe into many houses, S. FRANCIS doth here admonish euerie one to exhort his familie vnto deuotion, and to frequent the diuine seruice and Sacraments, as chiefe meanes to preserue their families, from such inconueniences and vices. S. Elzearius had so great a care, in instructing his seruants, and ruled his familie in such sorte, that his Court seemed to be rather a Religious house, then the Pallace of a Prince: For at his first comming to keepe house, hee prescribed vnto his seruants those lawes, That euerie day they should heere deuoutly the whole Office of the Masse, that hauing euerie weeke cleansed their soules by Confession, should receaue euerie month, the holy Sacrament of the Altar, That the Gentlemen, Matrons, and Virgins* from betimes in thy morning, vntill dinner, should employ themselues in prayer and meditation of heauenly things, and after dinner, should diligently exercise themselues in some handie workes, and finally, that none should presume to sweare vitiouslie or lightlie, and not so much as to speake an vnhonest or vnciuil worde. A worthie Paterne, left vnto all deuout posteritie, for the gouernement of their familie, and to induce them vnto
 ve^tue, wherefore as euery one doth reioyce in the glory of the Saints, so let them endeauour to imitate their holy actions, to the inte^t, that following their vertuous examples in earth, they may be partakers of euerlasting ioyes with them in heauen.



Of hearing Masse, and making the Congregation. CHAP. XIII.

LEt all the Brethren and Sisters, of euery Citie and place, being in health, euery day (if they may conuenie^tly) heare Masse, and euery moneth, let them assemble vnto the Church, or place, or to which places the Minister shal haue care to giue notice there, to here the solemnities of the Masse. Let euery one giue a penny of current vsual money, to him which saith the Masse, who may gather the same money, and conueniently distribute it, by the aduise and counsel of the Ministers, amo^gst
 the brethren and sisters, oppressed with pouertie, and chiefly amongst the sicke, and those which are knowe^ to haue wanted the general funerall offices, and then amongst the other poore. Moreouer let them offer some parte of the same, to the foresaide Church, and then let them procure (if they may conueniently) some religious person, competently instructed in the worde of God, who shall exhorte them, carefully warne the^, and induce them to penance, and to exercise the workes of mercie. Let euerie one be careful to keepe silence whilest the office of the Masse is celebrated, and the worde of God preached, and let him be intentiue vnto prayer, and his office, vnlesse the common profite, of the fraternitie hinder him,

IT is a common Maxime, that examples doe more moue then wordes, for that words do oftentimes passe with smal
 profite; but examples haue such force, that it draweth a ma^ to follow and do that which he seeth to be done before his eyes, and the greater that the perso^ is, which giueth the example, the more force it hath: for the lesser, by the guide of nature, do follow the example of the greater. Wherfore our holy patrone S. Francis, hauing in the precedent chap. giuen a certaine commandeme^t vnto al Maisters, that they should be mindful to exhort their familie, to frequent the diuine Seruice; but knowing that they are sooner to be brought thereunto, by examples, then wordes, doeth now here after his kinde custome of Commanding, will al the brethren and sisters, being in health (if they may conueniently) to heare Masse deuoutly euery daye, to the intent that by their presence there, they may not onely draw their seruants to do the like, but also reape thereby, great and inestimable benefite, daily enioying there, the company of the Angels, which S. Ambrose affirmeth are alwaies the^ present there,Amb. super luc. saying: doubt not but that the Angels are present, whe^ Christ doth assist at the altar, that is, when he is offered vp there in Sacrifice. S Chrys. in like sort saith,S. Chrys. that the Angels of heauen be alvvaies present in great number, to honour this sacred mysterie, and we being present with them, and assisting with the same intention, cannot but receaue many excellent influences by such a Societie, the two Quiers of that
 Triumphant and militant Church conioyning the^selues to our Lord, in this diuine action, to obteyne mercy and grace for vs: The prayer also made in this diuine Sacrifice hath an vnspeakable force and efficacy, so that the soule by aide hereof aboundeth with heaue^ly fauours, wherunto the prayer of the Priest doth not a little helpe, whe^ as in particuler he prayeth in the Cano^, for al that ar present, vvhose faith (saith he) and deuotion is knowne vnto thee, for whom vvee here offer.S. Anselm. S. Anselme therefore considering what benefite it was to be present at the Masse, said that one Masse which was heard whilst a man liued, vvas more worth then a thousand after his death: that is, in respecte of the essential reward. How great benefits and what inestimable co^fort shal those the^ receaue, which following the exhortation and counsel of S Francis, do force the^selues to the vttermost of their power, to heare Masse euery day, seeing that a most reuere^d and learned Father affirmeth,Card. Tol. lib. 6. de instruc, Sac. c. 10. that he which commeth vvell desposed to heare Masse, receiueth many fruits from this holy Sacrifice: the first is, augmentation of grace, for that hee vvhich is in state of grace, in hearing deuoutly Masse, getteth encrease of grace: The second is the Remission of temporall paine, due vnto sinne: Thirdly, he obtaineth vvith more ease, that vvhich hee demaundeth, for that hee offereth to GOD, a most acceptable oblation, that is, CHRIST.
 They do easily get of men their requests, which bring vvith the^ gifts to offer vnto them, and so much the easier, as their gifts are more gratious: Fourthly, he exerciseth the principall acts of vertue, and chiefly of three, he exerciseth Faith in beleeuing those things which a^ celebrated in the misteries. Charitie also, vvhilest his vvill is vvholly carryed by loue vnto Christ present: he exerciseth in like sort Religion, by adoring Christ in the Sacrament, with that Supreame adoration of Latria.
Moreouer, by their deuout assisting there, they may in like sorte dailie receaue him Spiritually, For he which deuoutly heareth Masse, being out of mortal sinne, and in state of grace, hauing a pious affection* and feruent desire to receaue the author of all grace, in that holye Sacrament of the Altar, and thinketh, and saieth deuoutly in his heart: O most louing Lord, and Sauiour IESVS CHRIST, howe willingly would I receaue thee this daye in this holy Sacrament, but alas I dare not approach and come thereunto* for feare least that I should by my indisposition, want of preparation and vnworthinesse, offend thy diuine maiestie, yet notwithstanding, I humbly beseech thee from the bottome of my heart (which thou, o Lord, knowest better then I can declare) that thou wilt vouchsafe most mercifully to graunt vnto mee (although
 farre vnworthie thereof) such grace which thou vouchsafest to imparte vnto all those which deuoutly doe actually receaue thee this daye in all thy Churches,Mat. 1.15 in this holy Sacrament. Seeing therefore by the testimony of our Sauiour himself, that the internal action of the will, is the substance of all our workes, and that the external action and deede, doth depende thereupon, and is also esteemed according to the qualitie thereof, good or euil hence may wee conclude, that they which being present dailie at Masse, making this foresaid preparation, with a feruent heart, and deuout intention, doe by this spirituall receauing of the Author of all grace, obteyne oftentimes, as much grace, as if they had corporally receaued him in the Sacrament. And though euerie one that can be present at this holy S^crifice of the Masse, notwithstanding cannot make dailie such feruent and deuout preparation, to receaue thereby this special grace, yet neuertheles, seeing that by their deuout presence and assistance there, in that Holie place and companie, he may obtaine all the other aforesaid graces and benefits, euerie one ought to doe his best endeauour, to be as often present there, as he may conuenie^tly.
If therefore, through the persecutions of our desolate Countrey, thou canst not haue oportunitie, as often as thou desirest to be present, at the Celebrating of this


 soueraigne Sacrifice, at the least, send thy heart and desire thither, to assist dailie there, with a spiritual presence: And although thou shouldest liue in such a place, where thou canst but seldome come to this holy Sacrifice, yet let thy soule, hart, and minde be daily present, and go in Spirit (if otherwise thou canst not) into the Oratorie or Chappell, and there vnite thine intention, with the intention of all the faithful Christians, and vse the same interiour actions, in the place where thou hast thus retyered thy selfe, which thou wouldest vse, if thou wert really present in some Church, at the office of the holie Masse, with all the reuerence that thou canst: in so doing, thou shalt reape more fruite and merit oftentimes, then man^e, which come with so small deuotion to Masse, that sca^tly wil bow both their knees at once, and spende often the time, rather in pratling, then in prayer: Wherefore S, FRANCIS giuing a caueat, vnto the Brethren and sisters, not to doe the like, doeth in the ende of this Chapter say, that Euerie one ought to be careful to keepe silence, when the office of the Masse is celebrated, and to be intentiue vnto Prayer: Seeing that the place where they then are, is ordained for that end, as our Sauiour himself witnesseth saying:Ioh. 2 Luc. 19 My house is the house of prayer: whosoeuer therfore goeth vnto that holy place, let them consider, that God saith by his Prophet
 Hier.Hier. 48 Cursed is he which doth the worke of God negligently.
Let them therfore, be careful to be attentiue vnto prayer, and bring with them all humilitie and deuotion, least it might happen vnto them,Luc 18. as it did vnto the Pharise, which entring into the temple with pride and arrogancy, lost what vertue hee had before: let this example teach all men to beware, how they behaue the^selus in that place; and seeing that Christ is alwaies present in the Sacrifice of the Masse, let al their care be to giue their hearts and minds wholly vnto deuout prayers, and feruent meditation, wherein I would rather counsel such as can, to employ themselues in, at that time, then in vocall prayers, wherunto many persons do so wholly then addict themselues, that scantly doe they once eleuate their mind, to thinke of the passion of our Sauiour, which all t^e mysteries of that holy Sacrifice, doe represent vnto vs, thereby many times losing a great part of the merite, which by meditating on the passion of our Sauiour, they might haue gained; for that S. BERNARD saith, It is more merit (in meditating of the Passion of Christ) to shedde one teare with compunction, then to fast a whole weeke with bread and water, or to saye the whole Psalter of DAVID. For where the memorie of Christs passion, is by often meditation thereon, engraffed in our heart, no
 vice can take place, or vertue be wanting, wherefore though vocal prayers be good, yet aboue all, I counsel thee, to apply thy selfe to mental and cordiall prayer, and specially for that which hath for matter, and subiect the life and passion of our Lorde. For beholding him often in meditation, thy soule will be filled with him, thou wilt learne his carriage, as it were and gestures, and conforme all thy actions, as neere as thou canst vnto his, which prayed with an enflamed affection.
Doe not therefore at the time of Masse striue to say a great manie prayers, but rather employ thy selfe in meditation, and endeauour to say those prayers, which thou then vsest, from thy heart: For one onely Pater noster, said with heedful attention of minde, and desire, is better woorth by farre, then manie recited hastilie without deuotion. It is not therefore multitude of prayers, or the maner of praying, which God so much regardeth, as wherein the heart is employed:Exod. 17 4. Reg. 4. For, MOYSES did praye standing, vvhen he did ouercome AMALECH: HELIZEVS prayed vvalking, vvhen hee raysed the sonne of SVNAMITI^ his hostesse.3. Reg. 8 SALOMON prayed vvith bovved knees in the Temple. DAVID prostrated himselfe dovvne vpon his face vpon the earth, crying vnto God for mercie. Our Sauiour, to shewe what exteriour maner soeuer thou vsest in prayer, if thy heart and
 affection be wholly fixed on him, are acceptable: In his passion, which this Sacrifice representeth vnto thee, he did vse him selfe all these kindes of praying: For hee prayed as it were standing, like vnto Moyses, vpon the Crosse: and as Elizeus walking, when he praying in the garden, visited his Disciples thrice: And like Salomon also kneeling,Luc. 22. when (as S, Luke saith) that vvithdravving himselfe a stones cast from his Disciples, kneeling on his knees prayed. And at length,Mat. 26. as Dauid prostrating himselfe vpon the earth: whereby our Sauiour by his example, sheweth that in what deuout maner soeuer, according vnto the time and place, we present our prayers vnto God, they shall be acceptable, if our hearts be eleuated and vnited vnto him. For it is not so much the situatio^ and disposition of the bodie, as the eleuation of the heart, which is most required: for though at all times, thou shouldest haue thy heart lifted vp vnto God, yet specially, here at the holie Sacrifice of the Masse, where is present the King of glorie, accompanied with the Angels, whose companie thou enioyest, by thy deuout assisting there, wherefore not without cause, doeth the Priest before the Canon of the Masse exhorte vs therunto saying: Lift vp you harts, etc. as though he would say, behoulde the king of glorie is comming; with his heauenly Court, attending on him, lift vp
 your hearts aloft from all earthly things, and prepare it to receaue him,Pro. 8. who saith, my delight is to be with the Sonnes of men.
As we answere, then that wee haue eleuated them vnto God, so let vs be carefull alwaies to keepe it in prayer, for otherwise it would profit thee little or nothing, to praye with the mouth, and to haue thy heart distracted about many other things, For thou shouldest be like vnto those of ^^om our Lord doth complaine by his Prophet ESAY, saying, These people doe honour me vvith their mouth,Esai. 29. but their heart is farre from me. Therefore S. BONAVENTVRE declareth that, It is a thing very absurde, to haue the mouth in the Quire, and the heart in the market place: For hee saith that, If thy hart doth not pray, in vaine doth the mouth labour.
He therefore which will haue his praiers to be pleasing vnto God, must employe both heart, mouth and hands therein, and endeauour first to haue a cleane heart. For as SALOMON before he praied,3. Reg. 8. caused the Temple to be prepared and adorned. So must thy hart,1. Rom. 3. which is as S. Paul saith, The temple of God; be first sprinckled with the water of teares, and afterwardes, sweapt with the broome of contrition, and sorrow for thy sinnes, and adorned with manie ornaments of vertue, and holy thoughts. wherefore the Ecclesiasticke exhorteth thee to prepare thy soule before prayer,Eccles. 18.
 that thou maiest not be like vnto those which tempt God. For as S. Clement saith, He vvhich prayeth,S. Clem. in const. Apol before he hath prepared his soule by contritio^ and sorrow for his sinnes, doth not pray, but stirreth vp the wrath and indignation of God against him, reducing his sinnes to memory. For euen as he which hauing killed the Princes sonne, and should come with his hands imbrudred in blood, the father would be so farre from pardoning, that hee seeing his sonnes blood, would presently punish him. So in like sort, if by mortall sinne, thou hast killed and crucifyed the Sonne of God againe, as much as lyeth in thee, canst thou approouing it, expect any fauour, as long as thy hands are ful of blood? no truely, but present punishment, for that God himself saith by the Prophet ESAY, that our sinnes haue made such a diuision betweene him and vs,Esai. 58 that though we lift vp our hands and cry out al the day long, yet, saith he, I wil not heare you, and sheweth that the only cause therof is, for that your hands are full of blood. By this, I diswade no sinner from praying, but perswade him first to haue repenta^ce of his sinnes, if he intende to be heard, for praying is an acte of vertue, and an exercise much commended, in which, God doth so mooue the offender to contrition, by his special illustrations, and is hindered from offending God otherwise, which perhappes he would doe, if hee were not occupied in prayer.

Wherefore to the intent that wee may find fauour at Gods handes, and that our prayers may be acceptable in his sight, let euerie one be careful to wash his hands cleane with the fountaine of teares, for his sinnes, and prepare his heart by perfect contrition, and sorrow for them, so shall his prayer be soone heard, for that God doth more regard oftentimes the preparation of the heart, then the prayers, and to this ende, are the wordes of the Royall Prophet DAVID, saying vnto God: Thy eare hath heard, the preparation of their heart: Secondly, thou must pray with mouth and voyce, as holy DAVID sayth, VVith my voyce, I haue cryed vnto our Lord, vvith my voice, I haue earnestly beseeched God: Wherein the Prophet doeth teach vs, that our voyce also must follow the affection of our heart, and not to be as though thou were reading of some matter, or meerely discoursing, but with all humilitie, humbly and earnestly beseeching God. Here also doe I exhorte thee, that the praiers, which by thy mouth thou pronouncest, be such as are examined and approued by the Catholike Church, and those whereunto most indulgences are graunted; and which thou art most bound vnto, according to thy estate and calling, then any other particuler prayers, wherein thou maiest finde sometimes more deuotion and sweetnesse; it is not the sweetnes
 which thou findest in thy prayers, which make them more meritorious, but the loue and affection, which thou shewest vnto God, and the desire that thou hast to fulfil that, which for his sake, and thy seruice vnto him, thou hast by thy profession and promise, bounde thy selfe vnto, as health and time shal permit thee.
Thirdly, thou must also pray with thy handes, for which cause our Sauiour saith in S. Luke, Knock and it shall be opened vnto you: For vvhilest MOYSES did lift and holde vp his handes, Israel did winne, but othervvise, if his handes vere downe, Amelech did winne: Euen so oughtest thou to lift and holde vp thy handes in prayer, that is, exercising thy selfe in good workes. For what is the cause that thy prayers often times are not heard, but that thou prayest only with thy mouth, hauing thy handes stained and dipped, as ESAY sayeth, in thy neighbours blood, you recall backe againe your debters, and you strike quickly with your clutched fisto, and make haste to strifes and contention: Wherefore that I may vse the Apostles wordes: Lift vp your remisse,Heb. 1^. and forsaken handes, and your vnbounde and vveake knees: Crye vnto our God, saith the Apostle, perseuering in pra^er,Rom. 12. offer vnto God thy prayer, cleane from the filth of sinne, and he vvil heare thee. Wherefore God commandeth in the law of MOYSES, that the lambe vvhich vvas to be offered vnto him,Exod. 12.
 should be vvithout spot. But alas, there are manie which are like vnto those which in the house of Pilate, bowed their knees before Christ, saluted him, and said, Haile King of the Ievves, but rising from their knees, they buffeted him, and stroke him with their fists on the face. So thou in the like sorte, commest vnto the Church to pray, and salutest God with holy meditations, deuotions, and prayers, but afterwards thou art no sooner gone out of the church or oratory, but him whom with thy mouth thou hast praysed, thou prouokest with a thousand iniuries, and dishonourest him with thy works. Take therefore fro^ hence forwards, no smal care, but rather employ all thy studie and endeauour, that when thou prayest with thy mouth, thou maiest honour God also with thy heart, and works of pietie, wherby thy praier may be made good. For as holie TOBIE witnesseth: Prayer is good, vvhen it is accompanied vvith fasting and almes deedes: Wherefore S. Francis, not onely doth exhort the brethren and sisters of this order, to heare dailie Masse, and to pray there with al reuerence and deuotion, but also that they should, at the least, in their monethly assemblies, giue something in almes, for the reliefe of the poore, but specially of the brethren and sisters, if any of them be in necessitie and want.


ARTICLE II. And euerie moneth, let them Assemble.
ALTHOVGH, as I haue said before, that these monthly assemblies and meetings, cannot for diuers reasons bee now made here so publikely, as in the rule is here set downe; yet notwithstanding, I would intreate, and with all fatherly loue, exhorte euery one to obserue, as carefully, to the vttermost of their power, what they may conueniently, as if they were present at those publike assemblies. And therefore, not onely to heare Masse dailie, as the rule requireth, that they should, if they may conueniently, but also where two or three do remaine in a house togeather, to assemble themselues once euerie moneth, when they may most conueniently, to performe as much as lyeth in them, of what is here ordained, both for the good of themselues, and of the whole congregation, knowing that their prayers shal be sooner heard, and they assembled togeather, obtaine that, which one alone should not, according to that saying of S. HIEROM. It is impossible that the prayers of many should not be heard: hauing the promise of our Sauiour for it saying, If two of you shall consent vpon earth of any thing vvhotsoeuer you shal demande, it shall be performed vnto them by my Father which is in heauen. Wherefore all those prayers, which this little assemblie shal make, without all doubt, will be very effectual, and most meritorious, whether they be made for the comfort of the liuing, or of the soules of the brethren departed, or for any other necessarie occasion.
And this prayer whi^h they make for the necessitie and comfort of the brethren, is a spiritual almes: That prayer also is very acceptable before God, whe^ through their fraternal charitie, they pray for the other brethren and sisters. For as holy S. CHRISOST. saieth: To pray for our selues, necessitie constraineth vs thereunto, but to pray for others, fraternal charitie exhorteth vs; that prayer is more sweete and pleasing vnto God, which is not forced by necessitie, but fraternal charitie commendeth. S, GREGORIE in like sort, saith that vvhosoeuer goeth about and endeauoureth to make intercession for others, doth rather by charitie giue his voice and suffrage vnto himselfe, and deserueth so much the sooner to be^ heard for himselfe, how much the more deuoutly he prayeth for others: Wherefore though it should so happen (as manie times it may) that any of the brethren and sisters should liue alone without any of their owne companie and congregation
 with them, yet as they are all desirous to be partakers both in this life, and after of the suffrages and praiers of the rest of the brethre^ and sisters, so they ought, if they haue meanes, and can conueniently both praye themselues, and cause a Masse to be saide euery moneth, for the comfort of themselues, and the rest of the order, both liuing and dead.


ARTICLE III. Let euery one giue a penny of vsuall money, etc.
S. FRANCIS hauing exhorted the brethren and sisters, vnto the oft freque^ting of the Sacrifice of the Masse; and hauing declared the reuerence and deuotion that they ought to haue there, to the intent, that their praiers should be more pleasing vnto God, doth (after their spiritual almes, which in their monthly assemblie, they should bestow both vpon the liuing and dead) here exhort the^ vnto corporal almes also, saying: Let euery one giue a penny. S. FRANCIS knowing, that it is not so much the greatnesse of the gift, as the goodwill of the giuer, which God doth most regard: doth not bind any one to giue more the^ what his estate may wel beare: and though he ordained that this third rule aswel
 for the poore, as for the rich, yet hee did presuppose, that there would bee none but such as would giue euerie moneth a penny, at the least, leauing the others of greater abilitie, to giue according to their deuotion.
In the Primitiue Church, liberallitie did so flourish, and waxed so strong towordes the poore, that it seemed not sufficient vnto any Christian, if hee gaue in almes onely, what he could wel spare, vnlesse he bestowed also euen of those things which were partly necessary for the sustenance of his owne life. And for this cause, the inhabitants of Achaia and Macedonia were highly commended by S. PAVLE, which being very poore themselues, yet notwithstanding, did aboue their power and substance, comfort the poore, giuing for Gods sake, such things as were most needful for their owne mainetenance, beseeching the Apostles with many teares, that they ^ would vouchsafe to accept of them, and bestow it as they should thinke good; Wherefore, that almes cannot but be most grateful vnto God, which is giuen with so pious and deuout a minde, which thing the Prophet ABDIAS wel considering, his pietie and liberallities, were so great, that hee did runne into great debt himselfe, to relieue the necessitie of the Prophets, which were in his time; and though God suffered his wife, after his
 death to be for a while so vexed for his debt, that the creditors ranne to take awaie her sonne to sell him: yet God to shew how readie he is to relieue and comforte such as are in distresse for his sake, sent vnto her the Prophet ELIZEVS, which by the power of God, did so multiple a little oyle, which she had, that therwithall she paide her debts, and liued her her selfe and her sonne with the rest.
Although this notable charitie of the Prophet, was so pleasing and acceptable before God, that euen in this present life, he rewarded his posteritie for it: yet notwithstanding, S. FRANCIS would not demaund here any great almes, to the intent that as in all other things of this rule, he desireth nothing, but what with alacritie and all facilitie thou maiest performe; so here in like sorte, hee requesteth now but a penny, which the poorest may easilie giue once in a moneth. And for as much as he did see, according to the saying of the Apostle, That iniquitie did abounde, and charitie grew colde* The more to stirre vp the brethren and sisters to charitie and almes giuing, did shew how their almes should be bestowed, and by whom, that is, the Priest which saieth the Masse, by the aduice of the Minister, which oftentimes might happen not to be a Priest (as first of all the Minister of the order it selfe was not) but onely a Lawyer called
 Maister BARTHOLOMEVVE, which leauing forraine causes, and the vanitie of the world, was carried with so great a spirit, and loue to God, that S. FRANCIS ordained him, the first minister: and considering that the lippes of the Priestes doe conserue wisdome, hee would that the Priests which said the Masse, which was most likely to bee their Ghostly Father, should (knowing best their necessitie) with the adiuse of the minister, distribute their almes, to the greatest benefits of their soules.
And for asmuch as charitie beginneth with it selfe, therefore chiefe consideration ought to be had, to the reliefe of their owne brethren and sisters, oppressed with pouerty or sicknesse: which amongst many consolations, which this holy order doeth yeeld, this is one of the least, that what aduersitie soeuer, should by Gods holy permission, fal vnto the^, that the rest of their brethren, are bound to haue a special care, to relieue such as remaine in the order. If the Emperour Octauian did put so little trust in his wealth, that he caused his daughter to learne some arte, whereby to liue, saying that he might fall himselfe into pouertie* what assurance then haue others of meaner estate, in this vncertaine world? wherefore S. FRAVNCIS (to take awaie al feare of this extreame want, that the Brethren and Sisters, might with
 greater feruour serue God) did prouidently ordeyne, that out of this common almes, the necessities of them should be relieued. And for the better enabling of the brethren to do this charitable deed, commandeth in the second chapter of this rule, that none should be admitted, but such as were either out of debt, or had sufficient to discharge it: and towardes the latter ende of the rule, he ordaineth in like sort, that if any should be faulty, in spending their goods riotuously, or commit any other notorious and manifest faults, and after thrice admonition, remaine incorrigible and disobedient; they are to be cast out of the companie, by the visitor, with the aduice of the Minister, and some discreete brethren, that the good and vertuous brethren may be the more honored, and better prouided for.
And though S. FRANCIS, his desire was, that they should haue a special care of their owne Brethren and Sisters, both in health and sicknes, and after their death, appoynting this foresaid almes, to serue for them, in euery one of these degrees: yet knowing, what infinite merite, and exceeding great profite, proceedeth from almes-giuing, declareth that neither the Church, where the Masse is said, or the co^mon poore persons, should be forgotten, but each to haue their part, imitating therin (as in al other actio^s) the example of our
 Sauiour Iesus Christ, which did chiesely recommend vnto vs alwaies, that wee should be merciful and pittiful vnto the poore: Whereof all the Euangelists haue aboundantly written, but for breuitis sake, I will onely set downe, what S. LVKE hath written briefly, of the commendations of this work:Luc. 6. He that hath tvvo coats, let him giue one of them to him vvhich hath none, etc. Be you merciful, as your father is pittiful,Luc. 10. and againe, Giue and it shal be giuen vnto you: And in the parable of him which descendeth from Hierusalem vnto Iericho: he did highly commend this virtue. He fed also with fiue loaues, the hungry multitude, and exhorting to almes deedes said: Sell all that thou hast, and giue almes, and you shal haue treasure in heauen: And in the 16. Chapter, Get you friends by the Mamon of iniquitie. Also be brought in the historie of the rich Glutton, which not shewing mercie to the poore LAZARE, was buried in hell, and vnto him which asked,Luc. 16 vvhat he should doe to get heauen, he said, Goe, sell all that thou hast, and giue vnto the poore:Luc. 15 He praysed ZACHEVS saying, that he vvas the sonne of ABRAHAM, for that he gaue almes. To conclude, Christ alwaies sheweth mercie to the poore, to the blinde,Luc. 19 to the leapers, to the sicke and weake, to exhort vs vnto this vertue of charitie, not onely by wordes, but also by his workes themselues; wherefore if there
 were no other argument or reason to perswade a man to exercise this charitie towardes the poore and needy, but onely so manie and so great testimonies alleadged here, of the Sonne of God, both by word and deed it were sufficie^t, firmly to engraffe in our minds foreuer, this notable and profitable vertue, to see that he was cast into hell, which saide, I haue not vvhere to put my goods and fruites: when as there were manie poore in the world which wanted.
Although most commonly there is nothing which doth more mooue, then the examples which are set dailie before our eyes, in so much that it is an auncient and common saying, that, According to the kings example, the vvhole vvorld doth compose it selfe: yet now in these our lamentable times, mens harts are so hardened, and they so prone to all kinde of vice, that an euill example, is as it were a law vnto all men, but if it tende vnto vertue, few will follow it, but looke onely vnto their priuate profite and commoditie: wherefore the more to draw the hearts of men vnto charitie, in almes giuing, I wil endeauour to set downe the priuate profite and vtilitie, which redoundeth vnto al men fro^ it.
The first commoditie therefore is, that almes doeth after a certaine manner, make God himselfe debtor, and as it were seruant vnto the Almes-giuer, as may bee plainely gathered, out of these two testimonies
 of the wise man: if we ioyne one with another:Pro. 19. The one is that, He vvhich vseth mercie vnto the poore, lendeth vnto God:Pro. 22 The other is, He vvhich borroweth, is seruant of the lender. If this be true, it followeth then well, that God remaineth, as it were debtor and seruant of him which giueth almes. For that this person, by this deede of charitie, lendeth vnto God: What is there I beseech you, that can be worthie of greater estimation, then to haue God his debtor? Or what can be more excellent, or better to bee desired, then to haue in our power, the meanes to obtaine the mercie of God, that thereby we may haue aboundance of his mercy? without all doubt, the almes-giuer hath this meanes in his owne handes, seeing that out Lord saith, Blessed are the merciful, for they shal obtaine mercie.
And besides this profite, there remaineth another more principall and chiefe benefite, that is, to get thereby the pardon and remission of their sinnes. For SALOMON sayeth:Eccl. 3 Euen as vvater putteth out fire, so doth almes extinguish sinne, and in the Prouerbs, A secret and hidden present,Prou. 21 doeth extinguish vvrath, and a gift in the bosome, the greatest indignation. And TOBIAS, almes deliuereth from all sinne. DANIEL also said vnto the King NABVCHODONOZER, Redeeme thy sinne vvith almes:Dan. 4 And if
 that infidell and Ethnicke, had power to be saued, if he would haue receaued and accepted of the Counsel of the Prophet (how much more then may a Christian satisfie for his sinnes, and be saued, by distributing by almes, his wel gotten goods.
It is a common saying, that he looseth his oyle, and his worke, that goeth about a thing not likely to be brought to passe: so may we saye, that he looseth his worke and his oyle, which lifteth vp his handes to God, that hee would remit and pardon his sinnes, if he shutte his handes from giuing almes to the poore. And this is it which our Lord would insinuate, when he saieth: That the Piiests did eate the sinnes of the people.Osa. 4, For that the Priests liued vpon the almes which the people did giue, for the extirpation and washing awaie of their sinnes, which was done by their almes.
Moreouer, not onely this vertue of remission of sinnes, proceedeth from almes, but also it enricheth the giuer with newe merits, for this payment is so plentifull, rich, and aboundant, that it is not onely sufficient to pay and make satisfaction for sinnes paste, but is of power also, and able to enrich the giuer, for hereafter: And the reason thereof is, for that this worke of mercie, specially when anie one giueth, more for GODS
 sake then otherwise he were able to spare, of this parte, wherein it is penal and painful, it is satisfactorie, and maketh perfect satisfaction. And because it is done in charitie, it is meritorious, and so of the one side, it satisfieth the debt, and on the other parte, it doth augment and encrease, what the giuer possesseth: both these benefites are plainely shewed in the deedes of the the Prophet ELIZEVS, which he did vnto the widdow of the Prophet ABDIAS: Whereof I made mention,4, Rog. 4 a little before, which giuing more then hee could well spare, to supply the wants of the other poore Prophets, dyed in great debt, but his charitie and almes, were so pleasing vnto God, that through his great goodnesse, and fatherly prouidence, he did sende his Prophet ELIZEVS, which did so multiplie that little oyle, which the poore widdow had left, in such sorte, that not onely shee payed therewith her husbandes debts, but liued afterwardes with the rest which remained; euen so although thy soule be poore and need^e: yet if it want not good will, and haue the oyle of mercie, to giue almes, and will vse that industry, which that poore widdow did, in shutting the doores close, and powring in parte of that little oyle, in the empty vessel, that is, amongst the poore, emptie, and voyde of comfort and consolation: shut the doore close, that is, do thy almes
 at least in thy intention, so hidden and secretly that thy left hand, may not knowe what thy right hand doeth: holde it for certaine, and vndoubtedly, that the fruits and merits of this almes, shall bee so encreased and multiplied, that it will not only be sufficient to pay all the debts of thy sinnes past, but also to inrich thee hereafter, with new merits; which the Psalmist doth shew most manifestly, saying: He desperse^ hee gaue vnto the poore, and his iustice remaineth vvorld vvithout end.
The Apostle compareth Almes, vnto seede which is sowen, when he saith, Hee vvhich sovveth sparingly,1. Cor. 9 reapeth and moovveth also niggardly, and of the other side: He which soweth plentifully, abundantly shall reape. He which soweth, although at the first sight, it seemeth that he looseth his seede: yet not withstanding looking well into the matter, hee findeth it the chiefe meanes to multiplie it; for as our Sauiour saith, Vnlesse a graine of corne falling into the earth be mortified, it remaineth it selfe alone: but if falling into the earth,Ioh. 12 it be dead, it bringeth foorth much fruite: eue^ so, what might be bestowed in almes, if it be kept vp, it multiplieth not, but if it be cast into the earth, that is cast vnto the poore; which like vnto the earth are troden vnder foote, it bringeth foorth greate fruite.
What great fruite I pray thee, or gaine
 can bee founde then this? thou giuest the earth, and findest heauen; thou impartest to the poore, the bread of men, and the bread of Angels, is yeelded vnto thee for it: thou bestowest a cup of cold water, and findest the water of life: to conclude, thou giuest that which thou canst not carry awaie with thee: and there is bestowed on thee, that which no man can take awaie from thee: wherefore wilt thou not then transpo^te thy goods to take place, where thou shalt dwell for euer. But seeing that the whole discourse of the scripture, is replenished either with notable exhortations vnto almes deedes, I am as it were enforced to adde thse other speciall benefits following, to the intent, that euerie one which readeth them, may take some one or other of those which he liketh, and shall finde most fitting for his estate and condition, thereby either to encourage him in that he hath already begun, or to moue him to make amends here after, for that which he hath hitherto neglected; therefore I know, there is not any one, scantly so bad, but that he would be willing to haue Gods helpe in his tribulations; truely there are few meanes which are better, for the obtaining thereof, then Almes-deedes. For seeing that Christ him selfe saith,Luck. 6 That vvhat measure you shall meate vnto others, shal be measured vnto you againe. It is therefore most iust, that as a
 merciful man did succour the poore and needie, in their necessities and distresses, that God should ayde, helpe and assist him in his owne, as he did helpe others, for the loue of God, in their great extreamities. DAVID did insinuate as much vnto vs, when he reckoned vp, so manie and so great blessings as shal come vnto the merciful man, saying:Psal. 40 Blessed is he which vnderstandeth the needie and poore, in the euil day our Lord vvill deliuer him: our Lord wil keep him and giue li^e vnto him, and vvill make him blessed on earth, and vvil not deliuer him into the hands of his enemies.
The second good, is that the almes-giuer shall he heard of God: For euen as hee hath heard the voice of the poore; so will Almightie God apply his eares to heare his prayers, and humble requests: therefore ESAY after he had exhorted vnto almes-giuing and praised almes, he presently added, Then shal he cry, and I wil heare him:Esai 58 and on the co^trary side, he which wil not heare the poore, nether shal he be heard of God,Proue. 21. as SALOMON witnesseth, saying, Hee which shutteth his eares to the cry of the poore, hee shal cal and not be heard. But aboue al these things aforesaid, thou oughtest chiefly to cast thy eyes vpon this, that our Sauiour promiseth, vnto the charitable and merciful persons, the life euerlasting: for in the last day, when euery one shal receaue the rewarde for all the deedes of his forepassed
 life, our Lord wil say vnto them: Come yee blessed of my father, receaue the kingdome prepared for you, from the beginning of the vvorlde.
Put therefore into one ballance, al those profits and benefits, which doe accorde vnto thee, and into the other, all the temporal things which thou loosest, by giuing almes; and duely considering, which of these are of greatest value; those which thou giuest, or those which thou receauest, and thou shalt finde that thou gainest more then thou hast lost: yea moreouer, for thy greater comfort and encouragement, I will shew vnto thee plainely, that not onely thou doest gaine these spiritual benefits, which I haue rehearsed, but also that thou loosest no temporal thing by it; and I wil do it so much the rather, for that though euery one desireth greatly to gaine, yet manie are of that condition, that they will not in the meane time loose any thing for it. Beholde therefore, I beseech you, that such is the goodnesse of God towardes those which are pittiful, and Almes-giuers, that he doth not onely rewarde them for it, in the life to come, but doeth also bestow on them here for their charitie, infinite benefits. Read Deutronomie, and you shal finde there innumerable benedictions,Deut. 28. prou. 3. which our Lord distributeth vnto the Almes-giuers. Moreouer heare SALOMON saying: Honour God of
 the first fruits of al thy goods, and thy Barnes shall be filled vvith fruitfulnesse, and thy vvine-presses shall ouer-flovv with wine: And againe: Hee vvhich giueth vnto the poore, shall not vvant, but whosoeuer despiseth their praier and petition, shal susteyne pennurie and want. Also S,1. Tim. 1. PAVL saieth vnto TIMOTHIE, that pietie is profitable vnto all things, hauing promise of the life that novv is, and of that to come. And our Sauiour himselfe doth with one accorde confirme the same, which all those aforesaide did testifie saying, Giue,Luc. 6. and it shal be giuen vnto you, that is, giue temporall things, for the loue of God, and you shal receaue here his grace, and plenty, and afterwardes life euerlasting. This doeth cleerely and plainely appeare, in that Widdow, which giuing first to the Prophet ELI. a cake of that litle meale, which she had left, God did so reward her for it, euen in her temporall goods, that from thencefoorth she neither wanted meale or oyles The like happened vnto TOBIE, whom our Lord enriched,Tob. 11. fo^ his exceeding charitie.
Now would I willingly aske of thee, doest thou beleeue these testimonies of the Scripture or no. If thou doest not beleeue them, thou art no christian: seeing that thou beleeuest not, and giuest not credit vnto the wordes of Christ: if thou sayest that thou beleeuest, then of necessitie, thou must confesse that when thou giuest
 almes, thou sufferest no losse of thy temporall goods, but art rather made more rich thereby, both in thy spirituall goods, and in thy temporal also: And although thou shouldest not finde any way to perswade thee thereunto, yet notwithstanding, thou oughtest firmely and stedfastly to beleeue it, seeing that God hath said it, that he which shall deale liberally with the poore, shall neuer be oppressed with necessitie, and need himselfe:
If thou therefore beleeuest it to be so, why art thou then so sparing and niggardly in giuing almes, when thy faith telleth thee, that in distributing it, the same will inrich thee more and more? There is no way to excuse thy selfe, for if thou turnest thy eyes to spiritual goods, many are promised vnto thee here, if thou lookest into temporal, faith doth render thee certaine and secure, that thou shalt neuer want them: Wherefore, if thou shouldest say that thou doest not see, how Almes-giuing should augmente thy goods and substance, neither doest thou see how God is three and one: it is hee which hath said both, and therefore thou oughtest firmely to beleeue: thou must therefore either denie thy faithe, or else freelie graunt, which is my drift, that the almes-giuer, meerely for Gods sake, shall neuer want necessaries, that is, those things which are necessarie, for bodie and
 soule. Did holie DANIEL in the Lyons denne want? If the birdes of the ayre, which know not God, doe not want, how should true Christians then be forgotten? how should Christ forget them, which feedeth himselfe being hungrie? For hee doeth acknowledge that which thou doest vnto one of the least of his, thou doest it vnto himselfe: howe will he denie thee earthlie goods, which graunteth liberally heauenly treasures? how will he refuse to giue thee a crust of bread, or a little water, which powred out his pretious blood and life for thee? Wherefore all this considered, how commeth it to passe, that thou enioying the name of a Christian, doest not trust and beleeue the words of Christ? Confesse therfore the trueth, say that thou hast no excuse, and shew plainely that it is thy miserable couetousnesse, which is cause thereof. But there are many Christians nowe, in this our vncharitable age, which will not departe from their goods, vntill such time as they see that death is so neere at hande, that of force they must leaue them, and then such as before would not, neither for the loue of God, or feare of displeasure, giue during their life any small almes, now death, sometimes causeth them to leaue very much to bee giuen for them. But it falleth out many times, by the iust iudgme^t of God, that such as had so litle care to do themselues good
 in their life, their friendes haue left any thing for them when they are dead, wherby they are depriued of great merite, and blessednesse, which they might haue bene assured of, if they would haue bestowed their almes themselues: for that to conclude with SALOMONS testimonie: He vvhich pittieth and relieueth the poore, shall be saued. O how excellent and great a reward doeth he promise for so small a gift: worthely therefore did S. FRANCIS ordaine, that the brethren and sisters, should giue themselues euery moneth something, though it were but a penny.


ARTICLE IIII. Let them procure some Religious, etc.
OVR holie Patron S. FRANCIS, endeauouring to heape vpon his children, all the happinesse that may be, hauing in this chapter ordeyned, that they should (to heape vp blisse and happinesse, both in this life, and in the other to come) giue euery moneth some almes, whereby they may reape and enioy all those blessings, benefits, and vtilities before mentioned. Now considering that our Sauiour himselfe saith, Blessed are they vvhich heare the vvord of God and keepe it; setteth downe
 here: that the brethren and sisters should endeauour to attaine vnto this blessednes also; procuring euery moneth, if they may conueniently, some religious person to Preach vnto the^ the word of God, which is the beginning and roote of blessednesse: for that therein is contained the remedies of all spiritual euils, and the inducement to all vertues, and spirituall perfection, and therefore S. FRANCIS desireth, that the exhortations which should be then made, might bee to exhorte them to Penance, which is both a meanes to preserue from all euils, and also to make amendes and satisfie for what is past, and for that the workes of mercie do greatly helpe thereunto, S. FRANCIS wisheth, that they should by those exhortations, be drawen to exercise dailie the workes of mercie, for that it is not enough to attaine vnto the heauenly blisse, to heare the worde of God, and to beleeue, vnlesse thou doest exercise thy selfe also in good workes. Therefore S IOHN in the Apocalypse, when he saith,Apoc. 1. Blessed is he vvhich heareth and readeth, the vvordes of this Prophecie: he addeth presently, and keepeth those things vvhich are written herein.Iam. 1. S. IAMES therefore saith, Be you doers of the vvord, and not hearers onely, deceauing your selues: And S. PAVL also saith in like sorte, that not onely the hearers of the vvorde, but the doers thereof shall be iustifyed.

Wherefore S. FRANCIS, to the intent, that by hearing the worde of God attentiuely, they may be the more mooued to put it in execution, ordeyneth, that the Brethren and sisters thould be c^reful to keepe silence, vvhilest the worde of God is preached. Insinuating by this careful silence, in hearing, the prepared minde, that they should haue to make their benefite thereof, and readie to follow what they haue heard.
Wherefore though the monthly publike assemblies, cannot in this our poore countrey be now made; yet I desire that euery one (as opportunitie serueth) should doe what he might conueniently: so now also, though these monethly exhortations to Penance, and to the workes of mercie cannot conueniently be had: yet to the intent that the brethren and sisters, may be the more mindful, of the holie estate of Penance, which they haue taken vpon them, I doe most earnestly desire them, that if they cannot conueniently get some exhortation to bee made thereof euerie moneth, that they will be careful to reade at these vsual times, some deuout treatise of Penance, or of good workes, which if they want, I hope they will not thinke their time lost, to reade some one of these little exhortations of Penance, set downe here in the begining, or some other of these discourses and exhortations, to good workes, which I haue heare set downe the
 more at large for that purpose, in this declaration of the rule.

And let them be attentiue vnto Prayer vnlesse, etc.
FORASMVCH as S. FRANCIS, though he found in himselfe such extraordinarie sweetnesse and comfort in prayer, that his onely desire was to giue himselfe wholly thereunto: yet seeing by diuine reuelation, he was informed that God had not called him and his brethren for the good of themselues onely, but for the good of manie: Therefore the instruction which he had receaued for himselfe, the selfe-same, doeth he here giue vnto others, whom though he doeth exhort to be intentiue to priuate praier, and his common office, according to his calling, that is, either the Breuiarie, our Ladies Mattins, or the Praer nosters, set downe in the ^ule, yet considering that euerie good thing, how much the more common it is, is so much the better for the doer, doeth here, preferring the common good of the fraternitie, before euerie mans priuate deuotion, by this worde, vnlesse, excuse and exempt them from that which before he had bound them vnto, to employ themselues when need requireth, for the whole Congregation.





Of the sicke Brethren, and them who are deseased.
BVt when it happeneth, any of the Brethre^ to bee sicke, let the Ministers be bound, either by themselues, or by an other, or others, to visite the sicke once in a weeke (if the sicke person do cause the same to be notified vnto them) inducing him carefully to receaue the Sacrament of Penance, as they shal thinke better, or more efficatious to be expedient, ministring vnto him necessaries out of the common goods; and if the sicke person, shal passe out of this present life, let warning be giuen vnto the Brethren and Sisters then in the place where he shal happen to dye that they may be carefull to be personally present at the funeralles of the dead; from whence let
 them not depart, vntill all the office be ended, and the bodie buried: we will that the like shal be obserued about the sicke sisters, and such of them as shal depart this life. Moreouer, within eight daies immediatly following, after the departure of the said partie buried, let euerie one of the said brethre^ and sisters, say for his soule: a Priest one Masse, such as can say the Psalter, 50. Psalmes, and the vnlearned so many Pater nosters, and let them adde, Requiem eternam in the ende of euerie one: and afterwardes, within the yeare, let them cause three Masses to be saide for the comforte of the Brethren and Sisters, as well liuing as dead. but they who can reade the Psalter, let them say it, and the others, let the^ not omitte to saye 105. Pater nosters, adding Requiem eternum, at the ende of each one.

EVEN as the law of nature doeth forbid thee to doe vnto another, what thou wouldest be loath he should doe vnto thee; so by the same law, the selfe same thing that thou desirest that others should employ themselues in for thee: the like of necessitie must thou be willing to doe for them, if thou canst conuenie^tly: wherfore if thou wert sicke, thou wouldest be glad and willing that others should visite and relieue thee; therefore S. FRANCIS, out of a special care that he had of the sicke, addeth vnto the law of nature, his commandement; and ordayneth in this chapter, that the Ministers must haue a speciall care, that the sicke Brethren and sisters, be visited and relieued; herein shewing himselfe, as in all other actions, a perfect imitator, and follower of Christ our Sauiour, who had so great a care of the sicke, that whe^ he sent his disciples abroad to preach, he commanded them to haue a speciall care of the sicke, and to cure and heale those whom they founde in the citties where they preached. And what hee commanded them to doe, the selfe-same hee did himselfe, teaching them both by deed and worde. When he went to Hierusalem in the Feast day, the first thing which he did, he came to the Ponde of Bethsaida (where the sheepe were washed, that were to bee sacrificed) and cured him which had bene torme^ted with a grieuous
 infirmitie, for the space of 38. yeares: So at another place, when he had ended his se^mon, hee went to visite a sicke woman, which had a cruell Feauour (which was mother of SIMON) whom he restored to her accustomed health, and magnified his doctri^e, by his pious workes, fulfilling himselfe, what he had taught others to doe.
MARTHA and MARY, hauing their brother LAZARVS sick at home,Iohn. 11. sente worde vnto our Sauiour thereof, that he whom he loued was sicke: They went not themselues to him, as REGALVS the little king, the Centurian, the Cananean, and others did, which were but Nouices, and new beginners in the seruice of God; but these two sisters being auntient seruants, and well instructed by Christ himselfe, did know right well that our Lorde was better pleased, that they should serue the sicke, and minister vnto him al things necessarie, then leauing this vndone, to come themselues, and that thereby, they did winne more his loue, then they should haue done by comming: Wherefore the Ecclesiasticke saith, Let it not grieue or repent thee, to visite the sicke, for hereby, thou shalt bee more confirmed in loue.
This worke of mercie, doeth greatly please him truly, which seeing vs infirme, miserable, and sicke, did himselfe visite vs
 from aboue, and with a reddie and ioyfull minde, did exercise himselfe this office, for he both did giue himselfe to visite the si^ke: and also when the lame, the blinde, the Paraliticke, and many others came vnto him, he cured and healed all. S. IAMES saith. This is a cleane and immaculate religion, before God, to visite the Pupilles and widdowes: Blessed IOB saith: Visiting thy like, thou shalt not offend: For S. AVGVSTINE saith: Hee which vvillingly practiseth the vvorkes of mercie, shall more easilie resist sinne. And if it be a worke of mercie, to feede the hungrie, and cloath the naked; how much more is it then to visite the sicke, and helpe him, whereby thou doest exercise all the workes of mercie togeather.
The health of bodie, is the chiefest and most excellent good amongst al temporall things, wherefore he which is depriued of his health, wanteth the greatest good; therefore he vseth greater mercie, which visiteth the sicke, then he which otherwise feedeth the hungry: for with good health. all other bodilie euils, are more easily tolerated; and without it, what is the greatest or richest mans life, but misery: when thou seest therefore, any sicke person, let thy pietie (for the loue of him which had so great compassion vpon the sicke) bee such, that thou maist say with S. PAVLE: VVho is infirme, and I not sick, as who should
 say none; for otherwise, if thy hart be hardened against them, though thou shouldest haue so great faith, as to translate mountaines, offending against charitie, thy faith would profite thee little. And seeing that Christ had so great a care of the sicke, if thou wilt not follow him in the like, thou art not worthie to be any of his, for that charitie truely doth not shine clearer, and shew it selfe more perfectly, then in the visitation and care of the sicke: because amongst all the miseries of the world, as hungar, thirst, heate and colde, pennury and wearisomnesse* there is none that is worthie of more commisseration, pittie, and helpe, then the sicke person: Whereupon, a certaine deuout and learned Religious person said, that he did more merit in one day, which did helpe, ayde, and serue the sicke person, then he which fasted a whole yeare: yea God doth reward them here also temporally: whereof wee haue example in holy DAVID, which helping that poore sicke Egyptian, of him hee vnderstood, where the Analithites were, and obteyned victorie, and hee which was cruell towardes the sicke person, for rewarde of his crueltie, lost the victorie, and was taken captiue.
How great merit it bringeth to a man after this life, may plainely be seene by this onely, that our Lord wil reproach vnto the damned, that he was sicke, and they did
 not visite him, and those which haue had care of them, hee will reward them with his heauenly kingdome.

ARTICLE II. Let the Ministers be bound by themselues, or by another, or others, to visite the sicke.
SO great was the care that S. FRANCIS had, that the sicke should bee comforted, both spiritually and corporally, that if the occasions of the Ministers were such, that they might bee lawfully excused, from not going themselues, yet would he not, that the sicke should be vnuisited: wherefore he declareth here, that they are bound (if the sicke party giueth them notice) to sende some other in their place.
But specially, if the Minister be not a Priest, as oftentimes it may happen, then ought hee to sende some other Priest, for we cannot thinke that S. FRANCIS would haue so great care of the sicke bodie, and forget the sicke soule; whose sinnes are oftentimes, cause of the infirmities which come vnto the bodie, which caused the Disciples of our Sauiour,Iohn. 9. seeing the poore man which was blinde from his natiuitie, to say vnto him, Maister, who
 was it that sinned, either this man, or his Parents, that he should be borne blinde? And though our Sauiour did answere, that neither his, or his Parents sinnes, were cause of his infirmitie: yet did not he reprehend them, as being in an errour, to thinke that sinnes were cause of sicknesse, which no doubt, but that he would haue done, if it had not bene so, and therefore did rather confirme it to be oftentimes true: wherefore it hath bene alwaies a laudable constitution and order, ordeyned by an auncient councel, that the Phisition (at the least, if hee finde the partie to be in anie danger) ought not to administer any corporall Ppysicke, vntill such time as hee hath admonished him to prouide for the soule, by cleansing it from sinne, which is oftentimes cause of the sicknesse: wherefore, it were in vaine to go about to take awaie the effect, as long as the cause remaineth. Therefore S. FRANCIS, vpon iust grounds ordaineth here, that the Minister himselfe, or some other Priest, visiting the sicke, ought first to induce him carefully to receaue the Sacrament of Penance. For though it may be wel presupposed, that the partie liuing in so holie a Congregation, will be careful to preserue himselfe, or at least, to make satisfaction for his great offences, yet considering, that so strict is the iudgement of God, and so seuere in punishing the least offences:
 and seeing that sicknesse is a messenger of death; nowe ought hee to be carefull to make some satisfaction, and be sorrowfull for the very least offences; for that a great sinne, as theft, murder, rapine, etc. doeth not so soone draw and leade vs into hell, as others which seeme to be lesse, doe: for the heynousnesse of a great offence, doeth so terrifie vs, that wee come, soone to the knowledge thereof; whereby it commeth to passe, that we do presently penance for it: But the sinnes of lesser note, into which we fall dailie, and whereunto for that we think the^ to be small, we take no regarde: these I say are they, which with a swift course, make vs runne into etenall perdition: Murmuration, detractation, or scoffing, and secret whispering, by taking awaie, the good fame and name of our neibours, which are now so commonly vsed in ordinarie talke, that we little regarding such small matters (as wee take them to be) do no penance for them, and so by little and little, wee runne head-long into hell.
Wherefore, God of his infinite goodnesse, and no lesse desire of the saluation of such as serue him, doeth seldome punish their sinne with suddaine death, but as a token of his loue towardes them, doeth sende some lingering sicknesses, thereby to bring them both to the knowledge of themselues, and of God in like sort, and to
 haue recourse vnto him, for mercie and grace; whereof we haue manifest examples in the holie Scripture: for NABVCHODONOZOR the King of Babilon, a cruel tyrant and persecutor, being stroken by the hand of God with great paines and sicknesses, himselfe did penance, and in the ende was saued (as holy S. AVGVSTINE saieth) So King EZECHIAS in his affliction and sicknesse,S. August turned vnto God, and wept bitterly.
God sendeth afflictions and sicknesse also vnto his friendes, whom hee loueth dearely: Beholde, LAZARVS was not exempted from sicknesse, though so dearely beloued of CHRIST, that it was the onely name which his sisters did giue him when they sent CHRIST worde of his sicknesse saying, Behold vvhom thou louest is sicke: our Sauiour himself did testifie no lesse, speaking vnto his disciples, saying: Our friend LAZARVS sleepeth. Wherfore seeing that we firmely beleeue, that such is the loue of God, towardes his friendes, that hee sendeth nothing vnto them, but what he knoweth to bee for their good: wee may therefore plainely see, that sicknesse is very profitable, vnto the true friendes of God, for it purgeth the soule from euil customes and maners, as it were from euill humours. SALOMON saith.Ioh. 17. Hatred of the wound vvasheth awaie the euill: For euen as in sicknesse, euil humours
 are wasted and consumed in such sorte, that the infirmitie being past, a man commeth to better health: so in like sort, sicknesse of the bodie, cleanseth and purgeth the humors of sinne, and wicked affections. But this is to bee vnderstood, when the afflicted minde is cleansed from euill, and enflamed with the fire of a certaine heauenly desire, which is the chiefe ende, wherefore S. FRANCIS ordeineth, that the Ministers should so often, not onely visite the sicke person, but endeauour to enduce him, to receaue penance carefully, that is, not to receaue it as it were by force and constraint, but to vse all care, diligence and feruour, in the doing thereof; his heart being inflamed (as I saide) with the fyer of heauenly desires.
For euen as of vnhard and vnshaped iron, no notable worke can bee made, wherein the worke man may shew his cunning and skill, though hee strike it with his hammer neuer so oft, vnlesse the iron it selfe be firie hot; euen so the colde and hardened hart, can neuer be polished and made shining bright, though it be beaten with the hammer of sicknes, vnlesse it be made burning hot, with the fire of the loue of God, with which helpes the Ministers, hauing first endeuored, to reliue the soule of the sicke person withall, then by the commandement of S. FRANCIS, and his ordinance
 set downe in this place; they are to haue care of his bodie, both liuing and dead; Ministring vnto him (whilest he liueth) necessaries, out of the common goods.
Though S. FRANCIS doeth shewe herein, the greate care that he had of the comforte for the poore distressed sick persons, in taking such order for their bodily reliefe: yet no doubt, his respect to the spirituall benefite of the Ministers, for their paines herein, was not little, for not onely are they partakers of all the merits, mentioned both in the former Chapter, and in this present also: but moreouer here, by this particular act, and compassion on the sicke, doe shewe herein themselues to be the true seruants of Christ, and deserue the more his fauour: For as S. GREGORIE saieth:S. Greg. VVe are not otherwise made the members of our Redeemer, but by ayding and hauing compassion vpon our neighbours: and how much more compassion any man hath vpon his Neighbours griefes: so much more fauour doeth he merit, to finde before God. And the greater that any man is in perfection, so much more perfectly doth he compassionate the vexation and sicknesse of his Neighbours: wherefore the Apostle S. PAVLE confirmed in grace and full of all perfection, had so much compassion on other mens griefes, that he saide, VVho is infirme, and I not sicke with him.

Wherefore, though euery one of the Brethren and Sisters, ought to haue a special care of the sick persons of their holy congregation, aboue others: yet for as much as the Ministers, are chosen for their perfection and prudence, to haue care of the rest, S. FRANCIS appoynteth them, particularlie to prouide for the sicke brethren, out of the common goods. O prudent and fatherlie care, of our most worthie Patrone, which prouidently forseeing that manie times there is no greater hinderance in the seruice of God, then feare of want! For though our Sauiour, both in the sixt Chapter of S: MATH. and the 12.Matt. 6. Luc. 12. of S. LVKE, doeth seeke to take this feare awaie, shewing what a care is had to prouide, both for the birdes of the ayre, and flowers of the fielde, and that our most louing heauenly father, whose loue is greate, and hath power to do what he please, knoweth our necessitie, and therefore he promiseth, that if wee will firste seeke the kingdome of God, that al things necessarie, shal be giuen vnto vs. And that DAVID which had long experience of the goodnesse of God, exhorteth vs to cast our care vpon God, and that hee will nourish vs, testifiing what he hath seene himselfe, saying: I haue bene a young man, and novve am olde, but yet neuer did I see the iust forsaken, nor his seede to seeke his bread, yet notwithstanding, such is the incredultie of
 many, that if they feele neuer so little want, insteede of hauing recourse, and setting their whole heart and minde on God, from whom all goodnesse proceedeth, they taking a contrarie course, set their affections, so to seeke after temporal and worldly maintenance, that hardly doe they once apply their minde, to thinke on God, and the health of their soule; Wherefore to the intent, that the brethren and sisters of this order (which haue after, a certaine particular maner, dedicated themselues vnto the seruice of God) should not for feare of want, either in health or sicknes, be hindered in their deuotions: let them know that by the obligation of their order, the Minister is to haue care that they may be prouided of necessaries, out of the common goods, of the Congregation.
But here some question may be made, from whence should arise this common goods to be in this sorte applyed, seeing that in the chapter precedent, and immediatly going before, mention is made of the almes to be giuen monethly; it is there declared, howe it should bee bestowed, whereby there seemeth nothing to be left to raise any summe, to make a common purse for the reliefe of the sicke and needie: Truely, God fordid that any man should thinke so vnreuerently of Saint FRANCIS, that hee which had receaued
 from God such heauenly light, and so manie diuine reuelations from aboue, that he often-times did know and declare the verie hidden secrets, of the hearts of manie, as holie S. BONAVENTVRE doeth largely declare in his life;S. Bonauen: in vitae S. Fr. should bee so ignorant, as not to knowe that (setting Gods power aside) of nothing, nothing can be made, or hauing our Sauiour for his instructor and chiefe director, in the erecting of all his three orders, that hee could so much ouer-shoote himselfe, as to set downe, for a principall poynt to be obserued, howe the poore brethren and sisters should bee relieued by the Ministers, if they had nothing to relieue them withall.
Wherefore certainely S. FRANCIS, a true louer of the poore, as in the precedent Chapter, he did set an order for their present reliefe; so in like sorte, he ordeined, that the Minister should prouide for the brethren and sisters in sicknes, did iustly iudge that they would not be so void of discretion, seeing that the almes was to be giuen by their aduise; but that it should be so giuen, that continually some thing might bee kept, to performe that which is required to be done in this chapter, aswel for the dead, as for the liuing: for his desire was, that no lesse care should be had of the brethren and sisters, after their departure, then in their life time.
 And therefore he saieth, If the sicke person passe out of this present life, let warning bee giuen, etc. I would with silence haue passed ouer this place, seeing that it is a thing which can very seldome or hardly at all be now practised in our countrey, were it not to make manifest vnto thee, that such was the prouident care, of our holie Patrone, in all the workes of mercie, which he ordeyned, that the Brethren and sisters should dailie exercise, as occasion was offered, that he did asmuch, if not more, regarde the good and merite, of the dooer thereof, both in this life, and after, as of him to whom it should be done: Wherefore, as in setting downe that, if the sicke partie dyed, that warning should be presently giuen vnto all the Brethren and Sisters, then in the Cittie or place, that they might bee careful to be present at the funeral, and not to departe from thence, vntill all the office be ended, and the bodie buried: Hee greatly desired, that the poore soule of the disceased, might presently haue all comfort by their prayers, both for the multitude of them, being all assembled togeather, for that intent, and also for the longenes of the time, in that they were not to departe vntil the offiee be ended: and for the feruentnesse of deuotion, which the presence of the dead bodie would moue them vnto* from whom they were not to depart, vntill it were buried, the soule might the sooner
 be deliuered, from the Paine of Purgatorie.
So in like sort, no small benefits do redound vnto them all, for this piety shewed vnto the dead person, by their presence and assistance, at his burial: For first it is a speciall meanes, to preserue thee from sinne, engraffing in thy minde, by thy presence, at this worke of mercie, in burying the dead, the memorie of death, then which nothing is more profitable or effectual, to preserue thee from falling into sinne, as witnesseth the Wiseman, saying, Remember the last things, and thou shalt neuer offend: Therefore S. FRANCIS [as I said before) willeth thee to be present personally at the buriall of thy brother, that seeing him layd into his graue, thou shouldest foorthwith remember thy selfe to be mortal, assuring thy selfe, that thou art to follow him in like maner by death, and to iudgement also, according to that of the Ecclesiasticke, saying: Be mindful of my iudgement, so shall thine be also: vnto me yesterdaie, and vnto thee to morrow.
This memorie of death is therefore a most singuler remedie, both to preserue from sinne, and to bridle the appetites of our flesh, whe^ we do rightly vnderstand, by the president of the dead person, layde in the graue, before our face, that this our bodie also shall be turned into wormes-meate, and ashes: It casteth colde water
 into the fire of our burning appetites and cooleth much, and extinguisheth al our hotte and inflamed concupiscences: Saint GREGORIE saieth, The sepulchres and graues doe shew what is the substance of humaine flesh, and there is nothing vvhich doeth more tame the vvanton desires thereof, then that euerie one consider, that this vvhich he novv loueth, what it vvil be after death. The memorie of death so fixed hereby in thy minde, will make thee to contemne quickly, the vanities and deceipts of the worlde, and all things that might hinder the seruice of God; for easil^e doth bee despise all transitory things, which firmely beleeueth, and daily thinketh that he must die, and so soone leaue them. The life therefore of a wise man, is the dailie meditation of death: wherefore the Ecclesiasticke doeth admonish vs most notablie, saying, If a man hath liued manie yeares, and hath bene merrie and pleasant in them all, he ought to remember the darke time, and the dayes of manie, which when they shal come, al that is past, vvill be accused and blamed of vanitie. Life seemeth faire, vntill death come to consume it, but thou must, if thou wilt, besecure, expect the other parte of thy time, which if thou keepe well in thy minde, thou shalt neuer bee deceaued with the false lies and vanities of this worlde, but rather thou wilt cleaue vnto
 God, and serue him more religiously. God commanded that the feathers of the birdes, which were offered vnto him in Sacrifice, should be cast into the place of ashes, to the east side; thereby insinuating that by riches, honours, health, nobilitie: men are lifted vp as high as a birde with her feathers. But our Lord would haue thee cast all those things into the place of ashes* which is the graue, whereby presently thou mayest see thy beginning to be no other but ashes, and from ashes, and into ashes must returne. Truely if thou wouldest bring all thy vanities and worldly honours, wherewith thou goest puffed vp, into the burying and laying into the earth, thou wouldest easilie contemne them all, and esteeme them for nothing, and soone leaue them for the good of thy soule.
Lastly, by the very deede it selfe, in burying the dead, thou doest both greatly merit, and shalt finde fauour at Gods handes for it, who fauoureth greatly those which doe exercise themselues in such workes of mercie and pietie. DAVID sent vnto the men of Iabes Galaad, to giue them great thankes, because they had buried the bodie of SAVL, saying, Blessed are you of God,2. Reg. 2 vvhich haue vsed this mercie vnto our lord SAVL, and haue buried him, and novv our Lord wil render vnto you againe mercie and veritie. So the holy
 Patriarch, ABRAHAM and IOSEPH: TOBIAS also, which gaue himselfe as it were, wholly to the woorke of mercie, was highly in this fauour of God for it. The Angel RAPHAEL remembred this worke of mercie, and praysed it in him;2. Mac. 12 Neither was Iudas Machabeus worthie of lesse prayse, in that hee caused the Iewes that were slaine, to bee buried, and sent money to the Temple of Ierusalem for them, to be prayed for.
In the new testament also, this woorke of mercie is remembred and praysed. The disciples of Iohn Baptist are praysed, because they buried honorablie their maister. In like sorte,Luc. 7. they which went to burie the only sonne of the Widdowe of Naime, for that only worke of mercie, were made so happie, as to see both Christ, and that great miracle which hee wrought, in raising the dead to life: but aboue all praises and benefits, the greatest is that, whereof our Sauiour himselfe speaketh, that for the workes of mercie, which the good haue done in this life, he will say vnto them at the daye of iudgement: Come yee blessed,Mat. 25. receaue the kingdome of heauen, vvhich is prepared for you.



ARTICLE III. Moreouer, within eight daies immediatly following, after the departure of the said partie buried, etc.
NO lesse care hath S. FRANCIS, that the brethren and sisters should exercise the workes of mercie spirituall, then corporal; amongst which, knowing that that which belongeth vnto the soule, is of greatest perfection, and most merit: hee doth here exhorte and command them to haue a special care to performe, with all diligence, this worke towardes the soule departed. For though by the Priuiledges graunted, by many supreame Pastors, vnto this order; the Brethre^ and sisters, are at the hower of death, not onely absolued from all their sinnes, but also from the verie paines due vnto their sinnes in Purgatorie, as appeareth in the forme of Absolution, here following: which for asmuch as it differeth verie little, from that which is set downe, to be giuen vnto them at their first entrance, I haue repeated it in Latine, as it is to be graunted vnto them, at the hower of their departure.





Absolutio.
DOminus noster Iesus Christus, qui est summus Pontifex, per meritum sua sacratissimae passionis te obsoluat, and gratiam suam tibi impartiri dignetur, and ego authoritate ipsius and beatorum Apostoloru^, Petri and Pauli sanctissimoru^que Pontificu^, nostro sacro ordini ab ipsis indultoru^, denique and Ministri Generalis mihi in hac pare commissa, absoluo te primo a sententia maioris and minoris exco^municationis, si quam incurristi, and restituo te communioni fidelium, and Sacramentis sanctae matris Ecclesiae, si indigeas. Item eadem authoritate: absoluo te ab omni irregularitate, suspentione and interdicto, ab omni tra^sgressione legis diuina Regulae tuae, and statutorum quorumcunque, nec non ab omnibus paenis tibi in Purgatorio debitis propter culpas qua^ commisisti, in quantum claues sancta Ecclesiae se extendunt in hac parte, and in qua^tum mihi permittitur, restituo te illi innocentiae in qua eras quando baptizatus fuisti, In nomine, etc. Et hoc, si de qua agrotas infirmitate, morieris: si ista vice non morieris reseruo tibi plenaria^ indulgentiam tibi concessam, pro vltimo articulo mortis tuae.





Yet notwithstanding, forasmuch as the iudgements of God are secret, and it is also vnknowen, what hinderance the dying partie himselfe may giue vnto the grace of God, which is then offered: Therefore S. FRANCIS, for the parties greater securitie, and present comfort, doth binde euerie one of the Brethren and Sisters, to yeelde him what helpe they may euery one, according to his calling, that is, he which is a Priest, to say a Masse for his soule; such as can say the Psalter, 50. Psalmes, or the Dirige: But they which cannot say the Dirige of nine lessons, and which cannot reade the Psalter, are to saye 50. Pater nosters, and Requiem eternam in the ende of euerie one.
Amongst many comforts, which this holie Order doeth affoord, truely this is one of the principall, to bee assured of helpe, when they stande in most neede, not being able to ayde or relieue themselues: Wherefore holie IOBE speaking, as it were in the person of the poore soule in Purgatorie, in great want, and penurie of comfort, earnestly crauing for helpe and compassion saith: Haue pittie on me, haue pittie on me, at least you which are my friends, for that the hande of the Lord hath touched me.Iob. 19 In which wordes, the poore soule seemeth to say, My paines and necessities are great, helpe my selfe I cannot, therefore, I beseech you that are my
 friendes, to relieue me. They which liue in the worlde, may helpe themselues, and Christ will put to his helping hande, as the wordes of S. PAVLE doe insinuate saying: Arise you vvhich sleepe, and Christ vvill illuminate you: And such as are in hell, can neither ayde themselues, or be succoured by others, for that in hel there is no redemption.
But the poore soules in Purgatorie, although, being out of the state of meriting for themselues, yet are they in the estate to be relieued by the merits and paines of others. For that whilest they liued, they merited by their good deedes, to be comforted after their departure.
Secondly, they dying in charitie, are made partakers, of all the good workes which are done: For as holie DAVID saieth: I am partaker of all those vvhich feare thee, and keepe thy commandement; so are the soules in Purgatorie, being of the communion of Saints, are capable of the graces and helpes, which proceedes from Christ, the chiefe head thereof; for euen as in a natural body the vnited members receaue nouriture and strength, from the head; so likewise, in the spirituall bodie, as S. PAVLE declareth most notablie: Wherefore being in the way of helpe, the more to mooue all men by co^passion to be drawe^ therunto, he sheweth the seueritie of the Iudge, and greatnesse of their paine,
 saying, that the hande of our Lorde hath touched them. The Apostle S. PAVL declaring, how seuere the hande of God is, sayeth, It is a horible and dreadful thing to fall into the handes of the liuing God, Therfore the afflicted soule, desiring soone to be deliuered, from those intollerable torments, cryeth out with great feruour, haue pittie on mee, at least you which are my friendes, for though the whole world, besides doe forget mee, they doe but obse^ue the common custome (which is, out of sight, out of minde:) but my onely trust and confidence, is in you my deare friendes: Though all the soules in Purgatorie, doe and may lawfully demaund this helpe at the handes of their friendes, yet after a more particular manner, may the soules of the brethten and sisters of this order, demaund this ayde at the handes of the rest of their congregation liuing; by reason that many waies they are bound to yeelde them this comforte. For first, if the Father and mother be bound to help their children, much more the spirituall brethren, by the commandement of S. Francis, are bound to loue and cherish, each other.
Secondly, by the right of confraternity, whereby all Religious persons are bound to ayde their brethren, but more particularlie, are the brethren and sisters of this Congregation, obliged by their special
 precept of the Rule, set downe in this present Chapter, as you haue heard, to yeelde all comforte, vnto the soules of their brethren and sisters: and shew themselues to be true friendes, which according as the Scripture witnesseth, oweth alwaies: He which is a true friend, lou^ at al times:Eccle 6 He saith at all times, for that a true friend helpeth his friend in his life time by inducing him to doe well, as by the whole discourse of this Rule euery one is bound, according to his calling and power. In his death also, admonishing him to a happie ende by Pennance, as the beginning of the Chapter doth binde the Ministers to doe, when they visite the sicke brethren or sisters, after his death by saying, within eight daies those foresaide suffrages, for his soule.


ARTICLE IIII. And afterwardes within the yeare, let them cause three Masses to be celebrated, for the comfort of the Brethren and sisters, aswel liuing as dead.
SVch is the excellencie and vertue of Prayer, that it is, and alwaies hath bene, the singuler refuge, whereunto all
 holy men, and seruants of God, had recourse vnto, for ayde, comfort, and deliuerance, in all their necessities: thereby pacifying Gods wrath, opening the heauens, commanding both Sunne and Moone. Tying vp the firmament from yeelding rayne, cha^^ng awaie the Diuels, curing all diseases, raising the dead, making the barren to be fertile.Luc. 1. Getting grace, not onely for themselues, but also for others* as S. STEVEN did for S. PAVLE:Act. 7. S. Aug. serm. 2. S. Steph. as S. AVGVSTINE sayeth: of S. STEVEN* If STEVEN had not prayed, the Church had not had PAVLE. And briefly to conclude, they haue obtained by it, not onely all good, both spirituall and corporal, but also to be deliuered from all euill: for by the prayer of the Church. S; PETER was deliuered out of HERODS prison:Act. 12. Ecc. 7, 1. Wherefore rightly may wee apply thereunto that sentence of the Ecclesiasticus, saying: All goodnesse came vnto mee, togeather vvith it: Therefore our most prudent and prouident Patrone, fore-seeing that the Brothers and Sisters, dispearsed into many places and countries, may stande in neede, all in generall, or euerie one in particular, of those helpes which prayer doeth affoorde, although in the precedent chapter, he made mention, with what deuotion they shall pray for themselues: and in this chapter also, what prayers they should say for euerie one in
 particular, of their Brethren and Sisters, within eight daies after their departure. Yet here to the inte^t, that not any one of the brethren and sisters of this order, whersoeuer they liue or die, should bee without co^fort; he setteth downe what praiers should be said for al in generall, that such persons which stand in neede, or die vnknowen, may be relieued, by these suffrages, which he appointeth, to be said, three times in the yeare, for the comfort of the brethren and sisters, aswel liuing as dead.
And although he studying as much breuitie in this rule, as he might co^ueniently, hath not set downe, what this three times are; yet by the general consent of all the brethren, long since it was ordained for order sake, that the Masses* Diriges, and Pater nosters, should be saide at these three seueral times, that is, betweene Septuagesima Sunday, and Ashwednesday, within the Octaues of S. Anthony of Padua, or at the first conuenient time, after the Octaues of the B. Sacrament: and betweene the feast of the exaltation of the Crosse, and the chiefe feast of our holy Patrone, S. FRANCIS. Great truly is the force of praier, which is made for our brethren, as worthily noteth S. Ambrose: Great is God, and pardoneth one sorte, through the merits of others. Therfore if thou doubt to obtaine forgiuenes of thy great offences, ioyne vnto thy selfe intercessors: vse the Churches helpe, which may pray for thee,
 and obtaine for thee, that vvhich our Lord deuie thy selfe.
God did greatly complaine (by the mouth of EZECHIEL) of the Cittie of Hierusalem, that he sought amongst them a man that might enterpose a hedge, and stande opposite against him for the lande, that he might not destroy it; and he found not one; shewing thereby that the prayers of iust men, are so pleasing vnto him, that if hee had founde any one which would haue prayed for Hierusalem, hee would not haue destroyed the Cittie: Marueilous is the prayers of the iuste men saith S. HIEROM,S. Hierom by which God suffereth himselfe to be ouercome: and it is most gratefull to God, when some doe oppose themselues, to entreate mercie for sinners, that they may repent.



Of the Officers. CHAP. XV.

LEt euery one, deuoutly receaue the Ministeries and other offices imposed on them, which the course of this present forme, doth expresse: and let him be careful, faithfully to exercise it. Let the office of euerie
 one also be limited, within a certaine space of time: Let no man be instituted for tearme of life, but let his office comprehende a certaine limit of time.

WHereas it is a common saying, that office and benefice are Corelatiues, in such sorte, that where the one is, the other followeth: for that according vnto S. PAVLE, The workeman is worthy his hyer: yet was S. FRANCIS, so great a despiser of that, which the world and worldlings most despiser, that in al the 3. Orders, which he instituted, he ordeyned, that no other reward for officers of them, but onely temporal paines, and spiritual gaines; that is, not onely the prayers of all such as are vnder their office and charge, but also the whole Church of God, doth pray for all such as are in authoritie.

Let euerie one deuoutly receaue the Ministeries.
AS most men doe receaue willingly temporal offices, in respect of the temporal gaine annexed thereunto: so S. FRANCIS, considering what spiritual treasure, doth belong vnto the charitable paines of the Ministers, and other officers,
 doth belong vnto the charitable paines of the Ministers, and other officers, doeth here, in regarde thereof, exhorte them to receaue those offices, willingly and deuoutly*
The other offices, which are imposed on him, which is elected and chosen by the Brethren, and confirmed by the Visitor, or chiefe superiour of that Prouince, to be the Collector and receauer, of such almes, as either in their Monthly assemblies, or any otherwise is giuen, either by the congregation, or vnto it, for the conseruation therof, and reliefe of the poore, but especially, of such poore soules, as through their pouerty, wanted the funerall offices, and prayers for their soules. For though, great was the care that Saint FRANCIS had of all the brethren and Sisters, yet more specially, of the poore, that their pouerty, might not be cause of any want of comfort, either for bodie or soule: Therefore hee willeth such, as any office is imposed on, by this congregation, not onely deuoutly to receaue it, but also to be carefull faithfully to exercise it.



Let the office of euery one also be limited within a certaine space of time.
THERE is no companie so holy, but that sometimes there is some imperfect person found amongst them; wherefore, to the intent that if at any time such should happen to be in this holy societie, hee might not haue occasion to murmure, that such particularly were therein, that one should co^tinually beare the burden of the care and paines of the order, or alwaies receaue the chiefe spirituall gaines thereof, by the daily prayers which the brethren and sisters, make specially for him which beareth office. S. FRANCIS ordaineth, that the burden shall be alike, by euerie one which shall be founde fitting for it, and therefore he saith, Let no man be instituted for tearme of life, but let his office comprehend a certaine limit of time, that thereby he may be the more careful to execute his office, both more diligently, and also more respectiuely vnto all persons: and deale with each on, as he shal expect and desire to be dealt withal by others, which shall come into his place hereafter, vsing that measur vnto others, which he would haue to be measured vnto himselfe. And to
 the intent, that none of them may want instruction, or that any one should intermedle in anothers charge, it behooueth to assigne vnto euery one of the Ministers of the order, what places appertaine to his charge, what Citties, Villages, Townes, Territories: for large Regions, require more Ministers, to gouerne and comfort all the Brethren and Sisters.



Of the Visitation and Correction of offenders. CHAP. XVI.
MOreouer, let the Ministers, and also the brethren and sisters of euery Cittie and place, come togeather, to the common Visitation, in some Religious place, or Church: where such a place shal happen to be wanting. And let them haue for the Visitor, a Priest, of some approoued Religion, who shall giue them healthful penance for their excesse, and faults committed.
 Neither may any other exercise the office of this visitation. But for asmuch as this present forme of liuing did take his institutio, of the aforesaid S. FRANCIS: wee Counsel the^ that such visitors and informers, be taken out of the order of the Fryer minors, whom the Prouincialls or Gardians of the same order shall thinke fit to be assigned, when they shal be thereunto required: yet will we not, that this Congregation be visited by a Lay-brother: And the visitation shall be made once euery yeare, vnlesse some necessarie occurrant require it to bee done oftner. Let the incorrigible and disobedient persons, be thrise admonished* who if they wil not be careful to amend themselues, let them by the aduise of the discreete Brethren, be altogeather expelled out of their congregation*


Comissarie General of Cismontana.
Co^mis. General, Cismon.CONCERNING this 16. chapter, it is to be noted, that Pope NICOLAS the fourth, of happie memory, for the good reformation and perpetuity of this Rule and forme of life, commanded, that the Visitors and Ministers of this familie, should be of our Order, as founded, by the Seraphical Father Saint FRANCIS. Wherefore let all the Father Guardians be careful, that in euerie Couent, they appoynt Visitors and other Ministers, as the Rule requireth: inculcating well vnto them the diligence which they ought to haue in the keeping and augmentation of it, in such sorte that the Brethren and Sisters exercise themselues in the workes of Charitie, and good of their owne soule, and their neighbours, eschewing all kinde of superfluity and tediousnesse, that they be not thereby cause of molestation and distraction, one to another.
EVEN as in the first Chapter of this Rule, S. FRANCIS was so careful in the reception of the brethren
 and sisters into this Congregation, that hee strictly prohibited, and forbideth, that no Hereticke or any suspected of heresie or diffamed should be receaued, and if it should be found out, that any such had bene receaued, the Ministers should with all speede, deliuer him ouer vnto the Inquisition, to be punished, that the rest of the Brethren might be preserued from corruption.
So now here, to the intent that the Ministers should bee the more carefull to looke diligently, both vnto their owne actions, and vnto those committed vnto their charge, ordeyneth that they shall come altogeather, vnto some Religious place or Church (which may be priuate vnto themselues for that instant time) where not onely the Brethren and Sisters, but also the Minister himselfe is to be visited and corrected or deposed, if hee be found faulty, either in his life, or execution of his charge.
Tertullian in his Apologie, reporteth that, in the Primitiue Church, where all perfection flourished amongst the christians, they were wont in that time of persecution, to come togeather in the night, in the churches of the holy martyrs* both to praise God, and to praye for the common good, as for peace for the Emperour, for the state of the church, and other thinges: and also to treate and conferre, of the affaires of Religion,
 and in like sorte, to correct the Brethren vvhich did not walke vvell.
Wherefore S. FRANCIS, seeing howe farre all men were in a maner fallen from this fore-mentioned perfection of the florishing time, did endeauour by al meanes possible, to raise his brethren to that perfection againe, and to obserue these holy meetings, as much as they might conueniently, for the selfe-same godly imitations: For considering that our weake and frayle nature, falleth very easiely from her good affectio^s and resolutions, through the bad inclinations of our flesh, which lye heauie vpon the soule it selfe, and drawe her still downewardes, if she striue not oftentimes to lift vp her selfe, by maine force, of renewing her former resolutions: for this cause, he did not onely ordaine the Monethly assemblies, wherin both by the feruent exhortations vnto penance (which as you haue heard, ought then to be made vnto the Brethren) and by the deuout admonitions of the Ministers of the congregation, with the vertuous examples of the sincerest brethren, the rest should be alluered, and drawen to amendement of life, and often repeating their former purposes.
But also instituted this yearely visitations and corrections, that hereby at the least, all that was amisse, might be amended. For as a Clocke, be it neuer so good
 or well set, must be wounded vp twice a day at the least, morning and euening: and moreouer, at least once a yeare, be taken all in peeces, to scoure awaie the ruste, which it hath gathered, to mende broken peeces, and renew such as be worne, casting awaie that, which cannot be amended.
Euen so, our holy Patrone, the paterne of all perfection, hauing a zealous care of the soules of his louing children, vnited togeather in this holy Congregation, as the wheeles of a clocke, to healpe one another, to strike the howres so truely, and spende euery moment thereof so piously, that their whole time, and actions, as far as humaine frailtie suffereth, may be pleasing vnto almightie God, ordeined that they should not onely winde vp their soules to God by prayer, but also to make them haue the more care, and be the diligenter in doing therof, appoynteth and enioyneth them penance: If in the morning they doe it not in the dewe hower, that is, as earely as they can conuenientlie.
In the Euening also, he exhorteth them to doe the like, both by diligent examination of their conscience, and by making present satisfaction for any offence, that they may happe^t to doe that day: and besides euery Moneth, hearing bow necessarie Pe^nance is vnto saluation, to make a reuewe
 of their estates, considering well what they haue done, for satisfaction of their former offences, or present negligences.
But forasmuch as it is a thing naturally giuen vnto all men, to bee so partial in their owne affaires, that they can see a more in another mans eye, and not a beame in their owne: for which cause, fearing that for want of seeing their owne imperfections, the soule might get such filth and rust, that hardly would it bee cleansed and made bright in the ende: ordeineth here, that at the least once in the yeare, they should take it downe, and consider precisely all the peeces thereof, that is, all the affections, passions, vnseemly behauiours, scandalous actions, or negligences, whatsoeuer; that all faults and defects being found out, may be corrected and redressed by the Visitor, in this publike visitation.
To visite, signifieth no other thing here, then to looke into the liues, and diligently examine the conditions and maners of the brethren, and afterwardes, to admonish and correct their excesse and imperfections, enioyning vnto them healthfull pennance, for their faultes committed, and for that end, he ordained that the Visitor should be a Priest, of some approoued Religion.
At the same time that this order was first instituted, our most louing and carefull
 Father, S. FRANCIS, seeing that the number of his owne brethren, was as yet but small, and that he had so great imployme^t for them, sending them with al speede to preach, as it were to al parts of the world, Penance, that they could hardly entend to make these Visitations: being desirous notwithstanding, that it should be made by some Religious person, set downe that the Visitor, should be a Priest of some approoued religion, and that no other might exercise this office, of Visitation.
But our holy Father NICHOLAVS the 4. which liued within 40. yeares after S. FRANCIS, and had bene the next Generall vnto Saincte BONAVENTVRE, though seeing that the number of our brethren were much encreased, that they might, well exercise this office: yet would hee not giue any commandement, that these elections should be made of them for Visitors, but sought to enduce the brethren and sisters, of this third order thereunto, by counsell, and gentle perswasions, alleadging, that, Seeing S, FRANCIS was the institutor of this forme of liuing, he therfore counselled the^ to choose visitors out of the order of the Fryer Minors. Also, he made a more speci^^al briefe in the third yeare of his Popedome, to exhort them thereunto.
In progresse of time, Sixtus 4. a man of singuler vertue and learning, which gouerned
 longe the Seraphical Order of S. FRANCIS, though he was called to a far greater dignitie and charge, being elected to the gouernement of the Sea Apostolik, yet did he not forget, the fatherly loue and care which hee had, vnto any of the Orders, which had bene vnder his charge. Wherefore knowing that the children of one father and mother, will bee more carefull of the conseruation and good of their brethren, then others, where there is not the like obligation and cause of loue: did commit the whole charge of the Brethren and Sisters, of the third order vnto the Superiours of the Fryer Minors, as appeareth at large, in his Apostolicall letters, beginning, Romani Pontificis prouidentiae, etc. Wherein he subiecteth this third Order altogeather, to the visitation and correction of the Generalles andprouincialls, and Visitors deputed by them, of the order of the Fryer Minors: and forbiddeth any Eccelesiastical Prelate whatsoeuer, from thence forwarde, that they should not enter meddle, with the Visitation or correction, of the Brethren and Sisters of this Order of Penance; or should goe about to hinder, in any sorte, the Fryer Minors, in these affaires: Granting vnto the said Order, that they may administer all Ecclesiasticall Sacraments vnto them, as oft as they shall see cause: wherefore though vntill this time, it remained
 onely, as a thing counsailed to make choise of one of the Fryer Minors, for the Visitor, yet euer since it remaineth as an obligation, for the Visitors to be one of them, whom and when the Prouinciall, or Gardians of the same order, shall thinke fit and conuenient.

ARTICLE II. Yet wee will not that the Congregation be visited by a Lay-brother.
THAT is, one which is not a Priest, or in possibility to be: for though in the beginning, many Lay-brethren, for their greate zeale, were chosen to be Gardians, as S. DIDACVS for example was amongst the Indians, yet forasmuch as in those Visitations, many things might fall out, to be receaued vnder the seale of Confession, and that the chiefe matters to be treated of herein concerned the good, and cleansing the consciences of the brethren and sisters, which a Lay-brother, except he were one of extraordinary gifts could not well know to doe. Therefore our holy Father ordaineth here, that only a Religious Priest, should be the Visitor, that he by learning, vertue, and prudence,
 may visite and admonish, correct and comfort the whole Congregation.


ARTICLE III. And the said Visitation shal be made onely once euery yeare, vnlesse some necessarie oc^urrant, require it to be done oftener.
WHEN Monethly assemblies might bee conueniently made, wherein the Ministers and Ghostlie fathers, togeather with the Preachers, did encourage them in the way of vertue, and reprehend for their vice, such as should happen to doe amisse. Yearely visitations were sufficient, vnlesse some extraordinarie occasion should fall out.
Yet now, where most of all these helps are wanting in this our poore countrey, though publike visitations, cannot be made also, yet notwithstanding, priuate Visitations, in euery particular house, where the Brethren and Sisters do liue, is most necessarie and needful to be the oftener made, that is, euerie halfe yeare at the least, as well to encourage those which doe well, and yeelde them all ayde and
 comforts that may be necessarie for their good proceeding in vertue, as also to admonish and correct those which haue done amisse, or lost their first feruour, that they may renew it againe, and by healthfull pennance, scoure awaie the rust, which their sinfull soule hath gathered, since their last halfe yeares generall Confession, to the intent that being made cleane by Pennance, and anoynted with the oyle of Grace, which is giuen in this holie Sacrament, they may with all ease and facilitie, runne the happie waie of saluation: And by this meanes repaire their weather-beaten forces, enflame their hearts againe, make their good purposes sproute out a fresh, and their vertues flourish a newe.
The auncient Christians (as testifieth S. GREGORIE NAZIAN.S. Greg. did on the Feast of our Sauiours Baptisme) which wee vsually call here, Twelft daie, renewe those promises and protestations, which they made in their Christening. Euen so doe the deuout and zealous brethren and sisters, renewe euerie halfe yeare, before the Visitor, in this his Visitation, the vowe and promise, which they haue made, of the obseruation of the commandements of God, and of this Rule, that by renewing their Vowes, they may augmente, more and more their merits. For euen as the often committing


 of a wicked acte, maketh the same sinne, and the sinner to be haynous and hateful vnto God; so in like sorte, the renewing and often doing of a good worke, maketh it to be more meritorious, and the doer more grateful vnto his diuine Maiestie, for his many good deedes; Wherefore if it be a good thing for a man to giue himselfe once as wholly vnto the seruice of God as he may, and the more to shewe his loue, doth binde himselfe thereunto by vowe, no doubt then, hee which for to shewe the continuance of his loue, and to be more mindfull of his promise, shall often renew his vowe, but that hee shall encrease thereby his merit. For that the renewing of the vowe, maketh the worke not onely more acceptable vnto God, but fortifieth the will to doe it more courageouslie, and giueth to God, not onely the good workes, which are the fruits of our will; but dedicateth likewise vnto him, our will it selfe, as the roote and tree of all our actions. Wherefore, euen as he giueth a greater gift, which giueth the fruit and tree togeather, then he which giueth the fruit alone. So doeth he present a greater present vnto GOD, which presenteth vnto him, not onelie his good workes, but himselfe withall by vowe, in not reseruing any possibilitie to goe backe from his worde, or promise so often renewed, rendring himselfe a
 happy bond-slaue vnto him whose bondage is better then all royalties.
How acceptable and pleasing vowes are vnto God, the Prophet DAVI^ doth declare when he saieth, Vow ye and render vnto our Lord your God, all they that bring gifts vnto him, for that the soule inflamed with Gods loue, is apt through gratitude, for his goodnesse towardes him, and all mankinde, to make vowes of thinges, whereunto we are not obliged.
The holy Apostles which were confirmed in grace, illuminated with the spirit of God, and brought vp in the schoole of Christ, knowing what merit the vowe of Virginitie did adde vnto that happy estate of life, did not onely exhorte many to follow that most vertuous course of life, but also to bring themselues to the obseruation and keeping thereof, by faithfull vowe and promise to God: whereof wee haue a manifest example in the life of the holy Apostle and Euangelist S. MATTHEVVE, which hauing most miraculously raised IPHIGINIA, the daughter of the King of Ethiopia from tempotall death, desirous to bring her to euerlasting life, induced her to vowe and dedicate her Virginitie to God* whereby she perseuering in her holy purpose, refused to marrie with King HIRTACVS, who caused therefore S. MATTHEVV to be slaine at the Aultar, for that by his meanes, this
 Virgin, had made the Vowe of Virginitie.


ARTICLE IIII. Let the incorrigible and disobedient persons, be thrice admonished: who if they will not be carefull to amende themselues: let them by the aduise of the discreete brethren, be altogeather expelled out of the Company of this holy Congregation.
ALTHOVGH many imperfections may happen to be sometimes in some one, or other of this Congregation, yet is there not any one set downe: for which any brother or Sister is to be expelled and vtterly reiected, but heresie and disobedience: Wherefore, as in the first Chapter, expresse commandement is giuen, that the person suspected of heresie, is speedely to be deliuered vnto the inquisitor to be punished: so here the disobedient is for his punishment to be expelled, which in respect of the good of his soule, is one of the greatest punishments that man can inflict, for that not
 onely is he hereby depriued of the participation of all the good deedes and merits of the brethren and sisters, and of the infinite prayers, which by many thousandes of holie and religious persons, should haue bene made for him, both in this life and after, but also of that inestimable benefite (graunted by manie Supreame Bishops, vnto those which die in this holie order,) as to be absolued at the hower of death, not onely from all his sinnes whatsoeuer, but from the paines also due thereunto in Purgatorie, and to be restored as far foorth as the Keyes of the Church doe extende to that state of innocencie, wherein he was when he was first baptized: besides a number of temporall benefites, and spiritual comforts also, which he doth loose by this expulsion, and separation fron this holy companie, and blessed order of Penance: Wherefore seeing that there is nothing more pretious vnto our Sauiour, then the comforte and saluation of poore penitent sinners: Our holie Fathers desire is here, that all meanes possible should be vsed, to bring the poore delinquent and offending Brother, to bee penitent for his sinnes and offences, and therefore will not that hee should be rashly punished and caste off, but that hee should bee first, thrice gently, and most charitablie admonished, according vnto the counsell
 of our louing Redeemer, who willeth, that if thy brother offende against thee, goe first, and admonish him betwixt him and thee,Mat. 18. and if he will not heare thee, take two or three others, viz. which are not ignorant of his offence, that by their perswasions, ioyning to thine, hee may be brought to the acknowledgement of his fault: and if by this meanes he cannot be reduced, then to goe and tell the Church, that is, they which haue authoritie to correct him. But if he will not heare the Church, and Prelates therof: whose wordes thereof ought to be so much esteemed, that hee which shall contemne them, is helde to despise Christ himselfe, who saieth: He which heareth you,Luc. 10, heareth me, and hee which contemneth you, despiseth me. And therefore worthely he said, If hee vvill not heare the Church,Mat. 18. let him be vnto thee as a Publicane and Ethnicke. The selfe same course is here set downe to be vsed towardes the incorrigible and disobedient persons, because Heresie excepted, it is the greatest euill that can happen in this Congregation, whose light should (as our Sauiour exhorteth) so shine before men, that they seeing our good workes, may glorifie our Father which is in heauen: which light would not be a little extinguished by those incorrigible and disobedient persons, if they should not in due time be expelled. For that their scandalls, riotous,
 and carelesse life, with their euill deedes, would be attributed vnto the whole companie, which should suffer such lewde and infamous persons, to remaine in their holy Order.
Wherefore seeing that they haue not, neither can any waies haue prisons or places of sharpe corrections, as other religious orders haue* their only way therefore, after they haue vsed all charitable meanes, to reduce such offenders, is to cause them to be cast out of their companie, and fraternitie.




Of auoyding strifes, betweene themselues, and with others. CHAP. XVII.

IN like sorte, let the Brethren and Sisters, auoide (to the vttermost of their power) all strifes amongst themselues, carefully breaking them of (if any should happen to be stirred vppe) otherwise let them answere
 of right, before him with whom power of iudgement remaineth.

AS there is no one thing which more displeaseth God, then strife and discorde; so is there nothing wherein hee more delighteth, then in peace and charitie. SALOMON sayeth, Hatred rayseth brawles,Prou. 10, and charitie, couereth all sinnes. And where sinnes are in such sorte couered, there will hee remaine which saieth: My delight is to be vvith the children of men:Prou. 8. Which thing, S. FRANCIS, well considering, tooke a most speciall care that peace and charitie, may be continually conserued amongst his children, For which cause, though in this little Rule,Chap. 10, hee had alreadie set downe, one whole Chapter, for making of peace betweene the Brethren and Strangers, yet not contenting himselfe there withall,Salust. doeth adde this present Chapter, for the better conseruation of peace, by auoyding all strifes, giuing here a straight commande vnto all the Brethren and Sisters, that they should, to the vttermost of their power, auoyde all strifes amongst themselues, for that, as by concorde, little thinges encrease, so by discorde, the greatest will be soone consumed.
 For as our Sauiour saide vnto the Iewes:Luc. 11 Euerie kingdome that is deuided in it selfe, vvill be desolate, and house vvill fall downe vpon house. So if there should remaine strife amongst the brethren, the Congregation would bee soone ouerthrowne.
Wherefore seeing that, in that thrice happie, and for euermore blessed companie of our Sauiours owne Disciples, there was, as testifieth the Gospell, a contention amongst them before they were confirmed in grace,Luc. 9. Luc. 18 and had in visible forme, receaued the Holie Ghost, which of them should bee the greater. Saint FRAVNCIS, did not take it for anie disgrace, vnto this Holie Order, that some strifes might happen to bee stirred amongst them: but his onelie care and commaunde is, that they should be carefull, and vse all diligence, presently to breake them off, amongst themselues.


Otherwise, let them answeare of right, before him with whome power of iudgement remaineth.
WHICH wordes, as they haue relation, vnto the strifes betwene the Brethren or Sisters themselues, may be vnderstood of the Visitor, whose loue being a like vnto them all, ought without all partiallitie, by his power and prudencie, ende the strifes amongst them.
But as they haue relation vnto other strangers, ouer whom the Visitor hath no power, then if by gentle perswasions, hee cannot ende the debate, the Brethren, as I said before, may take any lawful course to end those strifes, and right their owne wrongs.




In what maner, and who may dispence in abstinences and fastings. CHAP. XVIII.

BVt the Ordinaries of the place, or Visitor, may for any lawfull cause, when they shall see it expedient, dispence with all the Brethren and Sisters in abstinences, fastings, and other austerities.

ALthough, in euery parte of this present Rule and forme of liuing, our louing Patrone, and tender Father, doeth shewe, how great a desire hee had to giue ayde and comfort, vnto all his children and followers of his counsell: yet here in this Chapter, doth he manifest more particularly his loue and prouident care, to prouide a soueraigne salue, and present remedie to yeelde them all, what comforte any vertuous and willing minde can desire, in ordeyning, that the Ordinarie of the places, or the Visitor, may for any
 (when they shall see it expedient) dispence vvith all the Brethren and Sisters,Luc. 16. in abstinences, fastings, and other austerities.
And whereas many deuout persons, knowing by the testimonie of our Sauiour, that Penance is so necessarie vnto saluation, that vnlesse wee doe Pennance, we shall all perish, and therefore would willingly vndertake this happie estate and forme of liuing of Penance, here prescribed; but that they want ability, through their weakenesse, to vndertake the fastings, abstinences, and other austerities therof: for though their strength being now good, they may be well able to beginne: but yeares and fotces daily decaying, that they should not be able to goe forwarde, and then as our Sauiour saieth: All men seeing them, vvill laugh them to scorne, saying, This man begunne to build, but could not finish it. Wherefore hee ordeyned this Chapter, not onely for the comfort of those, which had taken this happie course of life in hand, but also for an encouragement for others to doe the like, seeing that if they haue but an earnest desire, and feruent loue and good will, to doe what their condition, yeares, strength and health will permit them, with all alacritie to doe: The Visitor, or their Ordinarie Ghostly Father, approoued by the Visitor, may dispence with them in al things that they themselues shal find to be necessary
 for them, for that the will and intention being the principal cause of the merit of our actions; it is not a little meritorious vnto them, which haue a feruent desire to keepe, all the abstinences, fastings, and austerities, that their health will permit. For though the strength of their body, should happen to be such, that they should be able to doe little, yet their good intention, would giue such vertue vnto their actions, that it would make them great and acceptable in the sight of God.
For seeing that by the testimonie of our Sauiour himselfe,Mat. 5.15 it is plaine that the internal acte of the Will, is the substance of our workes; the external indifferent action, both depending thereupon, and onely esteemed according to the qualitie thereof, good or euil: Hence may we conclude, that the good-will, and earnest desire, which manie haue to keepe all the austerities of this Rule, if strength and abilitie would permit them, is often as effectual to saluation, and as essential merit vnto them, as the obseruation thereof is vnto others, to whom God hath giuen strength to obserue them: For God is neither acceptor of persons, or requireth any thing, aboue our possibilitie, but onely our hearte and trwe affection, and therefore sayeth onely, My sonne, giue mee thy heart:Prou. 13 as I haue declared at large, in the exposition of the
 first Chapter of this Rule.
Yet notwithstanding, to take awaie all occasions of scruples, which many deuout persons might haue, thinking still that their strength is able to endure, and doe more then they doe: Our holy Father out of a prouident care, setteth downe here, that both the Visitor and Ordinaries of the places, may dispence with all the Brethren and Sisters, in any thing conteined here in the Rule, that they shall thinke it expedient, giuing them thereby also leaue, to settle the consciences of euerie one, by ordeyning them to keepe, what with health, both of bodie and soule, they may conueniently.


That their Ministers ought to declare vnto the Visitor their manifest faults. CHAP. XIX.

BVt the Ministers ought to declare vnto the Visitor, the manifest faults, of the Brethren and Sisters, to be punished, and if any one remaine incorrigible, after the instancy
 of thrice warning: let them (by the counsell of some discreete Brethren) be denounced by the Ministers, vnto the Visitor, by him to be cast out of the company of this Fraternitie, and to be published afterwardes in the Congregation.

IT is a thing commonly knowen, that a little spot of filth, is sooner perceaued in a cleane cloath, in a farre greater, then one that is alreadie foule. So in like sorte, few are ignorant, that a little fault is more noted, and diligently marked, in any that make profession, to tende vnto perfection, then in other worldlings, which may peraduenture be defiled with many enormious crimes: wherefore, as a good person, shall be the more amply rewarded, for his vertuous deedes, by reason, that through his goodnesse, others may be drawne to imitate his pious example. So on the contrary side, if hee should chance to commit any smal fault, he shall be more seuerely punished for it then any other, for that his shew of goodnesse, causeth others of lesse perfection, to doe the like, or worse, being induced and lead thereunto, by his euill example.
Wherefore, S. FRANCIS, hauing
 drawen and brought, the Brethren and Sisters of this Order, to a state of perfection, aboue the common worldlings, is so carefull to keep them from such faults, whereby they might incurre the heauie curse of our Sauiour, saying: Woe be vnto them, by whom scandal commeth: That he ordeyned, two special Chapters in this little Rule, to perswade them, whilest they remaine in this Order, from such faults as might breede scandal. Wherefore, in the first of them, which is the 16.Chap. 16. Chapter, he setteth downe the time, place, and person, which should both come and make the visitation.Chap. 19. Now here in this, he doeth make a more ample declaration, how it should be made, and who should specially punish the manifest faults, which may happen to be committed. First, here he declareth (how) saying, that the Ministers ought to declare to the Visitor, the manifest faults, of the brethren and sisters, to be punished. The Visitor may proceede, three maner of waies in correcting the offenders: First, by denunciation, whilest hee commandeth all the brethren and sisters, that if any one of them doe knowe, any thing amongst them worthie of correction, that faithfully he declare it. Secondly, by inquisition and diligent inquitie, which may be made of euerie one secretly, seeing that there are manie which will be loath to accuse
 others publikely of any crime. Thirdly, by Expostulation, expostulating diligently of the person accused, whether those things be true which he hath heard, which if he seeme to deny falsely, then to bring the witnesse face to face, and so proceeding with all charitie, to correct him in time: for that euen as a dangerous kindled fire, if it be neglected, soone taketh such forces, that afterwardes hardly will it be quenched: so sinnes not corrected in time, quickly growe so great, that not onely with great difficultie, will they be rooted out, but also soone infect others, or at least bring with all speede, infamie and scandall vnto the companie where such a person is tollerated. Therefore S. FRANCIS, although his desire is, that all mutuall loue and charitie, should be maintained amongst all the brethren and sisters, yet will he not in any wise, that an incorrigible person, should be suffered amongst them, but doeth repeate here againe, as a matter of great weight, that after thrice warning, such disobedient persons, as by the triple admonitio^ of the Ministers, wil not be corrected, That the Ministers with the aduise of some discreete brethren, should denounce it vnto the Visitor, by him to be cast out of the companie.
Here now secondly doth S. FRANCIS declare, that the Visitors onely haue power to inflict this seuere punishment of
 expulsion, and casting quite out of the companie for euer, such incorrigible persons: For though the Ministers ought to instruct the brethren and sisters, and haue a special care, to see that euery one, vnder his charge, be mindful to walke according to his calling, in all vertue and pietie, and to admonish those which doe otherwise to amende; and if their liues, being scandalous, and their offences haynous, will not after thrice admonition, desist from their wicked actions, he may debarre them from the company and benefites of the Congregation, vntill the comming of the Visitor, yet not to expel him for euer. S. FRANCIS knowing that our Sauiour hath so great compassion on poore sinners,Ezech. 18 that, Hee vvil not the death of a sinner, but that he should rather be conuerted and liue. Doeth insinuate here that all meanes possible, should be vsed to conuerte and draw, this disobedient brother from his obstinacie, before that this great punishment of expulsion be vsed towardes him, and for that cause, he seemeth to reserue it vnto the Visitor, to do it, and publish it in the Congregation.



How in all these aforesaide things, no man is bound to mortall sinne. CHAP. XX.

BVt in all these aforesaid things, whereunto the Brethren of your Order, are not bound by the Commandements of God, or Ordinances of the Church: we will that none of them be bound vnder mortall sinne, to keepe them, but with prompt humilitie, let them receaue the Pennance enioyned him, for the excesse of his transgression, and studie to fulfill and accomplish it effectually.


AT that happie marriage, where our Sauiour turned water into wine, the ARCHITRICLINE and gouernour of the Feast, tasting the goodnesse thereof, and not knowing from whence it came,Ioh. 2. saide vnto the Bridegrome: Euerie man bringeth first good wine, and afterwardes that which is worst, but thou hast kept the best wine vnto the last. So in like sorte* worldlings and worldly pleasures, doe bring first their best wine of vaine consolations and comforts, and afterwards, that men are drunke with these pleasures, do bring that which is worst. But our Holie Father keepeth the best wine and chiefest comfort here vnto the last, declaring for the quietnesse of all such as either wil, or haue vndertaken this forme of Penance, that though the Profession and vowe thereof, bringeth great benefites, both corporall and spiritual, and no lesse merit withall: Yet is there no hardnesse or danger to be feared herein, seeing that concerning the strictnesse which might terrifie any: He declareth in the last Chapter here, sauing one, as you haue heard, that, The Visitors may take awaie all difficulties, and make it as easie as the partie, that hath any zeale, can desire. And as for danger, hee sheweth here, that there is none at all, of falling into mortal sinne, by transgressing any precept or poynts aforesaid, of this Rule, vnlesse it be otherwise against
 the Commandements of God, or ordinances of the Church, which (whether they enter into this order or not) they are bound vnder mortal sinne to keepe, as all other Christians are.
And as all Doctors agree in this, and SOTVS most learnedly prooueth it,Lib. 1. de instit. quest. 6. Artic. 4. that Superiours, both Ecclesiastical and Temporal, may binde their subiects, vnder the paine of a mortal sinne; and make precepts and commandements, binding them thereunto. So in like sort, do they al hold, that when the Superiour intendeth to binde, vnder the paine of a mottal sinne, then doth he binde; and when he intendeth not to oblige them, hee doeth not binde.
That precept and commandement therfore obligeth, vnder the paine of a mortall sinne, when it appeareth that such was the intention of the Commander. So likewise, if it be manifest, that hee had no such will, it doth not binde.
Wherefore, seeing that it plainely appeareth here, by the sentence of Pope NICOLAVS the fourth, which confirmed this Rule, with his Apostolical letters, that hee would not that any should offende mortally, in transgressing any point of those things which are conteyned therein, all men are out of danger from falling into mortal sinne, by omitting any thing conteyned herein* seeing
 that both S. FRANCIS, and the Pope, had no will to binde them to the obseruation of any poynt, here vnder any such paine.22. quest. 186. Artis. 9. The Angelical Doctor, S. THOMAS of Aquine, affirmeth as much of the Rule of S. DOMINICK, saying, that it doeth not binde, vnder the paine of a mortall sinne, because the Institutor of that Rule said, and expressed, that hee would not binde vnder that paine. But some may peraduenture obiect, that though the Brethren and Sisters, are not bound by the Rule; yet by the vowe which they make, specially aboue all other Religious persons, to obserue the Commandements of God, all their life time, doe binde themselues, to keepe them vnder the paine of a double mortall sinne; one in respect that the breach of them, is a mortall sinne, to any man whatsoeuer doth it. Another, in respect of the breach of the vowe, which they haue particularly made, or at the least, one mortall sinne, equiualent to them both. Vnto which Obiection, the vertuous and learned Father, BERNARDINVS DE BVSTIS, some hundred yeares past answeareth directly; that though a vowe commonly of his owne nature, do binde to obserue that promise, vnder the paine of a mortall sinne, yet notwithstanding, the Vowe which is made in the profession of this Rule, doeth
 not binde, but vnder the paine of a venial sinne: Because, they which make this Vowe, doe not intende to binde themselues, no further foorth, then according to the Commandement of the Rule, and the will of the Pope, which confirmeth it; which as you haue heard, hath no intention, to binde them further.
Moreouer, the most learned Cardinall TOLLET saieth,Lib. 4. instruct. Sacerd. cap. 17. that concerning the Obligation of Vowes, we must rather regarde and looke into the intention of him that Voweth, then vnto the wordes. For that he is bounde vnto those thinges whereunto his intention did intende: Wherefore (saith hee) that whosoeuer maketh a vowe to faste three daies; he is to be examined, how he did entende this fast for that his vow is, according to his intention.
From hence therefore wee do inferre that, seeing, as you haue heard, neither the Precepts of the Rule, or the Confirmer thereof, nor yet the person which maketh the vowe, do intend to bind the^selues, vnder mortall sinne to keepe it, though the merit is doubled, by making this vow; yet is there no more danger, but much lesse in them, of falling into a mortall sinn, the^ in others which make it not.
Yet neuerthelesse, whosoeuer of this holy Order, should either by frailtie,
 suggestion of the deuill, or by any other maner of waies, so farre forget the perfection whereunto their estate of life and profession doth tende, as to transgresse any of the diuine Precepts, which by vowe here they doe binde themselues to keepe; I earnestly exhort them, not onely with all hearty sorrowe, to confesse the enormitie and greatnesse of the same, but also therewith the circumstance of their vowe, that thereby their Contrition being the greater, they may more easilie make satisfaction, for their sinful transgression, and as the Rule requireth.

With prompt humilitie, receaue the Penance, enioyned him for the excesse thereof, and studie to fulfill, and accomplish it effectually.
THOVGH the greater the sinne is, the more prompt and diligent ought the sinner to bee, to doe Penance for it, with perfect sorrow and humilitie; yet notwithstanding, must he not neglect to make satisfaction, for the very least offences: For that, as the Ecclesiasticke sayeth:Eccles. 19 He that contemneth smal things, shall fall by little and little into greater. The best remedie against great sinnes, is to auoyde small ones, and not to contemne the
 the least, but diligently to amende all. For that cause, though the offence and transgression of any poynt of this Rule (being not against the Commandements, of God and his Church) be but small; yet to auoyde contempt and confusion, which would soone destroy the Congregation, or at least, greatly hinder the perfection, and merit, which is there to be gained: Our holy Father ordained, that for the smallest excesses, sinnes, or transgressions, that any should chance to commit against this Rule and forme of life, hee should with prompt humilitie, receaue the Penance enioyned vnto him for it, especially, seeing that by the vowe of the Order, he is bound so to doe: what benefite he reapeth thereby, the Ecclesiastike declareth, saying,Eccles. 20 How good a thing is it being rebuked, to shew repentance, for so thou shalt auoyd^ wilful sinnes: And to that ende, S. FRANCIS, not onely exhorteth, to receaue, with prompt humilitie Pennance, but also to study to fulfill and accomplish it effectually* for hee that taketh reprehension and Penance in good parte, when he is faulty, meriteth pardon; And when hee is not faulty, he satisfieth for his other sinnes, and meriteth reward: that is, Gods grace here, and thereby after this transitory life, euerlasting glorie.





The Confirmation of the Rule, by NICHOLAS the fourth.
LEt it not therefore be lawfull for any maner of man, to infring this writ of our Decree and Ordinance, or with rash temeritie, to with-stand it. But if any doe presume to attempt it, let him knowe that he doeth incurre, the indignation of Almightie God, and of his blessed Apostles, S. PETER and S. PAVLE. Giuen at the Reate the 16. Kalendes of Septemb. the 2. yeare of our Pontificate. Anno Dom. 1209.




OVR Holie Father NICHOL. the 4. which before (as you haue heard) being General, of all the three Orders of S. FRANCIS; hauing found in his Visitations, that although all his Predecessors, from HONORIVS the third, which confirmed this Order of Penance, onely viua voce, out of a special loue that they
 did beare vnto it; for the greater good and comfort which it yeelded vnto the soules of manie vertuous and deuout persons; had graunted many Priuiledges and immunities, and exemptions; yet had not any of them, set foorth the Rule in any of their Breues, thereby to expresse and put to silence, the indiscreete and malitious tongues, of such as enuie at other mens profite, good, and perfection; he therefore, to compell, by feare of Censures of the Church, such persons, as charitie could not force to speake well of holy and vertuous courses to perfection; not onely did confirme the Rule, with his Apostolicall letters, but also imposeth here the heauie curse of God and his Church, on all such as infringe this Writ of this Decree and Ordinance; or endeauour with rash temeritie to withstand it.
The Reuerend and most worthy Cardinal TOLLET, declaring how al the Doctors of the Church do agree in this, how farre the Prelates Ecclesiastical may bind their subiects, saith that,Lib. de. 7. de pecatis mort. cap. 19. vvhen any thing is commanded vnder the paine of Excommunication, or any other paine which cannot befal to a man, standing in the state of grace, as vnder the paine of the malediction of his Apostles, or any other such like, it bindeth, vnder the paine of a mortall sinn, although there is not put, that Exco^municatio^ is incurred by the deed it self.
 Wherefore hoping that amongst the children of our holy Mother, the Catholike, Apostolike, and Romane Church, there will be none founde, whose hearts will be so much possessed with rancour and enuy, as to encurre a mortal sinne, by maligning, and with rash temeritie, withstanding this holy Order of Pennance, which can neither hurt or hinder any, but is a secure meanes, vnto all persons, that will embrace and follow this path and happy course of life, to deliuer them with speede, from the paineful paines of Purgatorie, and leade them to euerlasting ioy and glorie in heauen. I will omit to make any further mention here, of such danger and imperfection: and nowe purposing to haue d^clared the perfections of this holy Rule and Order, hauing had occasion to adde vnto this present, the annotations of the Reuerende Father, Commissarie General, of all our Order in these parts, vpon this Rule, finding that this booke, is thereby growen vnto a greater volume, then I desired that it should be, I haue adioyned the perfectio^s of this order, vnto the directory, of the societie of the Corde, of our holy Patron S. FRANCIS, to the intente, that such deuoute persons, as for the affection, which they doe beare vnto him, doe weare one of those hallowed cordes, may to augment their deuotion, and desire
 to imitate his perfection and vertues, see the great perfections of this holy Order, gathered into a smale briefe togeather; that thereby, such as are of that Congregation, may learne the perfections of this; and of the otherside, such of this Holy order as are desirous to know the perfections of their owne Rule, may by getting them, see also the great indulgences, which belong vnto their Corde or Girdle, which they daily weare, that by gaining those Heaue^ly treasures, may both here make satisfaction for al paines due vnto their sinnes; and cleanse their soules from the least thing that might defile it; and by the perfections of this Rule, so order it with all kinde of vertues in this life, that their action and conuersation, may bee so acceptable in the sight of Almighty God, that for their reward, they continue here in his fauour and grace, and after raigne with him, in euarlasting glorie.




A CATOLOGVE, Of the Saints and worthie men of the Third Order of the Brothers and Sisters of PENANCE, which our Seraphical Father S. FRANCIS founded, the ninth yeare after his Conuersion.
ALthough, in commendation of the third Order, which our Seraphicall Father S. FRANCIS (inspired by the Holy Ghost) did institute for a generall comforte and ayde of all men and woemen, aswel Married, as Virgins, many things might be said ful of trueth and Christian pietie, yet to make it manifest and plainly to be vnderstood, how gratefull it is to God, and of how great edification in the Catholike Church, it is an euident and sufficient argume^t, to see the manifold fruts, which in these yeares past, it hath yeelded in the same Church, as is manifest by this Catalogue of Saints, and true Apostolicall men, and holy vertuous women, taken out
 of the Chronicle, and Bookes of this Order, where their liues are written at large.

Popes who haue confirmed the Rule, and fauoured it with gra^es and Priuiledges.
THE Pope Honorius the 3. Pope Gregorie the 9. three times. Innocentius the 4. Nicolas the 4. Clement the 5. Martin the 5. Eugonius the 4. Nicolas the 5. Calixtus the 3. Pius the 2. Sixtus the 4.


Saintes that be Canonized.

S. LEWES the King of France.
S. Alexius, Earle of Arian in France.
S. Iuo Priest.
S. Elizabeth, daughter to the King of Hungarie.



Holy men Beatified.

BLESSED Alexander of Perusio, indued with admirable pietie.

Bl. Bonisius Volaterranus, shining with miracles.
Bl. Bartolus of S. Geminian, a most holy man.
Bl Charles of Monte Feltrio, indued with all kinde of vertues
B. Gualterius, bish^p of Taruisi^us greatly renouned for his wo^derful miracles.
Bl. Iames of the lande Pompeia, a Priest, shining with miracles.
Bl. Iohn of Vrbin, a man most perfect, and enobled with vertues.
Bl. Iohn of Rauenna, did many miracles.
Bl. Luchesi, copious and abounding in miracles, hath a Church of his name.
Bl. Lucia, most famous for his miracles was the first which receaued the habite at the hands of our father. S. Francis.
Bl. Landonus of Mont Feltrio, is had in great reuerence, for the vertues which he wrought.
Bl. Nicoluccius of Senna, a man most intire and shining in vertues and miracles.
Bl. Peter Romanus, crowned with Martyrdome, for the faith of Iesus Christ vnder the Soldane.
Bl. Peter Pectinarius of Senna, most noble in Sanctitie of life.
Bl. Peter of Colle, like in all things to these afore named.
Bl. Richard, Bishop of Fossabrunencis, and a most holy man.
Bl. Robert, Lord of Ariminensium, noble
 both by birth and miracles.
Bl. Rock, a man full of deuotion.
Bl. Thomasinus, a man of great sanctitie, which whilest he prayed on the Feast of all Saints, he was in an extasie, from the Sun rising, vntil the Sun setting.
Bl. Torellus, a ma^ absolute in al perfectio^.
Pl. Thomas Vncius of Fulginio, who was famous for miracles and prophesies.



Holy women beatified.

BLessed Angelo of Fulginio, who did giue her selfe wholly to contemplation: and for the space of 12. yeares togeather, neuer did take any meate or drinke, but contented her selfe with the B. Sacrament only. She was the first which did reforme the sisters of the third Order.
Bl. Apolonia of Bonomia, most pious and liberal to the poore, is highly reuerenced for her miracles.
Bl.. Blanch, Queene of France, and mother of S. Lewes King of Fraunce, most renowned for her miracles.
B Beatrix of Millane, copious in miracles
Bl. Bona, wife vnto the blessed Lucius, which was the first that receaued the habite of this third order, from our holy father. S. Francis.
Bl. Clare of Monte Falcon, shining with illustrious signes and miracles.
Bl. S. Delphina, excelling in the vertue^
 of Chastitie, for though she liued 25. yeares, in marriage with S. Elzearius, yet did the holy S. testifie at his death, that he left her a pure Virgin.
Bl. Elizabeth, Empresse of the Romaines, and wife vnto the Emperour Charles the 4. but more noble, for the abundance of her myracles.
Bl. Elizabeth, Queene of Hungarie.
Bl. Elizabeth Queene of Portugal.
Bl. Homiliana of Florena, nobly descended of the familie of the Circulie: and much more honoured, for the sanctity of her life, and famousnesse of her myracles.
Bl. Ione of S. Marie.
Bl. Ione Signa.
Bl. Margaret of Carena.
Bl. Mea of Senna, much renowned for her miracles.
Bl. Pasquilina of Fulginio Celeber, and famous for her myracles,
Bl. Rose of Viturbia, buried at Viturbia, and shineth with miracles.



Prelates.

DON Leo, Archbishop of Milan.
Don Gualter, Bishop or Threliso.
Don. Richard, Bishop of Alexandria, Doctor of Diuinitie.




Empresses.

LAdie Elizabeth, Empresse wife to the Emperour, Charles the 4.
Ladie Ione, Empresse of the Greekes.



Kings.

CHARLES the 2. King of Cicilie, Father to S. Lewes Bisshop.
Robe^t King of Cicilie.
Henry Prince of Cicilie.



Queenes.

LAdie Marie, daughter to the King of Hungarie, mother to the Bishop S. Lewes.
Ladie Blanch, Queene of Cataluinia, mother to S. Lewes King of France.
Ladie Marie, Queene of Hungarie.
Ladie Katherine Queene of Bosna.
Queene of Hungarie, who built the Monasterie; in the Royal fielde at Austria.
Queene Katherine, daughter to Ferdinando, and Elizabeth King and Queene of Spaine, Aunt vnto Charles the Emperour, wife of King Henry the eight, mother vnto Queene Marie of England, of late and happie memorie.




Dukes.

RObert of Malatesta, Duke of Vrbine.
Ladie Katherine, Dutchesse of Millan.



Earles.

ALberte Mountacute, to whom our Father gaue the Habite.
Orlande Chu^ssie in Italy, who gaue vnto our holy Father, the Mount of Alnerne, and did entertaine him as his guest, and receaued the Habite at his handes.
Don Artal of Alagon, Ea^le of Sostage, and his wife, with many other verie famous in sanctitie of life.



Worthy men.
1. ALexander, Doctor of Diuinitie. 2. Bartholomew of S. Hierome, to whom our blessed Father S. Francis gaue the habite. 3. Bartholomew, a lawier, to whom our holy Father gaue leaue also, to receaue diuers into the habite, of the third order. 4. Brother Bruno, to whom our holy Father S. Francis, gaue himselfe the habite. 5. Charles Lundati of Mount Feltrio. 6. Brother Demetrius. 7. Brother Estupe.
 8. Gerard Hermitane. 9. Brother Hierome. 10. Iohn of Vrbilo. 11 Iohn of Riberia. 12. Brother Iohn of Hermitane. 13. Matthew Lesse, to whom our holy Father S. Francis, gaue the Habite. 14. Matthew Rubie Romane, father to Nicolas Pope, which before was called Iohn Caietane, to whom being a child, our Father Commended his order. 15. Robert Coellus, to whom also our Holy Father S. Frances, gaue the habite. 16. Brother Peter, a Spaniard. 17. Bother Peter Hermitane. 18. Peter Tercelane. 19 Tercellus of Papio Vinaldus. 20. Brother Vitalles.


Noble and worthy woemen.
BOnuenuta married. Dulcelnia. Sister Francis of Eugubium Ladie Lucia. Ladie Lucy, of Venice. Malquiliana married. Siriana. Viridiana.




ALthough this Catologue was made to the honour and glory of God, and of our Holy Father S. Francis, and his Children, of this his third Order: yet would I not haue thee, gentle reader, to thinke, but there are infinite more, holy and worthy persons, which are and haue bene of this most holy Congregation; but these are onely those which the Reuerend Father, Comissary General, did set downe in the Spanish Coppie: Or that I could as yet finde which might conueniently be Croni^led published, and Registred amongst this holy Companie; but if thou doest chance to finde any others, I beseech thee to doe them that honour, as to adde them to their places of worthinesse, according to their good deserts.


Of the glorious name of IESVS, The 1. of Ianuary.

Antiphona.
NOMEN IESV, tibi sit semper in corde, semper in ore, semper in sinu, semper in manu, quo omnes tui in Iesum sensus dirigantur and actus, alleluia. Versu^. Sit nomen Domini benedictum. Respons. Ex hoc nunc and vsque in seculum.


Oremus.
DEVS, qui gloriosissimum nomen Domini nostri vnigeniti filij tui Iesu Christi, fecisti fidelibus tuis summo suauitatis, affectu amabile, and malignis spiritibus tremendum, atque terribile: concede propitius, vt qui eiusdem benedicte Saluatoris nomen celebriter veneramur in terris, eius foelici consortio, perenniter perfruamur in coelis. Qui tec^m viuit and regnat in secula seculorum. Amen.



The fiue Brethren Martyrs, the 16. of Ianuary.

Ant.
QVinque passeres veneunt dipondio, nec pereunt, IESV, propter te mortui, illi sunt fratres minores
 quos trucidarunt tortores dum precones essent tui. Versus. Letamini in Domino and exultate iusti. Resp. Ecce enim merces vestra, multa est in coelis.


Oremus.
LArgire nobis quaesumus domine, beatis mar^yribus tuis Berardo, Petro, Accursio, Adiuto, and Ottone, intercedentibus coelestia semper and Christum amare, quorum glorioso martirio, Ordinis minorum initia conseruasti, Per eundem Christum Dominum nostrum, Amen.



The translation of S. Bonauenture, the 14. of March.

Antiph
RVtilit vir seraphicus and totus scientificus, Parisiis rimari sacra dogmata meruit, his Deum semper monuit prae cunctis adamari. Versus. Clara est and quae nunquam marcessit sapientia. Resp. Et facile videtur ab ijs qui diligunt eum,


Oremus.
DEus qui Ecclesiam tuam B. Bonauenturae confessoris tui. atque pontificis illuminare dignatus es meritis and doctrinis, concede propitius. vt eius meritis and intercessionibus spiritualibus
 muniatur auxiliis, and donis gaudeat sempiternis. Per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.



The translation of S. Antonie of Padua, the 15. of February.

Ant.
DOmus ab Antonio supra Petram Dominum, posita perstabit, quam maris elatio, fluctus, ceu vox fluminum vltra non turbabit, Versus. Iustum deduxit dominus per vias rectas. Resp. Et ostendit illi regnum Dei.


Oremus.
ECclesiam tuam Deus. B. Antonio Confessoris tui translatio votiua laetificet, vt spiritualibus semper muniatur auxilljs and gaudijs perfrui mereatur aeternis. Per Christum Dominum. Amen.



The translation, of Saincte BARNARDINE, the 17. of May.

Ant
SEnarum ciuis inclytus, super na luce preditus, Bernardinus feruenter semper amare studuit Christum Iesum, quem docuit reuereri. Versus. Puer
 eram ingeniosus and sortitus sum animam bonam. Resp. Et cum essem magis bonus veni ad corpus incoinquinatum.


Oremus.
DEus, qui corda fi^elium sancti Spiritus vnctione ad sancti nominis tui honorem. and vitae sanctimoniam per B. Bernardinum confessorem tuum, egregiumq^o doctorem inspirare dignatus es: tribue nobis quaesumus, vt cuius sacram memoriam veneramur in terris, eius felici consortio perfruamur in caelis, per Christum. On his Feast, as in the translation.



The translation of our Holie Father S. FRANCIS, the 25. of May.

Ant.
SAncte Francisse, propera, veni pater accelera ad populum, qui premitur, and teritur sub onere, palea, luto, latere: and sepulto aegiptio sub sabulo, nos libera, carnis extincto vitio. Versus Nemo mihi molestus sit. Resp. Ego enim stigmata Domini in corpore meo porto.


Oremus.
OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui frigescente mundo ad inflamandum corda nostra in carne, beatissimi P. N.
 Francissii passionis tuae sacra stigma^a renouasti: concede propitius, vt eius meritis and precibus dignos paenitentiae fructus faciamus, Qui viuis and regnas in secula seculorum.



The Feast of S. Anthonie of Padua, the 13. of Iune.

Antiph.
DOmus ab Antonio supram petram Dominum posita perstabit, quam maris elatio, fluctus, seu vox fluminum vltra non turbabit. Versus. Iustum deduxit Dominus per vias rectas. Resp. Et ostendit illi regnum Dei.


Oremus.
ECclesiam tuam Deus B. Antonij confessoris tui solennitas votui laetificet, vt spiritualibus semper muniatur auxilijs, and gaudiis perfrui mereatur aeternis, per Christum Dominum.



The Feast of S. Bonauenture, the 14. of Iulij.

Antiph RVtilat vir seraphicus and totus scientificus, parisijs rimari sacra dogmata meruit, his Deum semper monuit prae cunctis adamari. Versus Clara est, and que nunquam marcessit sapientia. Resp, Et facile videtur ab iis qui diligunt



Oremus.
DEus qui Ecclesiam tuam B. Bonauenturae Confessoris tui, atque pontificis illuminare dignatus es meritis and doctrinis, concede propitius, vt eius meritis and intercessionibus, spiritualibus muniatur auxiliis, and donis gaudeat sempiternis, per Christum Dominum nostrum.



The dedication of our Ladie of Angels, called Portiuncula, the 2. of Aug.

Ant.
SVbtuum presidium confugimus sancta dei genitrix, nostras deprecationes ne despicias in necessitatibus, sed a periculis cunctis libera nos semper, virgo gloriosa and benedicta. Versus. Domum tuam Domine decet sanctitudo. Resp. In longitudine dierum.


Oremus.
OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui gloriosae Virginis matris Mariae corpus and animam vt dignum filii tui habitaculum effici mereretur, spiritu sancto cooperante preparasti: da vt cuius commeratione laetamur, eius pia intercessione ab instantibus malis, and a morte perpetua liberemur, per eundum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.




The Feast of S. Clare, the 12. of August.

Ant.
POst vitae Clarae terminum, Clara cum turba virginum, ad coelos euolauit, suum complexa Dominum. regnat in regno luminu^, quo Dominus regnauit. Vers. O quam pulchra est casta generatio. Resp. Cum claritate.


Oremus.
FAmulos tuos quaesumus Domine B. Virginis tuae Clarae votiua natalitia recensentes; coelestium gaudiorum sua facias interuentione participes, and tui vnigeniti coheredes: Qui tecum viuit and regnat in vnitate spiritus sancti Deus.



S. Lewes Bishop of Tolose, the 19. of August.

Ant.
TEcum fuit principiu^ beati Ludouice, virtutum Christus omnium pro meritorum vice. vers. In conspectu potentium admirabilis ero. Resp. Et facies principum mirabuntur me.


Oremus.
DEus qui Ecclesiam tuam dispensatione mirabili nobis semper illustras sanctorum splendoribus, tribue quaesumus, vt qui Beati LVDOVICI Confessoris tui, atque Pontificis solemniis
 gratulantur, ad eius consortium faeliciter peruenire mereantur. per Christum Dominum nostrum, Amen.



S. Levves King of France, of of the third Order, the 25. of August.

Ant.
SImilabo eum viro sapienti, qui edificauit domum suam supra firmam petram, Vers. Lex Dei eius in corde ipsius. Resp. Et non supplantabuntur gressus eius.


Oremus.
DEus, qui beatum Ludouicum confessorem tuum de terreno ac temporal^ regno, ad coelesti and eterni gloriam transtulisti: eius quaesumus meritis and intercessione regis regnum Iesu Christi filij tui nos coheredes efficias, and eiusdem regni tribuas esse consortes, per eundem Dominum nostrum. Amen.



The Feast of the Stigmates of S. FRANCIS, the 17. of September.

Antiph.
Coelorum candor splenduit, nouum sidus emicuit, sacer Franciscus clarauit, cui seraphim apparuit signans, cum caractere, in palmis, plantis,
 latere, dum formam crucis gerere, vult corde ore opere. Vers. Signate Domine seruum tuum Franciscum. Resp. Signis redemptionis nostrae.


Oremus.
DEus qui mira Crucis mysteria in B. Francisco confessore tuo multi formiter demonstrasti, da nobis quae sumus, deuotionis suae semper exempla sectari, and assidua eiusdem crucis mediratione muniri, per Christi^ Dominum nostrum. Ame^.



The translation of S. Clare, the 2. of October.

Ant.
POst vitae Clarae terminum, Clara cum turba virginum ad coelos euolauit, suum complexa Dominum, regnat in regno luminum, quo Dominus, regnauit. Vers. O quam pulchra est cas^a generatio. Resp. Cum claritate.


Oremus.
FAmulos tuos quaesumus Domine B. Virginis tuae Clarae votiuam translationem recensentes, celestium gaudiorum sua facias interuentione participes, and tui vnigeniti co^eredes. Qui tecum vi^it and regnat in vnitate spiritus sancti Deus.




The feast of S. Francis. the 4. of October.

Ant.
O Martyr desiderio Francisce, quanto studio compatie^s hunc sequeris, quem passum libro reperis quem aperuisti. Tu contuens in aere seraph in cruce positum, ex tunc in palmis, latere, and ped^bus effigiem fers plagarum Christi? tu gregi tuo prouide; qui post foelicem transitum dire prius and liuide glorificatae speciem carnis pretendisti versus. Ora pro nobis B. P. Francisce. Resp. Vt digini efficiamur promissionibus Christi.


Oremus.
DEus qui Ecclesiam tuam Beati Fra^scisci meritis foeta nouae prolis amplificas: tribue nobis ex eius imitatione terrena despicere, and coelestium donorum semper participatione gaudere. Per Christum Dominum nostrum.



The vij. brethren Martyrs, the 13. of October.

Ant.
Haec est vera fraternitas, quae nunquam potuit violari certamine, qui effusa sanguine sequuti sunt Dominum, and contemnentes aulam regiam, peruenerunt ad regna coelestia, Versu. Ecce quam bonum, and quam iucundum. Resp. Habitare fratres in vnum.



Oremus.
OMnipotentiam tuam aeterne Deus suppliciter exoramus, vt suffragantibus beatissimis martyribus tuis Daniele, Angelo, Samuele, Donulo, Leono, Augolino atque Nicolao, discamus terrena despicere, and amare coelestia. Per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.



S. Iue Confessor, of the third Order of S. FRANCIS. the 27. of October.

Ant.
HIc est qui post aurum no^ abiit, nec sperauit in pecuniae thesauris. Hinc and laudabimus eum: fecit enim mirabilia in vita sua. Versus. Hic vir despiciens mundum and terrena triumphans. Resp. Diuitias coelo condidit ore manu.


Oremus.
DEus qui B. Iuonem confessore^ tuum piis operibus, signis and miraculis in Ecclesia tua clarere fecisti: praesta quesumus, vt eius meritis and precibus tua beneficia capiamus. Per Christum Dominum nostrum.



The translation of S. Lewes Bishop of Tolledo, Nouember.

Ant.
TEcum fuit principiu^ beate Ludouice, virtutum Christus
 omnium, pro meritorum vice. Vers. In conspectu potentium admirabilis ero. Res. Et facies principum mirabuntur me:


Oremus.
DEus qui Ecclesiam tuam dispensatione mirabile nouis semper illustras sanctorum splendoribus, tribue quaesumus, vt qui B. Ludouici confessoris tui atque Pontificis solemniis gratulantur, ad eius consortium foeliciter peruenire mereamur: per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.



S. Didacus, the 12. of Nouember.

Antip
BEatus Didacus stadium virtutis ingressus carnem suam laboribus and flagellis, vigiliis ac ieiunijs edomabat, Versus. Quae stulta sunt mundi elegit Deus Resp. Vt confundat fapientes.


Oremus.
OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui dispositione mirabili infirma mundi elegis, vt fortia quaeque confundas: Concede propitius humilitati nostrae, vt pijs B. Didaci confessoris tui precibus, ad p^rennem in coelis gloriam sublimiari. Per Christum Dominum nostru^. Amen.




S. Elizabeth VViddowe, of the third Order of S. Francis, the 20. Nouember.

Ant.
Dvm esset vir in acubitu suo, nardus eius dabat suauitatis odorem. Vers. Manum suam aperuit inop^, Res. Et palmas suas extendit ad pauperem.


Oremus.
TVorum corda fidelium Deus miserator illustra, and beatae Elizabethae precibus gloriosis, fac nos prospera mundi dispicere, and celesti semper consolatione gaudere: per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.



The Feast of S. Elzearius, Confessor, of the third order of S. Francis, the 28. December.

Ant.
EVge serue bone and fidelis, quia in pauca fuisti fidelis, supra multa te constituam dicit Dominus. Vers. Amauit eum Dominus, and ornauit eum. Resp. Stolam gloriae induit eum.



Oremus.
DEus, qui beatu^ Elzearium confessorem tuum, inter cetera virtutum insignia Virginali pudicitia in co^iugio decorasti: concede propitius, vt cuius sacra solemnia celebriter veneramur in terris, eius beata consortia foeliciter consequamur in caelis, Per Christum.



Commemoration of all the Sainctes of the Order.

Antiph.
VOs sancti Dei incliti, qui estis mente simplici Franciscum imitato: Orate vt hic feruidi, and in futuro lucidi, simus and nos beati. Versus. Aeterna fac nos Domine cum sanctis tuis. Resp. In gloria numerari.


Oremus.
DEuotionem nostram quaesumus Domine tua gratia redd^t salutarem, vt quos sanctorum tuorum Berardi, Petri, Accurtij, Adiuti and Ottonis martyrum, Bonauenturae ac Ludouici Pontificum, Antonij and Bernardini confessorum, ac Clarae Virginis deuota commemoratione laetificat. ipsos ad gaudia aeterna perducat. Per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.





A TABLE, OF THE principall matters, conteined in the Treatise of PENANCE.

Epistle Dedicatorie.
CHildren are bound to honour and obey their Parents.
Parents are bound to instruct and correct their children.
God punisheth those which are negligent in correcting them.
The obligation of spirituall fathers.
The principall businesse of a Christian.
VVhat is conuenient for such as tend to perfectio^.
Hope of gaine, encourageth one to vndertake any labour.
The Authors intention.


Epistle to the Reader.
MAny benefites are reaped in this holy Order of Penance.
The way of Penance is common to all, that desire to go to heauen.
Into this Order of Pennance, all sorts of vertuous people and sexes, may be admitted, aswel maried, as vnmaried.
This order, exhorteth to all pious workes.
The general Chapter commanded to puhlish this Order againe.
The Authors motiue to set forth this book in print.
This Order is much respected, and not worne
 out of request.
A great part of the Nobilitie of Spaine, doth dailie embrace this Order.
Queene Katherine, mother vnto our happie Q. Marie, was of this Order.
The names of the Saincts, and worthie persons, arset in the end of this booke.
The Epistle of the Commissarie General, vnto the Prouincials.


Treatise of Penance, Chapter I. pag. 1.
AN introduction and exhortatio^ to Pennance. page. 1
Great is the corruption of the world. ibid.
An admonition. pag. 2
The cause of the perdition of many. pag. 3
The difference betweene the good and the badde. ibid.
No man can here reioyce with the worlde, and raigne with God in heauen. pag. 4
The great loue of Christ to mans soule. ibid.
For the health of the soule regarde not what the flesh suggesteth, but what the spirit is able to doe. ibid.
A profitable consideration. pag. 5.
What man is in respect of his bodie. pag. 5
As death is most certaine, so is the hower very vncertaine. pag. 5.
How euery one ought to esteeme of himselfe. p. 6.
Euery one ought to consider dilige^tly, what preparation he hath made for the life to come. p. 6.
No man can finde any assured contentment in
 this world. pag. 7.
VVhat course euery one which desireth to liue piously, ought to take presently. pag. 7
Penance must be answerable vnto the greatnes of the sinnes. pag. 8


Chapter II.
OF the necessitie of Pennance. pag. 9
Baptisme necessarie vnto Saluation. pag. 9
Penance is necessary for al sinners that haue the vse of reason. ibid.
Penance is the second table after shipwracke. ib.
Baptisme cannot be reiterated. pag. 10.
Penance hath bene in all ages, necessarie vnto saluation. pag. 10
S. Iohn Baptist did preach penance, both by worde and deede. pag. 11
The austeritie of the life of S. Iohn Baptist, doeth condemne the delicatenesse of worldlings. p. 11.
Christ calleth all vnto penance. pag. 12
True penance washeth awaie our sinnes, and maketh vs as white as snow. pag. 12
One of the difficultst works of God, is to make of a sinner, a iust man. p. 13
VVhosoeuer will raigne with God, must suffer with his Sonne. pag. 14
How wee must followe Christ. ibid.
VVhat we must do which will follow our Lord. pag. 14
Our Lord doth admit all that will, of what estate or condition soeuer. ibi.
Many follow the desire of the flesh, but few follow Christ. pag. 15

The world calleth to deceaue vs, yet many follow it. pag. 16
Christ calleth to saue vs, few or none will heare him. ibid
God of his ordinary power cannot remit actuall sinnes, with out the parties penance. ibid.
By penance, great offenders became the especial friends of God. p. 17


Chapter 3. pag. 22.
OF the dangers in deferring of Penance.
Bruite beasts, by the instinct of nature, seeke prese^t remedie in sicknesse. pag. 17
Many for to recouer health of the body, wil endure great paines. pag. 18
Much more dangerous is the sicknes of the soule, the^ that of the body. p. 18
Deferring of penance, doth put the soule oftentimes, in danger of perishing euerlastingly. pag. 19
Penance deferred vntill the hower of death, is dangerous. ibid
Hope of long life, maketh many to perish. pag. 20
The sorrowful words of a dying man diligently to be noted. pag. 21
Euery one must render an account not onely of what he hath done, but also what he hath omitted, that hee might and ought to haue done. ibi.
Our whole time, is to bee e^ployed to Gods honor, and the good of our soul. p. 22
This present time is ours, granted by God to merit therein, the life euerlasting. ibid.
God will iudge our beste workes. pag. 23
They are much incident to
 many dangers, which deferre their Pennance till death. ibid
Penance is presently to be done, to auoide Gods wrath, which otherwise suddainely commeth vpon vs. pag. 24


Chapter IIII. pag. 27
CErtaine reasons to make more manifest the dangers which proceed from delay and neglige^ce in doing pena^ce. 25
The first reason wherefore Pennance should not be deferred. ibid.
Which way a ma^ hath be^t all his desires in his life, that way is he most likly to sal at his death. pa. 26
A ma^ must render an account of euery moment of time, how it is spent. ibi.
The second reason, why Penance should be presently done, is for that a man by long delay, is the more burdened. ibid
The longer a man deferreth to do Penance the les able is be to do it. 28
The weight of one mortall sinne, is so great, that without the greate mercie of God, it would presse thee down to hell. ibid.
Sinners ought to consider, into what dangererous estate sinne hath brought them. ibid.
The third reason, that Penance ought not to be deferred, is feare of suddaine death. ibid.
He which forgetteth God in his life, wil forget himselfe at the hower of death. pag. 29
The fourth reasons is, for that a little pennance done in time, makes more satisfaction for
 our sinnes, here then great and long paines which are suffered in Purgatory, p. 30
The paines of Purgatory, though they are not euerlasting, yet do they farre exceede, all the paines of the worlde. pag. 32
No temporal paine is to be compared, vnto the paines of Purgatory. ib.
A man may make satisfaction for venial sinnes, by any pious and vertuous action. pag. 32.
What Penance is due vnto a mortall sinne. pag. 33.


Chapter V.
THat Penance is not to be left off, whilest life lasteth. pag. 34
He which after his Pennance is done, liueth caresly, soone falleth, either into his former, or worse offences. ibid.
We must not onely by confession, sweepe awaie the dust of our sinnes, but also scrape awaie the durte, with harde iron of strict Penance. pag 35
The serua^ts of God ought neuer to be idle. pa. 26
The second sinnes, of the same kinde are worse then the first. ibid.
Pennance is a meanes to preserue one from falling againe into sinne. pag. 37
Pennance is the weapon wherewith wee must wage warre, againste the flesh and the deuil. pag. 38
The deuil be^deth his forces, chiefefly against
 those which leue sin. and come vnto God. p. 39.
As Sat^a^, whe^ our Sauior fasted, did chiefely te^pt him, so doth he the like when any tende vnto perfection pag. 40.
A similitude to proue the same. ibid.
Fruits proceeding from Penance. ibid
The second fal into sinne, is worse then the first. pag. 41
It is easier for one to keepe him from sinne, then after that he is fallen, to rise againe. pag. 42
Many dangers come, by leauing off the armour of Penance. pag. 43
There is no ende prefixed for Pennance in this life. pag. 44
It is not enough for one to beginne to do Penance, but he must perseuer therein to the last end. ibid.
Similitudes, to exhorte vnto perseuerance, in doing of Penance. ibid.
The rewarde of perseuerance. pag. 45


Chapter VI.
THat the austeritie of Penance, is made easie, hy the due considerattion of the sweetnesse, which is in it. pag. 46
The meanes to preue^t and auoide Gods wrath, is to make present satisfaction for sinne. ibid.
Examples howe Pennance helde the hand of God from inflicting iust punishment. ibid.
The Niniuites receaued profite from Pennance. pag. 47
An obiectio^, and answer. ib.

It is not sufficient for saluation to bring forth the leaues or buddes of Pennance, but the worthie fruits ar required. p 48
Good motions which are not put in execution, d^e augment the paines of the damned. pag. 49
The path of pennance, leadeth to eternall consolation. pag. 49
The way of penance, which seemeth very hard, is by Christs example, made plaine and easie. pag. 50
The benefites which are found in the way of Penance. ibid.
What it is to eate our labours ibid.


Chapter VII. pag. 55
HOw great is the profite which proceedeth from penance. p. 55
Pennance bringeth manie benefits vnto the soule ib.
Iustice requireth, that according to the greatnes ^^ the sin, so should the pennance be. pag. 5^
Penance is so pleasing vnt^ God, that it restoret^ life vnto the soule. ibid
Wounderful is the profit of penance. ibid
God spareth euerlastingly those whom he punisheth here. pag, 57
God doth more accept of a little paines voluntarili^ suffered here, then of asmuch more endured elsewhere. pag. 58
Little are al the paines of this life in respect of future punishment ibid.
Terrible are the paines of Purgatory. pag. 59
Though the paines of Purgatorie be great, yet litle or nothing in respect of the torments in hell ibid.
The paines of hel, are so infinite,
 that all the men of the world, are not aable to declare the least parte of them. ibid.
That paine cannot be imagined, but that the damned endure it. pag. 60
True penance, not onely deliuereth one fro^ all those aforesaide paines, but bringeth him also to infinite glorie and ioy. p. 61
What the ioyes of heauen are. ibid.
All ioyes, happinesse, and and al that can be desired, is in God. pag. 62
The excellency of the kingdome of heauen. ibid.
Example of Dauid, what we ought to doe, to enioy the presence of God. ibi.
The state of innocency was lost by sinne, Penance is the way to regaine it. 63
As wee desire to enioy with Dauid, al happinesse: So let vs here endeauour to imitate his penance. 61.


Chapter VIII. pag. 64.
THat pennance ought chiefly to be done for the loue of God. ibid.
It is our intention which maketh our penance the more meritorious, ibid.
The chiefest intention in doing of penance, ought to be the loue of God. pa. 65
In sinne, two things are to be considered. The offence vnto God, and the hurt of the sinner. pag. 66
God is no acceptor of persons. pag. 67
The cause why God did accept of the Pena^ce of Dauid, and not of Saul: was the different actions in doing. ibid.
The example of Esau. ibid
The loue of God ought to be the ballance of all our actions. pag. 69

God more regardeth the intention of the doer, then the worke it self. ibid.
In all our actions, wee must direct our intentions, to the loue of God. pag. 70
What ought to bee our chiefe intention, in doing of penance. ibid.
A similitude. ibid.
What ought to bee the chiefest cause of sorrow; with an exhortation. pag. 71
A man ought rather choose to suffer all the paines of the damned, then to offende. ibid.
Let our hell be the displesure of God, and our heaue^ to haue his loue. pag. 72
Hell ought rather to bee feared; for that Gods enemies dwell there, then for the paines therein. ibid.
The chiefest cause wherefore the eternal beatitude is to be desired, is the assurance neuer to offend God. ibid.
The meanes to make all our actions meritorious, is to doe them meerely for the loue of God. ibid
An Example worthy to be noted. ibid.
The malice of Sathan is often turned, by Gods goodnesse, to the encrease of our merite. pag. 73
Constancy in the loue of of God, is more meritorious, then any other action. pag. 74
The merit of our labours and aff^ictions, consisteth in the loue of God, ibid.



Chapter IX. pag. 75.
THat the best and most in Gods fauour, haue not neglected to do Penance. ibi.
The chiefest remedie for sinne, after baptisme, is Penance. ibid.
It is a great errour and blindnesse, to thinke that none do pennance, but such as haue bene notorious sinners. pag. 76
Examples to prooue that such as haue bene alwaies vertuous, yet not withstanding, haue done great penance. ibi.
Example of Iobs penance. Of Ieremies, S. Iohn Baptist, although sanctified in his mothers wombe, yet did greate penance all his life. ibid.
The whole life of the mother of God, was little, other then continuall penance. pag. 78
The Penance of S. Elizabeth of Hungary, was not smale. pag. 79
Though she were noble by parentage in earth, yet pennance made her more noble in heauen, ibid.
Pennance is not onely a salue to cure sinne, but also a meanes, to preserue from sinne, and to winne fauor with God. pag. 80
God punisheth smal offences, in his great friends pag. 81
Example in Zachary punished for a venial sin. ibid.
This life is no other, but a vale of miserie, and a time of penance. p. 82

The hower of death to worldlings, is of all things the most terrible. ibid
Nothing defiled, can enter into heauen. ibid.
Whosoeuer looketh well into his daily actions, shal consider some imperfection. pag. 83
S. Paule acknowledged his imperfections, and did penance for them. ibid.
The more that one encreaseth in all perfection, the plainer doth he perceiue his owne imperfections. ibid.
Little sinnes are not to be contemned. ibid.
They are oft meanes to draw vs into hell. pag. 84
Small sinnes, oft breed great da^ger, by drawing many times into mortal sinnes, and offences. pag. 85
An Epilogue vnto the order, of the Brethren and Sisters of Pennance. pag. 86
God of euill, oftentimes draweth good. ibid
Sathan of good, manie times endeuoureth to drawe euil. ibid




A TABLE OF THE Chapters, Articles, and chiefe matters, conteined in the Third Rule of S. FRANCIS, and in the explication thereof.

THe antiquitie, institution, and confirmation of this Rule, by our H. Father Nicolaus 4. pag. 89
The best meanes to vnderstand Gods holy will and pleasure, is to haue recourse vnto feruent prayer. pag. 92
S. Francis, by diuine inspiration yea rather commandement, did institute this holy Order of Penance. pag. 94
The intention of S. Francis, in instituting this Order, was to incite all sorts of people, so to followe our Sauiours example here, that they may raigne with him in heauen. pag. 95
S. Francis ordained, that it should be so ordered, as it might be fit for al such as with any zeale would vndertake it. ibid.
In this Rule, is not required any hard matters, aboue the power of the meanest or least able. pag. 96
The brethre^ and Sisters do by vowe, binde the^selues, to obserue the commandements of God, but not vnder the paine a of double mortal sinne. ibi.

The chiefest thing which God requireth at our hands, is to giue our hart wholly vnto him. ibid.
They lend their hart vnto God, which serue him for temporal prosperitie. pag. 49
They sell their hart which serue him onely for eternal reward. ibid,
They onely giue him their hearte, which out of meere loue to himselfe doe serue him without any other respect, p. 100
Loue is the loadstone of loue. ibid.
God hath bestowed great benefites vpon man, to win his loue to him. ibid.
Gods true Children giue their hearts wholly vnto him. pag. 201
The poorest begger may gaine heauen by his perfect loue to God, as well as the richest Emperour. ibid.
There are many in heauen, which were poore, weake and ignorant, but none which did not entirely loue God. ibid.
The commandements of God, which are affirmatiue, binde alwaies, but not for all times. pag. 102
The chiefest pointe of this Rule, is to obserue the commandements of God. pag. 103
No parte of the Rule it selfe doth binde, vnder paine of mortal sinne. ibid.
Of the benefits and priuiledges of this holy Order of Penance. pag. 104
At their firste entrance, they are cleansed from their sinnes and paines
 due thereunto in Purgatorie, and restored to the state as it were of innocencie, wherein they were, when they were first baptised. ibid.
The forme of the general approbation, at their entrance pag. 105
They must first make a general Confession of their whole life, but neuer to repeate it any more. pag. 106
It doth rather hinder deuotion, then augment it, to make often the same general confession. pag. 107
It is counsailed, though not commanded, to make euerye halfe yeare, a general confession of all notable thinges which haue happened in that time. ibid
It is not enough to doe a a good deed, but it must also be well done. p. 108
The Visitor must oftner visite here, then in other places, because hee and the Brethren and Sisters, want the helpe here, which they haue else where. ibid.
One of the chiefest obligations of this Rule, is to make euery night, not onely a diligent examination of their conscience, but also present satisfaction for any fault committed that daye. pag. 109
Howe wee ought to make this examination ibid
God wil not forgiue sinne, and the paines due therunto, vnlesse the sinner do make some satisfaction. pag. 109
The cause why wee are iudged and punished
 by God, is for that we doe not iudge and punish our selues, p. 110
God doeth neuer punish the selfe-same faulte twise. pag. 111
This, and all labours of this life, will seeme but little, if they be compared with the greatnesse of the rewarde. ibid.
The sinner cannot escape punishment, but must either be punished here, or in the world to come. pag. 112
Assured hope of rewarde, maketh all labour seeme so light, that one shall not scarce feele them. ibid
Whosoeuer doeth duely meditate vpon the rewarde of the life to come, wil ioyfully beare all present paines. pag. 113
Most miserable are they which will suffer nothing, for the life euerlasting. pag. 114
Great is the happinesse of those which truely obserue this rule. ibid.
Euerie one may see by the ordinance of the late general Chapter, at Tolledo, and annotations since, of the Commissarie General, vpon this Rule, that it is not worne out of request. ibid.




The first Chapter of the Rule: Of the manner of examining those vvhich vvill vndertake this forme of life. pag. 115.

ARTIC. 1.

THis holy Order of Penance, is ordeyned for all Christians, of what estate or degree soeuer. pag. 117
The firme foundation of all happinesse, is the true beleefe, and constant profession of the Catholike faith. ibid.
He which will not doe both these, cannot bee admitted into this order. ibid.
A man must not onely beleeue, but must consta^tly professe the Catholike faith. pag. 118.
The loue in Religion, doth far excel al other whatsoeuer. ibid.
In matters that may hinder the good of the soule, al other loue is to be set aside. ibid.
Whosoeuer hath bene iustly and publikely reprehended or punished by iustice, cannot be receiued into this order. pag. 119
God requireth all perfefectnesse in his seruice and seruants. ibid.
One bad sheepe, may spoyle a whole flock. ibid.





Chapter II.

ARTIC. 1.

HOw they are to be be receaued, which will enter into this order. pag 120
As all wood is not fit for building, so all persons are not fit for Religion. pag. 120
Christs delight, is to bee with the sonnes of me^. pag. 123
All such as ar desirous to be receaued, must be first deligentlye examined before they be admitted. pag. 124
The vowe which they do make, which after their probation, are admitted to profession. pag. 125



ARTIC. 2.

THat the Ministers must plainely declare vnto the Brethre^ and Sisters, before their profession, the burdens of the fraternity. p. 126
A summary, of all the burdens and constitutions of this Order, where in the whole effect of the chapters of the Rule ar briefly comprehended. pag. 127
Chapter. 1. concerning their beliefe. ibid.
Concerning their admission. chap* 2. ibid
Their apparrel. chap. 3. ib.
Their communication. ch. 4. pag. 128
Their abstinences and fasts ibid,
Of receauing the blessed Sacrament. c. 6. p. 130

Of their Canonical howrs c. 8. ibid,
Of making their wil. cha. 9. p. 131
Of examining their conscience. chap, 2. ibid
Of hearing Masse, and monethly exercises. chap. 13. ibid.
Of exercising the workes of mercie. ch. 14. p. 132
Of the vissitation. cha. 16. ibid.
Of the correction of offenders. chap. 16. pa. 133.
Of the conseruation of peace. chap. 17. ibid.
How the Ordinarie Prelates, may when neede requireth, dispence in in al these aforesaide things, according vnto the necessitie of each one. chap. 18. ibid
That no point of this rule doeth of it seife binde, vnder mortal sinne. ch. 20. pag. 134
Of their obedience vnto the Visitor, in al such things as concerne the Rule. chap. 2. ver. 20-ibid.
Many vndeuout persons, and some vnexperienced Ghostly Fathers, in matters of perfection, do goe about to discourage many from taking this happie course tending to al perfection. pag. 135
The feruent loue of God makes a man easely to beare the burdens, that belong to perfection. pag. 136
The great benefits which this Rule yeeldeth, causeth the followers therof to obserue it with all alacritie. ibid.
A spare diet, killeth vice, and nourisheth vertue
 strengtheneth the soule, and eleuateth the minde. pag. 146
Chap. 6. by often frequenting the holy Sacraments, they cleanse their soules from sinn, and replenish it with grace. ibid.
Chap 7. As the iust man falleth seuen times in the daye, so by their seseuen canonical houres, are they mooued to rise as oft. ibid.
All men haue as much neede of prayer, as trees of moysture. pag. 147
Hee prayeth continually, which doeth alwaies well. ibid.
Chap 8. They reap great quietnesse, and tranquillitie of conscience, which make their wil, and settle their goods in time. ibid.
They which after due examination of their conscience, make daily satisfaction for their offences, doe free the^selues from far greater paines hereafter. pag. 148
Cha. 9. great benefits proceed fro^ hearing Masse daily. pag. 189
The Brethren and Sisters, gaine 100. yeares of pardon, by reading or hearing the Rule read once euery moneth. ibid.
By their monethly almes, they redeeme their sins, and lay vp treasuere for themselues in heaue^, and here also, if they should stand in neede. ibid.
Chap. 10. Their works of mercy, wil worke them, that fauour, to hear that co^fortable speech of our Sauiour, Come ye blessed.
 pag. 189
Chap. 11. At the yearely visitation, they receaue helpe and comforte, both spiritual and temporall, pag. 190
God hath commanded euery one to haue a care of his neighbour. ibid.
Seuerely shall he be punished, which through his silence, or conuiuence, shall let his neighbour perish. pag. 191
Ch. 12. Concord and peace, giue such strength vnto a congregatio^, that their enemies can hardly preuaile any waies against them. pag. 192
Whosoeuer beginneth a life, tending to perfection doeth presently enter into combate against Sathan. ibid.



ARTIC. 3.

Concerning restitution. pag. 193
This order tendeth to the good of all persons, but to the preiudice of none pag. 194
He incurreth great hurt, which with holdeth any thing against right ibid.
As the Brethren which fal into want, without their own fault, ar charitably to be relieued; so wasteful persons, if they wil not be corrected, ar presently to be expelled. ibi.



ARTIC. 4.

OF reconciliation to his neighbors. p. 195
No gift is pleassng vnto God, which is giuen by one that is not in charitie, with his neighbours. ibid.
No man can be admitted
 into this Congregation, vnlesse he first reconcile himself vnto his neighbours. pag. 196



ARTIC. 5.

OF the Profession, pag. 196
Euery one must expect vntil the yeare of probation be expired p. 197



ARTIC. 6.

OF the obseruation of the commandements of God. pag. 197
As this estate doth far excell the ordinary secular estate and calling; so is there more perfection required therein, and greater care in obseruation of the Co^mandements of God. pag. 198



ARTIC. 7.

OF their manner of obedience. p. 199
Although the brethren and Sisters, doe not make any expresse vowe of obedience yet doe they here make an implicite vowe thereof, in al such thinges as concerne meerely the good of the congregation. ib.
S. Elizabeth promised obedie^ce vnto her ghostly father in al thinges, that were not preiudicial, vnto the duety of marriage. ibid.
Amongst all vowes, obedience is the chiefest. pag. 180
He which is obedient, both eating fasteth, sleeping watcheth, and in test labour^th. ibid.
The excellencie of the vertue of obedience, is prooued, by manie worthie sentences of the auncient Fathers,
 pag. 181
The vertue of obedience is so necessarie, for the conseruation of al congregations, that without it, they would soone fall to confussion. pag. 205
No poynt of the Rule doth of it selfe binde, vnder the paine of a mortall sinne. ibid
It is a great comforte to haue an instructor to guide vs in our spiritual actions. pag. 207
Thinke that thou hast only liued that daye well, wherein thou hast renounced thy owne will. pag. 208
The merit and perfection of the soule, consisteth more in denying thy owne will, then in feeling a tendernesse of heart, or sweetnesse in deuotion. pag. 210
Selfe-loue doeth so defile all our actions, that thereby we loose soone al deuotion. ibid.
An example thereof. ibid.
A comfortable caueat. ibi.
How a man ought to behaue himselfe, when he findeth a drinesse in his deuotion. ibid.
One of the chiefest things, wherby a man may win heauen, is in al things, to conforme his wil, vnto the wil of God. pag. 212
Our owne will is like vnto a Rauen, which will pike out the eyes of his feeder. pag. 213
Our selfe-will, is often cause, that our fasting is not accepted. ibid.
Though the wil of our Superiour should be contrarie vnto our owne wil, yet must we follow him, for that Christ
 himselfe is our chiefe gouernour. ibid.
A notable example of S. Peter. pag. 214
Though we labour much, if it be against obedie^ce, or onely following our owne will, yet shall our merit be little. ibid.
He which laboureth by obedience, though the labour be smale, yet the merite will bee greate. pag. 215
Obedience addeth double merite, to euery good worke. ibid.
Euery one ought greatly esteeme their superiors, and to behaue themselus with al respect towards them. ibid.
Example of our Queene Katherine, and her worthie Epistle to Father Forrest. pag. 216
How euery one ought to obey his Superior. p. 222
How their vowe and promise made vnto them, ought to bee set downe. ibid.



ARTIC. 8.

THat the professed may not leaue this maner of life, pag. 223
From alowe estate, a man may profitably assende vnto one of higher perfection, but not of the contrarie, ibid
The scripture it selfe doth exhorte vs to make pious vowes. pag. 224
A vowe is a matter of counsaile, and not a precept. ibid
Difference, betweene a counsaile, and a precept. ibid.
Euery one must be carefull to render vnto God
 what hee hath piously vowed. pag. 225
God seuerely punisheth those which keepe not their promise with him. pag. 2^6
The breaking of lawfull vowes, doth greatly displease Almightie God. ibid.
The auncient Fathers, giue encouragement, to make pious vowes, and shewe what profite commeth thereby. ibid.



ARTIC. 9.

COncerning the receauing of married women. pag. 227
There is no rule so geneneral, but time and place may haue iust occasion to alter it. ibid
Where ceaseth the cause that obliged, the obligation also doeth cease. ibid.
The husbande reapeth great benefite by his wifes entrance into this Congregation. ibid,
It seemeth to be against reason, that such as desire and haue most n^ed of comforte, should with out iust cause, be depriued of it, when they may lawfully haue it. pag. 228




Chapter III.

OF the forme of the habite, and quality of the apparrell. pag. 230
It is not the habite which maketh a religious person, but the due obseruation of their approoued order. pag. 233

This holy Order, was chiefly ordeined for such deuoute persons as desire to exercise themselues alreadie in the worlde, in the workes of pietie and penance.
The Habite ordeined in this chapter, seemeth to belong principally vnto those which liue in Monasteries. ibid.
The brethren and Sisters, in S. Francis time, and vntil this daye, in those places, where he liued, doe weare for Habite, their ordinary apparrell, the colour, onely is, and ought to be gray. pag. 234
As the brethren, whilest they liued, were made members of S. Francis order, so in their death their bodies ought not to bee separated from them. pag. 235
They which receaue them into the Order, must instruct them what is required at their handes. pag. 236


ARTIC. 2.

OF the dispensation, with the coloure and maner of apparell. pag. 236
The most accustomed habite, is to weare, either their apparell of Grey, or otherwise, vnder their ordinary garme^ts some white habite of flannel, linnen, or heare-cloath. ibid.
The examples of the Saints of this Order, doe make it manifest, as of S. Lewes King of Fra^ce. pag. 237
S. Elzearius count of Alsatia.
 pag. 237
S. Iuo in like sorte. ibid.
Blessed Galeatus ibid.
S. Elizabeth, daughter to the King of Hungary ibid.
Blessed Queene Salomea. ibid.
Holy Queene Katherine of England. ibid.
S. Francis ordeined that they should weare, either their outwarde, or inward apparrel of this colour of humility, to put them daiely in minde of their mortalitie. pag. 240
The garments of the Saints, of the old Testament, were but poore and simple. pag. 241
Before sinne came into the world, man needed no garments. ibid.
Gods great friends went but poorely apparrelled. pag. 242
It seldome happeneth, that they which haue such care to apparrell gorgeously their bodies, but that they leaue their poore soule naked of vertue and grace. ibid.
The Romanes made a worthy ordinance for their wiues herein. pag. 243
Christ, which was Lorde of the whole world, and all that is therein, caried nothing with him thereof, but a poore shroude. ibid
So thou shalt cary no more vnlesse it be a grey weed wherein thou oughtest to be buried, if thou maiest. ibid.





Chapter IIII.

OF their conuersation, and going abroade, and giuing of gifts. pag. 244
They are not forbidden to goe vnto courts, vpon necessary businesse. ibid
As their happie course of life, inuiteth them to flie all vaine pleasures, so must they endeauour to auoide al vaine occasions and companie. pag. 246
Euil company, corrupteth the good. pag. 247
Example in the children of Israel. ibid
Also the Hebrewes. ibid.
S. Peter in like manner. ibid.
The hurt which S. Peter receiued by bad companie, ought to make vs feare and flie the like. ibid.
Iust, men are compared vnto a fruitfull tree. pag 248
As dust hurteth the eies, so doeth the bad example of the wicked. ibid.
The wicked are compared vnto thornes. ibid.
As the company is which a man doth frequent, so shal he be iudged to be.
A similitude of the looking glasse. pag. 250
It is very dangerous to conuerse with the wicked. ibid.
If the strength of S. Peter did not preserue him from falling, how much then ought euery one to feare. ibid.
Euery one doeth for the most part, imitate the manners of those with whom hee do^h conuerse. pag. 251
As the profitable floude of
 Iourdane, when he entreth into the vnholsome lake of the Palestine, looseth his vertue. So he which is vertuous in his owne course, if hee runne into the company of the wicked, looseth his vertue and deuotion. ibid.
S. Augustine holdeth, that one offendes more to spende the festiual daies in dauncing, then if he spent it in plowing. 252
The goods which may be spared, belonging vnto the poore, must not be imploied vpo^ vanity or idle persons. pag. 253



Chapter. V.

OF abstinence and fasting. pag. 257
Howe the fastes of this rule, are to be kept in our Countrey. 257
Fasting is to bee vsed in such sorte, that the bodie and soule may be able to goe forwarde in the seruice of God, with alacritie, pag. 258
The faithfull seruant of God must by fasting and prayer, so weaken his flesh, that it may be obedient vnto the spirit. pag. 259
A similitude of a shippe. pag. 260
There is nothing which doth more terrifie and ouercome the deuill, the^ austeritie of life. p. 261


ARTIC. 2.

OF dispensation in fasting. pag 262
In al points of the Rule if the Br. and Sisters, do follow the aduise of the Visitor or of his prudent ghostly Father, it is a sufficient discharge. page. 263

S. Frnacis would that his Children should sometimes reioyce in ciuile companie, as iust occasion should fall out. pag, 264,



ARTIC. 3.

OF thankessgiuing, before their refections. pag. 265
Three degrees of thankfulnesse. ibid.
In token of thankfulnesse, euery one must say one Pater noster, before and after euery refection at the least. ibid
Our life doth not only depende vpon the common vse of naturall things, but vpon the will of God, pa. 266
It is a great comfort in our greatest extreamitie, daily to consider, and firmely to beleeue, that our heauenly Father, is so potent, that he can as well susteine and nourish vs without bread, as with it. ibid.
Far greater care hath our Sauiour of those which seeke him, then they can haue of themselues. pag. 267



ARTIC. 4.

OF rendring thanks after each refection. pag. 268
The more benefits that we receaue, the more are we obliged to shew our selues, thankfull for them ibid.
Great hurt commeth from ingratitude. ibid
By ingratitude, men become worse then bruite beasts. pag. 269
It is no smale fault for a man to shew himselfe vnthankful for the benfits
 receiued from the hands of God. ibid.
The example of the holy Saincts, doe sufficiently testifie, that it is a thing lawful for married persons, by mutual consent, to vow chastitie. pag. 276
S. Aug. alleageth that act of the glorious Virgin, and Ioseph, for an example. ibid.
S. Paulinus also with his wife Therasia. ibid.
The like is written of S. Edward our King. ibi.
Chastitie is triple. The first of married persons. The second of Widdowes. The third, of Virgins. pag. 277
Virginitie doeth so farre excell matrimony, as heauen doth surpasse the earth and asmuch as angels doe exceed men. ibid.
Mariage filleth the earth, Virginitie Paradise. ibid.
The blessed Apostles, and holy Fathers, haue all laboured, to induce chaste Virgins, to dedicate by vowe their Virginitie vnto God. pag. 278
To doe a good deede, by vowe, is more meritorious. ibid.
Great benefites doth Virginitie reape, by the vow thereof. pag. 279
A sinne which proceedeth from a will, setled vnto euil, is farre worse then that which commeth of frailtie. ibid.
So that deede which is done with a minde and will, setled in God, is far better then that which wanteth the stabilitie.
 ibid.
They which vowe virginall chastitie, vidual, or single life, do more specially enioy all our priuiledges and spiritual fauours. pag. 280



ARTIC. 5.

OF corporal exercises. pag. 280
Nothing is more pretious, then time, which God hath lent vs, to worke our saluation. ibid.
They are much deceaued, which thinke that the time of this momentary life is lent vnto the^ to passe it in vaine pleasures. ibid.
S. Francis did giue himselfe vnto bodely labour, and commanded that all his Brethren should doe the like. pag. 281
Women in our Ladies bandes, must insteed of other exercises, employ themselues as much as they can conueniently in feruente prayer. pag, 282
One of the principal caueats, which the holy fathers haue giuen, is to auoyde idlenesse pag. 293
Our Sauiour himselfe for our example, was most carefull to spende his whole time, for our good. ibid.
His blessed Mother, vsed no lesse diligence therin. ibid.
Our most vertuous Queene Katherine, imitating the Queene of Angels, did spende her whole time in the seruice of God. ibid.
S. Clare in all her sickenesse, loste no time. pag. 284

S. Lewes King of France, dedicated his whole time to the seruice of God, and good of his Realme. ibid.
Great benefites are not graunted for smale trifles. pag. 285
Euery one of this Order must doe something dailie, when hee may conueniently. ibid.
It is not the greatnesse of the deede, but the affection of the hearte, which is most regarded. pa. 286
The weake, and such as are able to doe little, yet if their affection be great, their rewarde shall be answerable. ibid.
Whilest life lasteth, wee muste be carefull to spende our whole time in (...) vertuous and profitable exercises. pag. 287
The greatnesse of our recompence, proceedeth from the rightnesse of our intention. pag. 288
No lesse diligence ought to be vsed in directing our intententions, then in the doing of our actions. ibid
A worthy example of the Emperour Octauian. ibid
No almes is more pleasing vnto God, then what is giuen out of the labour of thy owne handes. p. 289.



ARTIC. 6.

OF the dyet of the labourers. pag. 290
A man ought to haue as great care to comforte the poore labourer, as the riche potentate ibi.

The labourer may eate three times in the day, when hee laboureth in the Summer. ibi.
The labourer and seruant, may as much merite by his faithful seruice, as his maister by his almes deedes and praier. pag. 291



ARTIC. 7.

LAbourers in other mens houses, may lawfully eate, as other Catholikes do. pa. 292
As Sathan did ouercome our first Parents, by the forbidden meate, so by gluttonie, doeth hee seeke to ouerthrowe vs dailie. pag. 293
Gluttony hurteth both body and soule, ibid.
Many great hurts proceed from that vice. ibid.
Our Sauiour himselfe gaue a heauy curse vnto the gluttons ibid.
Temperance is profitable, both for body and soule. pag. 294
Abstinence is a thing necessarie for al persons, but especially for the brethren and Sisters, which make profession of Penance. ibid.




Chapter VI.

OF Confession and receauing. pag. 195
In the primitiue Church, the Christians did frequent the blessed Sacrament, once euery weeke, at the least. pag. 297
S. Francis desireth, to inflame againe the harts of many, which at length were growen to be very colde. ibid.

A generous minde is rather led by sweetnesse, then drawen by force. ibid.
By spirituall receauing, much grace may bee gained. ibid.
They cannot but be much pleasing vnto our heauenly Father, which doe by this Sacrament, oft vnite themselues vnto his louing Sonne. ibid.
An example of Elzearius, most worthy to be followed. pag. 299
No lesse is the example of our most vertuous Queene Katherine. pag. 300


ARTIC 2.

OF the preparation against high feasts pag. 300
Against high Feasts, men ought to make a great preparation. ibid.
Necessary counsaile, concerning Confession. ibi.




Chapter VII.

THat they ought not to weare weapons of offence. pag. 301
The chiefest weapon against all iniures, is patience. pag. 302
It is much better to suffer great iniuries for the loue of God, without murmuring, then to feede dailie a 100. poor people, or to fast thy selfe for many daies togeather. ibid.
If thou ouercome thy self, thou shalt eassily ouercome all thy enemies. ib.
The more that a man murmureth, so much the more doeth he vexe
 and burden himselfe. pag. 303.
By patience and wel-doing, thou shalt best ouercome and reuenge thy selfe of thy enemies ibid
The best meanes for one to reuenge himselfe of his enimies, is to shew himselfe to be a good and honest man. pag. 304
Euen: As wee caste a crust of bread to stop a dogges mouth which barketh against vs. So against euil desposed persons, let vs cast our prayers, that they may be stopped from these euils. ibid.
All such as desire to raigne with Christ in glory, must endeauour to imitate his holy maner of reuenging. pag. 305



Chapter VIII.

OF saying the Canonicall howres. pag. 305
The soule which giueth not it selfe vnto prayer, is dead and stinketh before the face of God. pag. 308
As water is life vnto the fish, so is prayer vnto the soule. ibid.
S. Francis did dedicate vnto prayer, not onely his heart and bodie, but in like manner, all his workes and time. ibid
The Cleargie, by saying the Romaine Breuiarie, doe discharge the offiice of the Rule. pag. 309
The Laietie, which can read, by saying the
 Office of our blessed Lady. pag. 310
The others, by deuoutly meditating, in saying of their beades, at their wi^l. ibid.
The maner how, by the the bonde of the Rule, and constitution of the order, they are to say, their diuine office. pag. 311.


ARTIC. 1.

WHat office euerie one is to saye. pag. 909



ARTIC. 2.

O^ saying their office in due time. p. 312
At what time they ought to say their office. ibid
The coustome is to rise as early in the morning as their health, with conueniency will permit them. ibid.
It were a great shame that the litle birds, being diligent timely to praise their Creator: man should be slouthful in his seruice ibid.
S. Aug. saieth, that it is a thing very vndecent, that the Sunne should be vp, and man in his bedde. pag. 313
Too much sleepe hurteth both body and soule ibid.
To rise early, is not onely profitable for the soule, but also for the health both of body and mind. ibid.
The morning is the principal time, to get diuine consolation, and food of the soule. p. 214
The gathering of Manna, in the morning, was a signe thereof. ibid.
The reason of the institution
 of the seuen canonicall houres. p. 315
What are the times for publike prayer, for what wee ought to praye in the morning. ibid,
Morning and euening we ought to haue a speciall care, what wee haue done, or are to doe. pag. 316
Though wee ought to be diligent at al times in prayer, yet specially in the morning and euening. ibid.
Order in doing, causeth euery good thing to bee the better. ibid.
Cursed is he which doeth the seruice of God, negligently. ibid.
S. Francis was only Christs secretary, in writing of his rules. ibid.



ARTIC. 3.

OF comming vnto publike prayers. pa. 317
In Aduent and Lent, the Brethren and Sisters must be prese^t at mattins, in their parishes or Chappels, if they may conueniently. pag. 318
A multitude is sooner heard, and doth often obtaine that, which one alone cannot. ibid.
There is euer more comforte and merite to be gained, at the publike seruce of Christ, then in our other particular actions. ibid.
A Communualty is to be preferred before all singularitie. ibid.
Sondaies and holy-dayes are dedicated vnto God
 particularly, therefore in the^ euery one ought to performe more actes of deuotion, then other daies. pag. 319




Chapter IX.

OF making their will. pag. 320
He which desireth to attaine vnto perfection, must allienate his mind from all those things, which may hinder him in the seruice of God. ibid.
Euery brother* and sister, which may conueniently, must make their wil within three moneths, after their entrance, at the farthest. 321
Sicknesse is the speedie messenger of God, to inuite all persons to make present repaire vnto him. pag. 322
Feruor in religion, is commonly very great at the first. pag. 323
As time encreaseth, so not seldome doth deuotion decrease. ibid.
They which die intestate, not onely doe depriue their soules of great co^forts which it might haue had, but oftentimes, in steed thereof, heape vp great paines and heauy curses. ibid.
Great hurt commeth vnto the soule of him which dyeth without making of a wil.
The soule must render a strict account, for the good deedes which it omitted to doe, when it might. pag. 324
Euery one ought to settle his affaires in such fort that hee may alwaies
 stand ready for death, considering that the hower thereof is most vncertaine. ibid
Many sentences, shewing the vncertainty thereof. ibid.
The place where a man shal die, is vncertaine. pag. 326
Neither is there any more certainty of the maner and kinde of death. ibi.
No lesse vncertaine is the estate, wherin the poore soule standeth, which is not prepared for death. pag. 327
To preuent these harmes, and vncertainties. S. Francis exhorteth the^ to prepare them for death, by making their will in time. ibid
As death is not fearefull vnto those which are vnprouided: so is it most comfortable for the^ which haue made due preparation for it. pag. 328
Many similitudes, and sentences, to prooue it. ibi.
By the benefite of death, wee are recalled from banishment, into our owne countrey. ibid.
To the louers of the world death is most feareful, but to such as loue God and desire his company, it is most ioyful. ibi.
Example in S. Paul. ibid.
Happy is hee which standeth alwaies reddy for death. pag. 329
That soule which hath deuoutly serued our Sauiour, hee will neuer leaue him without co^fort in his greatest agonies. ibid.
The soule which is well prepared, the celestiall
 spirits are readdy to meete it, at her departure, out of this corruptible bodie. p. 330
Heauen is a place where wee should lay vp our treasure, and sende our gifts from al parts of our bodie. ibid
They which make not their will in time, s^a^d in great danger, that it shal neuer be fulfiled. ib
We must doe our best to purchase the kingdome of heauen our selues, and not leaue others to doe it for vs. pag. 331
Note how heauen is to be purchased. ibid
Some giue all their goods, to buye it; others purchase it, with halfe their inheritance. ibid.
Neither are the poorest left without meanes to buy it, when by goodwil, and earnest desire a man may obtaine it. pag. 332
The reason wherefore, a man should euery halfe yeare renew his wil. ib
Often making of a mans will, causeth in him a perpetual memorie of death. pag. 333
The dailie remedie of death, not onely doeth preserue a man from sinne, but inuiteth him vnto vertue also. ibid.
Hee which remembreth that he must die, contemneth what is here present, and hasteneth vnto that which is to come hereafter. ibid.



Chapter X.

COncerning peace. pag. 334
The holy Ghost doth not power his grace, but wher is co^cord and peace. ib
 Our Sauiour did much esteeme of peace. p. 335
As Christ brought peace at his comming into the world, so did hee leaue it vnto vs at his departure. ibid.
An exhortatio^ vnto peace ibid.
A parable wherein is shewed, that none shal be forgiuen by God, which doeth not forgiue all others. p. 336
What hee must doe which offered the iniurie. ibid.
How the Ministers must proceede to make peace. pag. 337



Chapter XI.

HOw iniuries are to be redressed. 3^8
A comparison, betweene a natural body, and a spiritual. pag. 339
When S. Francis would haue the Ministers to see that all wrongs were righted. ibid.
The Apostolical letters of Gregorious the 9. in the behalfe of the Br. and Sisters. ibid
The like of Sextus the 4. 200. yeares after pag. 341



Chapter XII.

OF oathes. p. 342
Our Sauiour exhorteth all men to auoide all kinde of oathes. pa. 343
How a man may sweare and when. ibid.


ARTIC. 2.

OF common talke. page. 344.
Many doe little regarde, whether their oathes be true or false. ibid.
A worthy example of S.
 Elzearius. p. 345
A little penance, voluntarily done here, maketh better satisfaction, then a far greater else where. ibid
From many words proceed vaine oaths. p. 346
Idle words are the beginning, and cause of many sinnes. ibid
What hurte proceedeth from many wordes. ibi.
A man ought to haue a great care of his wordes, before he pronounce them. pag. 347
He which is giuen to many wordes, seldome commeth to true perfection. ibid
Nature it selfe induceth vs to silence. ibid.
Great benefits commeth from silence, pag. 348
From much speech, proceede many lyes. ibid.
By multiplicity of wordes, a man sheweth his owne folly. ibid.
A foole by houlding his peace, is often taken for a wise man. p. 349
An idle worde, is that which is vttered without the profite of the hearer or speaker. ibid
Many words shew a great pride in the speaker. ib.
As silence is the beginning of good discipline, so much speech is the gate of deuotion. p. 350



ARTIC. 3.

OF penance for idle wordes, after the due examination of our conscie^ce. pa. 351
Why S. Francis did not set downe here any penance for other sins. ib.
The soule must render an accounte of euery idle worde. pag. 352
God wil punish the verie
 sinnes of omission with hell fire. ibid
Example hereof, in the vnprofitable seruant. Mat. 25. ibid.
It is not enough for one to do no euil. p. 353
Hee which omitteth to bring foorth good fruit when he should, shalbe cast into hell. ibid
Euery one ought at night to examine himselfe, what good hee hath done that day. p. 354
A necessarie rule to be followed. ibid
Whereof one ought to make this daily examination of his conscience. ibid
First, concerning the gifts wherewith his soule is adorned. pag. 355
2. Of corporall benefites bestowed vpon our corruptible body. ibid.
3. About the temporall goods which God hath lent vs. pag. 356
By this daily examinatio^, a man must make him selfe ready for that great and strict accou^t to be made befor God. ib
Examples shewing, howe needfull it is for euery one to make daily his accounts reddy. p. 357
What is the duty of a true Christian. ibid.
How, and when euery one ought to make this daily examinatio^. p. 359
A sincere conscience, is the true friende vnto the soule. ibid
What is the common custome, of many worldly friendships. ibid
At the dreadfull iudgement day, al the courte of heauen, cannot helpe that soule which dyed in mortall sinn. p. 359
The daily exercise of euery
 good christian. ibid
The good resolution which euery one ought to make daily. ibid
A worthy instruction of S. Chrysost.
The meanes how to finde fauour before the iust iudge of the worlde. pag. 362



ARTIC. 4.

OF the care of ones familie. p. 362
In the kingdome of heauen, there is no differe^ce of persons, but according vnto their memerits. ibid
A true comfort for faithful seruants. ibid
The meanes for maisters to make good serua^ts. ib
Example of Abraham and Loth. ibid
Absolon is but too much example of bad maisters. pag. 363
The cause of so many bad seruants now a-daies. ibid.
It is a great fault for a maister, to be carelesse of the principal good of his seruants. p. 364
A Worthy example of S. Elzearius for all maisters to followe. pag. 365.




Chapter XIII.

OF hearing Masse, and making the Congregation. pag 366
Examples doe more moue then wordes. pag. 367
The lesser, by the instinct of nature, doe followe the example of the greater. pag. 368
Great benefits are reaped daily, by hearing Masse deuoutly. ibid
A worthy sentence, of S. Anselme pag. 369

Many particuler benefites Frist, encrease of grace. ib.
Second, remission of temporall paine, due vnto sinnes. ibid.
Third, One obteineth, with more ease what he demandeth. pa. 370
Fourth, Hee exerciseth 3. principal actes of vertue. ibid
Fift. He may daily receaue Christ spiritually. ibid.
How to receaue spiritually. ibid.
The internall action of the will, is the substance of al our works. pag. 371
What euery one ought to doe, which cannot be present at Masse. ib.
Howe a man ought to behaue himselfe, at Masse. ibid.
In time of Masse, they which can, ought rather to employ themselues in meditating, them in vocal prayer pag. 372.
How great is the merit of meditating, vpon the passion of Christe. pag. 373
What one ought to meditate vpon, in the time of Masse. ibid
The affection of the heart, is more regarded, then either the manner or multitude of prayers. pag. 374
Christ in his passio^ shewed all maner of praying. ibid.
It profiteth little to praye with the mouth, if the heart be altogeather distracted p. 376
Sinne hindereth our prayers from being heard. pag. 377
What we ought to doe to make our prayers acceptable before God.

First, wee must wash our handes cleane, with the fountaine of teares. ibi.
Secondly, our voice and hart must go togeather. ibi.
A necessary caueat. ibid
It is not the sweetnesse which we finde in in prayer, that mamaketh it more metorious, but the loue and affectio^ to God. p. 379
Thirdly, we must pray with our handes, by doing good workes. ibi.
As the ^ewes vexed Christ in the house of Pilate* so doe many nowe. pag. 380
A good caueat. ibid.


ARTIC 2.

OF their monethly assembly. p. 381
Euery one must endeuour to learne whatsoeuer he can conueniently, as wel as if he were present at these monethly assemblies. ibid,
To pray for our Brethren is a spiritual almes. pag. 382
That prayer is most acceptable to God, which is not forced by necessity, but commanded by spiritual charitie ibid.
How much the more deuoutly a man prayeth for a nother, so much the sooner shall he be heard for himselfe. ib.
What the Brethren or Sisters, which liue, alone should doe. ibid.



ARTIC. 3.

OF their monethly almes. p. 383
God doth not so much reregarde the greatnes of the gift, as the good will of the giuer. ibid.
Great was their charitie in the primitiue Church pag. 384
The charity of the Prophet
 Abdias was very great, yet greater was Gods care, to recompence his family for it in this life. ibid
The first minister of this third Order it self* was a lawyer, called Mr. Bartholowe. pag. 385
In distributing their almes chiefe regard ought to be had, of the reliefe of their owne brethren and Sisters. pag, 386
It is a perpetual comforte, that the brethren and sisters, are sure to be relieued, in their necessitie, if they deserue it. ibid
A worthy example of the Emperour Octauian. pag. 386
Many special places out of S. Luke, concerning almes-giuing. pag 388
Christ by his owne examample, taught vs to shewe mercie to all sorts of people. ibid
An euil example, is nowe helde as a law, but a good, few wil followe, pag. 389
Many particular benefites proceede from Almes-giuing. ibid
1. First, it obteineth mercy. ibid
2. It extinguisheth sinne. pag. 390
3. It enricheth the giuer. ibid.
4. God hath great care of the posterity of the Almes-giuer. ibid
How almes must be giuen to reape benefite by it. ibid.
Almes is compared vnto seede. pa. 393
The almes-giuer, bestoweth the fruites of the earth, and getteth heauen, and other many profitable excha^ges. ib

1. Hee which helpeth others in their tribulatio^s, deserueth to haue helpe in his necessity. pag. 395
2. Their prayers, shalbe soone heard, but not of the contrary ibid
3. They shal enioy life eeuerlasting. ibid
Weigh in equal ballance and consider, whether the spiritual benefites are not farre greater, then the temporall losses. pag. 396
The almes-giuer, looseth nothing at al. ibid
God doeth not onely reward him, in the life to come, but here also. ibi.
God bestoweth many te^porall benefites vpon him. pag 397
Example in the poore widowe. ibid.
Let euery man examine himselfe how he beleueth beleeueth al this aforesaid. ibid
The vnmerciful hath no way to excuse himselfe. pag. 398
God which hath a care of al his creatures, wil neuer see the^ want, which feede the poore. p. 399
What is done vnto the poore, God reputeth it as done vnto himself. ib
Though it be good to giue almes, and leaue to be giuen at the hower of death* yet is it far better for one to giue it in his life time. pag. 399
Great is the rewarde, for almes-gifts. p. 400



ARTIC. 4.

OF hearing monethly sermons. p. 400
The worde of God is the beginning and roote of all blessednesse. ibid

Penance is both a meanes to preserue from all euils, and to make satisfaction for what is past. pag. 401
God did not cal S. Francis and his Children for their owne good onely, but for the good of many. pag. 403




Chapter XIIII.

OF the sicke, and such as die. pag. 404
What thou wouldest haue done vnto thee, doe thou vnto another. pag. 406
Christ had a great care of the sick. ibid
What Christ taught others to doe, he did it first himselfe. ibid.
It is a thing most meritorious, to helpe the sicke and infirme. pag. 407
Health is more pretious then any temporal riches. pag. 408
Charity doth shew it selfe most charitably, in relieuing and healping the sicke. pag. 409


ARTIC. 2.

OF visiting the sicke pag 410
The Ministers are particularly bounde to visite the sicke, or send some oother, if hee cannot come, or be not a priest. ibid.
Sinne, is oftentimes cause of sicknesse. p. 411
Great hurt commeth of the abuse which is daily vsed and little regarded, in ordinary talke, by detractions. pag. 412.
God doth seldome punish his true seruants with suddaine death. ibid.
God visiteth his deare friendes also with sicknesse. pag. 413

A similitude of the harde iron. pag. 414
By perfect compassion on our neighbour, wee are made Christs true me^bers. ibid
S. Paule had great compassion on the sicke persons. pag. 415
In al sicknesse and afflictions, wee must cast our chiefe care and confidence on God pag. 416
They which put their trust in others then in God, are oftentimes deceaued. ibid.
A great comforte for the brethren and Sisters, that in time of sicknesse, they are sure to to be visited and prouided for. pag. 4^7
A question howe this prouisio^ should be made. ib
Our Sauiour was the instructor and director of S. Francis, in the institution of al the 3. Orders, pag. 4^8
The meanes how the brethren should be relieued. ibid
A special cause why al the Brethren and Sisters, are required to be personally present, at the burials of the brethren and Sisters. ibid.
What benefite the brethre^ and sisters do reape the^ selues by their assista^ce. pag. 420
The daily memory of death, is both a preseruatiue from sinne, and an inducement vnto vertue. ibid.
Note what the sepulchres and graues doe shewe. pag. 421
Many benefites proceede from the daily memory of death. ibid.
1. It maketh a man to contemne the vanities
 of the world. pag. 422
2. It maketh appeare, what life is, for that life, seemeth faire vntil death come to consume it. ibid
3. It preserueth a man fro^ the false deceits of this world. ibid
4. It serueth a man to consider, that as from ashes hee came, so to earth be must returne. ibid.
By the casting of the feathers into the place of ashes, we are admonished, what wee should doe. ibid
Hee which exerciseth the worke of mercy, in burying the dead, shall finde fauour and mercy at Gods hands. ibid.
Examples in the olde testament. ibid
Exa^ples in the new. p. 423



ARTIC. 3

OF their prayers for the dead 424
Amongst the workes of mercy spirituall, that is most meritorious which doth comfort the soule. ibid.
The general absolution at the houer of death. pag. 425
The same absolution at the hower of death. pag. 425
The same absolution is to be giuen also vnto those which are of the confraternity of the Girdle of S. Francis p. 426
They which liue in the world may if they wil helpe themselues in time. p. 427
The soules in Purgatory, though they cannot helpe themselues, yet may bee helped by others. ibid

The reasons why the souls in purgatory may be helped. 1. They did merite it, whilest they yet liued. pag. 428
2. They which die in charitie, are made partakers of all good deedes, that are done.
3. They being members of the Church, are partakers of all the graces, which proceede from Christ the head therof. pag. 429
A comparison, betweene the corporal and spiritual body. ibid
The brethren and Sisters are bounde to helpe the soules of their brethren and Sisters. ibid
1. By the bond of loue. ibid
2. By the right of confraternity. ibid
A true friend loueth alwaies, and at al tims p. 4^9



ARTIC. 4.

OF their prayers, for all in general, both liuing and dead. p 424
Of the excellency of prayer. ibid.
As the precedent praiers were to bee said for euery one in particuler, so the other following, are to be said, for al in generall. pag 430
The times when these generall prayers are to be said. ibid
He doth a thing most pleasing vnto God, which prayeth for the conuersio^ of a sinner. p. 432




Chapter XV.

OF the officers. p 432
Office and benefice do most commonly followe each other pag. 433
The whole Church of God doth pray for al such as are in lawful authoritie and office of Collectors. pa. 434

The Collectour is to keepe faithfully such Almes as is giuen vnto this Congregation, that it may be employed, for the comforte of the poore, ibid.
The burdens of the order, are to be borne by euery one alike, that is fitting. ibid



Chapter. XV.

OF the visitation and correction. p. 436
As the Ministers are to visite and looke vnto others monethly, so in the visitation, are they to be visited and looked vnto ibid. ibid.
A worthy deuout coustome of the primitiue Churche. pag. 440
The intention of S. Francis in instituting this order of visitation. ibi.
The bad inclination of the flesh, seeketh still to draw the soule down. ib
A co^pariso^ of the clock. ibi.
The brethren of a Congregation, must be like vnto the wheeles of a clocke. pag. 441
Euery one must doe some penance, if he bee negligent to say his office in due time. ibid.
Euery night they must both daily examine their conscience, and make satisfaction for the negligences of that daye, ibid
What it is to visite. p. 442
By reason that the number of our order was but smale at the first, S. Francis did not giue expresse commandement, that the Visitor should be one of his order. ibid
Nicolaus the 4. did first only counsaile, but afterwardes
 strictly co^manded, that the Visitor should be a Franciscan Priest. pag. 443
Although Sextus the 4. from a poore Franciscan, was called to the highest dignitie, yet did he not forget this poore familie. pag. 444
Childre^ of one family will be euer more carefull of the good therof, the^ other strangers. ibid.
Sextus the 4. did subiect al of this third order, vnto the gouernement of the Fathers, of our Order. ibid.


ARTIC. 2

THe reason wherefore none but a Priest may be the Visitor, pag. 445



ARTIC. 3.

OF the time of the visitation. p. 446
What helpes the monethly assemblies did yeelde vnto the Brethren and Sisters. ibid
The cause that now euery ha^fe yeare visitatitions are made, and the benefits proceeding fro^ them. pag 447
A laudable custome of the auncient Christia^s. ibi.
An imitation of the custome, in renewing oftentimes former deuoute promises. ibid.
Great benefites proceede from often renewing of vowes made vnto God. pag. 448
The renewing of a vowe, of any good work makes it not onely more acceptable, but also fortifieth the will to doe it more courageously. ib
The gift is made the greater, by giuing of it, by a
 continual vewe. ibid
The Prophet Dauid counselleth, to make vowes. pag. 449
The Apostles, after they were co^firmed in grace counsailed and induced many to make the vow of virginity. ibid
S. Matthew induced Iphiginea, to vow virginitie. ibid
The rest of the Apostles did the like vnto many, as I haue declared at large in the 5. chap. and 5. Article.



ARTIC. 4.

OF the expulsion of incorrigible persons. pag. 450
For heresie, or disobedience, they are chiefly to be expelled out of this congregation. ibid
What great hurt, and how many benefits they loose which are expelled. pag. 451
What benefite they receaue, which perseuer in the order. ibid
All conuenient meanes must be vsed, to bring the sinner to bee penitent. ibid
What estimation is to be made of the wordes of the Church pag. 452
Next vnto heresie, disobedience, bringeth the greatest hurt vnto this whole Congregation. ibid




Chapter XVII.

OF auoyding strifes, betweene themselues and others p. 453
What profite proceedeth from peace. p. 454
Howe great hurt proceedeth from discord. ibid
The course which must be
 taken for the righting of all wrongs ibid.



Chapter XVIII.

IN what manner, and who may dispence in abstinences and fastings. pag. 457
A special comfort for the weake and infirme sorte of the brethren and sisters. ibid
Whosoeuer hath an earnest desire to doe what he is wel able to doe, it is sufficient. p. 458
The good wil and intention, are the principall causes, of the merit of our actions. ibid
The internall acte of the wil, is the substance of all our works. pag. 459
A special remedie, to take away all occasions of scruples, from the brethren and sisters. p. 460



Chapter. XIX.

THe very Ministers, ought to declare, vnto the visitors, the manifest faults of the Brethren and sisters. pag. 460.
A little fault is greatly noted in one that professeth any perfection. pag. .461
How the Visitors ought to proceede in correcting of offenders pag. 462
Sinns not corrected in time, doe growe verie greate, pag. 463
The punishers, may debarre the offenders, but not quite expell them. ibid.




Chapter XX.

HOwe in all these aforesaid thinges, no man is bound to mortal sinne. pag 465
The custome of worldlings is to present their beste first, and to keepe the worst last. pag. 466
S, Francis doeth the contrary. ibid
Most comfortable is this rule, where there is no difficulty to obserue it. or danger of sinne, in breaking of it. ibid.
A manifest proofe, that no point of this rule bindeth, vnder the paine of a mortal sin. p. 467
The vowe which is made in this order, doeth not binde, but vnder the paine of a venial sinne. pag, 468
In vowes, the intention of him which voweth is more to be regarded the^ the wordes. pa. 469
The merit by making this vowe, is doubled, and the danger of falling into a mortal sinn is made lesse. ibid
What they ought to doe in confession, which breake any of the commandements of God. p. 470
Not onely must wee with prompt humility, accept of penance, but also fu fil it effectually. pa. 471
The confirmation of the rule. pag. 472
Honorius 3, confirmed this rule, only viua voce. ibid.
Nicol. 4. to stop the mouth of alenuious persons, did confirme it with his Apostolical briefe. p. 473
This rule ^a secure means to saluation, vnto al that follow it sincerely. p. 474

FINIS.
Laus Deo beatissimae que Matri eius, and humilimo seruo suo, Sancto Francisco.

