


AN EPISTLE OF A RELIGIOVS PRIEST VNTO his father: exhorting him to the perfect forsaking of the world.
TO THE WORSHIPFVL his very good father, R. S. his dutifull sonne R. S. wisheth all happines.
IN childre^ of former ages, it hath bene thought so behofull a point of dewty to theire parents, in presence by seruiceable offices, in absence by other affectuall significa^ions, to yeld proofe of their thankfull mindes, that neither any child could omitte it, without touch of
vngratfulnes, nor the parents forbeare it without iust displeasure. But now we are falne into such calamitye of times, and the violence of heresy hath so crossed the course, both of vertew and nature, that their ingraffed lawes, neuer infringed by the most sauage and brute creatures, ca^not of Gods people without perill be obserued. I am not of so vnnaturall a kind, of so wilde education, or so vnchristian a spirite, as not to remember the roote out of which I braunched, or to forget my secondary maker and auctor of my being: It is not the carelesnes of a colde affection, nor the want of a dew and reuerent respect, that hath made me such a stranger to my natiue home, and so slacke in defraying the debt of a thankfull minde, but onely the iniquity of our daies,
that maketh my presence perillous and the discharge of my dewty an occasion of daunger. I was loth to enforce an vnwelcome courtesy vp on any, or by seming officious, to become offensiue, deeming it better to let time digest the feare, that my return into the realme had bred in my kindred, then apruptly to intrude my selfe, to purchase theire anger, whose good will I so highly esteemed. I neuer doubted, but that the beliefe, which to all my frendes by descent and petegree is in maner hereditary, framed in the^ a righte perswasion of my present calling, not suffering them to measure their censures of me, by the vgly termes, and odious Epitheetes, wherwith heresy hath sought to discredite my function, but rather by the reuerence of so worthy a Sacrament,
and the sacred doome of all former ages. Yet because I might verye easely perceiue by apparent coniectures, that many were more willing to heare of me, then from me, and readier to praise, then to vse my endeuours, I haue hitherto bridled my desire to see them, with the care and ielosy of their saftye, and banishing my selfe from the sent of my cradle, in my owne country I haue liued like a forreiner, finding emong strangers that, which in my neerest bloode I presumed not to seeke. But now considering, that delay may haue qualified feare, and knowing my person onely to import daunger to others, and my per swasion to none but to my selfe, I thought it highe time to vtter my sincere and duetifull minde, and to open a vent to my zealous affection,
which I haue so long smothered and suppressed in silence. For not onely the originall lawe of nature, written in all childrens harts, and deriued from the bowells and brestes of their mothers, is a continuall soliciter vrging me in your be halfe, but the souereigne decree enacted by the father of heauen, ratified by his sonne, and daily repeated by instincte of the holy ghost, bindeth euery child in the dew of Christianitye, to tender the estate and welfare of his parentes, and is a motiue, that alloweth no excuse, but of necessity presseth to performance of dewty. Nature by grace is not abolished, but perfited, not murdered, but manured, neither are her impressions quite rased, or annulled, but suted to the colours of faith and vertew. And if her affections
be so forcible, that eue^ in hell where rancour and despite chiefly reigneth, and all feeling of goodnes is ouerwhelmed in malice, they moued the rich glutton by experience of his owne misery to carry the lesse enuy to his kinred: how much more in the Church of God, where grace quickneth, charity enflameth, and natures good inclinations are abettered by supernaturall giftes, ought the duety of piety to preuaile. And who but more merciles then damned creatures, could see their deerest frendes plunged in the like perill, and not to be wounded with deepe remorse of their lamentable and imminent hazardes? If in beholding a mortall enemy wroung and tortured with deadly pangues, the toughest harte softeneth with some sorow: If the most frozen and
fierce minde cannot but thawe and melte with pity, euen when it seeth the worst miscrea^t suffer his deserued torments: how much lesse can the hart of a childe, consider those that bredd him into this world, to be in the fall to farr more bitter extremities, and not bleed with griefe of their vncomfortable case. Surely for my owne parte, though I chalenge not the prerogatiue of the best disposition, yet am I not of so harshe and currish an humour, but that it is a continuall corrasiue, and crosse vnto me, that wheras my endeuours haue reclaimed many fro^ the brincke of perditio^, I haue bene least able to employ them, where they were most dew, and barred fro^ affordinge to my deerest frendes, that which hath ben eagerly sought and beneficially obtained of mere
strangers. Who hath more interest in the grape then he that planted the vine? who more right to the cropp the^ he that sowed the corne? or how can the child owe so greate seruice to any, as to him who^e he is indebted vnto for his very life and being? With yong Tobye I haue trauailed farre, and brought home a freight of spirituall substance, to enrich you, and medicinable receites against your ghostlye maladyes. I haue with Esau after long toile in pursuing a painfull chase, returned with such pray as you were wonte to loue, desiring therby to procure your blessing. I haue in this generall famine of all true and Christian food, with Ioseph prepared abundance of the bread of Angells, for the repast of your soule. And now my desire is that my drugges may
cure you, my pray delight you, and my prouision feed you, by whom I haue bene cured, delighted, and fedd my selfe, that your courtesies may in parte be counteruailed, and my ducty in some sorte performed. Despise not good Sir the youth of your sonne, neither deeme that god measureth his endouments by number of yeeres. Hoary senses are often couched vnder greene lockes, and some are riper in the springe, then others in the Autumne of their age. God chose not Isai him selfe, nor his eldest sonne, but yong Dauid to conquere Golias and to rule his people. Not the most aged person, but Daniel the most innocent infant deliuered Suzanna from the iniquity of the iudges: and Christ at twelue yeares of age, was found in the temple questioning with the
grauest Doctors. A true Elias can conceiue, that a little cloude may cast a large and abu^dant shower, and the scripture teacheth vs, that God reuealeth to little ones that which he concealeth from the wisest Sages. His truth is not abased by the minority of the speaker, who out of the mouthes of infantes and sucklinges can perfit his praises. Timothy was yong, and yet a principall pastour. S. Ihon not olde and yet an Apostle, yea and the Angels by appearing in youthfull semblances, giue vs a pregnant proofe, that many glorious giftes may be shrouded vnder tender shapes. All which I alledge, not to claime any priuiledge surmounting the rate of vsuall habilities, but to auoid all touch of presumption in aduising my elders, seing that it hath the warrant
of scripture, the testimony of examples, and sufficient groundes both in grace and nature. There is diuersity in the degrees of our carnall consanquinity, and the preminence appertaineth to you, as superiour ouer your childes body. Yet if you consider our alliance in the chiefe portion, I meane our foule, which discerneth man from inferiour creatures, we are of equall proximity to our heauenly father, both descended of the same parent, and no other distance in our degrees, but that you are the elder brother. In this sense doth the scripture saye, Call not any father vpon earth, for one is your father which is in heauen. Seing therfore that your superiority is founded vpon flesh and blood, which are in maner but the barke and rine of a man, and our
equality vppon the soule, which is mans maigne substance, thinke it I praye you no dishonour to your age, or disparagement to your person, If with all humility I offer my aduise vnto you. One man cannot be perfect in all faculties, neither is it a disgrace to the goldsmith, if he be ignorant of the milleners trade. Many are deepe lawiers and yett shallowe Diuines, manye verye de liuer in feates of the body, and curious in externall complementes, yet litle experimented in matters of their soule and farre to seeke in religious actions. I haue studied and practised these many yeeres spirituall phisicke, acquainting my selfe with the beating and temper of euery pulse, and trauailing in the scrutiny of the maladies and medicines in cident vnto soules. If therfore I profer
you the fruits of my long studies and make you a present of my profession, I hope you will construe it rather as a duetifull parte, then any point of presumption. He may be a father to the soule, that is a sonne to the body, and requite the benefit of his te^porall life, by reuiuing his parent from a spirituall death. And to this effect did christ say thes words: my mother, and brethren are they, that do the will of my father which is in heauen: Vpon which place S. Climacus shewing to what kinred a Christian ought chiefly to relye, draweth this discourse. Let him be thy father, that both can and will lay his labour to disburden thee of thy packe of sinnes. Let holy compunction be thy mother, to depure thee from thy ordure and filth. Let him be thy brother, that wilbe both
thy partner and co^peditour to passe and perfite thy race towardes heauen. Take the memory of death for thy perpetuall pheere, and vnseparable spouse. Lett thy children be bitter sighes of a sorowfull harte, and possesse thy body as thy bondman. Fasten thy frendshippe with the Angelicall powers, with which if thou closest in familiar affiance, they will be patrones vnto thee in thy finall passage. This (saieth he) is the generation and kinred of those that seeke God. Such a father as this Sainte speaketh of, maye you haue of your owne sonne, to enter you farther in the fore recited affinity. Of which happely it was a significa^t presage, aboding the future euent, that euen fro^ my infancy you were wont in merime^t to call me father, R. which is the custumary stile
now allotted to my present estate.
Now therfore to ioine issue, and to come to the principall drifte of my discourse, most humbly and earnestly I am to besech you, that both in respect of the honour of God, your duty to his Church, the comforte of your children, and the redres of your owne soule, you wold seriously consider the termes you stand in, and way your selfe in a christian ballance, taking for your cou^terpoise the iudgementes of God. Take heede in time, that the word Thecel writte^ of olde against Baltazar, and interpreted by Daniel, Dan. 5. be not verified in you, whose exposition was: you haue bene poised in the scoale, and found of to lighte weight. Remember that you are in the waining, and the date of your pilgrimage is well nere expired, and
now it behooueth you to looke towardes your country. Your force languisheth, your senses impaire, and your body droupeth, and on euery side the ruinous cottage of your faint and feeble flesh, thretneth fall. And hauing so many herbingers of death to premonishe you of your end, how can you but prepare for so dredfull a stranger. The yonge may dye quickly, but the olde cannot liue long. The yong mens life by casualty may be abridged, but the olde mens by no phisicke can be long adiourned: and therfore if greene yeres sometimes must think of the graue, the thoughtes of sere age should continually dwel in the same. The prerogatiue of infancie is innocency, of childhoode reuerence, of manhood maturity, and of age wisdome. And seeing that
the chiefe properties of wisdome are, to be mindfull of things passed carefull of thinges present, and prouident of thinges to come, vse now the priuiledge of natures talent to the benefitte of your soule, and procure hereafter to be wise in weldoing, and watchfull in foresight of future harmes. To serue the world you are now vnhable, and though you were hable you haue litle cause to be willing, seeing that it neuer gaue you but an vnhappy welcome a hurtfull entertainment, and now doth abandon you with an vnfortunate farewell. You haue long sowed in a field of flint, which could bring you nothing forth, but a crop of cares, and affliction of spirit, rewarding your labours with remorse and affording for your gaine eternall domages. It is now more then
a seasonable time time, to alter the course of so vnthriuing a husba^dry, and to enter into the field of Gods Church, in which sowing the seeds of repentant sorow, and watering them with the teares of humble co^trition, you may reape a more beneficiall haruest, and gather the fruits of euerlasting comforte. Remember I pray you, that your spring is spent, and your somer ouerpast: you are now arriued to the fall of leafe, yea and winter colours haue already stained your hoary head. Be not careles (saieth S. Augustin) though our louing Lorde beare long with offenders. for the longer he staieth not finding amendment, the sorer will he scourge when he cometh to ludgement. and his patience in so long expecting, is onely to lend vs respite to repent, not any way to
enlarge vs leisure to sinne. He that is tossed with varietye of stormes, and cannot come to his desired port, maketh not much way, but is much tormoiled: So he that hath passed many yeeres, and purchased little profitte, hath had a long being, but a shorte life. for life is more to be measured by merittes, the^ by number of daies, seeing that most men by many daies do but procure many deathes, and others in a shorte space attein the life of infinite ages. What is the body without the soule but a corrupte carcase: and what the soule without God, but a sepulcher of sinne. If God be the way, the life, and the truth, he that goeth without him, strayeth: he that liueth without him, dieth: and he that is not taught by him, erreth. Well saieth S. Augustine that God
is our trew and chiefest life, from whome the reuolting is falling, to whome the returninge is rising, in whom the staying is sure standing. God is he, from whom to depart is to dye, to whom to repaire is to reuiue, in whome to dwell is to liue. Be not you therfore of those, that beginne not to liue, vntill they be ready to dye, and then after a foes desert, come to craue of God a frends entertainment. Some thincke to snatch heauen in a moment, which the best scarce atteined in the mou^tenance of many yeeres. and when they haue glutted them selues with worldly delites, they would iumpe fro^ Diues his diet to Lazarus croun, and from the seruice of Satan to the solacy of a Saint. But be you well assured, that god is not so penurious of frendes, as to hold him selfe and
his kingdome salable for the refuse and reuersion of theire liues, who haue sacrificed the principall therof to his enemies, and their owne brutishe appetites, then onely ceasing to offend, when hability of offending is taken from them. True it is, that a theefe may be saued vpon the crosse, and mercy found at the last gaspe. But well saieth saint Augustine that though it be possible, yett is it scarce credible, that his death should find fauour, whose whole life hath earned wrath, and that his repentance should be accepted, that more for feare of hell, and loue of him selfe, then for loue of God or lothsomnes of sinne, crieth for mercy. Wherfore good Sir make no longer delayes, but being so neere the breaking vpp of your mortall house, take time before extremitye
to satisfie Gods Iustice. Though you suffered the bud to be blasted, and the flower to fade, thogh you permitted the fruite to be perished, and the leaues to drye vp, yea though you let the bougheswither, and the body of your tree growe to decaye: yett alas keepe life in the roote, for feare least the wholle become fuell for hell fire. for surely whersoeuer the tree falleth, there shall it be, whether it be to south or north, heaue^ or hell, and such sap as it bringeth such fruit shal it euer bear. Death hath already filed from you the better part of your naturall forces, and hath lefte you now to the lees and remissailes of your wearish and dyinge dayes: the remainder wherof, as it ca^not be long, so doth it warne you speedilye to ransome your former losses. For what is age
but the calendes of death, and what importeth your present weaknes, but an earnest of your approching dissolution? You are now impathed in your finall voiage, and not far of from the stint and period of your course: and therfore be not dispurueied of such appurtenances as are behoofull in so perplexed and perillous a iorney. Death in it selfe is very fearefull, but much more terble in regard of the iudgement that it summoneth vs vnto. If you were layed on your departing bed, burdened with the heauy load of your former trespasses, and goared with the sting and pricke of a festered conscience: If you felt the crampe of death wresting your hart stringes and ready to make the rufull diuorce betweene body and soule: If you lay panting for breath, and swimming
in a colde and fatall sweat, weried with strugling against your deadly panges: O how much wold you giue for an hower of repenta^ce at what rate woulde you valew a dayes contrition. Then worldes would be worthles in respecte of a litle respitte. A shorte truce would seeme more pretious, then the trea sures of Empires. nothing would be so much esteemed as a trice of time, which now by monethes and yeeres is lauishly mispent. O how deeply would it wound your hart, when looking backe into your life you considered many faultes committed and not confessed, manye good workes omitted and not recouered, your seruice to God promised and not performed. How inconsolable were your case, your frends being fled, your senses frighted,
your thoughtes amazed, your memory decaied, your whole mind agast, and no partable to performe that it should, but onely your guilty conscience pestered with sinne, that would co^tinually vpbreid you with most bitter accusations. what woulde you thinke when stripped out of your mortall weed, and turned both out of the seruice and housrome of this world, you were forced to enter into vncouth and stra^ge pathes, and with vnknowen and vgly company to be co^uented before a most seuere iudge, carying in your owne conscience your enditement written, and a perfitte register of all your misdeedes: when you should see him prepared to passe the sentence vpon you, against whom you had transgressed, and the same to be your vmpier, whom by so many
offe^ces you had made your enemy: When not onely the Deuells, but euen the Angells should pleade against you, and your selfe maugre your will be your sharpest appeacher. What would you do in these dredfull exigentes? When you saw that gastly dungeon and huge golfe of hell, breaking out with most fear full flames: Whe^ you saw the weeping and gnashing of teeth, the rage of those hellish monsters, the horrour of the place, the rigour of the paine, the terrour of the company, and the eternity of all these punishmentes, would you then thinke the^ wise, that would daly in so weighty matters, and idly play away the time allotted to preue^t these intollerable calamities? would you the^ account it secure, to nurse in your bosome so many serpents as sinnes,
or to foster in your soule so manye malicious accusers as mortal faltes? Would yo not then thinke one life to little to do penance for so many iniquities, euery one wherof were enough to cast you into those euerlasting and vnspeakable torments? Why then do you not at the least deuote that small remnant and surplusage of these your latter dayes, procuring to make an attonement with God and to free your conscience from such corruption, as by your schisme and fall hath crept into it. Those very eies that read this discourse, and that very vnderstanding that conceiueth it, shalbe sighted and certaine witnesses of the rehearsed thinges. In your owne body shall you experience those dedly agonies, and in your soule shall you feelinglye finde those terrible
feares, yea and your present estate is in danger of the deepest harmes, if you doe not the sooner recouer your selfe into the folde and family of Gods Church. What haue you gotten by being so long customer to the world, but false ware sutable to the shoppe of such a marchant, whose traficke is toile, whose welth trashe, and whose gaine miserye? what interest haue you reaped, that maye equall your decrementes in grace and vertew, or what coulde you find in a vale of teares parageable to the fauour of God, with the losse wherof you were contented to buy it: You cannot be now inueigled with the passions of youth, which making a partiall estimate of thinges sette no distance betweene counterfeite and currant. For they are now worn out of force by tract
of time, or fallen in reproofe by triall of their folly. It cannot be feare that leadeth you amisse, seeing it were to vnfitting a thing, that the craua^t cowardice of flesh and blood, should daunte the prowesse of an intelligent person, who by his wisdome can-not but discerne, how much more cause there is to feare God then man, and to stand in more awe of perpetuall, then of temporall penalties. If it be an vngrounded presumption of the mercy of God, and the hope of his assistance at the last plunge, (the ordinarye lure of the Deuell to reclaime sinners from the pursuite of vertew) it is to palpable a collusio^ to misleade a sound and sensed man, howsoeuer it preuaile with sicke and affected iudgmentes. Who would rely eternall affaires vppon the gliding
slippernes and running streame of our vncertaine life? or who but one of diste^pered wittes, would offer fraud to the decipherer of all thoughtes, with whome dissemble we may to our cost, but to deceiue him it is impossible. Shall we esteeme it cunning to robbe the time from him and bestow it on his enemies, who keepeth tale of the least minutes of our life, and will examine in the end how eche moment hath bene imploied. It is a preposterous pollicy in any wise conceit, to fight against God till our weapons be blunted, our forces consumed, our limmes impotent, and our best spent, and then when we fall for faintnes, and haue fought our selues almost dead to presume of his mercy, the wou^ds both of his sacred body, so often rubbed and renued by our sinnes,
and euery parcell of our owne so sundry and diuerse waies abused, being so many whetstones and incentiues to edge and exasperat his reuenge against vs. It were a stra^ge peece of art, and a very exorbitant course, while the shippe is sound, the Pilote well, the sailers strong, the gale fauourable, and the Sea calme, to lye idle at rode, burning so seasonable wether: and whe^ the ship leaked, the Pilot were sick, the Mariners faint, the stormes boisterous, and the Sea a tormoile of outragious surges, then to lanch forth, to hoise vp sailes, and to set out for a voiage into farre countries. Yett such is the skill of these euening repenters, who though in the soundnes of helth, and in the perfitte vse of reason, they cannot resolue to cut the gables and weigh the anckers,
that with-hold the^ from God, neuerthelesse they feed them selues with a strong perswasion, that whe^ their senses are astonied, their witts distracted, their vnderstanding dusked, and both the body and minde racked and torme^ted with the throbs and gripes of a mortall sicknes, the^ forsooth will they thincke of the weightiest matters, and become sodaine Saintes, when they are scarce able to behaue them selues, like resonable creatures. If neither the canon, ciuill, nor co^mon law alloweth, that a man perished in iudgement, should make any testament or bequeste of his temporall substance, being then presumed to be lesse then a man: how can he that is amated with the inward garboils of an vnsetled conscience, distrained with the wringing fittes of his
dying fleshe, maimed in all his habilities, and circled in with so stra^ge encombrances, be thought of dew discretion to dispose of his chiefest iewell, which is his soule, and to dispatch the wholle menage of all eternity, and of the treasures of heauen, in so stormy and shorte a spurt. No no they that will loyter in seed time, and beginne onely to sowe, when others reape: They that will riotte out their health, and cast theire accountes when they can scarcely speake: They that will slumber out the day and enter their iorney when the light doth faile the^. Let them blame their owne folly, if they dye in debt, and eternall beggers, and fall hedlong into the lapse of endlesse perdition. Let such harken to S. Ciprians lesson. Let (saieth he) the greeuousnes of our sore, be the
sure of our sorrowe. Lett a deepe wounde haue deepe and dilligent cure. Lett no mans contrition be lesse then his crime. Thinkest thou that our Lord can be so soone appeased, who^ with perfidious words thou hast denied, whom lesse then thy patrimony thou hast esteemed, whose temple with sacriligious corruption thou hast defiled. Thinckest thou easely to recouer his fauour, whome thou hast auouched not to be thy Master? We must rather most instantly intreat, we must passe the day in mourning, the night in watching, and weeping, our wholl time in plainfull lamentinge. We must fall prostrate vpon the ground humbling our selues in sackclothe and ashes. And hauing lost the garment of Christ, we should be vnwillinge to be clothed with any other
hauing farsed our stomackes with the viande of the Deuell, we should now desire to fast from all earthly food. We should ply good workes to purge our offences, we should be liberall in almes to auoid the death of our soules, that Christ may receiue, that the persecutour would haue spoiled, neither ought that patrimony to be kept or phansied, with which a man hath bene ensnared and vanquished. Not euery short sighe will be a sufficient satisfaction, nor euery knocke a warrant to get in. Many cry Lord Lord and are not accepted. The foolish Virgins knocked, and were not admitted. Iudas had some sorow and yet dyed desperate. Forslowe not saieth the holy ghost to be conuerted vnto God, and linger not of from day to day. for sodeinly will
his wrath come, and in the time of reuenge he will destroy thee. Lett no man soiourne long in his sinfull securitye, nor post ouer his repentance till feare enforce him vnto it. Lett vs frame our premises as we would find our conclusion, and endeuour to liue as we are desirous to dye. Shall we offer the mayne crop to the Deuell, and set God to glean the reproofe of his haruest? Shall we gorge the Deuell with our fairest fruites, and turne God to feed on the filthy scraps of his leauings? How great a folly were it when a man pineth away in a perillous languour, to prouide gorgeous apparell, to bespeake sumptuous furniture, and take order for the rearing of stately buildings, and neuer thinking of his owne recouery, to let the disease take roote within him? were
it not the like vanity, for a Prince to dote so farre vpon his subiecte, as neglecting his owne regalty, to busy him selfe wholly in aduancing his seruant? Thus saieth S. Chrisostome do they, that whe^ their soule hath surfeited with all kind of sinne and is drenched in the depth of infinite diseases, without any regard therof, labour their wittes in setting forth her garment, and in pampering the body with all possible delightes. And wheras the soule shold haue the soueraignty, and the body followe the sway of her direction, scruile senses, and lawlesse appetites do rule her as superiours, and she is made a vassall in her owne dominions. What is there sayeth S. Augustine in thy meanest necessaries, that thou wouldest not haue good? Thou wouldest haue a good
house, good furniture, good apparell, good fare, good cattell, and not so much but thy hose and thy shoes thou wilt seek to haue good. Onely thy life and poore soule, thy principall charge, and of all other things the most worthy to be best, thou arte co^tent should be nought, and ly cancring and rusting in all kinde of euelles. O vnspeakable blindnes. can we preferr our shoes before our soule, refusing to we are an euell shoe, and not caring to cary an vgly and deformed soule? Alas let vs not set so litle by that, which God prised so much. Lett vs not rate our selues at soe base a peniworth, being in truth of so pereles dignity. If the soule be such, that not all the gold and treasure of the world, nor any thing of lesse worth then the blood and life of almighty
God, was able to buy it. If not all the deinties that witt can deuise, or heauen and earth afford, but onely Gods owne pretious body was by him deemed a repast fitt to feed it. If not all the creatures of this, nor millions of new worldes, if so many more were created, but onely the illimitable goodnes and maiestye of God can satisfie the desire, and fill the compasse and capacity of it, who but of lame iudgeme^t, or peruers will, yea who but of an incredulous mind, and pitiles spirite could set more by his shoes, then he did by his soule, or be co^tented to suffer so noble a paragon, so many monethes and yeeres to ly chanelled in ordure, and mired in all sinne. Can we not see our seruant sicke, but we allow him a Phisician, our horse diseased but we send for a
leach, nor our garment torne, but we will haue one to mend it? and can we so much maligne out soule, as to let it dye for want of cure, and seing it mangled with so many vices, neuer seeke any to restore it to the wonted inte grity? Is our serua^t neerer, our beast more pretious, and our coate dearer, then our owne soule? If any shold call vs Epicures Aethestes, rebells vnto God, or murderers of soules, we would take it for an vntollerable reproche, and thinke it a most disgracefull and opprobrious calumniatio^. But to liue like Epicures, to sinne like Aethists to struggle against Gods callinges, and like viole^t rebells to scorne his commandements: yea and with dailye and damnable wounds, barbarously to stab our infortunat soules, this we account no contumely, we
reckon for no discreditt, yea rather we register it in the vaunte of our chiefe praises. O ye sonnes of men, how long will you carry this heauy hart, aliking vanity, and seeking lyes? how long will children loue the follies of infancye, and sinners runne carelesse and wilfull to their ruine? Will you keepe your chicken from the kite, your lambe from the wolfe, your faune fro^ the hou^d. Dare you not suffer a spider in your bosome, or a toade to come nere you, and can you nestle in your soule so many vipers as vices, and permit it to be so long chewed, and weried with the poisoned iawes, and tuskes of the Deuell? And is our soule so vaine a substance as to be had in so litle esteeme? Had Christ made shipwracke of his wisdome, or was he in a rage of passion when he became
a wandering pilgrimme exiling him selfe from the comfortes of his Godhead, and passing three and thirty yeares in paine and penury for the be hoofe of our soules? Was he surprised with a rauing fitt, when in the tragedy of his passion so bloodily inflicted, and so patitiently accepted, he made his body as a cloud, to resolue into shouers of innocent blood, and suffered the deerest veines of his hart to be lanced, to giue full issue to the price of our soules redemption? Or if Christ did not erre, nor deeme amisse, when it pleased him to redeeme vs with so excessiue a ransome, then what should we iudge of our monstruous abuse, that sell our soule to the Deuell for euerye vaine delighte, and rather aduenture the hazard therof, then of a selye
pittance of worldly pelfe. O that a creature of so inco^parable a price, should be in the demaine of so vnnaturall keepers, and that which is in it selfe so gracious and amiable, that the Angells and Saintes delite to behold it, (as S. Chrisostome saieth) should by sinne be fashioned into so lothsome and disguised shapes as to become a horrour to heauen, and a sutely pheere for the foulest fiendes. Alas if the care of our own harmes moue vs no more, but that we can still be so barbarous to the better portion of our selues, lett vs at the lest feare to iniury an other party, very carefull and ielious ouer it: who will neuer endure so deepe an impeachment of his interest to passe vnreuenged. We must reme^ber, that our soule is not onely a part of vs, but also the temple, the
paradise, and spouse of Almightye god, by him in baptisme garnished, stored, and endowed with moste graciouse ornamentes. And how think you, he can brooke, to see his temple prophaned, and turned into a denne of Deuels, his paradise displanted, and altered into a wildernesse of serpentes, his spouse defloured, and become an adulteresse to his vtter enemies? Durst we offer such vsage to our Princes, yea or to our farmers daughter? woulde not feare of the lawe, and popular shame, disturne vs from it? And shall not the reuerend Maiestye of almighty God, and the vnrebated iustice of his angry sword, terrifie vs from offering the like to his own spouse? Do we thinke God either so impotent that he cannot, so base and sottish that he will not, or so
weake witted that he knoweth not how to wreake him selfe vpon so conte^ptuous and daring offenders? Will he so neglect and lose his honour, which of all thinges he claimeth as his chiefe peculier? Will he that for the soules sake keepeth a reckoninge of our verye heares, which are but the excrementes of her earthly weed, see him selfe so much wronged in the principall, and passe it without remo^strance of his iust indignation? O deere Sir reme^ber tha^t the scripture termeth it a thing full of horrour to fall into the hands of God, who is able to crush the proud spirittes of the obstinate, and to make his enemies the footestoole of his feete. Wrastle no longer against the cries of your owne conscience, and the forcible inspirations that God doth sende you.
Embrace his mercy before the time of rigour, and returne to his Church lest he debarre you his kingdome. He cannot haue God for his father, that refuseth to professe the Catholicke Church for his mother, neither can he atchiue to the Church triumphant in heauen, that is not a member of the Church milita^t here in earth.
You haue bene alas to long an aliant in the tabernacles of sinners, and straied to farr from the folde of Gods flocke. Turne now the blaze of your harte towardes the sanctuary of saluation, and the city of refuge, seeking to recompence your wandering steppes trodde^ in error, with a swifte gate and zelous progresse to Christian perfection, and redeming the time because the daies be euell. The full of your springtide (...)




