


A DELINEATION OF the vniuersall Notions of Geographie.
GEographie is a Science which teacheth the description, distinction, and dimension of the Earth; and according to the common diuision, is either generall, or speciall; or (as some of our late Geographers haue more fitly diuided it) it is either Sphaericall, or Topographicall.
The Generall or Sphaericall part of this Science is that which setteth forth the naturall constitution of the Terrestriall Globe.
The Terrestriall Globe is a round body comprehended within the superficies of earth and water, and situated in respect of the other Globes or Starres of the world, according to Ptolemy and Tycho Brahe, in the Center; but according to Copernicus, betweene the Orbes of MARS and VENVS.

The parts whereof it consisteth, are either
Reall,Imaginarie.
Reall, are such as agree to the Terrestriall Globe by nature.
Imaginarie, are such as agree to it by vertue of our vnderstanding.
The Reall parts of the Inferiour Globe are
Earth.Water.
The Imaginarie parts are certaine lines which are not, but (for the better vnderstanding of this Science) are supposed to be in the Earth.
These are either
Straight,Circular. and of this kinde is only one, viz. the Axell.
The Axell is a strait line passing thorow the middest or center of the Earth, the extremest points whereof are termed Poles: the North point is called the Articke Pole, and the South the Antarticke.
The Circular Lines are diuided into the
Greater,Lesser.
The Greater Circles are such as diuide the Globe into two equall parts, each whereof containeth in it 360 Degrees, euery Degree being 60 miles; so that the Earth by this computation is 21600 English miles about, and almost 7000 miles thorow.
The Greater Circles are three in number,
Meridian,Horizon,Aequator.
And these are either
Mutable, viz.Immutable, as the Aequator. with the mutation of the place, as
Meridian,Horizon.

The Meridian is a Circle drawne by the Poles of the world, and the verticall point of the place. Of these (though the number set downe in the Artificiall Globe at the most be but 180) are there to be supposed in the Reall Globe as many as there are Zeniths or verticall points from East to West. So places distant East and West haue diuers Meridians, (and in this respect it is called a Mutable Circle) but places different directly North and South haue the same.
Among these one is of speciall note and use, which Geographers commonly call the first and chiefe Meridian.
The first Meridian is that from which the longitude of places from West to East is reckoned. This Meridian (according to Ptolemie and the Ancients) passeth thorow the Canary Ilands, but according to our latter Artists, vpon better reasons, thorow the Azores.
The Horizon is a Circle comprehending al that space of the Earth which is visible, and distinguisheth it from the rest which lieth vnder and is inuisible.
The Horizon is either
Sensible,Rationall.
The Sensible Horizon is the Circle that terminateth a mans ken looking round about him in an open place; and therefore is greater or lesser, according to the conueniencie of the place wherein a man standeth.
The Rationall Horizon is a Circle passing by the Center of the Earth, whose two Poles are the point directly ouer a mans head, which is called the Zenith, and the point directly vnder his feet, called the Nadyr.
The Rationall Horizon is that which Geographers reckon among the greater Circles, and not the Sensible; but both change according to the change of the place which way soeuer it is.
The vse of this is to discerne the diuers risings and settings of the Starres.

The Aequator is a great Circle passing thorow the midst of the Earth, and diuiding it exactly into two equall parts or Haemispheres, North and South. The vse of it is to shew the latitude of any place; for from it both the Southerne latitude betwixt it and the South Pole, and the Northerne latitude betwixt it and the North Pole is to be reckoned.
The lesser Circles or parallels, are either
named with peculiar names, as
the Tropicks of
Cancer.Capricorne.Polar Circles.want such, and they are commonly called Parallels.
The Tropicks are Parallels bounding the Sunnes greatest declination, which is either toward the North, and from the Celestiall Signe is called The Tropicke of Cancer; or towards the South, and is from another Signe called The Tropicke of Capricorne.
Both of these are 23 degrees distant from the Aequinoctiall, the one Southward, and the other Northward.
The Polar Circles are Parallels compassing the Poles. That which compasseth the North Pole is termed from the signe of the Beare the Arcticke Circle; that which compasseth the South Pole is termed the Antarcticke Circle, because it is iust opposite to the former.
A Parallel compasseth the Earth from East to West, and diuideth it into two vnequall parts.
These foure nominated Parallels or lesser Circles serue to describe the Zones so much mentioned in the writings of Ancients; the vnnamed Parallels to set out Climates.
A Zone is a space of earth contained betwixt two lesser Circles: the number of them is fiue, whereof two are ouer-cold, one ouer-hot, and two temperate.
The two ouer-cold Zones are those parts of the Earth which lie betwixt the two Polar Circles and the Poles.

The two temperate Zones are betwixt the Tropicks of Cancer and the Articke, and betwixt the Tropicke of Capricorne and the Antarticke Circles.
The Torrid or ouer-hot Zone is that which lieth betwixt both the Tropicks.
Both the Torrid and Frigid Zones (though the Ancients thought them to be altogether vnhabitable) are in many parts at this day well inhabited.
Againe, the Inhabitants in the burnt Zones are called Amphiscians, for that they haue the meridian shadow on both sides of them, some part of the yeere Northwards, and sometimes Southwards. In the temperate Zones, Hetoroscians, hauing the shadow but on one side; and the frigid Periscians hauing their shadowes runne round about.
Also the Inhabitants in the same parallel and opposite part of the Meridian are called Periaecians.
In the like parrallel on the other side of the line and same meridian Antiaecians. In the like parallel on the other side of the line and opposite part of the meridian, Antipodes.
A climate is a space of earth contained betwixt two parallels, distant from the Aequinoctiall towards the North or South Pole: the vse of climats is to distinguish the length and shortnesse of the daies in all places, for places as they differ North and South, so haue they vnequall daies and nights; the more Northerly climats and places hauing longer daies in the Summer, and longer nights in the Winter than the more Southerly doe enioy.
Thus much of the generall or sphericall part of Geography.
The speciall or Topographicall part hereof is that which setteth forth the description of the Terrestriall Globe so farre forth as it is diuided into distinct parts or places, and is either
1 The description of some great integrating part of the Earth.2 Or of some one Region, and so it is properly termed Chorography.3 Or of some particular place in a Region.
According to the greater integrating parts thereof, the Ancients diuided the whole world into three parts (no more being then discouered) namely Asia, Africa, and Europa; but now of late all the world being in a manner found out, the rest is diuided into other three parts (viz.) Atlantis, or America Septentrionall, Meridionall, and Terra del Chasdi or the South Continent.
Asia is bounded on the North with the Hyperborean Seas, on the East with Mar del Zur or South Sea, on the South with the Indian Seas, and on the West with the Red Sea, part of the Mediterranean Sea, the Helespont, and the Riuers Don and Duyna.
Africa is enuironed with the Midland Seas North, the Red Sea East, and the Aethiopian and Atlantick Ocean, on the South and West.
Europe is bordered on the East with Don and Duyna, on the North with the Frozen Seas, on the West with the Atlantick Ocean, and on the South with the Mediterranean Sea.
North America is termined on the East with the North-Sea, on the West with the South-Sea, on the North with the Hyperborean or Frozen-Seas, and on the South with the Isthmos at Panania.
South America is confined on the North with this Isthmos, on the South with the Straights of Magellane, on the East with the Aethiopian Sea, and on the West with Mar del Zur.
The South Continent is accosted on the North with Mar del Zur, the Aethiopick, and Indian Seas. But how it is on the other parts is not yet discouered.
Each of these more spatious parts is againe subdiuided into many Regions, as Asia is diuided into these Regions, Chyna, Tartaria, Muscouia, Georgia, Armenia, Natolia, Syria, Caldea, Arabia, Persia, Magora, India, and Cauchychina, with innumerable Islands called the Moluccoes or Spicerie Islands and Iapan, etc.

Africa into Aegypt, Abyssina, Monomotapa, Magadoxo, Quiloa, Mozambigue, Manicongo, Guynea, Byledulgerid, Barbarie, Cyrenaica, and Nubia, with the Islands of the Canaryes, Cape-verde, St. Helen, and Madagasar.
Europe into these Kingdomes, Crymea, Polon, Sweden, Denmarke, Germanie, both the higher and lower, Greece, Hungarie, Bohemia, Austria, Italy, France, Spaine, with the Islands of Candy, Corsica, Sardinia, Maiorca, and these most famous Islands of Great Britaine, and Ireland,
North America into Noua Britannia, Noua Albion, Noua Anglia, Virginia, Noua Francia, Florida, Calfornia, Noua Granada, Noua Hispania, Nicoragua, etc.
South America into Castilia del-Oro, Peru, Chily, Guiana, Ouram, Chicas, Brasilia, and Pantagones, with the Antellar Iles.
The South Continent (so farre as is discouered) into Noua Guinea, Luchach, Maletur, with the Islands of Salomon.
Againe euery one of these Regions is subdiuided into Prouinces, Hundreds, or Counties. These three kinde of parts make vp the perfect subiect of Topographie.
Againe euery part and place of the earth is considered either
in it selfe.according to its adiuncts.
In it selfe, and so it is
ContinentIland.
A Continent is a great quantitie of land in which many kingdomes and principalities are conioyned together, none of them being separated from the rest by any Sea.
An Island (quasi an eie of land, called in Latine, Insula quasi in salo) is a part of land compassed and enuironed round about with waters, of which Great Britaine and Iapan are the most spacious.

These againe are obseruable parts both of Continents and Islands,
Peninsula.Isthmus.Promontorium.
Peninsula (quasi pene Insula) is a tract of land, which being compassed almost round with waters, is ioyned by some little necke or Isthmus to the firme land, as Peloponesus in Greece.
An Isthmus is a narrow peece of land which ioyneth the Peninsula to the Continent or greater Islands, as the straights of Dariene and Corinth.
Promontorium is a high mountaine shooting it selfe much farther into the Sea than the Adiacent land. The extremest point or nooke hereof is called a Cape, as Cape-verde in Africa, etc.
The adiuncts of a place are either such as respect
the earth it selfe.the heauens.
Those that agree to a place in respect of the earth, are three in number, viz.
1 The magnitude or extent of a Country.2 The bounds and limits.3 The qualitie.
1 The magnitude comprehendeth the length and bredth of any place. The length of a place is measured East and West, what figure soeuer the place is of; the bredth thereof North and South.
It is to be obserued that those places that are vnder the Aequinoctiall haue no bredth, because that the measuring of latitude is begunne from this circle.
2 The bounds of a Country is a line terminating it round about, and distinguishing it from the bordering lands or waters.
3 The qualitie of a place is the naturall temper and disposition thereof.

A place in regard of the heauens is either
East.West.North.South.
Those places are properly said to be Northerne, which lie betwixt the Aequinoctiall and the Arctick Pole. Those Southerne, which are betwixt the Aequinoctiall and the Antarcticke Pole.
Those places likewise are said to be Easterne which lie in the Easterne Haemisphaere, terminated by the first Meridian which passeth thorow the Azores, and those the Westerne which lie within the Haemisphaere which lieth Westernly of the same Meridian. And thus much of the vniuersall Notions of Geography.






map of England
A TIPE OF ENGLAND





OF ENGLAND.
THis farre famoused Kingdome is bordered on the North with Scotland, on the South with the British Sea, on the East with the German Ocean, and on the West with the Hybernian Seas. It is situate in the temperate Z^ne and eighth Climate; watered with a multitude of Crystall streames, Currents, and Nauigable Riuers; the banks whereof are crowned with Flowrie Meadowes, the Meadowes replenished with abundance of Cattell, and accosted with all manner of fertile fields, of all manner of Corne and Graine; and besides all these affords many other both Commodities and Rarities, which hereafter are particularly expressed in their proper places.
This kingdome was first inhabited by some Colonies which transplanted themselues from the neighbouring coasts of France and Lower Germanie, as the affinity of their Language, Policie, Religion, and Manners, doe vnquestionably proue; being the ofspring of Gomer of Iaphets progenie, as their owne appellation doth witnesse, calling themselues Komery, who possessed and gouerned this Iland aboue one thousand yeares. About fifty foure yeares before the Natiuitie of our Lord and Sauiour, Iulius Caesar entred this land, which within one hundred and fifty yeares after was subiugated by the Romans, vnder whose commands they liued till the 430 yeare after Christ, when the Roman Empire declining, was forced to call home their Garrisons, and hauing before exhausted the strength of this Kingdome, left it a prey to the enemie, whereupon
 the Picts assaulting this land thus disfurnished and weakned, they were compelled to craue the aid of the Saxons and Anglies, a warlike nation, inhabiting neare the confines of Denmarke; who being ariued, chased away their enemies; and allured with the temperature, fertilitie and pleasantnesse of the Country (flowing in great numbers) expelled the Britaines or Komeros, that would not liue vnder their lawes and subiection, and so held it till the yeare 1066. when William the Conquerour with his Normans subdued them, whose successors haue continually enioyed it to this present time.
It was anciently diuided by the Romans into three parts, Britanniam primam, from the South parts to Trent; Maximam Caesariensem, from thence Northward; and Britanniam secundam, which we call Wales.
After by the Saxons it was diuided into an Heptarchie, which at last (reduced to a Monarchie) was by Elfred diuided into Shires, Wapentakes, and Tithings; with Iustices and Sheriffes appointed for ministring of iustice, which partly confirmed, partly altered by William the Conquerour, was at last diuided into 39 Shires of the English, with the addition of 13 of Wales. In which are at this present two famous Vniuersities, the Seminaries of vertue and learning; 26 Bishopricks, 641 Market Towees, 186 Castles, 9725 Parish Churches, 555 Riuers, 956 Bridges, 13 Chases, 68 Forests, and 781 Parkes. Tribunalls, or Courts of iustice temporall, nine, viz. Parliament, Starchamber, Chancerie, Kings Bench, Exchequer, Common pleas, Court of Wards, Admiraltie, and Court of Requests, besides Court Leet and Baron. Spirituall seuen, of Conuocation, Synods, Audience, Arches, Prerogatiue, Faculties, and Peculiar Iurisdictions. Rankes of Nobilitie nine, that is, Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, Viscounts, Barons, Baronets, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen. And of Inferiour Ranke or Communaltie three, Yeomen, Husbandmen, and Tradesmen.
The Battells by Sea and Land since the Conquest, fought by the Kings, Nobilitie, and Commons, against forraine inuasions, and Domestique and Intestine warres, 76. The last and most Admirable, being in the Chase of the Spanish Armado, Ann. Dom. 1588.



 A Table containing the prouisions of the Spanish Armado against ENGLAND in Anno Domini 1588. and Anno ELIZ. REGINae XXX.



Leaders.
Prouinces aiding.
Galliasses and Gallions.
Ships and Hulks.
Pinaces and Carauals.
Great Ordnance
Saylers.
Souldiers.
Galley-slaues.



D. Medina Sydonia.


Portugal.

10
2
 
300
1300
3300
 



Diego de Mandranae.


Portugal.

4
 
 
20
360
 
888



Io. Martynes de Richaldes


Bisca^.

10
 
4
250
700
2000
 



Michael de Oquendo.


Guiapusco.

10
 
4
310
700
2000
 



Pedro de Valdez.


Andolozia.

10
 
1
280
800
2400
 



Martyn de Vertendona.


Italie.

10
 
 
310
800
2000
 



Diego Floris de Valdez.


Castile.

14
 
2
380
1700
2400
 



Iohn Lopez de Medina.


Medina.

 
23
 
400
700
3200
 



Hugo de Moncade.


Naples.

4
 
 
200
460
870
1200



Antonio Buccade.


Mendoza.

 
22
 
193
574
488
 






ESPECIALL NOTES worthy of obseruation.

13 H. 1. The first Parliament was in Anno 1112
19 H. 2. Ireland was conquered in Anno 1172
4 Ioh. Normandy was lost by King Iohn and the title thereto released Anno 1202
43 H. 3. Normandy was lost by King Iohn and the title thereto released Anno 1258
11 E. 1. Wales was subdued Anno 1283
19 E. 3. The order of the Garter deuised Anno 1344
14 E. 3. England first quartered the Armes of France Anno 1339
21 E. 3. Calice was wonne in Anno 1346
5 Mariae. Calice was lost Anno 1557
5 H. 5. Normandy was wonne in Anno 1416
8 H. 5. King Henry the fifth was proclaimed heire Apparant and Regent of France in Anno 1419
10 H. 6. Henry the sixth was crowned King of France in the Citie of Paris Anno 1431
27 H. 6. France was lost in Anno 1449
28 H. 6. Normandy was lost in Anno 1449
31 H. 6. Acuitaine etc. were lost in Anno 1453
4 R. 2. Wat Tylors Rebellion Anno 1380
29 H. 6. Iack Cades Rebellion Anno 1450
4 H. 8. Nauarre surprised by the Spaniards Anno 1512




At the time of the first dissoluing of Religious Houses in ENGLAND there were

ARchbishopricks and Bishopricks 21
Deanries 11
Archdeaconries 60
Dignities and Prebends in Cathedrall Churches 364
Benefices 8803
Religious Houses 65
Hospitalls 110
Colledges 96
Chauntries and free Chappells 2374
Their Rates were per annum 320180







In the Prouince of Canterbury,


 
Dioceses
Parish-Churches,
Churches appropriated


In the Diocese
Of Canterbury
257
140


Of London
623
189


Of Winchester
362
131


Of Couentrey and Lichfield
557
250


Of Salisburie
248
109


Of Ba^h and Well^
388
160


Of Lincolne
1255
577


Of Peterborough
293
91


Of Exeter
604
239


Of Glocester
267
125


Of Hereford
313
166


Of Norwich
1121
385


Of Elie
141
75


Of Rochester
98
36


Of Chichester
250
112


Of Oxford
195
88


Of Worcester
241
76


Of Eristol
236
64


Of S. Dauids
308
120


Of Bangor
107
36


Of Llandeffe
177
98


Of S. Asaph
121
19


Peculiar in the Prouince of Canterbury
57
14


The summe of the Prouince of Canterbury
8219
3303


In the Prouince of Yorke,


In the Diocese
Of Yorke
581
336


Of Durham
135
87


Of Chester
256
101


Of Carlisle
93
18


The summe of the Prouince of Yorke
1065
592


The totall summe in both Prouinces,
9284
3845







Shires in ENGLAND.
COrnwall.
Deuonshire.
Dorcetshire.
Somersetshire.
Wiltshire.
Hampshire.
Barkshire.
Surrey.
Sussex.
Kent.
Middlesex.
Essex.
Hartfordshire.
Buckinghamshire.
Oxfordshire.
Glocestershire.
Worcestershire.
Warwickshire.
Northamptonshire.
Bedfordshire.
Huntingtonshire.
Cambridgeshire.
Suffolke.
Northfolke.
Lincolneshire.
Rutlandshire.
Leicestershire.
Staffordshire.
Darbishire.
Nottinghamshire.
Yorkeshire.
Durham Bishoprick.
Northumberland.
Cumberland.
Westmerland.
Lancaster.
Cheshire.
Shropshire.
Herefordshire.


Shires in Wales
RAdnorshire.
Brecknocksh.
Monmouthsh.
Glamorganshire.
Carmardenshire.
Pembrookeshire.
Cardiganshire.
Montgomerishire.
Merionethshire.
Carnaruanshire.
Anglesey.
Denbighshire.
Flintshire.






THE MAPS AND DESCRIPTIONS OF THE SEVERALL SHIRES OF ENGLAND AND WALES.


Deuon-shire.
DEuon-shire, which the Cornish-Britaines named Deuinan, and the Welsh-Britaines Duffneint. signifying low Valleys, abbutteth on the West vpon Cornwall, being diuided from it by the Riuer Tamar: On the South and North sides it is walled with the Sea, and on the East with Sommerset-shire. The Dimension being from Canshere North, to Salcombe South, 55. Miles, and from Thornecombe East, to Hartland-point West, 54. Miles, the compasse being about 200. Miles: It is diuided into 33. Hundreds, wherein are contained 394. Parish Churches, and it is interspersed with 29. Riuers, being fitted with 166. Bridges. It hath the foundations of 9. notable Religious Houses and Monasteries, which now remaine but ruines. It is well traded with 37. Market Townes for commerce, the principall whereof is the famous Citie of Exeter, which is seated vpon the Riuer Ex, and thereof hath the name: but by Ptolomy it was called Isea, and by the Welsh Pencaer. It is very pleasant situated on the rising of a Hill, adorned with stately buildings, and is plentifully furnished with all kinde of prouision, as well for pleasure as necessary vse. It was compassed about by King Athalstane, with a circular wall, except on the side towards the Riuer Ex, where it is built in a strait line, and is beautified with faire Battlements, diuers Towers, and 6. Gates, for passage. On the East side of this Citie stands the Castle, which in former times was the resident seat of the West-Saxon Kings. In it also are many faire Churches, but the chiefe is Saint Peters the Cathedrall, which was made a Bishops Sea by Edward the Confessor: It is gouerned by a Maior, 24. Brethren, and a Recorder, hauing Latitude 50. 45. degrees, and Longitude degrees 20. 39. This Shire hath many hills and dales, hauing store of woods: And though the soile be somewhat fruitfull of it selfe, yet it is very much amended by the industry of the Inhabitants, with the sand that they fe^ch from the Sea side. The Aire is sharp and healthfull, the commodities are generally Wooll, Cloth, Kearsies, Lead, Corne, and Cattell, with abundance of Fish and Fowle. This Countrey hath many fitter Hauens for intercourse of ships, than Cornwall, whereof Totnes, Plimouth, and Dartmouth are accounted the most famous. In Exmore in this Shire are sandy stones set in diuers formes, some circular, and some triangle wise, which are said to be the ancient memorable markes of Victories obtained there by the Romans, Saxons, and Danes. And at a place called Hubstow, not farre from the mouth of Tawe (in the yeare of Christ 879.) was the Dane Hubba (who in many places persecuted the English) encountred, slaine, and buried.



map of Devon
DEVON SHIRE





Dorset-shire.
DOrset-shirs, the Inhabitants wherof (by Ptolomy) were called Durotriges, by the Brit^ines Dur-Gwgr, and by the English Saxons Dor-Seddar; It hath Sommerset and Wilt-shires on the North, Deu^n-shire and another part of Sommerset-shire on the West, Hamp-shire on the East, and the Brittish Seas on the South. It is extended in length 44. Miles, in bredth 24. and makes his circumference about 150. Miles. It is shared into fiue diuisions, viz Sherborne, Bridport, Shast^r, Dorch^^t^r, and Blanford, and these are subdiuided into 34. Hundreds, which containe in them 248. Parish Churches. It is interlaced with the currents of many cleare and fresh-water Springs, hauing 4. Riuers, and 24. Bridges, and in former times hath beene guarded with 8. strong Castles, which time hath now almost quite deuoured. It hath entercourse and trastique with 8. Market Townes, the principall whereof is Dorchester, which in the Itinerarium of Antoninus was called Durnouaria, signifying the Ferry: it is seated on the South side of the Riuer Frome, and Fosse-way the Romane Cawsy. In times past this Towne was walled, and much greater than it is; but by the Danes who quite rased downe the walles, it was brought low, and of a lesse quantitie. It is now gouerned by two Bayliffes, one Alderman, and a Recorder: The height of the Pole being there 50. 38. degrees for Latitude, and the Longitude 21. 51. degrees. Not farre from this Towne on the South side is a small plot of ground raised some 30. paces higher than the rest of the Plaine, and compassed about with 5. Trenches, containing 10. Acres in quantitie, and is called by the Country people, The Mayd^ Castle: hauing entrance into it but only at the East and West sides; it is now tilled, and beareth Corne, but it is thought in times past to haue beene some fort of defence for the Roman Garisons. The soile of this Country is very fruitfull, producing many necessary commodities: the Aire very wholsome, and the situation most p^eas^^t both for Champion and Woods, hauing in it 2. Forrests, 12. Parks, and one Chase. The chiefe commoditie, being here Wood, Wooll, and Corne. This Shire hath also beene beautified with many faire Monasterie^ and Religious Houses, which are now transformed to heaps of Ruines, like that old decayed Castle of Badburg, which was inuironed with a triple Trench, and had beene sometime the seat of the West-Saxon Kings.



map of Dorset
DORSET SHIRE





Sommerset-shire.
SOmmerset-shire is so called of an ancient Towne named Sommerton, which in former ages was the chiefest and most famous in all the County. It is bounded with Deuon, and Dorset-shires on the South, the Seuerne Sea on the North, Wilt-shire and Glocester-shire on the East and North-east, and Deuon-shire on the West. The length of it, from Brackley East, to Oure West, being 55. Miles; and bredth, from Chard South, to Porshut-point North, about 40. Miles, the whole circuit containing much vpon 204. Miles. It is diuided into 42. Hundreds, wherein are 305. Parish Churches. It is furnished with commodious Hauens and Ports, hauing 9. Riuers, and 45. Bridges. It is strengthened with 4. Castles, and hath beene fairely adorned with many Religious Houses, whereof the Abbey of Glastenburg was of greatest note, both for quantitie and quality, the antiquitie whereof was deduced from Ioseph of Arimathea, whole body (as the report goes) was there interred. So likewise was Witham Nunnery erected by King Henry the 3. and Hinton, which were afterwards the first and second Houses of Carthusian Monkes that euer were in England; but now with diuers other like, they lie pressed with their owne ruines. This County is traffiqued with 24. Market Townes, and 3. famous Cities, namely Bristow, Bath, and Wells, the first whereof, though vnequall in bignesse to some others in England, yet for beautie and pleasant situation, will hardly yeeld vnto any. The next is Bath, so called from the Hot-Bathes, and medicinable springs, which to the exceeding comfort and wonderfull cures of infinite diseased persons of all sorts, by Gods prouidence doe there continually boyle and bubble vp. The third is Wells, which (as some hold) hath the name from certaine Wells which there spring up, insomuch as in former times that Sea hath beene called Fontanensis Ecclesia. It is gouerned by a Maior, 7. Magistrates, 16. Burgesses, and a Recorder. The Latitude being there 51. 12. degrees, and the Longitude 21. 36. degrees. This County as it is most delightfull in Summer, the Aire being mild, temperate, and pleasant, yet is it as myry, moist, and wet in Winter, insomuch as it is then exceeding troublesome for Trauellers. But the soile is most fruitfull and fertile, yeelding in abundance most of our necessary commodities: yet chiefly doth it excell for the goodnesse of Corne, and fatnesse of Cattell, wherein it exceedeth the most of our other Prouinces. Neither is it without rich Mines of Lead, which haue beene and are very gainfull to the County; and at Saint Vincents Rocke are gotten great store of Diamonds, which for beautie and luster doe parallel the best, but are defectiue in the hardnesse. In this Shire haue beene fought many bloudy battells, as that neere Pen, when King Canutus was pursued by Edmond named Ironside; and that which was performed by Ealstaw Bishop of Sherborne vpon the Danes, neare to Bridge-water, with diuers others.



map of Somerset
SOMERSET SHIRE





Wilt-shire.
WIltshire, which the old English-Saxons called Wilsetta, hath Barkeshire on the East, Glocester and Somersetshires on the West, Glocestershire alone on the North, and Dorset and Hampshire on the South. The length from Burgate South to Ingl sham North, being about 40. miles, and the bredth from the Shire-stones in the West to Buttermer East (which is the broadest part of the Shire) spreadeth 29. miles, making the compasse of the whole Shire much vpon 140. miles. This County is diuided into 29. Hundreds, wherein are 304. Parish Churches; and it is well watered and irriguated with 5. Riuers, ouer which is conuenient passage by 31. Bridges. It hath beene fortified also with 8. Castles of strength, viz. Malmesbury, Castlecombe, Lacocke, The Deuises, Lurgishall, Warder-Castle, Salisbury, and Marlingsborough. It is traffiqued for commerce with 21. Market Townes, the chiefe whereof is the Citie of Salisburie, which in time past was placed some what higher than it is now, but was changed to a farre fitter place, where it is plentifully accommodated with pleasant Riuerets of fresh running water, passing thorow many of the streets. It is adorned with many beautifull buildings, hauing a most sumptuous Cathedrall Church, wherein are as many doores as there are moneths, as many windowes as there are dayes, as many marble pilla^s as there be houres in the yeare. This Church was begun by Richard Poore a Bishop, being 40. yeares before it was finished: And (as my selfe haue read in an ancient Record yet remaining in the Treasurie there) amongst all the workmen that were at the building thereof, he that had the greatest wages, had but three halfe pence a day and found himselfe. This Citie is placed for Latitude 51. 5. and for Longitude 22. 35. Not farre from this, but somewhat higher, stands old Salisburie, which was anciently the seat of the Romans, but now is transformed to ruines. This County is decked with many faire edifices, and in times past hath had the foundations of many Monasteries and Religious Houses, whereof that at Malmesburie was of great note for William the Monke of Malmesburie, who with great industrie recorded the historie of this our Land; and another at Ambresburie, where Queene Eleanor wife to King Henry the Third spent her widowhood as a Nunne; besides diuers others which would be here too tedious to recite. This Shire is both pleasant and fertile, being situate in a temperate clime, and most wholesome. The North part (commonly called North-Wiltshire) is both hillie and wooddie, which besides many other delectable Riuerets, is watered with the famous Riuer Isis. But the South being not so hillie, thorow which passe the Riuers W^ly, Adder, and Alton, is inriched most plentifully with grasse and corne: And the middle part, situate betweene them both, very leuell and euen, called Salisbury Plaines, whereon doe graze an infinite number of sleecie sheepe. At a little village in this County, called Calne, Ann. Dom. 977. was assembled a Synod about the mariages of the Clergie, where by the sudden breaking of the floore of the roome wherein they were, very many both of the Nobles, Prelates, and Commons, were slaine and sore hurt; but Dunstan the President was only vntouched.



map of Wiltshire
WILT SHIRE





Hamp-shire.
THis Shire by the Saxons was called Handerchyr, hauing his North side butting vpon Barkshire, his East vpon Survey, Sussex with the Brittish Seas bounding his South side, and Dorset and Wilt shires with the Ile of Wight opposing his West. The length of this County from Bascomb South to Bla^kwater North containeth 54. Miles, and the bredth from Petersfield East, to Tedworth West about 29. or 30. Miles, making about 155. the whole circumference. It is diuided into 37. Hundreds, wherein are contained 253. parish Churches. It is watered with 4. Riuers, ouer which for passage are 31. Bridges, and it is commodiously furnished with faire Hauens for ships, as at Southampton, Portsmouth, Tichfield, and Hamble, etc. It is fortified with diuers strong Castles, as at Southampton, Calshot, Hurst, Saint Andrewes, Porchester, Worth, and the South Castle, with diuers other places of strength which are situate on the Sea coast, for defence of the County: Besides at Winchester, Malwood, and Odiam, which are seated within Land. Marker Townes for commerce are in this Shire 18. wherof the Citie of Winchester is the chiefe, which by the Britans was called Caer Gwent; by the Romans, Venta Belgarum, and the Saxons Windanearder: it was built by Rudbudibras, before our Sauiours natiuitie 900. yeares, and after it had beene twice consumed by fire in the time of the Saxons, was reedified, the walls raised, and made the chiefe seat of the West-Saxon Kings, and the Metropolitane Sea of their Bishops: wherein were crowned Egbert, and Elfred, and Henry 3. was borne. In the time of King Edward 3. this Citie was made the staple for Cloth and Wooll, and in the Cathedrall Church of this Citie haue diuers English Kings beene interred. The situation of this City is in a bottome vnder hills, very pleasant and fruitfull, hauing the Castle on the one side, and the Riuer on the other, the walls which ingirt it containing neare two English Miles, hauing 6. Gates for entrance, and 7. Churches within it besides the Cathedrall; but heretofore it hath beene adorned with many others which now remaine nothing but Ruines. The graduation of this Citie for Latitude is 51. 5. and for Longitude 23. 10. The next to this in this Shire is the Towne of Southampton, from which the whole Shire hath the name; it is both beautifull and rich, walled with a strong stone wall, wherein are 7. gates, and 29. Towers, and two faire Hauens for ships, 5. Churches, and an Hospitall; and on the West side of this Towne standeth a fair^ strong double walled Castle, vpon the Top of a very faire high hill, making a most delightfull prospect both by Sea and Land. The aire in this Shire is very temperate, though sometimes somewhat foggy, which proceeds from the Seas adioyning to it, and the Riuers passing thorow it, which notwithstanding doe store the Countrey with plentie of fish. And for the soile it is both rich and pleasant, producing plenty of Corne, Cattell, Woods, and Pasture, bountifully storing the Inhabitants with Woolls, Cloths, Iron, and almost all kinde of profitable commodities, both by Sea and Land.



map of Hampshire
HANT SHIRE





Barke-shire.
THe English Saxons called this Shire Berrocscyre, which on the North is diuided from Buckingham and Oxford-shires by the Riuer of Thames, on the South it butteth on Hamp-shire, the East is bounded with Surrey, and the West with Wilt-shire and Glocester-shire. The length from Inglesham West, to old Windsor in the East, being about 40. Miles, and the bredth from Inkpen South, to Wightham North, 24. Miles, maketh the compasse much vpon 120. Miles. This County is parted in 20. Hundreds, which containe in them 140. Parish Churches. It is interlaced with 3. Riuers, which for conuenient passage haue 7. Bridges. 13. Market Townes are also dispersed in it for the commoditie and commerce of the Inhabitants, whereof Reading is the chiefe, where the Danes An. 866. setled and fortified themselues. But it was built by King Henry 1. who adorned it both with a faire Monasterie and strong Castle, which the first Henry raised, and the 2. Henry razed and turned to Ruines. The Latitude here is 51. 31. degrees, and Longitude 23. 34 In this Shire is seated that famous and stately Castle of Windsor, which sometimes did belong to the Abbot of Westm. till William the Conquerour by composition obtained it, and made it his Regall Palace. In it was borne King Edward 3 who afterwards held there (as his prisoners) Iohn King of France, and Dauid King of Scots. In this Castle is also celebrated the famous and memorable institution of that most honourable order of the Garter, and in the Chappell thereof lie interred the bodies of K. Henry 6. Edward 4. and Henry 8. Wallingford, Watham in the East, and Sinodum in the North, in this Shire were all places of residence for the Romans, as appeareth by their moneys which very often are found in those places. And Mr Stow writeth, that at Finchamsted in the yeare of grace 1100. did a wonderfull spring boyle vp for the space of 15. dayes sending forth streames of bloud. This County is adorned with many faire and stately buildings, 6. faire Castles, 3. of his Maiesties houses, and in times past had diuers Religious houses and Monasteries, at A^^^gton, Reading, Bysham, Bromhall, Hernly, Hamme, and Wallingford. The aire is pleasant, temperate, and wholsome, the soyle bringing plenty of Corne and pasturage, yeelding an abundance of increase, especially in the Vale of Wh^^ehorse. But generally the whole County both for profit and pleasure (producing Corne and Cattell, with woods, waters, and very delightfull prospects) is inferiour for the quantitie to no other Shire in England.



map of Berkshire
BARKE SHIRE





Surrey.
SVrrey was called by the Saxons Suthrea, and by Beda Suthri. It is bounded on the North with the Counties of Buckingham and Middlesex, and diuided from them by the River of Thames: Sussex and Hampshire inclose it on the South, Kent on the East, and Hampshire and Barkshire on the West. This Shire is as it were square in forme; yet the length (extending from Frensham to Redrith) containeth 34. miles, and the bredth (from Aufold Southward to the Thames by Stanes Northward) is 22. miles, which makes the Shires circuit about 112. miles. It is diuided into 13. Hundreds, which containe in them 140. Parish Churches, and 8. Market Townes for traffique and commerce. In this County is no Citie nor great Towne, and yet may it compare with any for faire buildings and stately houses, whereof 5. are his Maiesties magnificent Palaces. Ptolemy affirmeth, that in this County an ancient people called the Regni had their residence, and after that Ella with the South-Saxons made it their Kingdome. At Lambeth (which was founded by Archbishop Baldwin, and is now a Palace for the Archbishops of Canterburie, and famous for being the seat of the Metropolitans of England) Canutus died, who was the last King of the Danes. And at Kingston in this County were crowned King Athelstan, Edwin, and Ethelred. And at the ancient Towne of Guildford (whose Pole for Latitude is eleuated 51. 15. and Longitude 24.59.) was seated the royall Palace of the English-Saxon Kings. This Shire hath beene adorned with the foundations of many faire and rich Religious Houses, as at Shene, Chertsey, Newarke, Rigate, Merton, Wauerley, and diuers others: And also 8. strong Castles, at Brenchingley, Goseford, Guilford, Farnham, Rigate, Darking, Starburg, and Addington: but of most of them is nought now to be seene, but heaps of old ruines. This County is seated in a very delectable, pleasant, and wholesome aire; and though it be not large, and altogether so commodious as others for profit, yet is it pleasurable and healthie, yeelding sufficient store of corne, fruit, and pasture.



map of Surrey
SURREY





Middlesex.
THis County was so called for being seated betweene the East and West Saxons and is bounded on the East by the Riuer Lea, where it butteth vpon Essex, and on the West by Colne is diuided from Bu^kingham. The Thames parts Surrey from it on the South, and Hartford-shire incloseth it on the North. The length from Stratford in the East to Mo^ehall in the West, containes of our English Miles 19. and the bredth from Hampton Court South to South-Mines in the North about 16. measuring the whole circumference about 90. Miles. It is distinguished into these 7. Hundreds, viz. Edmonton, Osulslon, Finnesbury, G^re. Is^eworth, Spelthorne, and Elthorne, in all which are contained 73. Parish Churches besides those in London. This County (though smaller in quantitie than many other) is the chiefest of all the Land both for beauty and ability, wherein are 2. Cities, and is watered with the most famous Riuer of Thames, being plentifully stored with Ships of great burthen, which continually send out and bring in all manner of wealthy commodities, for the abundant enriching of all these his Maiesties Dominions; which Riuer carries her course all along the South side of the farre renowned and euer famous Citie of London, which for antiquity hath almost worne out her Records; yet we reade she was first called Troy-Nouant, from Bru^e, and Ludstone from King Lud, by the Britans Londaine, by the Saxons London Cearder, and now by vs London. It is the rich Seat and Royall Chamber of the English Kings, whereto from all parts of the world are brought all sorts of commodious Merchandize. Shee was first compassed with walls by the first Christian Emperour Constantine the Great, wherein besides other passages, are now built 7. most Magnificent Gates for entrance, and in it with the Suburbs are contained 121. Churches, besides the Cathedrall of Saint Paul, which (as by tradition is receiued) was first the Temple of Diana. This Cities graduation is 51. 32@. of Latitude, and in Longitude 24. 27. It is diuided into 26. wards, which by a Lord Maior, two Sherifes, and 26. Aldermen, is most religiously in all good order gouerned. In the time of King Iohn was the stone Bridge built ouer the Thames, which for strength, length, bredth, and beauty, exceeds all others in the world. Close adioyning to this London is the Citie of Westminster, famous as well for the seats of Iustice, as for the rich and stately Sepulchers of many Kings, Queenes, and other the Nobilitie of England. But if I should insist any longer in the particular descriptions of these Cities, I should exceed my limits, and therefore generally for the County thus. It is adorned with very many rich and magnificent edifices, whereof 5. are his Maiesties princely Palaces. The forme of this Shire is square-like: The Aire delightfull, pleasant and healthfull, and the Soile rich and fruitfull, yeelding great plenty of full Corne of all kindes, an^ fat Pasture in abundance.



map of Middlesex
MIDDLESSEX





Kent.
THis County of Kent, which by Ptolemy and diuers other Writers was called Cantium, is bounded on the East with the Germane Sea, on the West with Sussex and Surrey, on the North with the Riuer of Thames, and on the South with the narrow Seas and Sussex. It runneth in length from Langley West to Ramsgate East, about 53. Miles, and from Rother South vnto the Northern Isle of Graine, about 26. Miles, whereby the whole circuit containeth much vpon 160. Miles. It is diuided into 5. Lathes, and they into 66. Hundreds, wherein are counted 398. Parish Churches. The Inland of it is watered with 11. faire Riuers, ouer which is passage by 14. Bridges, and diuers of them are nauigable, whereof Medwey which diuideth the Shire in two parts is principall. It is fortified with 27. Castles, and hath in it 2. Cities, 2. Bishops Seas, and for commerce and traffique 24. Market Townes; b^ing besides garnished and fairely adorned with diuers stately and sumptuous buildings, whereof 8. of them are his Maiesties Houses. The chiefest Citie is Canterbury, which is the Metrapolitan and Archbishops Sea. It was built 900. yeares before the birth of our Sauiour, (as we read in the ancient Brittish Histories) but afterwa^d it became most famous by Austen the Monke, his conuerting the Saxons to Christianity, and for the Cathedrall Church wherein is the Tombe of Thomas of Becket, which in the time of Idolatrie became infinitely rich by superstitious offerings. In it was King Iohn with Queene Isabel his wife crowned, King Henry the 3. maried, and Henry the 4. buried. Henry the 3. granted it afterwards priuiledges and Charters Richard the 2. fortified and entrenched it, and Archbishop Sudbury walled it. The graduation for Latitude being there 50. 18. and the Longitude 25. 41. This Shire is well stored with faire Hauens for ships, some of them being strongly fortified, as Winchelsey, Rumney, Sandwich, and Douer, which with the Castle there is accounted the Locke and Key of the Realme. The Inhabitants of this County doe account themselues the freest of any other in England, because they were neuer conquered, but by Conquering Willi^m were compounded withall. The Christian faith was first planted in this County, and (as ancient Records doe testifie) the fi^st Church dedicated to the seruice of Christ was founded in Douer Castle by Lucius the first Christian King of the Brittaines. In this Shire haue beene seated 23. Religious Houses, which now by time are conuerted to Ruines. The Aire of this County is temperate and healthfull, though sometimes mist-clouded with vapours from the Sea. The East side of the Shire is Hilly, but the West more plaine, euen, and wooddy, yeelding generally great store of all profitable commodities, but is most remarkable for Broad cloths, fruits, and feedings for Cattell.



map of Kent
KENT





Sussex.
THis Shire which of vs is called Sussex, was written by the Saxons Suthrex, s^gnifying as if it were their South Kingdome, in the time of their Heptarchie. It is confined on the North with Surrey and Kent, on the West with Hampshire, the Brittish Seas ingirting both the East and South. It is formed long and narrow, stretching in length from West-harting in the West to the Ditch that diuides it from Kent, called Kent Ditch, 64. Miles, but where it is broadest it containes not aboue 20. making the compasse of it about 158. Miles. This Shire diuideth it selfe into 6 Rapes, viz. Chichester, Arundell, Bramber, Lewes, Peuenscy, and Hastings; and euery of these haue seuerall Hundreds, an cunting in all to the number of 65. which containe in them 312. Parish Churches. Industrious Mr. Speed also writes that euery of these Rapes containe in them a Riuer, a Castle, and a Forest. The ancient Inhabitants of this County were the Regni in time of the Romans, who were subdued by the Lieutenant of the Emperour Claudius, and after the Romans departure, this Shire and Surrey became the Kingdome of the South-Saxons. Diuers places of note are registred in this County, but the chiefest of all is the City of Chiches^er, which by the Saxons was written Cissan-Ceasder, built by Cissa the South-Saxon King, who therein kept his Court. It is large, faire, and well fortified with a wall, and was made the Bishops Sea by William the Conquerour. The Pole being there eleuated 50. 52. and hath Longitude 23. 50. This Shire hath beene both strengthened and beautified with 10. Castles, and many Religious Houses, which were built for pious uses, but are now dissolued into Ruines. 18. Market-Townes for tr^ffique of the Inhabitants are fitly seated in this County, whereof Chichester formerly spoken of is the chiefe, although Lewes both for bignesse and faire buildings seemeth to compare with it. The aire in this Shire is both temperate and pleasant, though sometimes darkned with mists arising from the Seas. The Soyle is rich, yeelding great plentie of necessary commodities, though in Winter it is both vnpleasant and vnsafe for Trauellers by reason of the deepe and dangerous wayes in it. It yeeldeth great plenty of Fish and Sea-Fowle, with Co^ne, Cattell, and Woods; and so doth it of Iron and Glasse good store, which are the two deuourers of those faire Woods. The middest of this Shire is decked with many faire Meadowes, Pastures, and Corne fields. But towards the Sea side are seated diuers Hills called the Downes, which produce abundance of Corne and Grasse: The rest of the Shire being yet stored with plenty of pleasant Groues and Woods.



map of Sussex
SUSSEX





Essex.
THis County (which by the Saxons was called East-seaxa, by the Normans Exssesa, and now by vs Essex) containes in length from Horsey Island East to Haydon West 40. Miles, and from Sturmere on the Riuer Stow North to East-ham vpon Thames South 35. Miles, making the forme somewhat circular, and the circumference to beare about 146. Miles. It is confined on the East with the Germane Seas, on the West with Hertfordshire and Middlesex. The Thames diuides it from Kent on the South, and Suffolke and Cambridgshires bind it on the North. The diuision of it is into 20. Hundreds, which containe in the^ 415. Parish Churches. It hath 7. Riuers, ouer wch is passage by 28. Bridges: and for delight is furnished with 46. Parkes and one Chase well stored with game. The Inhabitants here haue intercourse for traffique and commerce in 21. Market Townes, the chiefest wherof is now the City of Colchester, which was built by the Brittish Prince Coilus, Ann. Dom. 124. and in it was borne Constantine the first Christian King and Emperour in the world. It is seated on the South side of the Riuer Colne, and therof beares the name. It hath beene fortified with a wall, wherein are 6. Gates, besides 3. smaller Posterns for passage, and 9. Towers, and within and without the walls hath it 10. faire Churches, besides diuers other foundations of Religious Houses, which are now vtterly decaied as well as the old Castle, which by the Ruines appeares in times past to haue beene of very great strength. This Citie is gouerned by 2. Bailiffes, 12. Aldermen, and a Recorder. The Latitude being there 51. 52. and the Longitude 25. 37. In the ancient Towne of Malden in this County Cuno-belin that was King of the Trinobants, held his Court about the time of our Sauiours birth, and was afterwards a garison for the Romans, till Queene Budo with the slaughter of 70000. Romans laid it leuell with the foundation. This County is very populous, and hath beene beautified with many faire and rich Religious Houses, and strengthened with 5. strong Castles. It is accommodated also with 5. conuenient Hauens for ships. The Aire (except by the Sea side) is both temperate and pleasant, the Soile most fertile, yeelding very many excellent commodities, as Corne, Cattell, Woods, Fish, Fowle, and that rich merchandize of the best Saffron, which where it groweth so fatneth the ground, that after three yeares gleabe thereof, the land for 18. yeares after brings forth Barly in abundance. Here are also many faire flocks of fine fleeced sheepe, which in this County they vse to milke as they doe their Kine, whereby is made much cheese, which (besides the furnishing of their owne Country) is transported and vttered in diuers other parts abroad.



map of Essex
THE COVNTY OF ESSEX.





Hartford-shire.
HA^^ford-shir^ (so called from the Shire-Towne Hartford, which some haue named Herudford) is of a circular forme, making 2. Diameters almost of an equall Longitude, crosse each other in the Center; for the one giuing the length from Cheston Nunnery in the East to Putnam West containes but 28. miles, and the other North and South, measuring the bredth from Ro^ston to Totteridge, is full 27. making the whole circumference to containe neare about 130. Miles. It is bounded on the East side by Essex, and on the West with Buckingham and Bedford-shires; the North butteth ^pon Bedford and Cambridge-shires, and the South vpon Middlesex. This Shire is watered but with one Riuer, yet hath it many Riuerets, and 24. Bridges, and 120 Parish-Churches are contained in these 8. Hundreds, Odsey, Edwinstree, Branghing, Brodewater, Hitching, Dacor, Hertford and Ca^sho, whereinto this Shire is diuided. And it is traded for the vtterance of commodities, and traffique amongst the Inhabitants, with 18 Market Townes, whereof though Hartford be the Shire-Towne, and hath gotten her Officer in chiefe to be altered from a Burgesse to a Maior, (who associated with nine Burgesses and a Recorder doth gouerne it) yet is Ware and others for abilitie the better, by reason of the continuall passage of people, that make therein their thorow-fare almost into all the Northerne parts of this Realme. Here in this Towne was sometime seated a faire and strong Castle, which now appeares to haue tasted the scourge of Time, as well as diuers other famous and richly endowed Relig^ous Houses that in former times haue gorgeously adorned this County. The Longitude is here 24. 25. and the Latitude 51. 22. ^. Neere to Saint Albans (that ancient Towne, made famous for diuers Battels there fought) in this Shire was seated that strong and magnificent Citie of Verulam, which was ouercome by the Romans, and endowed with the priuileges of Rome, but now lies dead and buried vnd^r the heaps of her owne ruines. The aire in this County is temperate, delightfull, and healthfull; the soile commodious, rich, and fruitfull, plentifully producing store of Cattell, Corne, Grasse, and Wood, with diuers other commodities most vsefull for the Inhabitants.



map of Hertfordshire
HARTFORD SHIRE





Buckingham-shire.
THis Shire is supposed to deriue the name from the Saxon word Bucken, which in that language signifieth Beech-trees, whereof this County is plentifully stored. It reacheth in length (from Bradfield in the North to Waisburie the furthest part South) 39. miles, and the bredth (from Ashridge East to the Forest of Brenwood West) 18. miles, whereby the whole circuit is about 138 miles. The bounds of this Shire are Northampton and Bedfordshires on the North, part of Bedford and Hertford-shires on the East, Barkeshire on the South, and Oxfordshire on the West. This Prouince is parted into 8 Hundreds, which are furnished with 185 Parish-Churches. It is watered with two Riuers, which haue 14 Bridges for passage: And for conuenient traffique of their commodities, it is interspersed with 11 Market Townes, whereof the chiefe is Buckingham the Shire-Towne, which is situated vpon the Riuer Ouse, which compasseth the Towne on all sides but the North. In times past it hath beene fortified by King Edward the elder with Sconces on both sides of the Riuer, ouer which are built three faire stone Bridges: and vpon a high hill in the middest of the Towne was sometime raised a strong Castle, which is now vtterly rased to dustie ruines. A Bailiffe with 12 Burgesses doe now very orderly gouerne this Towne, where the eleuation of the Pole is 52. 2. and the Longitude 23. 30. At Stony Stretford an ancient Towne in this Shire, standing vpon the Causey called Watling-street, which passeth thorow England, is a Crosse, built by King Edward the first for a memoriall of Eleanor his Queene, because there her dead corps rested, as it was brought from Herdby in Lincolne-shire, to be buried at Westminster; and the like did he doe in euery place where it rested. This Shire hath beene strengthned with 4 Castles, viz. at Buckingham, Newport, Launden, and Hampsleepe, and was also beautified with many Religious Houses, which time hath now ruined, and conuerted to other vses. The Aire in this County is temperate, wholesome, and pleasant; and the Soile (by reason of his fatnesse) is both rich and fruitfull, yeelding Corne, Grasse, and Marle in abundance. The middle part of the Shire being high, called the Chilterne Hills, hath beene and still is well stored with woods; and the Vallies lying plaine, are very fruitfull for medowes, tillage, and pastures, feeding infinite numbers of fleecie sheepe.



map of Buckinghamshire
BVCKINGHAM SHIRE





Oxford-shire.
THe Histories of our English-Saxons say, that the Citie of Oxford deriueth the name from the Foord of Oxen, from which Citie the whole County is called Oxfordshire, which is enuironed on the North side with Warwicke and Northampton-shires, on the East with Buckingham, the West with Glocester, and the South by Barkshire. It containeth in length, from Cleydon North-west to Cauersham South-east, neere forty miles; and in bredth, from the aforesaid Cleydon North to Farringdon vpon the Riuer Isis in the South (which is the broadest of the Shire) almost 26. miles, causing the circumference to come neere to 130 miles. This County is diuided into 14 Hundreds, and they haue 280 Parish Churches contained in them. It is interlaced with 3. Riuers, which are fitted with 26. Bridges. Foure Forests and 9 Parks doe also beautifie this County; and for commerce and traffique of commodities there are dispersed 10 Market Townes, the chiefe whereof is the faire Citie and euer renowned Vniuersitie of Oxford, which for the infinite numbers of most learned, reuerend, and famous Fathers, Doctors and Scholers it hath produced, and enriched this Kingdome withal, hath made it selfe not only glorious in this our Nation, but purchased an euer-liuing fame and memorie thorow all the Kingdomes of Christendome. This Citie hath beene walled, and strongly fortified with a Castle, which though time hath now vtterly ruined, yet is it adorned with 17 most stately Colleges, 8 Halls, and many other most beautifull buildings. The Pole is there eleuated 51. 47. and the Longitude 23. 15. About six miles from this Citie is seated Woodflocke, where King Hen. 2. built a Labyrinth to keepe his faire Concubine Rosamond, who was afterward poisoned by the Queene, and buried in the Nunnery at Godstow neere thereto adioyning. This County is adorned with many faire Mannors and beautifull buildings, wherein (as by their ruines doth appeare) haue beene many stately and richly endowed Religious Houses, as Oseney, Godstow, Tame, Burchester, Euisham, Beuerne, and diuers others. The Aire in this County is both sweet, pleasant, and healthfull; The Soile rich, commodious, and fruitfull, yeelding to the Inhabitants great plenty of Wood, Wooll, Cattell, Corne, Pasture, and (in a word) almost all vsefull commodities in abundance.



map of Oxfordshire
OXFORD SHIRE





Glocester-shire.
GLocestershire in the Saxon tongue was called Gleaucesderschyre, fetching the name from the chiefest Towne the Citie of Glocester. It is ingirt with Worcester and Warwickeshires on the North, Somersetshire on the South, Oxford and Wiltshires on the East, and H^refordshire on the West. The length of it (reaching from Bristow vpon Auon South, to Clifford vpon Auon North) is much vpon 48 miles; and the bredth (extending from Lechlad East to Preston West) 28. which causeth the whole compasse to containe about 138 miles. The ancient Inhabitants of this County were the Dobuni, and in some part the Silures. This Prouince is diuided into 30 Hundreds, which containe in them 280 Parish-Churches. It hath three faire Riuers, ouer which a man may passe by 22 Bridges; the chiefe whereof is Seuerne, which for store of Fish, bredth of Channell, and swiftnesse of Streame, excelleth any other in the Land. It is conueniently sprinkled with 25 Market-Townes for trade and traffique, whereof two are famous Cities, whereof the first and most ancient is Glocester, which about the middle of the Shire is situate vpon the Riuer Seuerne. It was built by the Romans, and was the Garrison Towne for their Colonia Gleuum, It hath beene strongly walled on all parts but that towards the Riuer, as may appeare by the ruines yet remaining in many places. There was the stately Nunnerie built by Osrick King of Northumberland, wherein three of the Mercian Queenes succeeded one another, being Prioresses. The Cathedrall Church (first built by Edels^ed, King Edward the elders sister) was ruinated by the Danes, but afterwards reedified, and dedicated to S. Peter, where King Edward the second, who was murdered at Barkley Castle, lies intombed. The Graduation of the Pole in this Citie is 51. 54. and Longitude 22. 17. The other Citie, which standeth but part in this Shire, and part in Somersetshire, is Bristow, seated vpon the two Riuers Froome and Auon, and, as is formerly said, (the quantitie excepted) for qualitie is parallel to the chiefest in England. In the Iland Alney neere Gl^cester, Edmund Iron-side combatted hand to hand with Canutus the Dane: And at Barkley Castle King Edward the second had a red hot spit thrust thorow his fundament into his belly. The foundations of many Religious Houses haue beene both raised vp, and rased downe in this County, where the Aire is very pleasant and delectable, the Soile being so fruitfull by nature, that the very Hedge-rowes of their owne accord bring plenty of excellent fruits, and in times past hath yeelded abundance of most pleasant Vines; but now it produceth store of Corne, Fruits, F^ne Wools, and Iron, and is most pleasantly accommodated with Woods and Pasture.



map of Gloucestershire
GLOCESTER SHIRE





Worcester-shire.
BY the English Saxons this County was written Wirceasderscyre, which wee call Worcester shire, which being inuerged on the East with Oxford and Warwicke-shires, is on the West diuided from Herefordshire by Maluerne Hills: the South is inuironed with Glocester-shire, and the North with the County of Stafford. It reacheth in length (from Ridmerly South to Yardley North) 32 miles, and the bredth (from Church Honyborne East to Tenbury West) about 28. which maketh the whole circumference to amount much vpon 120 miles. Into 7 Hundreds is this Shire diuided, and those containe in them 152 Parish-Churches. It hath but one Citie, one Bishopricke, but is pleasantly watered with foure faire Riuers, as Auon, Tame, Salwarpe, and Seuerne, which passeth almost thorow the Center of the Shire: and these may be passed ouer by 13 Bridges. This Shire also is delighted with one Chase, two Forests, and 16 Parkes; and for concourse and commerce is fitted with 10 Market Townes, whereof the Citie of Worcester (whence the County is so called) is the chiefest, which is a faire, rich, and populous Citie, most delightfully situate on the East side of Seuerne, being built somewhat like the whole Shire, in a triangular forme. The old Saxons called it Wireceas^er, the Latines Vigornia, and we Worcester. It was founded (as is supposed) by the Romans, to oppost the Britaines* It is compassed with a wall, which giues entrance thorow seuen gates, and both for defence and ornament hath fiue Turrets. This Citie hath diuers times tasted of diuers fortunes, hauing beene sometimes almost quite consumed by fire, and otherwise grieuously oppressed by enemies, and yet is now againe become a famous and magnificent Citie, which hath a faire Cathedrall Church, first founded by Sexwolfe the Bishop, in the yeere 680. wherein are interred the bodies of King Iohn that was poisoned by a Monke, and Prince Arthur, King Henry the Seuenths eldest sonne. The gouernment of this Citie is orderly menaged by two Bailiffes, two Aldermen, two Chamberlaines, and two Constables, which being chosen out of 24 Burgesses, are annually changed. The Pole is here eleuated 52. 19. and the Longitude is 22. 17. The ancient Inhabitants of this County were the Cornauij, who in Claudius Caesars time were ouercome by the Romans, after whose departure it became part of the Mercian Saxon kingdome. Vpton in this Shire in the Romans time was a place of Garrison for their Legions, and to this day are many of their moneyes found there. In this County haue many famous Religious Houses beene founded, but by King Henry the Eighth were they rased downe like the rest, and nothing now remaining for their memoriall, but huge heaps of pitifull ruines. And with diuers strong Castles also hath this County beene fortified, whereof the most of them haue felt the heauy hand of fortune, to suppresse them as low as their foundations were laid. In a most temperate and pleasant aire is this Shire seated, and for fertilitie of Soile may be accounted comparable to the best in the Land. It is plentifully stored with all kinde of most necessary commodities, yeelding abundance of Corne, Cattell, Woods, and Pastures; hauing the fields and hedges set full of Peare trees, wherewith they make much Pe^^y. Besides all which, in this Prouince are many Salt Springs, and diuers other profitable commodities, which yeeld welcome gaine to the Inhabitants.



map of Worcestershire
WORCESTER SHIRE





Warwicke-shire.
WArwicke-shire is so called from the Shire-Towne, now vulgarly named Warwicke, but was ^^armed by the Saxons Warringwicke, as our euer famous Historian M. Camden records, which he also iudgeth to haue beene the Romans Garrisons Towne. By Ptolemy they were called the Cornauij, wherein after were seated the Mercian Saxons. It is enuironed with the County of Stafford on the North, Watling-street and Northampton-shire on the East, Oxford and Glocester-shires on the South, and Worcester-shire on the West. It is extended from Newton in the North to Long Compton in the South, 33. miles, and is spread in widenesse from Hewell Grange in the West to Hill Morton in the East, 25 miles, the whole circuit thereof being 135 miles. It is diuided into fiue Hundreds, viz. Hemlingford, Couentry, Knightlow, Barklichway, and Kington, wherein are 158 Parish-Churches. This Shire is interlaced with eight Riuers, as Auon, Anker, Blyth, Bourne, Leame, Sherburne, Sowe, and Tame, being fitted with 29 Bridges. It is traded with 16 Market Townes, the chiefe whereof are Couentry and Warwicke, Couentry being stately adorned with faire buildings, well fortified with a Wall, wherein are 13 Gates, and 18 Towers, by the grant of King Edward the Third, whereby also they might elect a Maior and two Bailiffes; but by King Henry the Sixth it was incorporated a County of it selfe, and the names of Bailiffes turned into Sheriffes, by which at this day it is gouerned. At Goffard Gate in the East end of this Citie, hangs the shield-bone of a wilde Boare, slaine by Sir Guy of Warwicke, as the report goes. Warwicke is built vpon the North-East banke of Auon, by Gurgustius the sonne of Belinus, 375 yeeres before the birth of our Sauiour. There is a very sumptuous Castle lately repaired by Sir Fulke Greuill; and from the Towne ouer the Riuer is a very faire strong stone Bridge, the passage into the Towne being hewed out of the Rocke. It hath two faire Churches, and is gouerned by a Bailiffe, 12 Brethren, and 24 Burgesses. This Shire is beautified with many faire Edifices, hauing had sometime 12 notable foundations of Religious Houses and Monasteries, 20 Parks, and one Chase. The Riuer Auon hath on the North side the Woodland, and on the South side the Feilden, with the Vale of Red-Horse. It is abundantly fruitfull, producing plenty of Corne, Wools, and Wood, with Mines of Iron and Cole. At a place called Shugborow in this Shire is found the pretious stone ^storices. At Offchurch is the Palace of the great Norman Commander Offa. At Lemington (farre from the Sea) is a Spring where Salt water continually boyles vp. And at Newnham Regis is found a Well, the water whereof is very medicinable for many diseases, and turneth wood into stone. At Guyes Cliffe neere Warwicke the famous Earle Guy (after many worthy exploits atchieued) lead an Hermites life vnknowne.



map of Warwickshire
WARWICK SHIRE





Northampton-shire.
THis Shire, by the Saxons tearmed Northafendonscire, and by vs Northampton-shire, is long and narrow, seated very neere the Center of England, and is bounded on the East by Huntington-shire, hauing the Riuer Nene to diuide them; on the West by Warwicke and Watling-street: the North is seuered from Lincolne-shire by the Riuer Weland; and Oxford and Buckingham-shires inclose it on the South. It containes in length (from Cherwell to Weland Riuer neere Crowland) 46 miles, and at the broadest (betweene the Riuers of Ouse and Auon) neere 20, the whole circuit being about 119 miles. Into 20 Hundreds is this Shire shared, which containe in them 326 Parish Churches: and with fiue Riuers is it watered, which are passeable by 24 Bridges. Moreouer with three Forests and 23 Parkes is this County delighted. For Traffique and Trade amongst the Inhabitants, there are seated seuerally 11 Market Townes, whereof the Shire-Towne Northhampton (whence the County carries the name) is of most account, being both large in quantitie, and beautifull in qualitie; for it is adorned with many faire and stately buildings, it is pleasantly seated on the Riuer Nene, and (excepting on the Riuers side) was anciently strongly walled with stone; but Suen the Danish King first fired it, and after that in King Iohns time the disloyall Barons afflicted it, since when hath it not beene free from cruell Fortunes bitter blasts. The ruines of (her sometime strong defence) the Castle stand weather beaten vpon a mount on the West part of the Towne, to shew what it had beene. This Towne is ciuilly gouerned by an annuall elected Maior, two Bailiffes, 12 Magistrates, and a Recorder; the Pole being eleuated 52. 16. and the Longitude 23. 44. In this County also is seated the Citie of Peterborough, which by the Saxons was called Meddeswell, where was a magnificent Monasterie built and dedicated to S. Peter by the Mercian King Wolphere; which though it be now ruinated, yet is there a most faire and stately Cathedrall, hauing a large Cloyster, in the glasse windowes whereof the historie of Wolphere the Founder is most curiously figured. This County hath beene fortified for defence with ten strong and famous Castles, and likewise plentifully stored with the foundations of many faire and rich Religious Houses, which for their magnificall state in time of their standing, were as so many beautifull ornaments to the Shire; whereas now their dust and ruines are but motiues of pittie to all that passe by them. The Aire in this Prouince is temperate, pleasant, and healthfull; and the Soile fat, rich, and fertile, producing all kinde of the best Corne: And for delightfull Medowes, cheerefull Woods, and pleasant Pastures, the Inhabitants are so plentifully furnished, as their herds of cattell and faire flocks of sheepe (which both for flesh and fleece cannot be bettered) doe so infinitely multiplie, as thereby the Countrey is befitted with all kinde of vsefull and necessary commodities in an abundant manner.



map of Northamptonshire
Northamton Shire





Bedford-shire.
THis Shire taketh the name from the Shire-Towne, called by vs Bedford, from the Saxon name Bedenford, but by the Britaines it was called Lettidur. This County is bordered on the North side with Huntington-shire, on the South with Buckingham and Hartford-shires, on the East with Hartford and Cambridge-shires, and vpon the West with Northampton and Buckingham-shires. It is but a small Continent, being in length (from Tilbrooke North to St^udham South) about 24 miles, and the bredth (from Turney West to Hatley Coking in the East) scarce 14 miles, which causeth the circumference to make in all not aboue 73 miles. It is distinguished into nine Hundreds, wherein are 116 Parish-Churches. Only one Riuer (which is Ouse) watereth this Shire, which is ouerpassed but by six Bridges. It hath intercourse for the traffique of commodities with ten Market Townes, whereof that at Bedford (the most famous) is most pleasantly seated, in a most fruitfull soile, hauing the Riuer Ouse diuiding the Towne in the midst, ouer which is built a faire and strong stone Bridge, with two Gates, for the preuention of passage if need should require. And here on the brinke of this Riuer sometime stood a little Chapell, wherein (as ancient Writers record) Offa the Mercian King was buried, whose Monument a long time there remained, till the ouerflowing Riuer washed it cleane away. This Towne hath a Maior, two Bailiffes, two Chamberlaines, and a Recorder, to gouerne it: the Longitude there being 24. 0. and the Eleuation of the Pole for Latitude 52. 11. At Dunstable in this Shire, and Sandey, which were then called Magintum and Selenae, lay the Roman Legions, where to this day are found diuers sorts of their Coynes. And afterwards hence did the Saxons driue out the Britaines, and seated themselues in their roome. At a place neere Harwo^d (Anno 1399) the Riuer Ouse stood suddenly still, so as men went three miles in the bottome of the Channell on foot without any danger. This Shire also hath beene beautified with diuers faire Castles, as at Woodhill, Temsford, Eaton. and Amphill, and many famous Houses of Religion, which are now vtterly abolished and laid leuell with their foundations. The Aire here is very temperate and pleasant bringing both delight and health to the Inhabitants. The Soile is rich and fertile, but especially where the Riuer Ouse by the moistening of her bankes makes the meadowes send forth their increase in abundance. And although the other parts of the Shire are somewhat more barren, being for the most part a Champion, yet by the industrious Inhabitants it is well stored with Barly, and plenty of Pasturage, and is not wanting for some store of Woods.



map of Bedfordshire
BEDFORD SHIRE





Huntington-shire.
HVntington-shire, which was called by the Ancients Hundedumscyre, is enuironed with Lincoln and Northampton-shires on the North, Bedford and Cambridge-shires on the South, the Ile of Ely on the East, and Northampton-shire on the West. It reacheth in length (from Tetworth South to Woodstone North) not aboue 20 miles, and from Erith East to Keston West (where it is broadest) much about 16. In the time of the Romans it was part of the Iceni, and vnder the Saxons part of Mercia, which till Canutus time was all Forest. This Shire in ancient time had 5, but now is distinguished into but 4 diuisions, called the Hundreds of Norman Crosse, Huntington, Leightenstone, and Tosland, which are subdiuided into 79 Parishes, which are measured by Hides and Carucks or plowed lands; and they are interlaced and irriguated with the Riuer Ouse, and diuers other Riuerets besides, the Fens and Marsh grounds stretching towards Lincolne-shire and the Ile of Ely. And for commerce and traffique amongst the Inhabitants, this County (being not very big) containeth but six Market Townes, wherof Huntington the Shire-Towne and denominator of the whole County, is accounted the chiefe, which in old time was called Hundendun, or The Hunters Downe, and is situate on the North banke of the Riuer Ouse, on the rising of a hill, and in former ages had in it 15 Churches, which are now suppressed with their own ruines, except S. Maries and 3 others. This Town in the time of the Conqueror was diuided into 4 Wards, wherin were contained 256 housholds: and here was money coyned, hauing on the one side the image and stile of the King, and on the other side the name of the Earle or B shop then being in the time of the coynage. The Castle also is now vtterly ruinated, which by some is thought to be built by Edw. the elder, and the seat of the great Saxon Earle Waltheol, but rased down by Hen. 2. Here Dauid Earle of Anguise built the Hospitall of S. Iohn Bapt. and with many other Monasteries and religious houses was as well this Towne as the whole County adorned. The Riuer to this Towne was once nauigable, till Grey the Kings Fauourite stopt vp the passage: and by Charter from K. Iohn is the gouernment hereof co^mitted to 2 yeerely elected Bailiffes and a Recorder, with some other Assistants. The Pole being eleuated 52. 23. and the Longitude 24. 21. The many rich and stately Monasteries and Religious Houses in this County were by K. Hen. 8. laid leuell with their foundations, and in their owne ruines entombed. This Prouince on the West side is more hillie and healthfull than the other toward the Fenns and Marshes, and yeeldeth store of corne and other vsefull commodities: and the lower watery grounds are equall to any part of England for goodnesse of feeding, and the best pasturage, besides plenty of Turfe and Fuell from the Moores and Marish grounds. So, as well as any other Shire, is this County accommodated with Corne, Flesh, Fowle, and Fish, and wants almost nothing that is necessary.



map of Huntingdonshire
HVNTINGTON SHIRE





Cambridge-shire.
THe English Saxons called this County Grentbrig-scyre, which wee call Cambridge-shire, and is bordered vpon on the East with Suffolke and Norfolke, on the West with Huntingdon and Bedford shires, on the North with Norfolke and Lincolne-shire, and on the South with Essex and Hartford-shire. The length of it (from the furthest of the Fenns in the North, to Royston South) containes 35 miles, and the bredth at the broadest from East to West, is scarce 20. and the whole compasse being measured with her many turnings, amounts to 128 miles. It is but a small Shire, and yet is diuided into 17 Hundreds, which haue in them 165 Parish-Churches, and eight Market Townes, whereof the most famous and euer flourishing Vniuersitie of Cambridge is the principall, which is situate on the East side of the Riuer Caine, from whence (as some hold) she hath her name; although other Histories of antiquitie deriue it from Cantaber, who 375 yeeres before the Incarnation had there setled the Muses seat. And albeit in many Ages this Citie (like many others) hath tasted many wofull fortunes, yet now is it beautified and fairely adorned with sixteene most magnificent Colleges and Halls, full stored with painfull Students, and as euer it hath, so still it doth with abundant increase of most learned and famous Docto^s, Teachers, and Professors of all Arts and Sciences, enrich not only this our Land, but all others whereto they are dispersed. The Eleuation of the Pole is here 52. 17. degrees, and Longitude 24. 46. Another Citie in this Shire was sometime also of great note, called by the Saxons Elg, but now by vs Ely, which grew first famous for one Audrey a Princesse, and wife to Egbert King of Northumberland, who there built a Nunnery, and leauing her husband, was the first Abbesse of it her selfe. Yet this also escaped not the fury of misfortune, for afterwards by the Danes was it vtterly ruinated, till Ethelwold the Bishop of Winchester repaired it, and built there a Monasterie for Monkes. And though it be now also dissolued, yet is there remaining the stately Cathedrall of that Diocesse. This County hath had many faire foundations of rich Religious Houses, as at Beach, Barnwell, Charteres, Denny, Elsey, Shengey, Swasey, and Thorney: but these as well as the rest were supprest and deprest with the weight of King Henry the Eighths hand. Amongst the remarkable things in this County, Gogmagog Hills is one, which is neere vnto Cambridge, and was a Fort with a Treble Trench raised there by the Danes, whose Station it then was. And another was a long and large Trench, passing quite thorow Newmarket Heath, which is commonly called The Deuils Ditch, but at first was made there to defend the East-Angles against the Mercians, as our ancient Histories doe record. The Fenns on the North of this County doe make the Aire neither so pleasant nor wholesome as it is in other Shires: but more Southerly it is much more delectable. And as in it, so is there a difference in the Soile, which on the South is Feilden, and being watered with the Riuer Came, is fraught with faire Medowes and Pastures, and yeeldeth plenty of Corne, some Saffron, and Woods: The Fenny part being exceedingly replenished with abundant store both of Fish and Fowle.



map of Cambridgeshire
CAMBRIDGE SHIRE AND ISLE OF ELY





Suffolke.
THis County was tearmed by the Saxons Suthfole, and is bounded on the East with the German Seas, on the West with the County of Cambridge; the South side by Stowre is seuered from Essex, and the North from Norfolke by the Riuers of Waueney and the lesser Ouse. The length (being from Easton point East to the Riuer of great Ouse West) 45 miles; and at the broadest part (betweene North and South) hath but about 20. which causeth the whole compasse to containe much vpon 146 miles. The diuision of this Shire is in three parts, viz. Celdable, S. Edmunds, and S. Audries, which are subdiuided into 22 Hundreds, and containe in them 575 Parish-Churches. Besides small Streames, it is watered but with two Riuers, which haue ouer them 32 Bridges. The Inhabitants doe trade for commodities in this County in 28 Market Townes, the chiefest whereof is Ipswich, a faire and stately Towne for buildings, being seated most pleasantly in a fruitfull Soile, and well traded with all kinde of merchantable commodities. It seemes to haue beene walled about in times past, and to haue had Gates for entrance, where is now but small appearance thereof, being cast downe by the Danes, who rased the whole Towne to the ground; but afterwards it reuiued, and was beautifully rebuilt, with many large streets, and diuers faire Churches, whereof 12 doe yet remaine, besides those that are dissolued. It is a Corporation orderly gouerned by two yeerely elected Bailiffes, 10 Portmen, 24 of the Common Counsell, and a Recorder. And the height of the Pole is there 52. 4 and Longitude 25. 52. And their ancient Towne of note in this County is that which euer since the buriall of King Edmund (who was shot to death at Hoxon) is therefore called S. Edmunds Bury, where for that Kings perpetuall memory was built one of the most magnificent Abbies that euer was founded; yet now (like the rest) it lies ouerwhelmed with the huge heapes of her owne ruines. Betweene Alborough and Orford, Anno 1555 (in the time of a violent famine) miraculously sprung vp great plenty of Pease on the Rocks, without either sowing or tillage, to the wonderfull releefe of the distressed Inhabitants of this County. Diuers most magnificent and faire Religious Houses haue beene in diuers places situate in this Shire, which are depressed. And many other places and accidents remarkable doth this County afford, which to keepe my selfe within my limited bounds, I am forced to omit. The Aire is here fresh, pleasant, and healthfull; the Soile rich, fat, and fruitfull, producing Pasture, Corne, Cattell, Woods, Wools, Cloth, and Fish and Fowles in abundance.



map of Suffolke
SUFFOLKE





Norfolke.
BEcause this County was the furthest North part of the Kingdome of the East-Angles, it was tearmed Northfolke, which wee call Norfolke, and is bounded on the East and North with the German Seas, on the South it is seuered from Suffolke with the Riuers of Waueney and the lesser Ouse, and on the West it butts vpon Lincolne and Cambridge-shires. It stretcheth in length (from Yarmouth East to Wi^bitch West) neere 50 miles, and the bredth (from Wells to The^ford) 30, making the circumference to containe much vpon 242 miles. It is diuided into 32 Hundreds, and these are subdiuided into 660 Parish-Churches. Besides, many good Harbours and diuers faire Riuers and Streames interlace this County, which are passable by 15 Bridges. And for traffique of merchandize and other commodities, it is conueniently fitted with 30 Market Townes, whereof the fairest is the famous Citie of Norwich, which though like others it hath tasted varietie of fortunes, yet is it now for beauty and abilitie counted the best next LONDON of any other City in England, being delectably placed in a pleasant bottome vpon the Riuer Hierus, and yet vpon the ascent of an hill, which on the East side mounts so high, as to ouerlooke the whole Citie. In King Stephens time it was made a Corporation; Edward the first fortified it with a wall, except on that side next the Riuer; and Henry the fourth made it a County, and changed the gouernment from foure Bailiffes to a Maior: and though many of the ancient Churches and Religious Houses lie now wasted in their owne ruines, yet still doth it containe about 30 Parishes. On the East side of this County is situate Yarmouth, at the mouth of the Riuer Yere, from whence it hath the name; and by King Henry the Third was walled and made a Corporation. It is strongly built, and well fortified, being the chiefe of the Cinque-ports, where about September euery yeere is great fishing for Herrings, as the like is not in any part of Europe, whereby the Towne for the present, and the whole Land (with diuers other) all the yeere after is both enriched and refreshed. Another remarkable Towne in this Shire is Lyn, which was made a Corporation by King Iohn, who gaue them a Cup, which still remaineth there as a memorable testimonie of his bounty: but afterwards by King Henry the third was their Charter enlarged, and their Bailiffe altered to a Maior, by whom (with Assistants of twelue Aldermen and a Recorder) it is at this day gouerned. About Thetford in this County, by Hungar and Hubba the Danes was good King Edmund ouerthrowne, who afterward was martyred at S. Edmunds Bury. By reason of this Shires so neere neighbouring to the Seas, the Aire is somewhat sharpe and piercing. The Eleuation of the Pol^ being there 52. 46. 1/2. and the Longitude 25. 57. The Soile as in some places it is leane and barren, so is it in other parts fat and fruitfull, but in all places very commodious to the Inhabitants, for Marsland is excellent good for Pasture, and Flegg for Corne. The West part along the Coast is their Champion, and yeeldeth great store of Sheepe, Corne, and Conies: and that part more within Land (being more wooddie) is their Woodland, which is so stored with grasse, as it furnisheth the Country with plenty of Cattell, and yet is not wanting for Corne or Sheepe. And generally all over doth it abound both for Fish and Fowle, with many other vsefull commodities.



map of Norfolk
NORFOLKE





Lincolne-shire.
THis Shire was called by the Saxons Lincollscyre, by the Normans Nicolshire, and now vulgarly Lincolne-shire. It is a very large County, extending in length (from Barton vpon Humber in the North, to Stanford on the Riuer Nyne in the South) 55 miles, and in bredth (from Newton in the West to Winthorpe in the East) 35 miles, the whole circuit being about 180 miles. It is enuironed on the North with the Riuer Humber, on the East with the German Sea; on the South it butteth on the Counties of Northampton and Cambridge, and on the West vpon Nottingham and Yorke-shires. It is diuided into three principall parts, Lindsey, Kesteuen, and Holland; Lindsey containing 17 Hundreds, Kesteuen 11, and Holland 3, in all 31 Hundreds, wherein are 630 Parish-Churches. This Shire hath also in it nine Riuers, and fifteene Bridges: and though on the East and South sides of it (by reason of the Fenns) the Aire is somewhat foggie, yet is it temperate. And it is eleuated to the height of 53 degrees. This County is somewhat vnsafe for Trauellers, for the Sands and Salt waters which in many places make incursions into the Land. It is traded with 31 Market Townes, whereof the Citie of Lincolne (the denomination of the County) is the chiefe. The antiquitie of the Citie appeareth as well by the still remaining ruines, as by the ancient Records. In one whereof is read, that this Citie had in it 1007 Mansions, 900 Burgesses, and 12 Lage-men. In the Normans time it was the most populous of any City of England, and in it did King Edward 3 ordaine his staple for the mart of Wools. Leather, and Lead; in whose raigne it was adorned with 50 Parish-Churches, but now (besides the Chathedrall) it hath but 15. It is gouerned with a Maior, 2 Sheriffes, 12 Aldermen, and a Recorder. It is seated ^n a hill, and hath for Longitude 23. 48. and for Latitude 53. 17. This County towards the North and West is very pleasant, rich, and fertile, both for Arable, Pasture, and Medow; and on the South and East it excells all other parts of this Realme for plentie of Fish and Fowle. Learned M. Cambden reports, that at Harlaxton in this Shire (in the time of King Henry the Eighth) was plowed vp a Brazen Vessell, wherein was an Helmet of gold of a very ancient fashion, beset with many pretious stones. This Shire hath heretofore beene adorned with many Religious Houses, which are now conuerted to ruines. And the chiefe commodities of this County are Cattell, Corne, Fish, Fowle, Alablaster, and Flax.



map of Lincolnshire
THE COUNTIE OF LINCOLNE





Rutland-shire.
THis Rutland-shire, which (as some hold) beares the name from one Rut, that rod about the whole Shire in one day; but others affirme it was first so called by the old English Saxons, for the re nesse of the earth, seeing the word Ru^ or Roet in their language, is as much as (...) in ours; and for that the naturall soile is indeed so red, that it often colours the wooll of the sheepe into a reddish die. It i^ the least of all the rest of the Shires in England, which on the East and South by the Riuer Wel^rd is diuided from Northampton-shire, the West side being bordered vpon by L ^caster- h^^^, and the North by Lincolne-shire. It containes in length (from Caldecor South on the Riuer E^, to th^ farthest part North at a little Towne called Thistleton) not altogether a dozen miles; and from Timwell in the East to Wissenden West (which is the broadest part) neere vnto nine miles: so as the whole County is much about forty miles compasse. It is diuided into 5 Hundreds. viz. East, Allstoe, O^^ham, W^anged, and Martinsley; and these are subdiuided into but 48 Parishes. There are foure Parkes in this County, and but two Market Townes for commerce of commodities; which causeth the Inhabitants (for their better aduantage) to trauell to others in the Shires next adioyning: but of the two, Ok^ham is the best and fairest, which stands not farre from Burley, that famous and stately house of the right honourable the Lord Harrington, who in this Lordship of Okeham had such an extraordinary Royaltie, that if any Noble man came at any time within the precinct of it, he was to forfet an homage horse-shooe from the Steed whereon he rode, or else to redeeme it at a price in money: and for a true confirmation thereof, a man may see many horse-shooes fastened on the doore of the Shire-Hall, whereof some are large and of ancient fashion. The Towne is large, and the Church faire. And here also hath beene a Castle of defence, which seemes by the ruines to haue beene of great strength. The Eleuati^n of the Pole is here 52. 45. and the Longitude 23. 48. King Edward the Confessor gaue this County to E^dg^th his Queene, and after her death to the Monasterie at Westminster: but William the Conqueror cancelled it, and bestowed the lands vpon others. The Coritani (according to Ptolemy) were the ancient Inhabitants of this County, which for aire and health is as good, pleasant and delightfull, as any other place of the Land, and (for the quantitie) hath as fertile a Soile, which for tillage may compare with the best. Woods are here good store, and both hills and pleasant bottomes watered with many fresh Springs, are not wanting, which bring forth abundance of Corne, and with stocks of sheepe and herds of Neat are plentifully stored.



map of Rutland
RUTLAND SHIRE





Leicester-shire.
THis Shire for the bounds hath Lincolne and Rutland-shires on the East, and on the West the way called Watling-street diuides it from Warwicke-shire; Nottingham-shire imbordereth on the North, and Northampton-shire on the South. It is neere as broad as long; for the full length in her greatest Longitude (from East to West) is not altogether thirty miles, and the bredth (from North to South) is twenty foure, which makes the whole circumference much vpon 196 miles. The diuision of it is into six Hundreds, namely, Sparkingho, Framland, Goodlaxton, Gartrey, East Goscote, and West Goscote, which doe containe in them 200 Parish-Churches. This Shire is watered but with one Riuer of note, (besides small brookes) namely Stowre, yet hath ten Bridges; and in it are also contained two Forests, and fifteene Parkes. A dosen of Market Townes are here and there dispersed in this County, for the Inhabitants traffique and commerce, whereof the chiefest is the Shire-Towne Leicester, which (as our old Histories record) in ancient times was called Legecestria, and by Ninus, Caer-Leri^n, being built 844 yeeres before the birth of our Sauiour, by King Leir, who there erected the Temple of Ianus, and in it placed a Flamine, and after (as it is recorded) was therein himselfe interred. But long after this did Ethelred the King of the Mercians make it an Episcopall Sea, wherein he made Sexwulph the first Bishop. But in processe of time, the Bishopricke being thence translated, and the Towne brought to a low ebbe, Edelfred repaired and fortified it with a strong wall, whereof there is now no memoriall but by some of the old ruines; for Henry the second both vtterly rased the Castle, and fired the Towne. It is situate on the Riuer Stowre, neere the very midst of the Shire. And the Eleuation of the Pole is there 52. 41. and the Longitude 23. 32. In the yeere 1485 the 22 day of August, neere Market Bosworth, was King Richard the Third slaine, with 4000 men, in a battell fought by King Henry the seuenth, who thereby happily ended the long and wofull contention betweene the two Houses of Yorke and Lancaster: and the Vsurpers body despightfully mangled, laid naked on a horse backe, and so carried to Leicester, and was there buried in the Gray Friers. The Aire in this County is milde, pleasant, and healthfull: The Soile towards the South and East (which is most Champion) is not so wooddie as the North, (where Pit-cole for fuell is gotten in abundance) yeeldeth great store of Corne: So as the chiefe commodities here are Cattell, Corne, and Pit-cole. And yet for other necessaries, they are nothing wanting.



map of Leicestershire
LEICESTER SHIRE





Stafford-shire.
THis County, which wee call Staff^rd-shire, was so called also by the Engl^sh Saxons, and is inclosed on the East with the Riuers of Dow^ and Trent, which diuide it from Darby-shire; and on the West with Shro^shire: Ch^shire and Da^by-shires confine it on the North, and Warwicke and Worcester-shires on the South. The length is measured (from North to South) 44 miles, and the bredth (from East to West) 27, making the whole circumference to containe 140 miles. It is diuided into fiue Hundreds, and they are subdiuided into 130 Parishes. There is in it also one Citie, one Chase, one Forest, and 38 Parkes. Thirteene Riuers doe irriguate this County, which haue ouer them nineteene Bridges. And for commerce and traffique, it is traded in thirteene Market Townes, whereof Stafford the Shire-Towne is accounted one of the chiefest, which was anciently called Beth^ney, from the holy Hermite Bertlin, that there liued. It hath in times past on the East and South sides beene fortified both with a Wall and Trench, and on the opposite sides had a st^ange defence of water, which now by time is transformed into faire and pleasant meadowes. Foure Gates (according to the foure Cardinall points) doe make way for passage into this Towne, which is seated on the North side of the Riuer Sowe, and is ciuilly and orderly gouerned by two yeerely elected Bailisses out of the Common Counsell, consisting of 21 Assistants. The Pole is here eleuated to 52. 53. and the Longitude 22. 29. In this Shire also is seated Lichfield, which is both of greater antiquitie, and farre more famous than Stafford; and which by Beda was called Licedfeld, signifying a field of dead carkasses, which (as some hold) was so termed of a great number of Saints there slaine by Dioclesian. In this Citie did Oswn King of Northumberland build a Church, and made it a Bishops Sea, which afterwards was by meanes of King Ossa, and Adrian the Pope, aduanced to the dignitie of an Archbishopricke: and in this Church were the bodies of Wolphere and Celred, two Mercian Kings, interred. This Citie at this day is gouerned by two Bailiffes, and one Sheriffe, which from 24 Burgesses are annually elected. By Ptolemy, the ancient Inhabitants of this County were the Cor^a^ij, but afterwards it became part of the Mercian Saxons possession, whose Kings palace was then seated at the Towne of Tamworth. Many famous and faire Religious Houses, that a long time flourished, haue beene raised vp in this County: but in continuance of time (as well as others in other Shires) haue beene rased downe and buried in their owne ^uines. And with thirteene strong Castles also was it once guarded, whereof now but few remaine so much as for an ornament to the County. The ^ire here (though toward the North somewhat fresh and sharpe) is very healthfull; and the Soile on the South fai^e and ^^uitfull, but on the North more barren, by ^eason of Moores and Hills there seated; yet is the middle both well woodded, and watered with many pleasant Riuers, yeelding great plenty of Fish, as well as the whole County doth of Flesh, and other necessary commodities, as namely of Corne, Cattell, Woods, Pit-cole, Iron, and Alablaster.



map of Staffordshire
STAFFORD SHIRE





Darby-shire.
DArby-shire (which the old Saxons called Deorbyrscire) is on the East inclosed with Nottingham-shire, on the South with Leicester-shire, on the West with Stafford-shire, and with Yorke-shire on the North, the Riuer Derwent (as it were) diuiding it, falleth into Trent, which ouerthwarteth the South point of the Shire. The East and South parts are very fruitfull, hauing many Parkes in them; but the West (called the Peake) which is hillie, stonie, and craggie, is more barren, yet hath it much Lead, Iron, and Coles, and is very good for the keeping of sheepe. On the West side of Derwent is seated Darby the chiefest Towne of the Shire, which by the Danes was called Deoraby, of the Riuer Derwent, contracted from Derwentby, as ancient Athelward records. This Towne is of a reasonable bignesse, hauing good trade and resort vnto it; the Riuer hauing a beautifull stone Bridge ouer it in the North-East of the Towne, whereupon was erected a faire Chapell, which is now decaying, besides which there are fiue Churches in the Towne, the greatest whereof (called All-Hallowes) is famous both for the height of the Tower, and the excellencie of the workmanship. And close by it the Countesse of Shrewsbury hath founded an Hospitall for the maintenance of eight men and foure women. This Towne is gouerned with two Bailiffes, chosen out of 24 brethren, and as many Burgesses, and a Towne-Clarke: The Eleuation of the Pole being there 55. 5. and the Longitude 23. 7. This was the Rendeuous for the Danes, till Ethelfleda the Mercian Lady by surprising and slaughtering of them, became Mistresse of it. And in the time of King Edward the Confessor it had 143 Burgesses. This Shire is in forme of a Triangle, the length (from North to South) containing 38 miles, and the bredth in the broadest part neere 29 miles, the circumference being about 130 miles. It is diuided into six Hundreds, wherein are 106 Parish-Churches. It hath commerce with eight Market Townes, and hath had seuen Castles, with eight foundations of Religious Houses and Monasteries. It hath store of Woods, Cattell, and Corne, with Mines of Lead, Milstone, Cole, and Stibium. At a place called Buxtons, in eight yards compasse arise nine Springs, eight warme, and one cold, neere which also is another hot Spring from a Well called S. Anne of Buxtons, and close by it another cold Spring; the waters of all which are reported to performe many strange Cures. Not farre hence is a place called Elden Hole, being of a huge widenesse, very steepe, and of a wonderfull depth. And about seuen miles from it is an old Castle, called The Castle in the Peake, vnder which is a hole tearmed The Deuils Arse, which in the entrance is very wide, hauing many turnings and retiring roomes in it, and is accounted for one of our English wonders. In Peake Forest neere Buxtons is a Well which ebbeth and floweth foure times an houre.



map of Derbyshire
DARBY SHIRE





Nottingham-shire.
NOttingham-shire is so called from Nottingham the chiefe Towne, and it is bounded on the North and North-west with the County of Yorke, on the East with Lincolne-shire, the South side being confined with Leicester-shire, and with Darby-shire on the West. It is extended from Fimingly North to Steanford in the South, 38 miles, and from Teuersall West to Beesthorpe East, about 20 miles, the whole compasse being 110 miles. This Shire is diuided into two parts, called by the Inhabitants The Sand and The Clay; and these are subdiuided into eight Wapentacks, which containe in them 168 Parish-Churches. This County is traffiqued with eight Market Townes for commerce, whereof the best and greatest is Nottingham, which is most pleasantly situated on a high hill, adorned with stately buildings, and for many faire streets much excelling diuers other greater Cities. The Market-place is large and faire. Many Caues and Vaults are in the Towne, which are hewen out of the Rocke, but the most famous of them are those vnder the Castle, whereof one hath the story of Christs passion engrauen on the walls by Dauid the Second King of Scots, being there held prisoner; and another wherein Lord Mortimer was surprised by King Edward the Third, for which cause it is still called Mortimers Hole. The Roomes and Staires of these are made out of the Rock, the Castle it selfe being strong. King Edward surnamed the Elder compassed this Towne with a Wall, whereof but a little doth now remaine, the rest being turned to ruines. The compasse of this Towne (according to M. Speed) is 2120 pases. And it is gouerned by a Maior, two Sheriffes, two Chamberlaines, and six Aldermen: The Pole being there eleuated 52. 58. and Longitude 23. 35. This County is pleasant, and wholsome for Aire; Clayie, Sandie, and rich for Soile; very fruitfull both for Corne and Grasse, being plentifully stored with Wood, Water, and Cole. In this Shire groweth a Stone, which being not so hard as Alablaster, maketh a Plaster harder than Plaster of Paris, wherewith they vse to floore their vpper roomes. At a place neere Worksopp in this Shire is planted much and very good Liquorice. And at Stoke neere Newarke was fought a great Battell by Iohn de la Poole in the reigne of King Henry the Seuenth. This County hath 5 Riuers interfluent to water and fertilize it, of which Trent is the greatest. It hath also 17 Bridges, and 18 Parkes.



map of Nottinghamshire
NOTINGHAM SHIRE





Yorke-shire.
THis is the greatest County in all this Land, and by the Saxons was called Effroc-scyre, and Eborascyre, but now by vs Yorke-shire, which is bounded on the East with the German Seas, on the West with the Counties of Westmerland and Lancashire, on the South with Cheshire, Darby, Not ingham, and Lincolne shires; and on the North it is parted by the Riuer Tees from the Bishopricke of Durham. In length (from Harthill in the South to the beginning of Tees in the North) is contained about 70 miles, and the bredth (from Flamborough head to Horne Castle on the Riuer Lun) 80, making the whole compasse much vpon 308 miles. It is diuided into three parts, called Ridings, viz. the East, West, and North Ridings; and they are subdiuided into Hundreds, whereof the West Riding containes ten, the North Riding twelue, and the East Riding fiue, making in all 27 Hundreds, which containe in them 563 Parish-Churches, besides very many Chapels of ease. It is interlaced with 36 Riuers, ouer which a man may passe by 62 Bridges. It hath but one Citie, and one Bishops Sea, but is delighted with foure Chases, eight Forests, and 72 Parkes. It hath beene fortified with fifteene strong Castles, and for traffique and commerce amongst the Inhabitants is traded with 45 Market Townes, whereof the most famous is the ancient and renowmed Citie of Yorke, which by Ptolemy was called Brigantium, and by the Britaines Caer Effrock. It is accounted the second Citie of England, and for beautie of building, and other ornaments, it farre surpasseth all others in the County. It is large, faire, rich, and populous, being made a Metropolitan Citie by Honorius, where King Henry the Ei^hth established a Counsell, consisting of a Lord President, with diuers Counsellors at the Kings pleasure, and a Secretary to heare and determine all causes in those Northerne parts. In this Citie both liued and died the Emperour Seuerus, whose ashes were afterwards carried to Rome, and there shriued. Here also (we reade) was sometime seated a Temple dedicated to the Goddesse Bellona. And here died the Emperour Constantius, surnamed Chlorus, who in this citie kept his royall Court. It was most famous also for a long time, in the English Saxons time, till the Danes suppressed and destroyed it, yet afterwards it recouered it selfe, and by the Citizens was strengthened with a Wall, adorned and fortified with Towers and Bulwarkes, and is now gouerned by a Lord Maior, 12. Aldermen, diuers Chamberlaines, and a Recorder. The latitude being here 54. 3. and the longitude 23. 48. Diuers other faire, famous, and remarkable Townes are seated in this Prouince, as Richmond, Hul, Halifax, and many others, whereof I am abridged particularly to discourse, by the straightnesse of my limits: As also am I restrained from relating of many strange ra^ities, wherewith this County is plentifully stored; as the dropping Well at Knausbrough, the Giggleswicke springs, Saint Wilfrids Needle, Constantius his Lamp, the Mountaine Co^les, and Sea-fish stones; as also those at Whitby, which are formed like wreathed Serpents; of all which I must referre you to our former and most famous Historiographers, Mr. Camden, Mr. Speed, and others. With very many Abbies, Monasteries, and Religious houses, hath this Shire beene adorned, which are now subuerted and vtterly decaied. The Aire here, though it be more sharp and frigid than in other parts of the land, yet is it very healthfull; and the Soile, though in some places sterile and barren, yet in others, fat, rich and fruitfull; so as what is defectiue in one part, is supplied by another, the whole Continent feeling no want, because it is generally sufficiently stored with Corne, Cattell, Fish, Fowle, and hath many mines of Copper, Lead, Cole, Stone. Allome, Coperasse, and other rich commodities.



map of Yorkshire
YORKE SHIRE





The Bishopricke of Durham.
THis Prouince, which wee call The Bishopricke of Durham, is confined on the East by the German Seas, and on the West is parted from Cumberland, Westmoreland, and Stainesmore, by the Riuer Tees: Yorke-shire bounds it on the South, and Northumberland on the North. It is shaped in the fashion of an Hoscedes Triangle, hauing two sides containing much vpon thirty miles a peece, and that by the Sea side but about 23 or 24, making the whole circumference to containe neere to 103 miles, within which compasse are dispersed 118 Parish-Churches. In this Shire are interfluent eleuen Riuers, which are passable by twenty Bridges: and because the quantitie of the County is but small, there is in it but one Citie, one Bishopricke, and but six Market Townes, whereof the chiefest is the ancient Citie of Durham, which was called by the Saxons Dun-holm, of the word Dun signifying an Hill, and Holme an Iland; for indeed it is almost circularly ingirt with the Riuer of Were. It was at first erected (as wee haue it by tradition) by the Monkes of Lyndisferne, who by Oracle were commanded to doe it. And here did William the Conquerour vpon an high hill raise a strong and stately Castle; and not only so, but made it a County Palatine, whereof the Bishops in times past haue had the Royalties of Princes. And here was the Tombe of S. Cuthbert, whereto King Egfrid, Aelfrid, Athelstane, and others of our English Kings, came in Pilgrimage (and some of them bare-footed) in humble deuotion, and to giue great gifts and offerings to the Church, in the West part whereof is still remaining the Marble monument of the Reuerend Beda, that learned Monke of Wermouth. And here is the Pole eleuated 54. 56. @. and the Longitude 22. 54. The Inhabitants of this County in Ptolemies time, were the Brigantes, whom the Romans conquered, and after that, by the Saxons was this Shire made a part of the Kingdome of Northumberland, which the Danes subdued, and was lastly ouercome and possessed by the Normans. About a mile from Darlington in this County, haue I seene 3 round Ponds of water, which the Countrey people call Hell-Kettles, which are in forme circular, the water alwayes temperately warme, and (as they say) neuer seene to be frozen. They likewise affirme them to be bottomelesse, because by no meanes they could euer be sounded. But of their strange beginning, with other particulars of them, as also of the salt stones in the Riuer Weere at Batterby (considering the strictnesse of my bounds) I must referre you to the learned Workes of our euer famous Antiquarie M. Camden. With diuers rich Religious Houses hath this County beene beautified, which are now defaced and subuerted; and with seuen strong Castles was it fortified, sed tempus edax rerum. The Aire is here sharpe, subtile, and healthfull; and Soile on the East side well stored with Pastures and Arable Grounds, but moorish on the South: and though other parts be more barren, yet are they so well stored with Cole-pits, that besides their owne abundant expence, they vent so much to other parts, as is a constant annuall and exceeding great benefit to the Inhabitants.



map of Durham
THE BISHOPRICK OF DVRHAM.





Northumberland.
THis County was called by the English Saxons North-Humberland, and is bounded on the South with the Bishopricke of D^rham, on the North with Scotland, on the West with part of Scotland and part of C^mberland, and on the East with the German Sea. It is fashioned in a triangular forme, containing from the South-East to the South-west, about 40 miles; and from the South-west to the North point, much vpon 60 miles; from whence to W^llinton by the Sea Coast, 45 miles; whereby the whole circumference amounts to the measure of 145 miles or thereabouts. In which circuit are included but 46 Parish-Churches. Many Riuers, ouer which a man may passe by 16 Bridges. It hath one Forest in it, and eight Parkes. And for trade and traffique amongst the Inhabitants, there are dispersed in this County but fiue Market Townes, whereof the principall is Nowcastle vpon Tine, so called of a new Castle built there by Robert the sonne of William the Conquerour: but before the Conquest it was called Monke-Chester, as a strong defence for Monkes that it seemes were resident there. It is now rich and famous, and very populous by reason of the plentifull vent of Sea-Coles, which from thence are vttered in f^rre more abundance th^n from any other part or place in E^gland besides. Richard the Second granted, that a Sword should be carried before the Maior; and Hen^y the Sixth made it a Country within it selfe. It hath a strong wall, with eight G^tes for entrance about it, and halfe so many Churches within it. And from thence, or rather from Ty^e M^^th, beginneth that famous wall called Th^ Picts wall, built first of earth, but afterwards of stone by the Romans, containing (as Be^a saith) eight foot in breadth, and twelue foot in height, reaching in length from the German Seas East to the Irish Seas West, cutting thorow the County of Cumberland, as well as this Prouince. Another chiefe Towne here is Barw^cke, the furthest and strongest of all this Land of England. It is situate on the Sea side, and on the North of the Riuer Tweede, betweene England and Scotland, and hath many times beene tossed by Fortune, sometimes to the subiection of the Scots, and then againe to the English, till Edward the Fourths time, who with his Successors from time to time so fortified it, as it hath euer since remained in the possession of the English. The Pole being there eleuated 55. 51. 1/^ and the Longitude 23. 0. In Ptolemies time the Ottadini were the Inhabitants of this County, which then were, since haue beene, and still are a stout, hardly, and warlike people, being very excellent Light Horse-men, as they haue often tried themselues in their many Battells and Encounters betweene them and the Scots. Very many remarkable and notable Roman Antiquities, as old decayed Altars, Inscriptions, Coynes, etc. haue beene and yet are found as well along the Wall, as in other places of this County. The Aire here, as well as in other Northerne parts, is sharpe, cold, and piercing; The Soile sterile and barren, except in those places next the Sea, and on the bankes of the Riuer Tyne. Their chiefest commoditie being Sea-Cole, wherewith they not only profit and pleasure themselues, but doe the like to others abundantly, by transporting them to other remote places.



map of Northumberland
NORTHVMBER LAND





Cumberland.
THis County of Cumberland, which is situate in the North-west part of this Realme, and is the furthest part of the Land on that point, was named Cumber of those Britaines that called themselues Cumbri and Canbri. It is bordered vpon on the North side with Northumberland and part of Scotland, on the South with part of Lancashire, on the East with Westmorland, and on the West with the Irish Sea. It is long and narrow, containing in length 54 miles, and at the broadest is not much aboue 30. And though (as other Shires bordering on Scotland are) it is exempted from Subsidie, and therefore wants the diuision of Hundreds, yet are there (besides Chapels of ease) 58 Parish-Churches contained in it: and also there are 20 Riuers in it, hauing 33 Bridges. There is one Citie, one Bishopricke, three Forests, and eight Parkes. And for traffique and commerce amongst men, there are dispersed in it nine Market Townes, whereof the ancient Citie of Carlile is the principall, which by the Romans was called Luguuallum, by Ptolemie Leucoipibia, and by Ninius Caer-Lualid. It is situate very commodiously and delectably, betweene the Riuers of Eden, Petterell, and Cand. It was strong, faire and famous, in the time of the Romans, but was ruinated by the Scots and Picts after their departure, till Northumberlands King Egsrid reedified and inclosed it in a wall. And afterwards, when againe the Danes had destroyed it, King William Rusus built the Castle and restored it, so as now (besides the naturall helps of the Riuers which encompasse three parts of it) it is fortified with a strong stone wall, a Castle, and a Citadell, betweene which almost in the midst stands the Cathedrall Church. The Eleuation of the Pole being there 55. 18. and the Longitude 21. 41. In Ptolemies time the Brigantes were the ancient Inhabitants of this County, but afterwards those Britaines that were called Cumbri possessed it. And when the Danes had sore troubled the Saxons, this County of Cumberland was accounted a Kingdome of it selfe, which King Stephen (in his time) gaue to the King of Scots; but Henry the Second both claimed and got it againe from that Crowne. In this Shire there haue beene and still are found many Antiquities of the Romans, whose furthest bounds are accounted no further than this County, as witnesseth the tract of that admirable wall called The Picts wall, which was built by Seuerus, and whereof diuers parts doe yet remaine, where (as also in diuers other places) are still remaining the ruines of Altars, and Inscriptions of seuerall Colonies and Captaines, etc. At Salkelds in this County are 77 stones, containing ten foot in height aboue ground, and one of them fifteene, which a^e commonly called Long Megg and her Daughters, but were erected there for the memoriall of a victorie there obtained. This Prouince as it hath beene strengthned with 25 strong Castles, so hath it beene beautified with many faire Religious Houses, which by King Henry the Eighth were vtterly suppressed. The Aire (though bitter and sharpe) is yet healthfull. The South part of the County is hillie; the midst leuell, and more populous, and yeeldeth sufficient prouision for the Inhabitants; but the North is hillie, wilde and desolate. The commodities here are Corne, Grasse, Sheepe, Cattell, Fish, and Fowle, with blacke Lead and mines of Copper, which yeeld much profit to the Country.



map of Cumberland
CVMBER LAND





Westmorland.
THis County, called in Latine Westmorlandia, and Westmaria, we in English call Westmorland, for the store of Moores and Hills contained in it. It is bordered vpon on the East side by Yorke-shire and The Bishopricke of Durham, on the West and North sides with the County of Cumberland, and Lancashire on the South. It extendeth from Kirkland North to Burton South, 30 miles, and stretcheth in widenesse (from Eden East to Dunbalrase stones in the West) 24 miles, making the measure of the whole circuit much vpon 112 miles; in which compasse are contained 26 Parish-Churches. This Shire is well watered with eight Riuers, which haue fifteene Bridges ouer them. And in it also are two Forests, and nineteene Parks. And for intercourse of people for commerce and traffique, there are but foure Market Townes, whereof that of the greatest account is Kendale, which is also called Kirkby Kendale, being situate on the Riuer Can, and for that cause so called. It is famous for the making of woollen clothes, whereby it is become very populous and very wealthy, hauing good vtterance for them thorow all the other parts of this Land. It is ciuilly and orderly gouerned by an Alderman annually elected out of his twelue brethren, which are his Assistants, and are knowne from others by their Purple Habits; with whom is ioyned a Recorder, and two Chamberlaines. The Pole is here eleuated 54. 40. and the Longitude 21. 53. The Brigantes were also the ancient Inhabitants of this County, where at a place called Apleby are often found peeces of antique Coyne, and some Inscriptions shewing that the Aurelian Maures kept there a station in the time of the Romans. The Records of this County speake but of one Monasterie founded in it, which was built by Thomas the sonne of Gospatrick, neere to the Riuer Loder, where is a Spring that diuers times a day both ebbes and flowes. And there are also a row of stones set equidistant, reaching a mile in fashion of Piramides, wherof some of them are nine, and some thirteene or fourteene foot high, which are supposed to be the memorable monument of some notable act performed in that place. In the Riuer Can neere Kendale are two such violent Water-falls, where in the descent it makes such a noise, that the Inhabitants adioyning can thereby fore-iudge of the weather; for if that which is North from them sound cleare and loud, they expect faire weather: but if that on the South doe so, they then looke for and finde the contrary. The Aire is cold and sharpe but very healthfull^; and the Soile also but barren and vnfruitfull. Their chiefest commodities consist vpon Cloathing.



map of Westmorland
WESTMOR LAND





Lancashire.
THis in the Saxon language was called Loncasderscyre, which we call Lanc^shir^, and The County Palatine of Lancaster. It is bounded on the East with Darby-shire, on the West with the Irish Seas: Cheshire confines it on the South, and Westmorland, Camberland, and Yorke-shire, border on the North. The full length of it is (from Hallwood South to Brathey North) 57 miles, and the widenesse (betweene Denton East and Formby neere Altmouth West) 31 miles, making the measure of the whole compasse to containe about 170 miles. The diuision is into six Hundreds, containing (besides many Chapels of ease) 36 Parishes, so large and populous, as the like are not in any other part of the Land. In this County are interspersed 33 Riuers, where ouer a man may passe by 24 Bridges: and one Chase, and 30 Parkes. And for concourse of people for trade and traffique, in this Shire are seated fifteene faire Market Townes, whereof that of greatest account is the Shire-Towne Lancaster, which is most pleasantly situate on the South side of the Riuer L^n, and is adorned with a faire Church, a strong Castle, and a stately Bridge. Ciuilly and orderly doth a Maior, yeerely chosen out of twelue of his Brethren, with the assistance of two Bail^ffes, 24 Burgesses, two Chamberlaines, and a Recorder, gouerne this Towne; where the Eleuation of the Pole is 54. 18. and the Longitude 21. 36. The ancient Inhabitants of this County were also the Brigantes, of whom I haue spoken in other former Shires, and whom the Emperour Claudius subiugated to the Romans: But afterwards was this County made part of Northumberlands Kingdome, till the Danes (and after them the Normans) conquered it. In this Shire Manchester is notable for the Church, Colledge, and Market-place: And Riblechester (sometimes the seat of the Romans) for that it was once held to be the richest Towne in all Christendome. Here also neere Furnesse Fills is Wynander-mere, being very deepe, and ten miles in length, accounted for the greatest standing water in all this Land, and yet is all paued with stone in the bottome. This County is also famous for the foure Henries, viz. the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Seuenth, which descending from Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, were all afterwards renowmed Kings of England. Diuers Castles, and foure Religious Houses, are now suppressed, that sometimes adorned this County. The Aire is here healthfull, though cold and searching; And the Soile, though not so fertile as in other places, yet produceth large Cattell, good Corne, with Grasse, Ilax, Cole, and almost all other necessary commodities.



map of Lancashire
LANCASHIRE





Ches-shire.
THis Shire, which we call the County Palatine of Chester, was by the Saxons both called and written Cestenscire, and is diuided from Darby and Stafford-shires on the East, by the Riuers of Goit, Dane, and Mercey; and on the West, by Dee, from Denbygh. On the Northside lies Lancashire, and the South is confined with Flint and Shrop-shire. It containeth in length from East to West 47. miles, and at the broadest betweene North and South 26. which causeth the measure of the whole circumference to contain about 142. miles. This County is diuided into 7. Hu^dreds, which containe in them (besides 38. Chapels of ease) 86. Parish Churches. It hath also in it one Citie, one Bishopricke, and is watered with 9. Riuers, ouer which men doe passe by 19. Bridges. Two Forests and 18. Parkes are also in this Shire. And for traffique and commerce amongst the Inhabitants, there are dispersed in conuenient places 15. Market Townes, the chiefe whereof is the faire and famous Citie of Chester, of which the whole Countie carries the name, and was sometimes the strong Fort of Ostorius, who was Claudius the Emperours Lieu-tenant. It is pleasantly situate on the North side of the Riuer Dee, ouer which a faire and strong stone Bridge, built on 8. arches and beautified: two faire gates at each end: giue passage to the Towne, which is incircled with a high and strong wall, containing (besides seuen Towers and three Posternes) foure faire Gates at the foure Cardinall points of the Compasse. On the North side of this Citie, Earle Leofrick built the Minster, which by Hugh the first Normaine Earle of Chester, was afterward both repaired and fairely beautified. And in it (as we haue it by tradition) Henry the fourth, Emperour of Almane, after he had there a long ^ime led a Hermits life, was interred: and on the South side stands the Castle, incompassed with a circular wall. This Citie was first ruined by the Northumberland King Egfrid, who there slew 1200. Monkes, and afterwards by the Danes, but by Edelsteda was both reedified and beautified. In this Citie King Edgar was towed from Saint Iohns to his Palace by eight other Kings, who did him homage, and himselfe as Supreme steered the Helme. And Henry the seuenth made it a Countie of it selfe, which is now gouerned by an annually elected Maior, two Sheriffes, foure and twenty Aldermen, and a Recorder. It hath had in it diuers Religious houses, which time hath now transformed to ruines. The Pole is there eleuated 53. 15. of Latitude, and the Longitude 21. 27. This Shire hath beene fortified with eight other Castles, and as many famous Religious Houses, which were suppressed by King Henry the eight. The Aire in this Countie is both pleasant and healthfull; the Soile fat, rich and fruitfull, bringing abundance both of profit and pleasure to the Inhabitants. And for Commodities, it yeelds plentifull store of Corne, Cattell, Fowle, Fish, Salt, Mines, Metalls, White-meats, and most of all other necessary and vsefull commodities.



map of Cheshire
CHESSHIRE





Shropshire.
THis Shire by the old Saxons was written and termed Sciripscyre, which at this day we call Shropshire. It is bordered vpon on the East with Stafford-shire, on the West with Denbigh and Montgomery: Radnor, Hereford, and Worcester-shires doe bound vpon the South, and the County Palatine of Chester on the North. From Wooferton South, to Ouer neere Trent on the North, (which is the full length) it containes 34 miles, and at the broadest (betweene Tong in the East and Oswestre West) 25, making the whole circumference to containe about 134 miles. The diuision of this County is shared into 15 Hundreds, whose subdiuision into Parishes is 170. It is well watered with 18 Riuers, which haue 13 large Bridges for passage. And in this Shire are found 7 Forests, and 27 Parks. In 14 Market Townes haue the Inhabitants commerce and traffique, wherof that of most note is the ancient Shire-Towne of Shrewsbury, which is both large and wealthie, containing many faire Streets, adorned with beautifull buildings, wherein are many rich and wealthie Inhabitants, who honestly attaine thereto, by their trading for the most part in Wools, Cloth, and Freese. It is strongly walled, hauing a Bulwarke descending from the Castle to the side of Seuerre, on the North banke whereof is the Towne most pleasantly situate: and for passage, on the East and West sides are built two faire Bridges of stone, and another entrance on the North, ouer which stands the ruinous remainder of the old Castle. The gouernment of this Towne is committed to two annually elected Bailiffes, with 24 Burgesses, and a Recorder. The height of the Pole is here 52. 49. and the Longitude 21. 38. This County in times past hath beene much troubled with many grieuous broiles, which caused the Inhabitants to fortifie themselues with diuers walled Townes, and 32 strong Castles, whereof now most of them are vtterly decayed, but that at Ludlow was made by King Henry the Seuenth the Court of his eldest Palace for the Lord President, who with diuers Counsellors, a Secretary, Atturney, Sollicitor, and foure Iustices of the Welch Counties, he appointed in their Termes to plead, heare, and determine of causes. Neere Clune Castle in this Shire is yet remaining the Fort of Cara^tac^^ a Prince of the S^lures, about the yeere of our Lord 53, which was won by P. Ostorius the Rom^n. In which Towne of Clune, amongst other memorable passages, I saw a Pardon for one Iohn Clune Esquire, seruant to King Henry the Eighth, for reseruation of his name and bloud, who accidentally slew one of the Burgesses thereof in the Church-yard: which Pardon was granted and signed by Pope Iulian the second, and was shewed to mee by m^ good friend Master Edmund Clun^, the sonne of Maurice Clun^, of the same House and Familie ^^ eally descending. The A^re in this County is both healthfull and pleasant; the So^le rich and fertile, y^^lding Wheat, Barly, Pit-cole, Iron, and Woods in abundance.



map of Shropshire
SHROPSHIRE





Hereford-shire.
THis County (which wee call Hereford-shire) was named by the Britaines Ereinuc. It is bordered vpon on the North with Worcester and Shropshires, on the South with Monmouth-shire; on the East it is diuided from Glocester-shire by Maluerne Hills, and the West is bounded by Brecknock and Radnor-shires. The forme of it is circular, containing in length (from Maluerne Hills on the East, to Michael Church West) about 26 miles; and in bredth (from Lanruthell South to Ouer Sapie North) 24 miles, causing the whole circumference to amount to 102 miles, or thereabouts. It is diuided into 11 Hundreds, and those are subdiuided into 176 Parishes. It containes one Citie, one Bishopricke, thirteene Riuers passable by eleuen Bridges; one Chase, two Forests, and eighteene Parks. And for commerce and trade the Inhabitants haue eight Market Townes, whereof the principall is the Citie of Hereford, which worthy M. Camden is of opinion to haue sprung from the ruines of old Ariconium, but is delectably seated amongst pleasant Medowes and plentifull Corne-fields, and almost round about encircled with the Riuer of Wye, and another on the North side whose name is not knowne. It grew first famous for the supposed sanctitie of King Ethelbert, who was there entombed after he had beene murthered by King Offaes wife, when he came to wooe her daughter: and in honour of him did Mildred a petty King of that County build the Cathedrall Church, which afterward was consumed by fire, but reedified by Bishop Reiuelin, and the Towne inclosed in a wall, with six Gates, and fifteene Towers: and is ciuilly gouerned by a Maior (yeerely elected out of 13. Citizens) and his Brethren, whereof foure of the ancientest are Iustices of Peace, and a Recorder. The Latitude being there 52. 7. @. and the Longitude 21. 50. In this Citie King Athelstane (as Malmesbury reports) caused the Lords of Wales to pay an annuall Tribute (besides Hawkes and Hounds) of twenty pounds of Gold, and 300 pounds of Siluer by weight. The ancient Inhabitants of this County were the Silures, a fierce, hardy, and valiant people, as appeares by their nine yeeres opposition to the Romans. And afterwards the Saxons made this County a part of their Mercian Kingdome: and Sutton was their Royall Court kept of their great King Offa. Before the Conquest this County was accounted vvith those of Wales against England; but when it was ioyned to the English, with diuers Castles was it fortified against the Welch: for wee reade that in times past it hath beene strengthned with 28 strong and faire Castles, most of which are now low buried in the heapes of their owne ruines. Of remarkable things in this Shire, the Spring called Bone Well, neere Richards Castle, is famous for Fish-bones and no Fish, which though it be cleerely cleansed thereof, will shortly after be furnished afresh with the like. But the great wonder was the admirable motion of Marcley Hill, containing about 26 acres, within our owne memorie, Anno 1571, which with a great noise remoued it selfe from its owne place, and went continually for three dayes together, carrying with it sheepe in their coats, hedge-rowes and trees, and ouerthrowing Kinnaston Chapell, and diuers trees, turning two high waies neere 100 yards from their vsuall Road, and bearing the earth before it the space of 400 yards. With very many Religious Houses hath this Shire beene adorned; but in the time of King Henry the Eighth were vtterly ruinated, as many others in all other Counties. The Aire is here pleasent, healthfull, and temperate; and the Soile as fertile and fruitfull as any other in England, yeelding Corne, Cattell, Wooll, Wheat, and almost all other necessary commodities, for the vse of the Inhabitants.



map of Herefordshire
HEREFORD SHIRE





Radnor-shire.
RAdnor-shire, in the British Sire Maiseueth, being in forme threesquare, is on the South side separated from Brecknok-shire by the Riuer Wy; on the North it bordereth vpon Montgomery-shire; on the South-east vpon Hereford-shire. The East and South parts of this Shire be farre more fruitfull than the rest. It hath in it two and fiftie Parishes, and three Townes of note, the principall whereof is Radnor, in British Maiseueth, which in times past was firmely fenced with a wall, but after that Owen Glendowre had burnt it, it began to grow to decay. It is probable that this Maiseueth or Radnor, was that ancient Citie Magi, which Antonine the Emperour calleth Magnos, where the Gouernour of the Pacensian Regiment lay in garrison vnder the Lieu-tenant of Britaine, in the reigne of Theodosius the younger: for Writers of the middle age call the Inhabitants of this coast Magesetae, and make mention of Earles Magesetenses; also the distance, if it be counted from Gobannium or Abergeuenny, or from Brangonium, (i.) Worcester differeth not from Antonines computation. Three miles Eastward from this Towne lieth Prestaine, in British Lhan Andrew (i.) St. Andrews Church, which of a very little Village, by the meanes of Richard Martin, Bishop of St. Davids, is of late yeares growne to be so great and faire a M^rket Towne, that it dimmeth the light of Radnor. Scarce foure miles from Prestaine standeth Knighton, a Towne not inferiour to the former, it is called in the British Trebuclo, in stead of Trefyclaudh, of a famous Ditch lying vnder it, which Offa, King of the Mercians, caused to be cast from Dee mouth to Wye mouth, to separate the Britaines from his English-men. In the South-west of this Countrey lieth a wide wildernesse, into which Vortigerne (whose memory the Britaines may wish damned) withdrew himselfe, when he had called the Saxons into this Land, and in horrible incest married his owne daughter; and here was he, with his Citie Treguortig^rn, burnt with fire from heauen. And not farre from the place where this Vortiger^, the last absolute Monarch of the Britaines, perished, was Lhewellin, the last Prince of Wales of the British race, slaine by Roger Francton. The Mortimers, not long after the Conquest, wonne a great part of this little countrey, and after that they had beene a long time eminent aboue others in these parts, King Edward the Third created Roger Mortimer, Lord of Wigmore, Earle of these Welsh limits, or according to the common speech, Earle of March.



map of Radnorshire
RADNOR SHIRE





Brecknock-shire.
THis Countie of Brecknock was called Brechineau in the British tongue, of one Brichauius, a Prince, that as the Inhabitants report, had foure and twentie daughters, and all of them Canonized for Saints. It is bounded on the East with Monmouth and Radnor-shires: on the West with Carmarden and Cardigan: on the South with Glamorgan; and the North side by the Riuers Wye and Clarwen, is diuided from Radnor. The length of it from Istragunles South, to Llanuthel North is 28. miles, and the extent of the broadest part from Pentrisso East, to Llywell West 20. the whole compasse containing much vpon 102. miles. Into six Hundreds is this Shire severed, and those are subdiuided into 61. Parishes: with 27. Riuers is it interlaced, ouer which in diuers places are 13. Bridges for passage. And for Traffique and trade amongst the Inhabitants, it is stored but with three Market Townes, namely, Hay, Bealt, and the Shire Towne Brecknock, which is now accounted the principall, though the other two in former times would haue beene preferred. Hay, pleasantly seated on Wye and Dulas, in Owen Glendowrs rebellion was vtterly ruinated; and Bealt, though still in some frequencie, yet is now nothing to what in antique Ages it hath beene; but Brecknock at this time is the best, which being pleasantly seated on the Riuers Vske and Howthy, is fortified with a faire strong wall, that besides ten Towers, hath 3. Gates for entrance, with a stately Castle, situate on the West part of the Towne, and is moreouer beautified with diuers faire buildings. It is ciuilly gouerned by two Bayliffes, fifteene Aldermen, two Chamberlaines, two Constables; where the Pole is eleuated. 52. 8. and the longitude 21. 11. The Inhabitants of this Countie, that anciently possessed it, were the Silures, who greatly opposed the Romans, whereto they were much aduantaged by the huge Mountaines, wherewith the Shire is replenished; one of them neere Brecknock, which in Welsh they call Mounch-denny, is of an vncredible height, in so much as nothing, without it be some metalline substance or stone, can be cast from the top of it, but with the aire and wind it will be blowne vp again, and neuer fall to the ground. Llynsauathan also, which is neare to Brecknock, is also admirable, for there (by report) stood a sumptuous Citie, which suncke downe in an earthquake. And with nine Castles hath this Countie beene accommodated. The Aire being cold, sharpe, and piercing; and the Soile though for the most part hilly, sterill and barren, yet the fresh Riuerers issuing from the Mountaines, make the Valleyes so fruitfull, as they yeeld both Corne and Grasse in abundance.



map of Brecknockshire
BRECKNOCK SHIRE





Monmouth-shire.
FOr the Riuer Mounowe is this Towne Monmouth so termed, and from that Towne we call this Countie Monmouth-shire: which on the East is bordered vpon by Glocester-shire, on the West by Brecknock and Glamorgan-shires. The South is bounded by the Seuerne Sea, and the North by the Riuer Monnowe, diuided from Hereford-shire. The extent of the greatest measure between North and South, is about twenty foure miles in length, and at the widest between East and West, not aboue nineteen, the whole circumference being much vpon 76. miles. The diuision of it is into six Hundreds, wherein are contained 127. Parish Churches, and with the pleasant streames of fifteene Riuers, passable by fourteene Bridges is it interlaced; besides which, for more delight in this Shire is there one Chace and eight Parks: and for Trade and Traffique of buying and selling, six Market Townes, whereof that of the greatest note, is the ancient Shire Towne of Monmouth, which betweene the two Riuers Wye and Monnowe is very delectably situate: wherein is yet remaining a faire Church and thirteene Gates, besides the Towre vpon the Bridge. But that which was called the Monkes Church, and was in times past most curiously edified in the East end of the Towne, is now vtterly ruined, as well as the Castle on the North, which yet will be euer memorable for the birth of the famous and victorious King Henry the Fifth. The gouernment of this Towne is committed to a Maior, two Bayliffes, fifteene common Councellours, and a Towne Clerke. The eleuation of the Pole being there 15. 53. and the Longitude 21. 39. The Silures were the ancient Inhabitants of this Countie, who had Caerwent for their principall place of abode, where the British St. Tathaie made an Academie. And at Caer-Lion lay the second Romane Legion called Augusta, whereof yet are found many antique Romane testimonies. And here also did the great King Arthur keepe his Royall Court, which then was a most magnificent Citie, but is now intombed in the heapes of her owne ruines. And so also are diuers Religious Houses sometime that beautified, and fourteene strong Castles, that some^^me fortified this famous Prouince: where the Aire is pleasant and healthfull, and the Soile, (though hilly) yet rich, fruitfull, and full of Woods; yeelding plenty of Corne, Grasse, Cattell, and many other nenessary Commodities.



map of Monmouthshire
MONMOUTH SHIRE





Glamorgan-shire.
THis Province which is called Glamorgan-shire, is supposed by some to deriue the name from one Morgan, a Prince that possessed it; but others hold, that it hath it from the Abbey Morgan, which on the South side of this Shire, neare the Sea, did Earle William of Glocester build. And it is seuered by the Riuer Remner on the East, from the Countie of Monmouth, and on the West, by the Riuer Loghor from Caermarden-shire. The South is inclosed with the British Sea, and the North is bounded vpon by Brecknock. It containes in length, from East to West, almost forty miles, and in the breadth, from South to North, almost twenty, making the whole compasse to containe 112. miles, which are distinguished into twelue Hundreds, and those are subdiuided into 118. Parishes. This Shire is well watered with sixteene Riuers, and containes for Commerce and Trade six Market Townes, whereof the chiefest is Cardiffe, which the Britaines called Caerdid, being pleasantly situated on the East side of the Riuer Taue, and in King Rufus time was strengthened with a wall, hauing foure Gates, and a strong Castle built by Fitz-Haimon: but afterwards the Normans wan it, and Rufus made it his Royall Court. This Towne is Gouerned by a Maior, annually elected out of twelue Aldermen, who are assisted with as many other Burgesses, a Towne Clerke, and foure Constables. The eleuation of the Pole being there 51. 32 @. and the Longitude 20. 21.. And neare to this is the Citie Landaffe, where nothing but the Cathedrall Church and Castle is worthy obseruance. Minyd-Margan is a Hill in this County, on the top whereof is a Monument, that hath such strange Characters, that (as the countrey people report and beleeue) hee that readeth them shall shortly after die. This Countie in times past hath beene strongly fortified with fiue and twentie Castles, whereof the most part are quite consumed to ruines, as are also some Religious Houses, which in former ages did adorne this Countrey. The Aire is cheerefull, pleasant and temperate. And the Soile, though the more North, the more Hilly, yet Southward, is plaine, euen and fruitfull, yeelding to the Inhabitants good store of Corne and Cattell.



map of Glamorgan
GLAMORGAN SHIRE





Caermarden-shire.
THis Countie of Caermarden hath the name from the Towne of Caermarden, which the ancient Britaines called Caer-Firdhin, and is inuironed on the East with Brecknock and Glamorganshire, on the West with Pembrook-shire; on the South with the British Sea, and on the North with Cardigan-shire. The length of it from point to point, in the longest part, being not aboue fiue and thirty miles, and the widenesse from the broadest part twentie, so as the measure of the whole circumference containes about an hundred and two miles. It is parted into six Hundreds, which are againe diuided into 87. Parishes. It is irriguated with eight and twenty Riuers, which may be passed by sixteene Bridges: and it containeth two Parkes and foure Forests. In six Market Townes haue the Inhabitants Traffique and Commerce, the chiefe whereof is the Shire Towne Caermarden, which in Ptolomies time was called Maridunum, and is very delectably situate on the Westerne side of the Riuer Towy, which diuideth the whole Shire in the middest: ouer which water is a faire strong built Bridge of stone, for passage to the Towne; wherein vpon a Rocke is seated a large Castle, from whence a wall enuironeth the Towne, where (by report wee haue it) was borne the famous Welch Prophet Merlin, being the sonne of an Incubus spirit. This Towne hath formerly bin the Exchequer for all South Wales. The gouernment wherof is now committed to a Maior (who euer after is a Iustice of Peace) with two Sheriffes and sixteene Burgesses. The Pole being there eleuated 50. 50. and the Latitude 20. 16. The ancient Inhabitants of this Countie, were the Dimetriae, yet some thinke they were part of the Silures, and that this Shire was afterward the strong Fort of the Romans, where lay their Legions, as appeareth by their Coines lately found at Kilmanlloyd. Some seuen or eight mile Eastward from Caermarden are the ruines of Castle Carreg on the top of an high Hill, which is famous for spacious holes and wide Caues that are within it, and also for a Well which ebbes and flowes twice euery foure and twentie houres. The Aire is here pleasant, temperate and healthfull. The Soile not so Hilly, and more fertile than in some adioyning Shires. And for Commodities produceth Corne, Cattell, Grasse, Woods and Pit-coale, with plentie of Fowle and Fish, whereof the Salmon is there caught in very great abundance.



map of Carmarthenshire
CARMADEN SHIRE





Pembroke-shire.
THis Shire which (as learned Mr. Cambden reports) was in old books named the Lawfull Countie of Pembroch, is bounded on the East side by the County of Caermarden, on the West and South by the Irish Seas, and on the North with the Riuers Keach and Tyuy is diuided from Cardigan. And the length of the Shire from Cardigan North, to St. Gowers point South, containes 26. miles; and the bredth from Landeny East, to St. Dauids point West, about twenty; whereby the whole compasse is accounted much vpon 93. miles. The diuision of this Shire is into seuen Hundreds, wherein are dispersed the number of 145. Parish Churches. There being interfluent in this Countie six Riuers, that haue seuen Bridges. In it also are two Forests and three Parkes: And for the Inhabitants intercourse for Trade and Traffique, they are furnished in this County with siue Market Townes, whereof that which is accounted the chiefe, is Pembroke, the Shire Towne, and Denominator of the Countie, which is pleasantly seated on the Banke of a Creeke, where the water ebbeth and floweth euen vp to the walls: which hauing three Gates in a long forme (and now decaying) doe inclose the Towne, which on the West end hath a Castle, that hath beene large and strong. And a Causey locked, which is the way to Monton Priory, now suppressed. Within the walls are two Parish Churches, and the Towne at this day gouerned by a Maior, assisted with Bayliffes and Burgesses: the height of the Pole being there 51. 47. and the Longitude 19. 40. Another Towne note-worthy in the West of this Shire, is ancient St. Dauids, which is barren and vnfruitfull, standing open to all kinde of ill weather, and yet from thence came St. Patrick the Irish Apostle, whose parents were the British Priest Calphurnius and his wife Concha, that was Sister to St. Martin. This Citie, though ill stored with houses and Inhabitants, hath yet a faire Cathedrall Church, in the Quire whereof is intombed Edmund Earle of Richmond, King Henry the Seuenths father, for whose sake King Henry the Eighth spared the pulling downe of this Church in the time of Suppression. The ancient Inhabitants of this County were the Dimetriae, but long after King Henry the First planted Flemings there, Monto Priory and St. Dogmells were the Religious Houses that I finde were erected in this Shire, and in the dissolution were suppressed; yet with sixteene strong Castles and two Block-houses at the mouth of Milford Hauen was it well fortified. The Aire being temperate and wholesome, and the Soile fat, fertile and full of Marle, yeelding plentie of Corne, Cattell, Fowle and Fish.



Pembrokeshire
PENBROKE SHIRE





Cardigan-shire.
THis Countie of Cardigan, called by old Latine Writers Geretica, and in British, Sire-Aber-Tius, is bordered vpon on the East by Montgomery and Brecknock-shires, on the West by the Irish Sea, on the South by Towy and Tiuy is diuided from Caermarden-shire, and on the North by the Riuer Douy, from Merioneth-shire. It containes from Cardigan Towne in the South, to the Riuer Douy on the North, 32. miles, and stretcheth her widest part from Clarwen head in the East, to Aberystwyth on the West, but fifteene; the whole content of the compasse being about 103. miles. It is diuided into fiue Hundreds, which are subdiuided into 64. Parishes: 26. Riuers and Riuerets, with nine Bridges, are pleasantly interspersed in it. And for negotiating of businesse for the Inhabitants, foure Market Townes, whereof Cardigan the Shire Towne is the principall, which on the North side of the Riuer Tyuy, on a high banke is pleasantly seated, which Gilbert de Clare, to whom King Henry the First gaue this County, encompassed with a wall that hath three waies for passage into the Towne; and built there also vpon a Rocke, a faire large and strong Castle, which the bitter stormes of time haue now transformed into a monument of ruines: vnder which Castle is the Bridge, which is the onely passable way ouer the Riuer Tyuy. The eleuation of the Pole is here 52. 16. and the Longitude 19. 55. The ancient Inhabitants of this Countie, that Ptolemie makes mention of, were the Dimetiae, who vnder the conduct of their King Caractacus, were most valiant opposers of the Romans, till Iulius Frontinus ouercame and subdued them. This small Shire, I finde was furnished with few Religious Houses, namely at Cardigan Istradfleet, Llan-Badern-Vaur, which sometime was a Bishops Sea, and yet these few could not escape the force of Fortune, and Time the deuourer of all things. The Aire is here open, sharp, and piercing, and yet withall wholesome. The Soile hilly and vneuen, except towards the Sea-side, where it is more plaine, hauing pleasant valleyes and rich pastures. And the chiefest Commodities of this Countie are Corne, Cattell, Fowle and Fish; and in some places are Mines of Lead.



Cardiganshire
CARDIGAN SHIRE





Montgomery-shire.
THis County which we call Montgomery-shire, by the Britaines was called Sire-Trefaldwin, and on the East is inclosed with Shropshire, on the West with Merioneth-shire: Radnor and Cardican-shires border on the South, and the North is bounded with the Countie of Denbigh. The measure of the length from Hyssyngton East to Machenlett West, is about 26. miles, and the broadest betweene the Riuers of Dulas South, and Riader North, much vpon 22. The diuision of it is into seuen Hundreds, wherein are in diuers places dispersed 47. Parish Churches: and with many sweet Riuers that have six Bridges for passage is this Countie accommodated, whereof Seuerne, the second of all the Land, hath the head rising and issuing from the high Hill Plymllymon, whence also descend from their heads, the Riuers of Wye and Rydall. The Inhabitants of this Countie haue for Commerce and Traffique six Market Townes, whereof the chiefest is the Shire Towne Montgomery, which vpon the side of an hill is pleasantly situated in a very healthfull Aire, neare to which vpon a higher mount is seated a faire and strong Castle, that is yet kept and maintained in very good repaire, hauing a most pleasant Plaine vnder it: It was built by Roger de Montgomery, Earle of Shrewsbury, and called by the Latins Mons Gomericus. The Pole is here eleuated 52. 43. and the Longitude 21. 17. The hardy Ordouices were the ancient Inhabitants that possessed this Countie, who were a warlike people, that valiantly a long time withstood the Romane Forces, and held out from the subiection of the English, till the reigne of King Edward the First; but since that time haue euer beene found most firme and faithfull to the Crowne. The Aire is here very delightfull and healthfull; The Soyle Hilly and vneuen, but plentifull of faire and fresh water Springs. The East part of this Shire being as fruitfull as any part of England, and the West breeding abundant store of Cattell, but especially of excellent Horses.



Montgomeryshire
MOUNTGOMERIE SHIRE





Merioneth-shire.
THe Latines call this Countie Meruinia, which the Britaines termed Syre-Verioneth, and wee now call Merioneth-shire. Which boundeth thus: Montgomery-shire bordereth the East, and the Irish Seas doe wash upon the West. Cardigan-shire is diuided from it by the Riuer Dowy on the South: and the North is limited by the Counties Carnarnan and Denbigh. It contains in length, from Aber-Dowy South-west, to Llansansfred North-East, about 33. miles, and in bredth from Maynlloyd South-east, to Bethkelert Bridge 22. It is diuided into six Hundreds, wherein are contained 37. Parish Churches, and 26. Riuers passable by seuen Bridges. And for Commerce and Traffique in this Countie, are but three Market Townes, viz. Bala, Dolgelhe and Harlech, which is accounted the principall, though it be much defectiue both of building or any other ornaments befitting a Shire Towne, for in a barren place it stands, but bleake and cold, where there is little plentie of any thing but of Fowle and Fish. Yet is there a strong and faire Castle, situate vpon a Mount encircled with a double Bulwarke, which is a sure defence against the entrance there of any forren inuaders. And though the Constable of this Castle by Patent is also Maior of the Towne, yet doth the want of repaire thereof threaten a sudden decay. The Pole is here eleuated to 52. 58. of Latitude, and the Longitude 20. 9. Neare Bala is a great Pond, called Pimble-meare, containing 160. Acres in quantitie, which neuer by any land-flouds falling into it, is any whit increased, but by stormes of violent winds ouerfloweth and rageth in a wonderfull manner. The Ordonices were the ancient Inhabitants of this County, who very stoutly opposed the Romanes. And after they were subiugated to the English, (by the meanes of Owen Glendour) made many rebellious quarrels, to free themselues againe from the English yoake. Many Wolues in ancient times did abound in the Mountaines of this Countie, which by meanes of King Edgar were vtterly destroyed. The Aire here may be healthfull to the Natiues, but it is so continually troubled with violent winds, as it is nothing pleasant. And the Soile so rough and mountainous, that though Corne can thriue there, yet for Grasse and feeding for sheepe, and other Cattell, it is no way defectiue. Herrings are caught also on those Coasts in abundance; and the whole Countie sufficiently stored with Fish and Fowle.



Merionethshire
MERIONYTH SHIRE





Carnaruon-shire and Anglesey.
HEre am I confined to a narrower limit than in the former, being to describe two Prouinces in this one page. Briefly therefore thus: The Britaines called this County Caer-aruon; the Bounds whereof are Denbigh-shire on the East, M^ri^^ on the South, the Irish Seas on the West and North. The length from South to North containes 40 M^les, the bredth 20, and the whole compasse 110. There are in it 68 Parishes, one Bishopricke, 17. Riuers, with 6 large Bridges. And for Commerce and Traffique 5 Market Townes, whereof the chiefest is the Shire-Towne Carnaruon, situate very pleasantly on the Sea side, and enclosed with a Wall, hauing beene both beautified and fortified also with a strong faire Castle, which now euen droopeth for age, and the violent force of the Sea, wherewith it is continually vndermined and battered: The Constable of which Castle (by Patent) is euer Maior; who with an Alderman, and two Baylisses, doe gouerne this Towne; where King Edward 2. was borne, and where the Pole is eleuated 53. 26. and the longitude 19. 57. The Bishops Sea Bangor, where Hugh Earle of Chester built a Castle, is another Towne of note in this County, where the Ordo^^^es were the ancient Inhabitants, who by reason of the mountaines, (wherewith this Shire aboundeth) did long and stoutly withstand the Romanes, amongst which Snoden Hill is both the greatest and highest; but for more particulars of it, and other places of note in this Shire, I must referre you to Mr. Camden, and Mr. Speed, who will fully resolue you. The Aire here is sharp and cold; the Soile barren and hilly, and yet yeelds Milke, Butter, Cheese, and Hony, in a plentifull manner.


Anglesey.
THe Romanes named this Mona, which we call Anglesey Iland, being diuided from Britaine by the Riuer Menoy, and the rest round bounded by the Sea: it containes 20. miles in length, and 17. in bredth, the whole compasse being about 70. miles. Into six Hundreds it is diuided, and these are subdiuided into seuenty foure Parishes. It hath eight Riuers, and but two Market Townes for Trade and Traffique, the chiefe whereof is Beau-Marish, built by King Edward the first, who first brought the whole Iland vnder the English yoke, and fortified it with a strong Castle; the faire situation whereof, being in a Moorish place, gaue the name that it hath vnto it: which is now gouerned by a Maior annually elected, who is assisted with two Bayliffes, and a Towne Clerke. The Ordouices also were the old Inhabitants of this Iland, who were subiugated to the Romanes by Julius Agricola. I reade but of one Religious House in this Prouince, namely Lhaan-vais, which though it be now quite rased, is yet memorable for the bodies of King Iohns daughter, the Danish Kings sonne, the Lord Clifford, and diuers other eminent persons there interred. The Aire is piercing, and healthfull; and though the Soile seeme drie and barren, yet is it plentifully stored with wheat, and produceth Corne and Cattell, wherewith it not only furnisheth it selfe, but is a good help to the neighbour Prouinces.



map of Caernarfonshire and Anglesey
CARNARVAN THE ISLE OF ANGLESEY





Denbigh-shire.
THis Countie, in British called Sire Denbigh, is bounded on the East with Ches-shire and Shrop-shire, on the West with Caernaruon and Merioneth-shires: Montgomery-shire encloseth the South; the Sea and Flynt-shire the North. It stretcheth in length from East to West one and thirty, and in bredth from South to North about seuenteene; the whole compasse containing much vpon an hundred and fourteene miles. Into twelue Hundreds is this Countie distinguished, and they containe in them seuen and fiftie Parish Churches; foure and twentie Riuers, passable by six Bridges. And for Traffique and Trade amongst the countrey Inhabitants, three Market Townes, whereof the Principall is the Shire Towne Denbigh, which Henry Lacy Earle of Lincolne fortified with a wall, and a strong Castle: And yet is it famous for the fairest place in all North-Wales. The Gouernment whereof is committed to two Aldermen, and two Bayliffes, which are euery yeare chosen out of fiue and twenty Burgesses, who with a Recorder and a Towne Clerke are their Assistants. The eleuation of the Pole being there 53. 18. and the Longitude 20. 51. The Ordouices were the ancient Inhabitants of this Countie, a strong and warlike people, who of all others continued the longest free, from the Romane or English subiection; but first by Iulius Agricola to the one, and then by King Edward the First to the other, were subdued and conquered. The Vale of Cluyd being both pleasant and fruitfull, passeth the space of seuenteene miles long, and about fiue miles broad, thorow the heart of this Shire, being walled about with high Hills, where on the top of the highest, called Moillenlly, was in former times entrenched a strong Fort, hauing a cleare Spring of faire water. And in Llan-sanan Parish, in this County, are foure and twentie seats cut in a circle out of a Rocke, which the Inhabitants doe call King Arthurs Round Table. The Aire is here (though sharpe and bleake) healthfull, and the Soile in the middle most fruitfull: though the East and West sides are but barren and mountainous, yet yeelds it good store of Sheepe, Goats, and Neat; besides plenty of Corne, and other necessary Commodities.



map of Denbighshire
DENBIGH SHIRE.





Flint-shire.
FLint-shire is in forme long and narrow, being bounded on the East side with Cheshire, from which it is seuered by the Riuer Dee, on the West with Cluyd is diuided from Denbigh; the South is bordered vpon by Shrop-shire, and the North is limited with the waues of the Sea. The length containes in all not aboue 26. Miles, and in the broadest part scarce 8. Into 5. Hundreds is it diuided, wherein are dispersed 28 Parish Churches, and a Bishopricke. With many small Riuers is it well watered, but only Cluyd and Dee are two of the greatest note. And for Commerce and Traffique, haue the Inhabitants of this County but only one Market Towne, namely Flint the Shire Towne, where Henry the second laid the foundation, and Edward the first built a faire strong Castle, at which King Richard the second was by Henry Earle of Northumberland circumuented, and surprised; and by Henry of Lancaster Duke of Hereford induced to resigne his Crowne and Royall Dignity: which when he had done, he was conueyed to the Tower of London, as a prisoner there deposed, and afterwards at Pomfret lost his life. The eleuation of the Pole at this place is 53. 19. and the Longitude 21. 8. The stout and sturdy Ordouices, who so long and valiantly withstood the Romans, were the ancient Inhabitants of this County, which hath beene fortified formerly with 7. faire Castles, which with their Hils, was a sure and strong defence against their enemies. At a little Towne named Halywell in this Shire, is that famous fountaine, called commonly St Winefrids Well, of a faire Virgin of that name, who by a Lord of that Country was in that place both by force rauished, and afterwards beheaded; about which Well is Mosse growing, of a most odoriferous and fragrant smell: and ouer the said Fountaine is built a faire freestone Chapell, in the windowes whereof is the picture of the iniured Virgin, whereto poore Pilgrimes were vsed in abundance to make their repaire. And at Kilken in this County is another little spring, that at certaine times doth both ebbe and slow like the Sea. Diuers Religious houses haue beene seated in this Shire, which are now subuerted and turned to ruines; amongst which that at St. Asaphs the Bishops Sea, is memorable, for hauing 663. persons in the brotherhood. And neare to that Monastery wh^ch was at Basingwarke, began King Offaes Ditch, which crosse cutteth this County: where the Aire is pleasant, temperate and wholsome, and the Soile fruitfull, yeelding many commodities, as Corne, Grasse, Cattell, Milke, Butter, Cheese, and Honey, whereof they make Metheglin: besides which is there plenteous store of Riuer Fish; and in some places good Milstones and Grindstones are wrought out of the Rocke.



map of Flintshire
FLINT SHIRE


FINIS.




