


THE DELIGHTFVLL HISTORIE OF THE MOST INGENIOVS Knight Don-Quixote of the MANCHA. The first Part.

CHAP. I.

Wherein is rehearsed the calling, and exercises of the renowmed Gentleman Don-Quixote, of the Mancha.

THere liued not long since in a certaine vilage of the Mancha, the name wherof I purposely omit, a Yeoman of their calling that vse to pile vp in their hals olde Launces, Halbards, Morrions, and such other armours and weapons. He was besides master of an ancient Target, a leane Stallion, and a swift Grey-hound. His pot consisted daily of somewhat more Beefe then
 Mutton, a little minced meate euery night, griefes and complaints the Saturdayes, Lentils on Fridayes, and now and then a Pigeon of respect on Sundayes; did consume three parts of his rents: the rest and remnant thereof was spent on a Ierkin of fine puke, a paire of veluet hose, with pantofles of the same for the holly-dayes, and one apparell of the finest vesture; for therewithall he honored and set out his person on the worke dayes. Hee had in his house a woman-seruant, of about some forty yeares old, and a niese not yet twenty, and a man that serued him both in fielde and at home, and could saddle his horse, and likewise manage a pruning hooke. The Master himselfe was about fifty yeares olde, of a strong complexion, drie flesh, and a withered face: he was an early riser, and a great friend of hunting. Some affirme that his surname was Quixada or Quesada (for in this there is some variance among the authours that write his life) although it may be gathered by very probable coniectures, that hee was called Quixana. Yet all this concernes our historicall relation but little; let it then suffice, that in the narration thereof we will not vary a iot from the truth.
You shall therefore wit, that this Yeoman abouenamed the spirts that he was idle (which was the longer part of the yeare) did apply himselfe wholly to the reading of bookes of bookes Knight-hood, and that with such gusts and delights, as he almost wholly neglected the exercise of hunting, yea and the very administration of his househould affaires: and his curiosity and folly came to that passe, that he made away many acres of arable land to buy him bookes of that kind; and therefore he brought to his house as many as euer he could get of that subiect: and among them all none pleased him better then those which famous Felician of Silua composed. For the smoothnesse of his prose, with now and then some intricate sentence medled, seemed to him peerlesse; and principally when he did reade the loue dalliances, or letters
 of challenge, that Knights sent to Ladies, or one to another; where, in many places he found written the reason of the vnreasonablenesse, which against my reason is wrought, doth so weaken my reason, as with all reason I doe iustly complaine on your beauty. And also when he read The high Heauens, which with your diuinity doe fortifie you diuinely with the starres, and make you deserueresse of the deserts that your greatnesse deserue, etc. With these and other such passages the poore Gentleman grew distracted, and was breaking his braines day and night to vnderstand and vnbowell their sense. An endles labor, for euen Aristotle himselfe would not vnderstand them, though he were againe resuscitated onely for that purpose. He did not like so much the vnproportionate blowes that Don Belianis gaue and tooke in fight; for, as he imagined, were the Surgeons neuer so cunning that cured them, yet was it impossible but that the patient his face and all his body must remaine full of scars, and tokens: yet did he praise notwithstanding in the authour of that History, the conclusion of his booke, with the promise of the endlesse aduenture, and many times he himselfe had a desire to take pen and finish it exactly as it is there promised; and would doubtlesly haue performed it, and that certes with happy successe, if other more vrgent and continuall thoughts had not disturbed him.
Many times did he fall at variance with the Curate of his village (who was a learned man, graduated in Ciguenca) touching who was the better Knight Palmerin of England, or Amadis de Gaule: but Master Nicholas the Barber of the same towne would affirme, that none of both arriued in worth to the Knight of the Sun; and if anyone Knight might paragon with him, it was infallibly Don Galaor, Amadis de Gaules brother, whose nature might fitly be accommodated to anything; for hee was not so coy and whyning a Knight as his brother, and that in matters of valour, he did not bate him an ace.

In resolution, he plunged himselfe so deepely in his reading of these bookes, as he spent many times in the Lecture of them whole dayes and nights; and in the end through his little sleepe and much reading, he dryed vp his braines in such sort as he lost wholly his iudgement. His fantasie was filled with those things that he read, of enchantments, quarrels, battels, challenges, wounds, woings, loues, tempests, and other impossible follies. And these toyes did so firmly possesse his imagination with an infallible opinion, that all that Machina of dreamed inuentions which he read was true, as he accounted no History in the world to be so certaine and sincere as they were. He was wont to say that the A famous Captaine of the Spanish nation. Cid Ruydiaz was a very good Knight, but not to be compared to the Knight of the burning sword, which with one thwart blow cut asunder two fierce and mighty Giants. He agreed better with Bernardo del Carpio, because he slew the enchanted Rowland in Roncesuales. He likewise liked of the shift Hercules vsed when he smothered Anteon the sonne of the earth betweene his armes. He praysed the Gyant Morgant maruellously, because though hee was of that monstrous progenie, who are commonly all of them proude and rude, yet he onely was affable and courteous. But he agreed best of all with Reinauld of Mount alban; and most of all then, when he saw him sallie out of his Castle to rob as many as euer hee could meete: and when moreouer he robd the Idoll of Mahomet made al of gold, as his History recounts, and would be content to giue his soule, yea and his Niese also, for a good oportunity on the traytor Galalon, that he might lamb-skin and trample him into powder.
Finally, his wit being wholly extinguished; he fell into one of the strangest conceits that euer mad-man stumbled on in this world, to wit, it seemed vnto him very requisite and behouefull, as well for the augmentation of his honours, as also for the benefite of the Commonwealth,
 that he himselfe should become a Knight errant, and goe throughout the world, with his horse and armor to seeke aduentures, and practise in person all that he had read was vsed by Knights of yoare; reuenging of all kinds of iniuries, and offering himselfe to occasions and dangers: which being once happily atchieued, might gaine him eternall renowne. The poore soule did already figure himselfe crowned, through the valour of his arme, at least with the Empire of Trapesonda: and ledde thus by these soothing thoughts, and borne away with the exceeding delight he found in them, he hastened all that he might, to effect his vrging desires.
And first of all he caused certaine olde rusty armes to be scoured, that belonged to his great Grand-father, and lay many ages neglected, and forgotten in a by-corner of his house; he trimmed them and dressed them the best he mought, and then perceiued a great defect they had; for they wanted an helmet, and had only a plain morrion: but he by his industry supplied that want, and framed with certaine papers pasted together, a Beauer for his Morrion. True it is, that to make tryall whether his pasted Beauer was strong enough, and might abide the aduenture of a blow, he out with his sword, and gaue it a blow or two, and with the very first did quite vndoe his whole weekes labour: the facility wherewithall it was dissolued liked him nothing; wherefore to assure himselfe better the next time from the like danger, he made it anew, placing certaine iron barres within it, in so artificiall manner, as he rested at once satisfied, both with his inuention, and also the sollidity of the worke; and without making a second tryall, he deputed and held it in estimation of a most excellent Beauer. Then did he presently visit his horse, who though he had more corners then a Spanish Reall, and more faults then Gonellas, hauing nothing on him but skin and bone; yet he thought that neyther Alexanders Bucephalus, nor the Cid his horse
 Balieca, were in any respect equall to him. He spent foure dayes deuising him a name: for (as he reasoned to himselfe) it was not fit that so famous a Knights horse, and chiefly being so good a beast, should want a knowne name; and therefore he endeuoured to giue him such a one, as should both declare what sometime he had been, before he pertayned to a Knight errant, and also what presently he was: for it stood greatly with reason, seeing his Lord and Master changed his estate and vocation, that he should alter likewise his denomination, and get a new one, that were famous and altisonant, as becommed the new order and exercise which he now professed: and therefore after many other names which he framed, blotted our, rejected, added, vndid, and turned again to frame in his memory and imagination, he finally concluded to name him Rozinante, a name in his opinion, lofty, ful, and A horse of labor or carriage in Spanish is called Rozin, and the word Ante, signifies Before: so that Rozinante is a horse that sometime was of carriage. significatiue of what he had beene when he was a simple horse, before he was exalted to his new dignity; being as he thought, the best carriage beast of the world. The name being thus giuen to his horse, and so to his minde, he resolued to giue himselfe a name also, and in that thought he laboured other eight dayes; and in conclusion, called himselfe Don-Quixote; whence (as is said) the Authours of this most true History deduce, that he was vndoubtedly named Quixada, and not Quesada as others would haue it. And remembring that the valorous Amadis was not satisfied onely with the dry name of Amadis, but added thereunto the name of his Kingdome and Country, to render his owne more redoubted, terming himselfe Amadis de Gaula; so he, like a good Knight would adde to his owne, that also of his Prouince, and call himselfe Don-Quixote of the Mancha, wherewith it appeared, that he very liuely declared his Image and countrey, which he did honour, by taking it for his surname.
His armour being scoured, his morrion transformed
 into an helmet, his horse named, and himselfe confirmed with a new name also; he forthwith bethought himselfe that now he wanted nothing but a Lady, on whom hee might bestow his seruice and affection; for the Knight errant that is louelesse, resembles a tree that wants leaues and fruit, or a body without a soule: and therefore hee was wont to say, If I should for my sinnes, or by good hap encounter there abroad with some Giant (as Knights errant doe ordinarily) and that I should ouerthrow him with one blow to the ground, or cut him with a stroke in two halues, or finally ouercom, and make him yeeld to me, would it not be very expedient to haue some Lady, to whom I might present him? And that he entring in her presence do lay himself on his knees before my sweet Lady, and say vnto her with an humble and submissiue voyce: Madam! I am the Giant Caraculiambro, Lord of the Iland called Malindrania, whom the neuer-too-much-praysed Knight Don-Quixote de la Mancha hath ouercome in single combat; and hath commaunded to present my selfe to your greatnesse, that it may please your Highnesse to dispose of me according vnto your liking. O! how glad was our Knight when he had made this discourseto himselfe, but chiefly when he had found out one, whom he might call his Lady. For, as it is imagined, there dwelled in the next village vnto his Mannor, a young handsome wench, on whom he was sometime in loue, although as is vnderstood, she neuer knew or tooke notice thereof. She was called Aldonca Lorenco, and her he thought fittest to intitle with the name of Lady of his thoughts, and searching a name for her that should not vary much from her owne, and yet should draw and aueere somewhat to that of a Princesse or great Lady, he called her Dulcinea del Toboso (for there she was borne) a name in his conceit harmonious strange and significatiue, like to all the others that he had giuen to his things.



CHAP. II.

Of the first sally that Don-Quixote made to seeke aduentures.

THese preuentions being made, he would deferre the execution of his designes no longer, being spur'd on the more vehemently, by the want which he esteemed his delayes wrought in the world, according to the wrongs that he resolued to right, the harmes he meant to redresse, the excesses he would amend, the abuses that he would better, and the debts he would satisfie. And therefore without acquainting any liuing creature with his intention, he vnseene of any, vpon a certaine morning, somwhat before the day (being one of the warmest of Iuly) armed himselfe Cap a pie, mounted on Rozinante, laced on his il-contriued Helmet, imbraced his Target, tooke his Launce, and by a posterne doore of his base-court issued out to the field, marueilous iocund and content to see with what facility he had commenced his good desires. But scarce had he sallied to the fields when he was suddenly assaulted by a terrible thought, and such a one as did welnigh ouerthrow his former good purposes; which was, he remembred that he was not yet dub'd Knight, and therefore by the lawes of Knighthood neyther could nor ought to combat with any Knight. And though he were one, yet ought he to weare white armour like a new Knight, without any deuice in his shield, vntill he did win it by force of armes.
These thoughts did make him stagger in his purposes; but his follies preuayling more then any other reason, he purposed to cause himselfe to be Knighted by the first he met, to the imitation of many others, that did the same, as he had read in the bookes which distracted him. As touching white armour, he resolued with the first oportunity
 to scoure his owne so well, that they should rest whiter then Ermines: and thus he pacified his mind, and prosecuted his iourney, without chusing any other way then that which his horse pleased, beleeuing that therein consisted the vigor of Knightly aduentures. Our flowrishing aduenturer trauelling thus onward, did parle with himselfe in this manner: Who doubts in the ensuing ages, when the true History of my famour actes shall come to light, but that the wiseman who shall write it will begin it when he comes to declare this my first sally so early in the morning, after this manner. Scarce had the ruddy Apollo spread ouer the face of the vast and spacious earth, the golden twists of his beautifull hayres, and scarce had the little enameld birds with their naked tongues saluted with sweet and Melodious. mellifluous harmony, the arriuall of Rosie Aurora, when abandoning her iealous husbands soft couch, shee shewes her selfe to mortall wights through the gates and windowes of the His countrey the Mancha. Manchegall Orizon. When the famous Knight Don-Quixote of the Mancha, abandoning the slouthfull plumes, did mount vpon his renouned horse Rozinante, and began to trauell through the auncient and notorious fields of Montiel, (as indeede he did) and following still on with his Discourse, he said: O! happy the age, and fortunate the time, wherein my famous feats shall be reuealed, feats worthy to be grauen in brasse, carued in marble and deliuered with most curious arte in tables, for a future instruction and memory. And thou wise enchanter, whosoeuer thou beest, whom it shall concerne to be the Chronicler of this strange History, I desire thee not to forget my good horse Rozinante, mine eternall and inseparable companion in all my iournies and courses. And then as if hee were verily enamoured, he said, O Princesse Dulcinea, Lady of this captiue heart, much wrong hast thou done me by dismissing me, and reproching me with the rigorous decree and commandement
 not to appeare before thy beauty: I pray thee sweete Lady deigne to remember thee of this poore subiected heart, that for thy loue suffers so many tortures. And with these words he inserted a thousand other rauings all after the very same manner that his bookes taught him, imitating as neere as he could their very phrase and language, and did ride therewithall so slow a pace, and the Sunne did mount so swiftly, and with so great heate as it was sufficient to melt his braines if he had had any left.
He trauelled almost all that day, without encountring any thing worthy the recitall, which made him to fret for anger, for he desired to encounter presently some one vppon whom he might make trial of his inuincible strength. Som authors write that his first aduenture was that of the Lapicean straites, others, that of the Winde-mils; but what I could only find out in this affaire, and that which I haue found written in the Annals of the Mancha is, that he trauelled all that day long, and at night both he and his horse were tyred, and marueilously prest by hunger, and looking about him on euery side, to see whether he could discouer any Castle or Sheepe-fold, wherein he might retire himselfe for that night, and remedy his wants; he perceiued an Inne, neare vnto the high way wherein he trauelled; which was as welcome a sight to him, as if he had seene a starre, that did addresse him to the porch, if not to the Pallace of his redemption. Then spurring his horse, he hyed all he might towards it, and arriued much about night fall. There stood by chance at the Inne dore, two young women aduenturers likewise, which trauelled toward Siuill with certaine Carriers, and did by chance take vp their lodging in that Inne the same euening; and for as much as our Knight errant esteemed all which he thought, saw, or imagined, was done or did really passe in the very same forme, as he had read the like in his bookes: forthwith as soone as he espied the Vent
 he fained to himselfe that it was a Castle with foure Turrets, whereof the Pinacles were of glistring siluer, without omitting the draw-bridge, deepe fosse, and other adherents belonging to the like places: And approching by little and little to the Vent, when he drew neere to it, checking Rozinante with the bridle, he rested a while to see whether any dwarse would mount on the battlements to giue warning with the sound of a Trumpet, how some Knight did approach the Castle: but seeing they stayed so long, and also that Rozinante kept a coile to goe to his stable, he went to the Inne dore, and there beheld the two distracted wenches, that stood at it, whom hee presently supposed to be two beautifull damzels or louely Ladies, that did solace themselues before the Castle gates. And in this space it befell by change, that a certaine Swine-heard as he gathered together his hogges, blew the horne, whereat they are wont to come together; and instantly Don-Quixote imagined it was what he desired, to wit, some dwarse who gaue notice of his arriuall; and therefore with marueilous satisfaction of minde he approched to the Inne and Ladies; who beholding one armed in that manner to draw so neere, with his Launce and Target, they made much hast being greatly affrighted, to get to their lodging. But Don-Quixote, perceiuing their feare by their flight, lifting vp his pasted Beauer, and discouering his withered and dusty countenance, did accost them with gentle demeanoure and graue words in this manner: Let not your Ladiships flie, nor feare any outrage, for to the order of Knighthood which I doe professe, it toucheth nor appertayneth not to wrong any body, and least of all such worthy damzels as your presences denote you to be. The wenches looked on him very earnestly, and did search with their eyes for the visage, which his il-fashioned Beauer did conceale: but when they heard themselues termed damzels, a thing so farre from their profession, they could not
 containe their laughter, which was so loude, as Don-Quixote waxed ashamed thereat, and therefore said to them: Modesty is a comely ornament of the beautifull, and the excessiue laughter that springs from a light occasion, must be reputed great folly: but I do not obiect this vnto you to make you the more ashamed, or that you should take it in ill part: for my desire is none other then to do you all the honour and seruice I may. This he spake vnto them in such vncouth words, as they could not vnderstand him, which was an occasion, ioyned with his owne vncomelinesse, to encrease their laughter and his wrath, which would haue past the bounds of reason, if the In-keeper had not come out at the instant; being a man who by reason of his exceeding fatnesse, must needes haue beene of a very peaceable condition, who beholding that counterfeit figure, all armed in so vnsutable armour, as were his Bridle, Lance, Target, and Corslet, was very neare to haue kept the damzels company in the pleasant showes of his merriment: but fearing in effect the Machina and bulke contriued of so various furnitures, he determined to speake him fairely, and therfore began to him in this maner: If your worship (Sir Knight) doe seeke for lodging, you may chalke your selfe a bedde (for there is none in this Inne) wherein you shall finde all other things in abundance. Don-Quixote noting the lowlinesse of the Constable of that Fortresse (for such the Inne and In-keeper seemed vnto him) answered, any thing Sir Here the Spanish is Castellano, that is in the Spanish tongue eyther a Constable of a Castle, or one borne in Castile. Constable, may serue me; for mine armes are mine ornaments, and battels mine ease, etc. The Hoste thought he had called him a Castellano or Constable, because hee esteemed him to be one of the sincere and honest men of Castile, whereas he was indeede an Andaluzian, and of the commarke of S. Lucars, no lesse thieuish then Cacus, nor lesse malicious and crafty then a student or page; and therefore he answered him thus: If that be so, your bedde must be hard rockes, and your sleepe a perpetuall watchings:
 and being such, you may boldly allight, and shall finde certainly here occasion and oportunitie to holde you waking this twelue-moneth, more for one night: and saying so, laid hand on Don-Quixotes stirrop, who did forthwith allight, though it was with great difficulty and paine (as one that had not eaten all that day one crumme) and then he requested the Hoste to haue speciall care of his horse, saying, he was one of the best pieces that euer eate bread. The In-keeper viewed and reuiewed him, to whom he did not seeme halfe so good as Don-Quixote valued him; and laying him vp in the stable, he turned to see what his Guest would command, who was a disarming by both the damzels (which were by this time reconciled to him) who though they had taken off his brest-plate and backe parts, yet knew they not how, nor could any wise vndo his gorget, nor take off his counterfeit Beauer, which he had fastened on with greene ribbands; and by reason the knots were so intricate, it was requisite they should be cut, whereunto he would not in any wise agree; and therfore remained all the night with his helmet on, and was the strangest and pleasantest figure thereby that one might behold. And as he was a disarming (imagining those light wenches that holpe him, to be certaine principall Ladies and dames of that Castle) he said vnto them with a very good grace: Neuer was any Knight so well attended on, and serued by Ladies as was Don-Quixote; when he departed from his village, damzels attended on him, and Princesses on his horse. O Rozinante, for (Ladies) that is the name of my horse, and Don-Quixote de la Mancha is mine owne. For although I meant at the first not to haue discouered my selfe, vntill the acts done in your seruice and benefite should manifest me, yet the necessity of acco^modating to our present purpose, the olde Romaunce of Sir Launce^lot hath beene an occasion that you should know my name before the right season: but the time will come wherein your Ladiships
 may commaund me, and I obey, and then the valor of mine arme shall discouer the desire I haue to doe you seruice.
The wenches being vnaccustomed to heare so rhetoricall termes, answered neuer a word to him, but onely demaunded, whether he would eate any thing? That I would, replied Don-Quixote, for as much as I thinke the taking of a little meate would be very behoouefull for me. It chanced by hap to be on Friday, and therefore there was no other meat in the Inne, then a few pieces of a fish called in Castile Abadexo, in Andaluzia Bacallao, and in some places Curadillo, and in others Truchuela, and is but poore-Iohn. They demanded of him therfore whether he would eate thereof, giuing it the name vsed in that place of Truchuela or little Troute, for there was no other fish in all the Inne to present vnto him but such? Why then quoth Don-Quixote bring it in, for if there be many little Trouts, they may serue me in stead of a great one; it being all one to me to be paide my money (if I were to receiue any) in eight single Reals, or to be paide the same in one Reall of eight. And moreouer those little Trouts are perhaps like vnto Veale, which is much more delicate flesh then Beefe or the Kid, which is better then the Goat: but be it what it list, let it be brought in presently; for the labour and weight of armes cannot be well borne, without the well supplying of the guttes. Then was there straight laid a table at the Inne dore, that he mought take the aire: and the Host brought him a portion of euil watered, and worse boyled poore-Iohn, and a loafe as blacke and hoary as his Harnesse: but the onely sport was to behold him eate: for by reason his helmet was on, and his Beauer lifted, he could put nothing into his mouth himselfe, if others did not helpe him to finde the way; and therefore one of those Ladies serued his turne in that: but it was altogether impossible to giue him drinke after that manner, and would haue remayned
 so for euer, if the In-keeper had not boared a Cane, and setting the one end in his mouth, poured downe the wine at the other: all which he suffered most patiently, because he would not breake the ribbans of his helmet. And as he sate at supper, there arriued by chance a Sow-gelder, who as soone as he came to the Inne did sound foure or fiue times a whistle of Canes, the which did confirme Don-Quixote that he was in some famous Castle, where he was serued with musicke, and that the poore-Iohn was Trouts, the bread of the finest flower, the whoores Ladies, and the In-keeper Constable of that Castle: Wherefore he accounted his resolution and departure from his owne house very well imployed. But that which did most afflict him, was, that he was not yet dubbed Knight, for as much as he was fully perswaded that he could not lawfully enterprise or follow any aduenture, vntill he receiued the order of Knight-hood.


CHAP. III.

Wherein is recounted the pleasant manner obserued in the Knighting of Don-Quixote.

ANd being thus tossed in minde, he did abreuiat his Tauernely and limited supper; which being finished, hee called for his horse, and shutting the Stable dore very fast, he laid himselfe down vpon his knees in it before him, saying, I will neuer rise from the place where I am valorous Knight, vntill your curtesie shall graunt vnto me a boone that I meane to demand of you, the which will redound vnto your renowne, and also to the profite of all humane kinde. The In-keeper seeing his guest at his feete, and hearing him speake those words, remayned confounded beholding
 him, not knowing what he might doe or say, and did studie and labour to make him arise: but all was in vaine, vntill he must haue promised vnto him, that he would graunt him any gift that he sought at his handes. I did neuer expect lesse (replied Don-Quixote) from your great magnificence my Lord, and therefore I say vnto you that the boone which I demaund of you, and that hath beene graunted vnto me by your liberality, is, that to morrow in the morning you wil dubbe me Knight, and this night I will watch mine armour in the Chappell of your Castle, and in the morning, as I haue said, the rest of my desires shall be accomplished, that I may goe in due manner throughout the foure parts of the world to seeke aduentures, to the benefit of the needy, as is the duety of Knight-hood and of Knights errant, as I am, whose desires are wholly inclined and dedicated to such atchieuements. The Hoste, who, as we noted before, was a great giber, and had before gathered som argume^ts of the defect of wit in his guest, did wholly now perswade himself that his suspicions were true, when he heard him speake in that manner: and that hee might haue an occasion of laughter, he resolued to feed his humour that night, and therefore answered him, that he had very great reason in that which he desired and sought, and that such proiects were proper and naturall to Knights of the garbe and worth he seemed to be of: and that he himselfe likewise in his youthfull yeares had followed that honourable exercise, going through diuers parts of the world to seeke aduentures, without eyther omitting the Percheles. dangers of Malaga, the Isles of Riaran, the compasse of Siuill, the Azogueso. Quicke-siluer-house of Segouia, the Oliue-field of Valencia, the Circuit of Granada, the wharfe of S. Lucor, the The Potron of Cordoua is a certaine fountaine whereon stands a Pegasus: and to that fountaine resort a number of cunny-catching fellowes, as Duke Humfrey at Paules. Potro or Cowlt of Cordoua, and the little Tauernes of Toledo; and many other places, wherein he practised the dexterity of his handes, doing many wrongs, solliciting many widdowes, vndoing certaine maydens, and deceiuing
 many pupils, and finally making himselfe knowne and famous in all the Tribunals and Courts almost of all Spaine, and that at last he had retired himselfe to that his Castle, where he was sustained with his owne and other mens goods; entertayning in it all Knights errants, of whatsoeuer quality and condition they were, onely for the great affection he bore towards them, and to the end they might diuide with him part of their winnings in recompence of his good will: he added besides, that there was no Chappell in his Castle, wherein he might watch his armes, for he had broken it downe to build it vp anew: but notwithstanding he knew very well that in a case of necessity, they might lawfully be watched in any other place, and therefore hee might watch them that night in the base Court of the Castle; for in the morning, and pleased God, the ceremonies requisite should bee done in such sort, as he should remaine a dubbed Knight, in so good fashion, as in all the world he could not be bettered. He demaunded of Don-Quixote whether he had any money? who answered that he had not a blanck, for he had neuer read in any History of Knights errants, that any one of them euer caried any money. To this his Hoste replied, that he was deceiued; for admit that Histories made no mention thereof, because the authours of them deemed it not necessary to expresse a thing so manifest, and needfull to be carried as was money and cleane shirts: it was not therefore to be credited, that they had none; and therefore he should hold for most certaine and manifest, that all the Knights errant, with the story of whose acts so many bookes are replenished and heaped, had their purses well lined for that which might befall, and did moreouer carie with them a litle Casket of oyntments and salues, to cure the wounds which they receiued; for they had not the commodity of a Surgeon to cure them, euery time that they fought abroad in the fields and desarts, if they had not by chaunce some wise
 Enchanter to their friend, who would presently succour them, bringing vnto them in some cloude through the ayre some damzell or dwarfe, with a Violl of water of so great vertue, as tasting one droppe therof, they remained as whole of their sores and wounds, as if they had neuer receiued any. But when they had not that benefite, the Knights of times past held it for a very commendable and secure course, that their Squires should be prouided of money and other necessary things, as linte, and oyntments for to cure themselues: and when it befell that the like Knights had no Squires to attend vpon them (which hapned but very seldome) then would they themselues carie all this prouision behinde them on their horses, in some slight and subtile wallets, which could scarce be perceiued, as a thing of very great consequence. For if it were not vpon such an occasion, the cariage of wallets was not very tollerable among Knights erra^t. And in this respect he did aduise him, seeing he might yet commaund him as one that by receiuing the order of Knight-hood at his hands, should very shortly become his God-childe, that he should not trauell from thence forward without money, and other the preuentions he had then giuen vnto him; and he should perceiue himselfe how behoouefull they would proue vnto him, when he least expected it.
Don-Quixote promised to accomplish all that he had counselled him to doe, with all punctuality; and so order was forthwith giuen how he should watch his armes in a great yard that lay neere vnto one side of the Inne: wherefore Don-Quixote gathering all his armes together, laid them on a Cisterne that stood neer vnto a Well: and buckling on his Target, he laid hold on his Launce and walked vp and downe before the Cisterne very demurely; and when he began to walke the night likewise, began to lo^ke vp the splendor of the day. The In-keeper in the meane season recounted to all the rest that lodged in the Inne the folly of his guest, the watching of
 his armes and the Knighthood which he expected to receiue. They all admired very much at so strange a kinde of folly, and went out to behold him from a farre off, and saw that sometimes he pranced too and fro with a quiet gesture; other times leaning vpon his Launce he looked vpon his armour, without beholding any other thing saue his armes for a good space.
The night being shut vp at last wholly, but with such cleerenesse of the Moone, as it might well compare with his brightnesse that lent her her splendor, euery thing which our new Knight did, was easily perceiued by all the beholders. In this season one of the Carriers that lodged in the Inne resolued to water his Mules, and for that purpose it was necessary to remooue Don-Quixotes armour that lay on the Cesterne; who seeing him approach, said vnto him with a loude voice: O thou! whosoeuer thou beest, bold Knight, that commest to touch the armour of the most valorous aduenturer that euer gyrded sword, looke well what thou dost, and touch them not if thou meanest not to leaue thy life in payment of thy presumption. The Carrier made no account of those words (but it were better he had, for it would haue redounded to his benefite) but rather laying hold on the leatherings, threw the armour a prettie way off from him: which being perceiued by Don-Quixote, he lifted vp his eyes towards heauen, and addressing his thoughts (as it seemed) to his Lady Dulcinea he said, Assist me deere Lady in this first dangerous scorne and aduenture offered to this breast, that is inthralled to thee, and let not thy fauor and protection faile me in this my first Traunce. And vttering these and other such words, he let slip his Target, and lifting vp his Launce with both hands, he paide the Carrier so round a knocke therewithall on the pate, as he ouerthrew him to the ground in so euill taking, as if he had seconded it with another, he should not haue needed any Surgeon to cure him. This being ended, he gathered vp
 his armour againe, and laying them where they had been before, he walked after vp and downe by them, with as much quientnesse as he did at the first.
But very soone after, another Carrier without knowing what had hapned (for his companion lay yet in a trance on the ground) came also to giue his Mules water, and comming to take away the armes, that he might free the Cesterne of encumbrances, and take water the easier: Don-Quixote saying nothing, nor imploring fauor of his Mistris or any other, let slip againe his Target, and lifting his Lance, without breaking of it in pieces, made more then three of the second Carriers noddle; for he broke it in foure places. All the people of the Inne, and amongst them the Host likewise repaired at this time to the noise: which Don-Quixote perceiuing, imbracing his Target, and laying hand on his sword, he said: O Lady of all beauty, courage, and vigour of my weakned heart, it is now high time that thou doe conuert the eyes of thy greatnesse to this thy Captiue Knight, who doth expect so marueilous great an aduenture. Saying thus, he recouered as he thought so great courage, that if al the Carriers of the world had assayled him, he would not go one steppe backward. The wounded mens fellowes, seeing them so euill dight, from a farre off began to raine stones on Don-Quixote, who did defend himselfe the best hee might with his Target, and durst not depart from the Cesterne, least he should seeme to a bandon his armes. The Inkeeper cryed to them to let him alone; for he had already informed them that he was madde, and for such a one would scape scot-free although he had slaine them all. Don-Quixote likewise cryed out louder, terming them all disloyall men and traytors, and that the Lord of the Castle was a treacherous and badde Knight, seeing he consented that Knights errant should be so basely vsed; and that if he had not yet receiued the order of Knighthood, he would make him vnderstand his treason,
 but of you base and rascally Kenell (quoth he) I make no reckoning at all: throw at me, approach, draw neare, and doe me all the hurt you may, for you shall ere long perceiue the reward you shall carie for this your madnesse and outrage. Which wordes hee spoke with-so great spirit and boldnesse, as hee stroke a terrible feare into all those that assaulted him: and therfore moued both by it, and the Inkeepers perswasions, they left off throwing stones at him, and he permitted them to carie away the wounded men, and returned to the guard of his armes, with as great quietnesse and grauity, as he did at the beginning.
The Inkeeper did not like very much these jests of his guest, and therfore he determined to abbreuiate, and giue him the vnfortunate order of Knighthood forthwith, before some other disaster befell: and with this resolution comming vnto him, he excused himself of the insolencies those base fellowes had vsed to him, without his priuity or consent, but their rashnesse, as he said, remayned well chastised: He added how he had already told vnto him, that there was no Chappel in his Castel, and that for what yet rested vnperfected of their intention, it was not necessary, because the chiefe point of remayning Knighted, consisted chiefly in blowes of the necke and shoulders, as he had read in the ceremoniall booke of the order, and that, that might be giuen in the very midst of the fieldes; and that he had already accomplished the obligation of watching his armes, which with only two houres watch might be fulfild; how much more after hauing watched foure, as he had done. All this Don-Quixote beleeued, and therfore answered, that he was most ready to obey him, and requested him to conclude with al the breuity possible: for if he saw himselfe Knighted, and were once againe assaulted, he meant not to leaue one person aliue in all the Castle, except those which the Constable should command, whom he would spare for his sake.

The Constable being thus aduertised, and fearefull that he would put this his deliberation in execution, brought out a booke presently, wherein he was wont to write downe the accounts of the straw and Barley, which he deliuered from time to time, to such Carriers as lodged in his Inne, for their beasts: and with a but of a candle which a boy held lighting in his hand before him, accompanied by the two damzels aboue mentioned, he came to Don-Quixote, whom he commanded to kneele vpon his knees, and reading in his Manual (as it seemed some deuoute Orison) he held vp his hand in the midst of the Lecture, and gaue him a good blow on the necke, and after that gaue him an other trimme thwacke ouer the shoulders with his owne sword (alwayes murmuring something betweene the teeth as if he prayed) this being done, he commaunded one of the Ladies to gy^d on his sword which she did with a singular good grace and dexteritie, which was much, the matter being of it selfe so ridiculous, as it wanted but little, to make a man burst for laughter at euery passage of the Ceremonies: but the prowesse which they had already beheld in the new Knight, did limit and contain their delight at the gyrding on of his sword, the good Lady said, God make you a fortunate Knight, and giue you good successe in all your debates. Don-Quixote demaunded then how she was called, that he might thenceforward know to whom he was so much obliged for the fauour receiued? And she answered with great buxomnes, that she was named Tolosa, and was a butchers daughter of Toledo, that dwelt in the Rewes of Sancho Benega, and that she would euer honour him as her Lord. Don-Quixote replied, requesting her for his sake to call her selfe from thence forth the Lady Tolosa, which he promised him to performe. The other Lady buckled on his spurre, with whom hee had the very like conference; and asking her name, shee told him shee was called Molinera, and was daughter
 to an honest Miller of Antequera: here likewise our Knight intreated to call her selfe the Lady Molinera, profering her new seruices and fauours. The new and neuer-seene before Ceremonies being thus speedily finished, as it seemed with a gallop, Don-Quixote could not rest vntill he were mounted on horse-backe, that hee might goe to seeke aduentures; wherefore causing Rozinante to be instantly sadled, he leaped on him, and imbracing his Hoste, he said vnto him such strange things, gratifying the fauour hee had done him in dubbing him Knight, as it is impossible to hit vpon the manner of recounting them right. The Inkeeper that hee might be quickly rid of him, did answere his wordes with others no lesse rethoricall, but was in his speech somwhat briefer; and without demanding of him any thing for his lodging, he suffered him to depart in a fortunate houre.


CHAP. IIII.

Of that which be fell to our Knight, after he had departed from the Inne.

AVrora began to display her beauties about the time that Don-Quixote issued out of the Inne, so content, liuely, and jocund to behold himselfe Knighted, as his very horse gyrts were ready to burst for ioy: but calling to memory the counsels that his Hoste had giuen him, touching the most needfull implements that he was euer to carie about him, of money and cleane shirts, he determined to returne to his house, and to prouide himselfe of them, and also of a Squire; making account to intertaine a certaine labourer his neighbour, who was poore, and had children, but yet one very fit for this purpose, and Squirely function, belonging to
 Knighthood. With this determination he turned Rozinante towards the way of his owne village, who knowing in a manner his will, began to trotte on with so good a will, as he seemed not to touch the ground. He had not trauelled farre, when hee thought that he heard certaine weake and delicate cryes, like to those of one that complayned to issue out from the thickest of a wood that stood on the right hand. And scarce had he heard them when he said: I render infinite thankes to heauen for the fauour it doth me, by profering me so soone occasions, wherein I may accomplish the duety of my profession, and gather the fruits of my good desires: these plaints doubtlesly be of some distressed man or woman, who needeth my fauour and ayde. Then turning the raynes, he guided Rozinante towards the place from whence he thought the complaints sallied; and within a few paces after he had entred into the thicket, he saw a Mare tyed vnto an Holme Oake, and to another was tied a young youth all naked from the middle vpward of about the age of fifteene yeares, and was he that cried so pittifully: and not without cause; for a certaine Countriman of comely personage did whip him with a girdle, and accompanied euery blow with a reprehension and counsell, for he said, the tongue must peace, and the eyes be warie: and the boy answered, I will neuer doe it againe, good Master; for the passion of God, I will neuer doe it againe. And I promise to haue more care of your things from henceforth.
But Don-Quixote viewing all that passed, said with an angry voyce: Discourteous Knight, it is very vncomely to see thee deale thus, with one that cannot defend himselfe, leape therefore a horse-backe, and take thy Launce (for the Farmer had also a Launce leaning to the very same tree, whereunto his Mare was tied) for I will make thee know, that it is the vse of Cowards to doe that which thou dost. The other beholding such
 an Anticke to houer ouer him, all laden with armes, and brandishing of his Launce towards his face, made full account that hee should be slaine, and therefore he answered with very milde and submissiue wordes, saying, Sir Knight, the boy which I chastise is mine owne seruant, and keepeth for me a flocke of sheepe in this Commarke; who is growne so negligent, as hee looseth one of them euery other day, and because I correct him for his carelesnesse and knauery, he sayes I doe it through couetousnesle and pinching, as meaning to defraude him of his wages; but before God and in conscience he belies me. What? The lie, in my presence rascally clowne? Quoth Don-Quixote by the Sunne that doth kindle this world, I am about to runne thee thorow and thorow with my Launce base Carle; pay him instantly without more replying, or else by that God which doth mannage our sublunar affaires, I will conclude thee, and annihilate thee in a moment; loose him forthwith. The Countrey-man hanging downe of his head, made no replie, but loosed his seruant; of whom Don-Quixote demaunded how much did his Master owe vnto him? hee said, one moneths hire, at seuen Reals a moneth. Don-Quixote made then the account, and found that all amounted to seuenty and three Reals, and therefore commaunded the Farmer to pay the money presently, if hee meaned not to die for it. The fearefull Countrey-man answered, that by the trance wherein he was then, and by the oath he had made (which was none at all, for hee swore not) that hee ought not so much: for there should bee deducted out of the accounts three paire of shoes hee had giuen vnto him, and a Reall for twise letting him bloud, being sicke. All is well, quoth Don Quixote, but let the price of the shoes and letting bloud, goe for the blowes which thou hast giuen him without amy
 desert; for if he haue broken the leather of those ^^oes thou hast bestowed on him, thou hast likewise torne the skinne of his body; and if the Barber tooke away his bloud being sicke, thou hast taken it out, he being in health; so as in that respect he owes thee nothing. The damage is Sir Knight, replied the boyes Master, that I haue no money here about me. Let Andrew come with me to my house, and I will pay him his wages, one Reall vpon another. I goe with him, quoth the boy. Euill befall me then. No Sir, I neuer meant it; for as soone as euer he were alone, he would fley me like S. Bartholomew. He will not dare to do it, quoth Don-Quixote, for my commaund is sufficient to make him respect me, and so that he will sweare to me to obserue it by the order of Knighthood which he hath receiued, I will set him free, and assure thee of the payment. Good Sir, quoth the youth, marke well what you say, for this man my Master is no Knight, nor did euer receiue any order of Knighthood; for he is Iohn Haldudo the rich man, a dweller of Quintanar. That makes no matter, quoth Don-Quixote, for there may be Knights of the Haldudos: and what is more, euery one is sonne of his workes. That's true, quoth Andrew, but of what workes can this my Master be sonne, seeing he denies me my wages, and my sweate and labour? I doe not denie thy wages friend Andrew, quoth his Master; doe me but the pleasure to come with me, and I sweare by all the orders of Knighthood that are in the world, to pay thee as I haue said, one Reall vppon another, yea and those also perfumed. For the perfuming I thanke thee, quoth Don-Quixote, giue it him in Reals, and with that I will rest satisfied; and see that thou fulfillest it as thou hast sworne: if not, I swear againe to thee by the same oath to returne and search thee, and chastise thee, and I will finde thee out, though thou didst hide thy selfe better then a Lizarde: and if thou desirest to note who commaunds thee this, that
 thou mayest remaine more firmely obliged to accomplish it, know that I am the valorous Don-Quixote of the Mancha, the righter of wrongs and vndoer of iniuries, and so farewell: and doe not forget what thou hast promised and sworne on paine of the paines already pronounced. And saying these wordes, he spurred Rozinante, and in short space was got farre off from them. The Countrey-man pursued him with his eye, and perceiuing that he was past the wood and quite out of sight, he returned to his man Andrew, and said to him come to me childe, for I will pay thee what I owe thee, as that righter of wrongs hath left me commanded. That I sweare, quoth Andrew, and you shall deale discreetely in fulfilling that good Knights commaundement, who I pray God may liue a thousand yeares: for seeing he is so valorous and so iust a Iudge I swear by Rocque, that if you pay me not, he shall returne and execute what he promised. I also doe sweare the same quoth the Farmer, but in respect of the great affection I beare vnto thee I wil augment the debt, to increase the payment; and catching the youth by the arme, he tied him againe to the Oake, where he gaue him so many blowes as he left him for dead. Call now Master Andrew (quoth he) for the righter of wrongs, and thou shalt see that he cannot vndo this, although I beleeue it is not yet ended to be done. For I haue yet a desire to flea thee aliue, as thou didst thy selfe feare. Notwithstanding all these threats, he vntied him at last, and gaue him leaue to goe seeke out his Iudge; to the end he might execute the sentence pronounced. Andrew departed somewhat discontent, swearing to search for the valorous Don-Quixote of the Mancha, and recount vnto him point by point all that had past, and that he should pay the abuse with vsury: but for all his threats he departed weeping, and his Master remained behinde laughing; and in this manner the valorous Don-Quixote redresse that wrong.

Who glad aboue measure for his successe, accounting himselfe to haue giuen a most noble beginning to his seats of armes, did trauell towards his village, with very great satisfaction of himselfe, and said in a low tune these wordes ensuing: Well maist thou call thy selfe happy aboue all other women of the earth, O! aboue all beauties beautifull Dulcinea of Tobosa, since thy good fortune was such, to hold subiect and prostrate to thy will and desire so valiant and renouned a Knight as is; and euer shall be, Don-Quixote of the Mancha: who, as all the world knowes, receiued the order of Knighthood but yesterday, and hath destroyed to day the greatest outrage and wrong that want of reason could forme, or cruelty commit. To day did he take away the whip out of that pittilesse enemies hand, which did so cruelly scourge without occasion the delicate infant.
In this discourse he aimed to a way which diuided it selfe into foure, and presently these thwarting crosse wayes represented themselues to his imagination, which oft-times held Knights errant in suspence, which way they should take; and that hee might imitate them hee stood still a while, and after he had bethought himselfe well, he let slip the raines to Rozinante, subiecting his will to that of his horse, who presently pursued his first designe, which was to returne home vnto his owne stable: and hauing trauelled some two miles, Don-Quixote discouered a great troupe of people, who as it was after knowne, were certaine Merchants of Toledo, that rode towards Murcia to buy silkes: they were sixe in number, and came with their A thing made like a Canopy, and is vsed by Trauellers to keepe away the Sunne. Quitasoles or shadowes of the Sunne, foure Seruing-men a horse-backe, and three Lackeyes. Scarce had Don-Quixote perceiued them, when he straight imagined them to be a new aduenture: and because he would imitate as much as was possible the passages which he read in his bookes, he represented this to himselfe to be iust such an aduenture as hee purposed to
 archieue. And so with comely gesture and hardinesse, setling himselfe well in the stirrops, he set his Launce into his rest; and imbraced his Target, and placing himselfe in the midst of the way, he stood awayting when those Knights errant should arriue; for now hee iudged and tooke them for such: and when they were so neare as they might heare and see him, he lifted vp his voyce, and said: Let all the world stand and passe no further, if all the world will not confesse, that there is not in all the world a more beautifull damzell then the Empresse of the Mancha, the peerelesse Dulomea of Toboso. The Merchants stayed at these wordes to behold the maruellous and ridiculous shape of him that spake them, and by his fashion and them ioynd, did incontinently gather his folly and distraction, and notwithstanding would leisurely behold to what tended that confession which he exacted of them; and therefore one of them who was somwhat giuen to gibing, and was withall very discreete, said vnto him, Sir Knight, we doe not know that good I ady of whom you speake; shew her therefore to vs, and if she be so beautiful as you affirme, we will willingly and without any compulsion confesse the truth, which you now demaund of vs. If I did shew her to you, replied Don-Quixote, without mastrie were it then for you to acknowledge a truth so notorious? The consequence of mine affairs consists in this, that without beholding her, you doe beleeue, confesse, affirme, sweare and desend it; which if you refuse to performe, I challenge you all to battell, proude and vnreasonable folke, and whether you come one by one (as the order of Knighthood requires) or all at once, as is the custome and dishonourable practise of men of your broode: here will I expect and awaite you all, trusting in the reason which I haue on my side. Sir Knight, replied the Merchant, I request you in all these Princes names, as many as we be here, that to the end we may not burden your consciences, confessing a thing
 which we neuer beheld nor heard, and chiefly being so preiudiciall to the Empresses and Queenes of the Kingdomes of Alcarria and Estremadura, you will please to shew vs some portraiture of that Lady, although it be no bigger then a graine of Wheate; for by one thread wee may iudge of the whole clew, and we will with this fauor rest secure and satisfied, and you likewise remaine content and appaide. And I doe beleeue moreouer that we are already so inclined to your side, that although her picture shewed her to be blinde of the one eye, and that Vermillion distilled from the other were brimstone, yet we would notwithstanding to please you say in her fauour all that you listed. There drops not infamous Kenell! quoth Don-Quixote, all inflamed with choler; there drops not, I say, from her that which thou sayest, but Amber and Ciuet among bombase; and she is not blinde of an eye, or crooke-backt, but is straighter then a spindle of Guadarama: but all of you together shall pay for the great blasphemy thou hast spoken against so immense a beautie, as is that of my Mistresse. And saying so, he abased his Launce against him that had answered with such furie and anger, as if good fortune had not so ordayned it, that Rozinante should stumble, and fal in the midst of the Carrier, it had gone very ill with the bolde Merchant. Rozinante fell in fine, and his Master reeled ouer a good piece of the field: and though he attempted to arise, yet was he neuer able, he was so encumbred by his Launce, Target, Spurs, Helmet, and his weighty olde armour. And in the meane while that he striued to arise and could not, he cried, flie not cowardly folke, abide base people, abide, for I lie not here through mine owne fault, but through the defect of my horse.
One of the Lackeyes which came in the company, and seemed to be a man of none of the best intentions, hearing the poore ouerthrown Knight speake such insolent words, could not forbeare them, without returning him
 an answere on his ribbes: and with that intention approaching to him he tooke his Launce, and after he had broken it in pieces, he gaue Don-Quixote so many blows with one of them, that in despite of his armour he threshed him like a sheafe of wheate. His Masters cried to him, commaunding him not to beate him so much, but that he should leaue him: but all would not serue, for the youth was angry, and would not leaue off the play vntill he had auoyded the rest of his choler. And therefore running for the other pieces of the broken Launce, he broke them all on the miserable falne Knight, who for all the tempest of blowes that rained on him, did neuer shut his mouth, but threatned heauen and earth, and those Malandrines. Murderers; for such they seemed to him. The Lackey tyred himselfe at last, and the Merchants followed on their way, carying with them occasion enough of talke of the poore belaboured Knight: who when he saw himselfe alone, turned againe to make tryall whether he might arise; but if hee could not doe it when he was whole and sound, how was it possible he being so brused and almost destroyed? And yet he accounted himselfe very happy, perswading himselfe that his disgrace was proper and incident to Knights errant, and did attribute all the fault to his horse, and could in no wise get vp, all his body was so Brumado. bruised and loaden with blowes.


CHAP. V.

Wherein is prosecuted the former Narration of our Knights misfortunes.

BVt seeing in effect that he could not stirre himselfe, he resolued to haue recourse to his ordinary remedy, which was to think on some passage of his Histories and in the instant his folly presented to his memory that of Valdouinos, and the Marquesse
 of Mantua, then when Carclote had left him wounded in the mountaine. A History knowne by children, not hidden to young men, much celebrated, yea, and beleeued by many olde men; and is yet for all that no more authenticall, then are Mahomets miracles. This History as it seemed to him, was most fit for the traunce wherein hee was, and therefore he began with signes of great paine to tumble vp and downe, and pronounce with a languishing breath the same that they faine the wounded Knight to haue said in the wood:
Where art thou Lady deere! that grieu'st not at my smart? Or thou dost it not know, or thou disloy all art.
And after this manner he did prosecute the olde song vntill these verses that say: O noble Marquesse of Mantua, my carnall Lord and vncle. And it befell by chance that at the very same there past by the place where he lay a man of his owne village, who was his neighbour, and returned after hauing caried a loade of wheate to the mill: who beholding a man stretched on the ground, he came ouer to him, and demaunded what he was, and what was it that caused him to complaine so dolefully? Don-Quixote did verily beleeue that it was his vncle the Marquesse of Mantoua; and so gaue him no other answere, but only followed on in the repetition of his old Romaunce, wherein he gaue him account of his disgrace, and of the loue the Emperours sonne bore to his Spouse, all in the very same manner that the Ballad recounts it. The labourer remained much astonished, hearing those follies; and taking off his vizard which with the Lackeyes blowes was broken all to pieces, he wiped his face that was full of poulder; and scarce had he done it when he knew him, to whom he said; Master Quixada, for so he was probably called when he had his wits, before he left the state of a staide-Yeoman, to become a wandring Knight) who hath vsed you after this manner? But he continued his Romance, answering out of it, to euery
 question that was put to him. Which the good man perceiuing disarmed him the best hee could, to see whether hee had any wound, but he could see no bloud, or any token on him of hurt. Afterward hee endeuoured to raise him from the ground; which hee did at last with much adoe; and mounted him on his Asse, as a beast of easiest cariage. He gathered then together all his armes, and left not behinde as much as the splinters of the Launce, and tied them all together vpon Rozinante, whom hee tooke by the bridle, and the Asse by his halter, and ledde them both in that equipage faire and easily towards his village, being very pensatiue to heare the follies that Don-Quixote spoke. And Don-Quixote was no lesse melancholy, who was so beaten and bruised, as he could very hardly holde himselfe vpon the Asse; and euer and anon he breathed forth such grieuous sighes, as he seemed to fixe them in heauen; which moued his neighbour to intreat him againe to declare vnto him the cause of his griefe. And it seemes none other, but that the very Diuell himselfe did call to his memorie, Histories accommodated to his successes. For in that instant, wholly forgetting Valdouinos, hee remembred the Moore Abindaraez then, when the Constable of Antequera Rodericke Naruaez had taken him, and caried him prisoner to his Castle. So that when his neighbour turned againe to aske of him how hee did, and what ailed him, he answered the very same wordes and speech that Captiue Abencerrase said to Naruaez, iust as hee had read them in Diana of Montemayor, where the History is written; applying it so properly to his purpose, that the labourer grew almost madde for anger to heare that Machina of follies: by which hee collected that his neighbour was distracted, and therefore hee hied as fast as possible hee could to the village, that so
 hee might free himselfe from the vexation that Don-Quixotes idle and prolixe discourse gaue vnto him. At the end whereof the Knight said, Don Rodericke of Naruaez, you shall vnderstand that this beautifull Xarifa, of whome I spoke, is now the faire Dulcinea of Toboso, for whom I haue done, I doe, and will doe such famous actes of Knighthood, as euer haue beene, are, and shall be seene in all the world. To this his neighbour answered, doe not you perceiue Sir, sinner that I am, how I am neyther Don Rodericke de Naruaez, nor the Marquesse of Mantua, but Peter Alonso your neighbour; nor are you Valdouinos, nor Abindaraez, but the honourable Yeoman Master Quixada. I know very well who I am quoth Don-Quixote, and also. I know that I may not onely be those whome I haue named, but also all the twelue Peeres of Fraunce; yea and the nine worthies since mine actes shall surpasse all those that euer they did together, or euery one of them apart.
With these and such other Discourses they arriued at last at their village about Sunne-set; but the labourer awayted vntill it waxed somewhat darke, because folke should not view the Knight so simply mounted. And when he saw his time, he entred into the towne, and went to Don-Quixotes house, which hee found full of confusion. There was the Curate and the Barber of the village, both of them Don-Quixotes great friends. To whom the olde woman of the house said in a lamentable manner; What doe you thinke Master Licenciate Pero Perez (for so the Curate was called) of my Masters misfortune? These sixe dayes, neyther hee nor his horse haue appeared, nor the Target, Launce, or Armour: vnfortunate woman that I am, I doe suspect, and I am as sure it is true, as that I shall die; how those accursed bookes of
 Knighthood which he hath, and is wont to reade ordinarily, haue turned his iudgement; for now I remember that I haue heard him say oftentimes, speaking to himselfe, that hee would become a Knight errant, and goe seeke aduentures throughout the world. Let such bookes bee recommended to Sathan and Barrabas, which haue destroyed in this sorte the most delicate vnderstanding of all the Mancha. His Niese affirmed the same, and did adde, moreouer you shall vnderstand good Master Nicholas (for so hight the Barber) that it many times befell my vncle to continue the Lecture of those vnhappy bookes of disuentures two dayes and two nights together. At the ende of which throwing the booke away from him, hee would lay hand on his sword; and would fall a slashing of the walles: and when hee were wearied, hee would say that hee had slaine foure Giants, as great as foure Towers, and the sweate that dropped downe through the labour hee tooke, hee would say was bloud that gushed out of those woundes which he had receiued in the conflict, and then would hee quaffe off a great potte full of colde water, and straight hee did become whole and quiet, saying, that water was a most precious drinke, which the wise man Esquife, a great Inchanter or Sorcerer, and his friend had brought vnto him. But I am in the fault of all this, who neuer aduertised you both of mine Vncles rauing, to the end you might haue redrest it, ere it came to these termes, and burnt all those excommunicated bookes; for hee had many that deserued the fire as much as if they were Hereticall. That doe I likewise affirme, quoth Master Curate, and in sooth to morrowshall not passe ouer vs, without making a publique processe against them, and condemne them to bee burned in the fire, that they may not minister
 occasion againe to such as may reade them, to doe that which I feare my good friende hath done.
The labourer and Don-Quixote stood hearing all that which was said, and then hee perfectly vnderstood the disease of his neighbour; and therefore hee began to crie aloude: open the doores to Lord Valdouinos, and to the Lord Marquesse of Mantua, who comes very sore wounded and hurt, and to the Lord Moore Abindaraez, whom the valorous Rodericke of Naruaez Constable of Antequera brings as his prisoner. All the housholde ran out hearing these cries, and some knowing their friend; the others their Master and Vncle, who had not yet alighted from the Asse, because hee was not able, they ranne to embrace him; but he forbad them, saying, stand still and touch me not, for I returne very so^e wounded and hurt through default of my horse: carie me to my bedde, and if it be possible send for the wise Viganda, that shee may cure and looke to my hurts. See in an ill houre (quoth the olde woman straight way) if my heart did not very well foretell me on which foote my Master halted: come vp in good time, for wee shall knowe how to cure you well enough, without sending for that Vrganda you haue mentioned, Accursed say I once againe, and a hundred times accursed may those bookes of Knighthood bee which haue brought you to such estate. With that they bore him vp to his bedde, and searching for his wounds could not finde any; and then he said all was but bruising, by reason of a great fall hee had with his horse Rozinante, as he sought with ten Giants, the most vnmeasurable and boldest that might bee found in a great part of the earth. Hearken, quoth the Curate, we haue also Giants in the dance; by mine honesty I will burne them all before to morrow at night. Then did they aske a thousand questions of Don-Quixote,
 but hee would answere to none of them; and onely requested them to giue him some meate, and suffer him to sleepe, seeing rest was most behouefull for him. All which was done, and the Curate informed himselfe at large of the labouring man: in what sort hee had found Don Quixote; which hee recounted to him, and also the follies hee said, both at his finding and bringing to towne; which did kindle more earnestly the Licenciats desire to doe what he had resolued the next day; which was to call his friend the Barber M. Nicholas, with whom he came to Don-Quixotes house.


CHAP. VI.

Of the pleasant and curious search made by the Curate and the Barber, of Don-Quixotes Library.

WHo slept yet soundly. The Curate sought for the keyes of the Library, the onely authors of his harme: which the Gentlem^ns Niese gaue vnto him very willingly. All of them entred into it, and among the rest the olde woman, wherein, they found more then a hundred great volumes, and those very well bound, beside the small ones. And as soone as the olde woman had seene them, she departed very hastily out of the chamber, and eftsoones returned with as great speed, with a holy water pot and a sprinckler in her hand, and said, Hold M. Licenciat and sprinckle this chamber all about, least there should lurke in it some one Inchanter of the many which these bookes containe, and bewitch vs in reuiling of the many paines wee meane to inflict on these bookes, by banishing them out of this world. The simplicity of the good olde wowoman,
 caused the Licentiat to laugh: who commanded the Barber to fetch him downe the bookes from their shelues, one by one, that he might peruse their arguments; for it might happen some to be found, which in no sort deserued to be chastised with fire. No, replyed the Niese, no, you ought not to pardon any of them, seeing they haue all beene offendors; it is better you throw them all into the base court, and there make a pile of them, and then set them a fire; if not, they may be carried into the yard, and there make a bon-fire of them, and the smoake will offend no body. The olde woman said as much, both of them thirsted so much for the death of these innocents, but the Curate would not condiscend thereto, vntill he had first read the titles at the least of euerie booke.
The first that Master Nicholas put into his hands, was that of Amadis of Gaule; which the Curate perusing a while, this comes not to me first of all others, without some mysterie: for as I haue heard tolde, this is the first booke of Knighthood that euer was printed in Spaine, and all the others haue had their beginning and originall from this; and therefore me thinkes that we must condemne him to the fire, without all remission, as the Dogmatizer and head of so badde a sect. Not so, fie quoth the Barber, for I haue heard that it is the very best contriued booke of all those of that kinde, and therefore he is to be pardoned as the onely complete one of his profession. That is true, replied the Curate, and for that reason we doe giue him his life for this time. Let vs see that other which lies next vnto him. It is, quoth the Barber, The Las Sergas. pag. 73. Aduentures of Splandian Amadis of Gaules lawfully begotten sonne: Yet on mine honesty, replyed the Curate, his fathers goodnesse shall nothing auaile him, take this booke old Masters, and opening the window throw it downe into the yard, and let it lay the foundation of our heape for the fire we meane to make. She did
 what was commaunded with great alacrity, and so the good Splandian fledde into the yard, to expect with all patience the fire which he was threatned to abide. Forward, quoth the Curate. This that comes now, said the Barber, is Amadis of Greece, and as I coniecture all those that lie on this side, are of the same linage of Amadis. Then let them go all to the yard, quoth the Curate, in exchange of burning Queene Pintiquinestra, and the sheepheard Darinel, with his Eglogues, and the subtile and intricate Discourses of the Author, which are able to intangle the father that ingendred me, if he went in forme of a Knight errant. I am of the same opinion, quoth the Barber, and I also said the Niese. Then since it is so, quoth the olde wife, let them come, and to the yard with them all. They were rendred all vp vnto her, which were many in number: wherefore to saue a labour of going vp and downe the staires, she threw them out at the window.
What bundle is that, quoth the Curate? This is, answered Master Nicholas, Don O liuante of Laura. The authour of that booke, quoth the Curate, composed likewise The Garden of flowres, and in good sooth I can scarce resolue which of the two workes is truest, or to speake better, is lesse lying: onely this much I can determine; that this must goe to the yard, being a booke foolish and arrogant. This that followes is Florismarte of Hircania, quoth the Barber. Is Lord Florismarte there? then replied the Curate, then by mine honesty hee shall briefly make his arrest in the yard, in despite of his wonderfull birth and famous aduentures; for the drouth and harshnesse of his stile deserues no greater fauour. To the yard with him, and this other, (Good Masters) with a very good will Sir, quoth olde Mumpsimus; and straightway did execute his commaundement with no small gladnesse. This is Sir Platyr (quoth the Barber). It is an ancient booke, replyed the Curate, wherein I finde nothing meriting pardon, let him without any replie keepe company with the rest.
 Forth with it was done. Then was another book opened, and they saw the title thereof to be The Knight of the Crosse. For the holy title which this booke beareth, quoth the Curate, his ignorance might be pardoned: but it is a common saying: The Diuell lurkes behinde the Crosse: wherefore let it goe to the fire. The Barber taking another booke, said: this is The Mirrour of Knighthood. I know his Worship well, quoth the Curate. There goes among those bookes I see the Lord Raynald of Montalban with his friends and companions, all of them greater theeues then A thiefe that vsed to steale cattell and pull them backeward by the tayles, that none might trace them. Cacus, and the twelue Peeres of Fraunce, with the true Historiographer Turpin. I am in truth about to condemne them only to exile, for as much as they containe some part of the famous Poet Matthew Boyardo his inuention. Out of which the Christian Poet Lodouicke Ariosto did likewise weaue his worke, which if I can find among these, and that hee speakes not his owne natiue tongue, I'le vse him with no respect, but if he talke in his owne language, I will put him for honours sake on my head. If that be so quoth the Barber, I haue him at home in the Italian, but cannot vnderstand him. Neither were it good you should vnderstand him, replied the Curate, and here we would willingly haue excused the good Captaine that translated it into Spanish from that labour, or bringing it into Spaine if it had pleased himselfe. For he hath depriued it of much naturall worth in the translation; a fault incident to all those that presume to translate Verses out of one language into another: for though they imploy all their industry and wit therein, they can neuer arriue to the height of that Primitiue conceit, which they bring with them in their first birth. I say therefore that this booke, and all the others that may be found in this Library to treate of French affaires be cast and deposited in some drie Vault, vntill we may determine with more deliberation what we should doe with them: alwayes excepting Bernardo del Carpio,
 which must be there among the rest, and another called Roncesualles; for these two comming to my handes, shall be rendred vp to those of the old guardian, and from hers into the fires, without any remission. All which was confirmed by the Barber, who did ratifie his sentence, holding it for good and discreete, because he knew the Curate to be so vertuous a man, and so great a friend of the truth, as he would say nothing contrary to it for all the goods of the world.
And then opening another booke, he saw it was Palmerin de Oliua, neere vnto which stood another, intituled Palmerin of England: which the Licenciat perceiuing, said, let Oliua be presently rent in pieces, and burned in such sort, that euen the very ashes thereof may not be found: and let Palmerin of England be preserued, as a thing rarely delectable, and let such another boxe as that which Alexander found among Darius spoyles, and deputed to keepe Homers workes, be made for it: for gossip this booke hath sufficient authority for two reasons; the first, because of it selfe it is very good and excellently contriued: the other for as much as the report runnes, that a certain discreete King of Portingal was the author thereof. All the aduentures of the Castle of Miraguarda, are excellent and artificiall. The discourses very cleere and courtly, obseruing euermore a decorum in him that speakes, with great propriety and conceit, therefore I say Master Nicholas, if you thinke good, this and Amadis de Gaule may be preserued from the fire: and let all the rest without further search or regard perish. In the diuels name do not so, gentle gossip (replyed the Barber) for this which I hold now in my hand is the famous Don Belianis: What he? quoth the Curate, the second, third, and fourth part thereof haue great neede of some Ruybarbe to purge his excessiue choler, and we must moreouer take out of him all that of the Castell of Fame, and other impertinencies of more consequence. Therefore wee giue them a
 terminus Vltramarinus, and as they shall be corrected, so will we vse mercy or iustice towards them: and in the meane space gossip, you may keepe them at your house, but permit no man to reade them. I am pleased, quoth the Barber, and being vnwilling to tire himselfe any more by reading of Titles, he bad the olde woman to take all the great volumes, and throw them into the yard; the wordes were not spoken to a Mome or deafe person, but to one that had more desire to burne them then to weaue a piece of linnen, were it neuer so great and fine. And therefore taking eight of them together, she threw them all out of the window, and returning the second time, thinking to carie away a great many at once, one of them fell at the Barbers feete, who desirous to know the title, saw that it was The History of the famous Knight Tirante the white. Good God, quoth the Curate with a loud voyce, is Tirante the white here? Giue me it gossip, for I make account to haue found in it a Treasure of delight, and a copious Mine of pastime. Here is Don Quireleison of Montalban, a valiant Knight, and his brother Thomas of Montalban, and the Knight Fonseca, and the combat which the valiant Detriante fought with Alano, and the witty conceits of the damzell Plazerdemiuida, with the loue and guiles of the widow Reposada, and of the Empresse enamoured on her Squire Ipolite. I say vnto you gossip, that this booke is for the stile, one of the best of the world: in it Knights doe eate and drinke and sleepe, and die in their beds naturally, and make their testaments before their death: with many other things, which all other bookes of this subiect doe want, yet notwithstanding, if I might be judge, the authour thereof deserued, because he purposely penned and writ so many follics, to be sent to the Gallies for all the dayes of his life. Carie it home and read it, and you shall see all that I haue said thereof to be true. I beleeue it very well, quoth the Barber. But what shall we doe with these little bookes
 that remaine? These as I take, said the Curate are not bookes of Knighthood, but of Poety; and opening one, he perceiued it was The Diana of Montemayor, and beleeuing that all the rest were of that stampe, he said, these deserue not to be burned with the rest, for they haue not, nor can do so much hurt as bookes of Knighthood, being all of them works full of vnderstanding and conceits, and doe not preiudice any other. O good Sir, quoth Don-Quixote his Niese, your reuerence shal likewise do wel to haue them also burned, least that mine vncle after he be cured of his Knightly disease, may fall by reading of these in an humour of becomming a Shepheard, and so wander through the woods, and fieldes singing of Roundelayes, and playing on a high Croude. And what is more dangerous then to become a Poet, which is as some say, an incurable and infectious disease. This maiden saies true, quoth the Curate, and it will not be amisse to remoue this stumbling block and occasion out of our friends way: and since we begin with the Diana of Montemayor, I am of opinion that it be not burned, but onely that all that which treates of the wise Felicia, and of the inchanted water be taken away, and also all the longer verses, and let him remaine with his proses, and the honour of being the best of that kinde. This that followes, quoth the Barber is the Diana called the second, written by him of Salamanca, and this other is of the same name, whose author is Gil Polo. Let that of Salamanea answered M. Parson, augment the number of the condemned in the yard, and that of Gil Polo be kept as charily, as if it were Apollo his own work: and go forward speedily good gossip, for it grows late. This booke, quoth the Barber, opening of another, is The twelue bookes of the fortunes of loue, written by Anthony Lofraso, the Sardinicall Poet: By the holy Orders which I haue receiued, quoth the Curate, since Apollo was Apollo, and the Muses Muses, and Poets Poets, was neuer written so delightfull and extrauagant a worke as this; and
 that in his way and vaine, it is the onely one of all the bookes that haue euer issued of that kinde to view the light of the world and he that hath not read it may make account that he hath neuer read matter of delight. Giue it to me gossip, for I doe prize more the finding of it, then I would the gift of a Caslocke of the best. Sattin of Florence. And so with great ioy he laid it aside, and the Barber prosecuted, saying, these that follow be, The sheepheard of Iberia: The Nimphes of Enares, and the Vndeceiuing of Iealousies. Then there's no more to be done, but to deliuer them vp to the secular arme of the olde wife, and doe not demaund the reason, for that were neuer to make an end. This that comes is The Sheepheard of Filida. That is not a Sheepheard, quoth the Curate, but a very complete Courtier, let it be reserued as a precious jewell. This greate one that followes, is, said the Barber, intituled The treasure of diuers Poems. If they had not bin so many, replied the Curate, they would haue been more esteemed. It is necessary that this booke be carded and purged of certaine base things, that lurke among his high conceits. Let him be kept, both because the author is my very great friend, and in regard of other more Heroicall and loftie workes he hath written. This is, said the Barber, The ditty booke of Lopez Maldonado. The author of that worke is likewise my great friend, replied the Parson, and his lines pronounced by himselfe doe aduise the hearers, and such is the sweetnesse of his voyce when hee sings them, as it doth inchant the eare. He is somewhat prolix in his Eglogues, but that which is good, is neuer superfluous: let him be kept among the choysest. But what booke is that, which lies next vnto him? The Galatea of Michel Ceruantes quoth the Barber. That Ceruantes, said the Curate is mine olde acquaintance this many a yeare. And I know he is more practised in misfortunes then in verses. His booke hath some good inuention in it, hee intends and propounds somwhat, but concludes nothing:
 therefore we must expect the second part, which he hath promised, perhaps his amendement may obtaine him a generall remission, which vntill now is denied him, and whilst we expect the sight of his second worke, keep this part closely imprisoned in your lodging. I am very well content to doe so good gossip, said the Barber, and here there come three together, The Auracana of Don Alonso de Ercilla, The Austriada of Iohn Ruffo, one of the Magistrates of Cordoua, and The Monserrato of Christopher de Virnes a Valentian Poet. All these three bookes, quoth the Curate are the best that are written in heroicall verse in the Castilian tongue, and may compare with the most famous of Italy. Reserue them as the richest pawnes that Spaine enioyeth of Poetry. The Curate with this grew wearie to see so many bookes, and so hee would haue all the rest burned at all aduentures. But the Barber ere the sentence was giuen, had opened by chance one intituled The Teares of Angelica. I would haue shed those teares my selfe, said the Curate, if I had wittingly caused such a booke to be burned; for the authour thereof was one of the most famous Poets of the world, not onely of Spaine: and was most happy in the translation of certaine fables of Ouid.


CHAP. VII.

Of the second departure which our good Knight Don-Quixote made from his house to seeke aduentures.

WHile they were thus busied, Don-Quixote began to crie aloude, saying, Heere heere valorous Knights, heere it is needfull that you shew the force of your valiant armes; for the Courtiers begin to beare away the best of the Tourney. The folke repayring to this rumour
 and noyse, was an occasion, that any farther speech and visitation of the bookes was omitted, and therefore it is to be suspected, that The Carolea and Lion of Spaine, with the actes of the Emperour Charles the fift, written by Don Luis de Auila were burned, without being euer seene or heard; and perhaps if the Curate had seene them, they should not haue past vnder so rigorous a sentence. When they all arriued to Don Quixote his chamber, he was risen already out of his bedde, and continued stil his out-cries, cutting and slashing on euery side, being as broadly awake, as if he neuer had slept. Wherfore taking him in their armes, they returned him by maine force into his bedde, and after he was somewhat quiet and setled, he said, turning himselfe to the Curate. In good sooth L. Archbishop Turpin, it is a great dishonor to vs that are called the twelue Peeres, to permit the Knights of the Court to beare thus away the glory of the Tournay without more adoe; seeing that we the aduenturers haue gained the prize thereof the three formost dayes. Hold your peace good gossip, quoth the Curate, for fortune may be pleased to change the successe, and what is lost to day, may be wonne againe to morrow: Looke you to your health for the present, for you seeme at least to be very much tyred, if besides you be not sore wounded. Wounded, no, quoth Don-Quixote, but doubtlesse I am somewhat bruised: for that bastard Don Rowland hath beaten me to pouder with the stocke of an Oake-tree, and all for enuy, because he sees that I onely dare oppose my selfe to his valour: but let me be neuer againe called Raynold of Montealban, if he pay not deerely for it, as soone as I rise from this bedde in despite of all his inchantment. But I pray you call for my breakefast, for I know it will doe me much good, and leaue the reuenge of this wrong to my charge. Presently meat was brought, and after he had eaten he fell a sleepe, and they remained astonished at his wonderfull madnesse. That night the old woman burned
 all the bookes that she found in the house and yard, and some there were burned as that deserued for their worthinesse to be kept vp in euerlasting Treasuries, if their fortunes and the lazinesse of the visiters had permitted it. And so the prouerbe was verified in them, That the Iust payes sometimes for Sinners. One of the remedies which the Curate and Barber prescribed for that present, to help their friends disease, was, that they should change his chamber, and damme vp his study, to the end that when he arose, he might not finde them: for perhaps by remouing the cause, they might also take away the effects: and moreouer they bad them to say, that a certaine inchanter had caried them away Study and all; which deuice was presently put in practise. And within two dayes after Don-Quixote got vp, and the first thing he did, was to go and visite his bookes; and seeing he could not finde the chamber in the same place, where he had left it, hee went vp and downe to finde it. Sometimes he came to the place where the dore stood, and felt it with his hands, and then would turne his eyes vp and downe, heere and there to seeke it, without speaking a word. But at last after deliberation, he asked of the olde woman the way to his bookes? Shee as one well schooled before what shee should answere, said, What Study, or what nothing is this you looke for? There is now no more Study nor bookes in this house; for the very Diuell himselfe caried all away with him. It was not the Diuell said his Niese, but an Inchanter that came here one night vpon a cloude, the day after you departed from hence; and alighting downe from a Serpent vpon which he rode, he entred into the Studie, and what he did therein I know not; and within a while after he fledde out at the roofe of the house, and left all the house full of smoake: and when we accorded to see what he had done, we could neyther see booke or Studie: onely this much the olde woman. And I do remember very well, that the naughty olde man at his departure
 said, with a loude voyce, that he for hidden enmitie that he bore to the Lord of those bookes had done all the harme to the horse that they might perceiue when he were departed, and added that hee was named the wise Muniaton Freston, you would haue said, quoth Don-Quixote. I know not quoth the olde woman, whether he hight Frestron or Friton, but well I wot, that his name ended with Ton. That is true quoth Don-Quioxte, and he is a very wise Inchanter, and my great aduersary, and lookes on me with a sinister eye, for he knows by his arte and science, that I shal in time fight a single combat with a Knight his very great friend, and ouercome him in battell without being able to be by him assisted, and therfore he labours to doe me all the hurt he may; and I haue sent him word that he striues in vaine to diuert or shunne that which is by heauen already decreed. Who doubts of that quoth his Niese, but I pray you good vncle say, what need haue you to thrust your selfe into these difficulties and brabbles? were it not better to rest you quietly in your owne house, then to wander through the world, searching bread of Buscardo pan de Trastrigo p. 47. blasted corne? Without once considering how many there goe to seeke for wooll, that returne againe shorne themselues. O Niese, quoth Don-Quixote, how ill dost thou vnderstand the matter? before I permit my selfe to be shorne, I will pill and plucke away the beards of as many as shall dare or imagine to touch but a haire onely of me. To these words the woman would make no replie, because they saw his choler increase.
Fifteene dayes he remained quietly at home, without giuing any argument of seconding his former vanities: in which time past many pleasant encounters betweene him and his two gossips, the Curate and Barber, vpon that point which he defended, to wit, that the world needed nothing so much as Knights errant, and that the erraticall Knighthood ought to be againe renewed therein. Master Parson would contradict him somtimes, and other times
 yeeld vnto that he vrged; for had they not obserued that manner of proceeding, it were impossible to bring him to any conformity. In this space Don-Quixote dealt with a certaine labourer his neighbour, an honest man (if the title of honestly may be giuen to the poore) but one of a very shallow wit; in resolution he said so much to him, and perswaded him so earnestly, and made him so large promises, as the poore fellow determined to goe away with him, and serue him as his Squire. Don-Quixote among many other things bad him to dispose himselfe willingly to depart with him, for now and then such an aduenture might present it selfe, that in as short space as one would take vp a couple of strawes, an Island might be won, and he be left as gouernour thereof. With these and such like promises Sancho Panca, for so he was called, left his wife and children, and agreed to be his Squire. Afterward Don-Quixote began to cast plots how to come by some money, which he atchieued by selling one thing, pawning another, and turning all vpside downe. At last he got a prettie summe, and accommodating himselfe with a buckler which he had borrowed of a friend, and patching vp his broken Beauer again as wel as he could, he aduertised his Squire Sancho of the day and houre wherein he meant to depart, that hee might likewise furnish himselfe with that which he thought needfull; but aboue all things he charged him to prouide himselfe of a Wallet; which he promised to performe, and said that he meant also to carie a very good Asse, which he had of his owne, because he was not wont to trauell much a foot. In that of the Asse Don-Quixote stood a while pensiue, calling to minde whether euer he had read, that any Knight errant carried his Squire Assishly mounted, but he could not remember any authority for it: yet notwithstanding he resolued that he might bring his beast, with intention to accommodate him more honourably when occasion were offered, by dismounting the first discurteous
 Knight they met from his horse, and giuing it to his Squire, he also furnished himselfe with shirts, and as many other things as hee might, according vnto the In-keepers aduice. All which being finished, Sancho Panca without bidding his wife or children farewell; or Don-Quixote his Niese and olde seruant, they both departed one night out of the village vnknowne to any person liuing; and they trauelled so farre that night, as they were sure in the morning not to be found, although they were pursued. Sancho Panca rode on his beast like a Patriarke with his Wallet and Bottle, and a maruellous longing to see himselfe gouernour of the Iland which his master had promised vnto him.
Don-Quixote tooke by chance the same very course and way that he had done in his first voyage through the field of Montiel, wherein he trauelled then with lesse vexation then the first; for by reason that it was early, and the Sunne beames stroke not directly downe, but athwart, the heat did not trouble them much. And Sancho Panca seeing the oportunity good, said to his Master, I pray you haue care good Sir Knight, that you forget not that gouernment of the Island which you haue promised me, for I shall be able to gouerne it were it neuer so great. To which Don-Quixote replied, You must vnderstand friend Sancho Panca that it was a custome very much vsed by auncient Knights errant, to make their Squires gouernours of the Islands and Kingdomes that they conquered, and I am resolued that so good a custome shall neuer be abolished by me, but rather I will passe and exceed them therein: for they sometimes, and as I take it, did for the greater part expect vntill their Squires waxed aged, and after they were cloyed with seruice, and had suffered many bad dayes and worse nights, then did they bestow vpon them some title of an Earle, or at least of a The title of a Marquesse is lesse then that of at Earle in Spaine. Marquesse of some valley or Prouince, of more or lesse account. But if thou liuest,
 and I withall, it may happen that I might conquer such a Kingdome within sixe dayes, that hath other Kingdomes adherent to it, which would fall out as iust as it were cast in a mould for thy purpose, whom I would crowne presently King of one of them. And doe not account this to be any great matter, for things and chances doe happen to such Knights aduenturers as I am, by so vnexpected and wonderfull wayes and meanes as I might giue thee very easily a great deale more then I promised. After that maner said Sancho Panca, if I were a King through some miracle of those which you say, then should Ioan Gutierez my wife become a Queene, and my children Princes. Who doubts of that, said Don-Quixote? That doe I, replied Sancho Panca, for I am fully perswaded, that although God would raine Kingdomes downe vpon the earth, none of them would sit well on Mary Gutierez her head. For Sir, you must vnderstand that shee's not worth a Dodkin for a Queene. To be a Countesse would agree with her better, and yet I pray God shee be able to discharge that calling. Commend thou the matter to God, quoth Don-Quixote, that hee may giue her that which is most conuenient for her. But do not thou abase thy minde so much, as to content thy selfe with lesse then at least to be a Vice-Roy. I will not good Sir, quoth Sancho, especially seeing I haue so worthy a Lord and Master as your selfe, who knowes how to giue me all that may turne to my benefit, and that I shall be able to discharge in good sort.



CHAP. VIII.

Of the good successe Don-Quixote had, in the dreadfull and neuer imagined aduenture of the Windemils, with other accidents worthy to be recorded.

AS thus they discoursed, they discouered some thirty or forty Windemils, that are in that field: and as soone as Don-Quixote espied them he said to his Squire; Fortune doth addresse our affaires better then wee our selues could desire; for behold there, friend Sancho Panca, how there appeares thirty or forty monstrous Giants, with whom I meane to fight, and depriue them all of their liues; with whose spoyles we will begin to be rich; for this is a good warre, and a great seruice vnto God, to take away so bad a seede from the face of the earth. What Giants? quoth Sancho Panca. Those that thou seest there, quoth his Lorde, with the long armes, and some there are of that race, whose armes are almost two leagues long. I pray you vnderstand, quoth Sancho Panca, that those which appeare there, are no Giants but Windemils: and that which seemes in them to be armes, are their Sayles, that are swinged about by the Winde, doe also make the Mill goe. It seemes well, quoth Don-Quixote, that thou art not yet acquainted with matter of aduentures: they are Giants, and if thou beest a feard, goe aside and pray whilst I enter into cruell and vnequall battell with them. And saying so, he spurd his horse Rozinante, without taking heed to his Squire Sanchos cryes, aduertising him how they were doubtlesly Windemils that he did assault, and no Giants; but he went so fully perswaded that they were Giants, as he neither heard his Squires out-cries, nor did discerne what they were, although he drew very neere to them, but rather
 said as loude as he could: Flie not ye cowards and vile creatures, for it is onely one Knight that assaults you. With this the Winde increased, and the Mill Sailes began to turn about; which Don-Quixote espying, said, although thou mouedst more armes then the Giant Briareo, thou shalt stoope to me; and after saying this, and commending himselfe most deuoutly to his Lady Dulcinea, desiring her to succour him in that trance, couering himselfe well with his buckler, and setting his Launce on his rest, he spurred on Rozinante, and encountred with the first Mill that was before him, and striking his Lance into the Saile, the winde swinged it about with such furie, that it broke his Launce into shiuers, carrying him and his horse after it, and finally tumbled him a good way off from it on the field in very euill plight. Sancho Panca repayred presently to succour him as fast as his Asse could driue: and when he arriued, he found him not able to stirre, hee had gotten such a crush with Rozinante. This word (Ioue) wil haue no grace in the worke, seeing the actions are presumed to be Christian, although otherwise distracted in minde, as was Don-Quixote. Good God! quoth Sancho, did I not foretell vnto you that you should looke well what you did, for they were none other then Windemils, nor could any thinke otherwise, vnlesse hee had also Windemils in his braines. Peace Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, for matters of warre are more subiect then any other thing to continuall change: how much more seeing I doe verily perswade my selfe, that the wise Freston who robbed my Studie and bookes, hath transformed these Giants into Mils, to depriue me of the glory of the victory; such is the enmity hee beares towards me. But yet in fine, all his bad arts shall but little preuaile against the goodnesse of my sword. God grant it, as he may, said Sancho Panca, and then helpt him to arise, and presently he mounted on Rozinante, who was Medio spaldado. A passage through the mountaines. halfe shoulderpitcht by rough encounter; and discoursing vpon that aduenture, they followed on the way which guided towards the passage or gate of Lapice, for there as Don Quixote auouched, it was not
 possible, but to finde many aduentures, because it was a through-fare much frequented, and yet he affirmed that he went very much grieued because he wanted a Lance, and telling it to his Squire he said, I remember how I haue read that a certaine Spanish Knight called Diego Peres of Vargas, hauing broken his sword in a battaile, tore off a great branch, or stock from an Oak tree, and did such maruailes with it that day, and battered so many Moores, as he remained with the surname of Machuca, which signifies a stampe, and as well he, as all his progenie were euer after that day called Vargas and Machuca, I tell thee this, because I meane to teare another branch, such, or as good at least as that, from the first Oake, we shall encounter, and I meane to atchieue such aduentures therwithall, as thou wilt account thy selfe fortunate, for hauing merited to behold them, and be a witnesse of things almost incredible. In Gods name quoth Sancho, I doe beleeue euery word you said: but I pray you sit right in your saddle, for you ride sideling which proceeds as I suppose of the bruising you got by your fall, thou sayest true quoth Don Quixote, and if I doe not complaine of the griefe, the reason is, because Knights errant vse not to complaine of any wound, although their guts did issue out thereof. If it be so (quoth Sancho) I know not what to say, but God knowes that I would be glad to heare you to complaine when any thing grieues you. Of my selfe I dare affirme, that I must co^plaine of the least griefe that I haue, if it be not likewise meant that the Squires of Knights errants must not complaine of any harme. Don Quixote could not refraine laughter, hearing the simplicitie of his Squire; and after shewed vnto him that he might lawfully complaine both when he pleased, and as much as he listed, with desire, or without it, for he had neuer yet red any thing to the contrary, in the order of Knighthood. Then Sancho said vnto him, that it was dinner time, to whom he answered that he needed no repast, but if he had will
 to eate, he might beginne when he pleased, Sancho hauing obtained his licence, did accommodate himselfe on his Asse backe, the best he might, taking our of his wallet some belly munition, he rode after his Master truailing and eating at once, and that with great leasure, and euer anone he lifted vp his bottle with such pleasure, as the best fed Tapster of Malaga might enuy his state, and whilst he rode multiplying of quaffes in that manner, he neuer remembred any of the promises his Master had made him, nor did he holde the fetch of aduentures to be a labour, but rather a great recreation and ease, were they neuer so dangerous. In conclusion they past ouer that night vnder certaine trees, from one of which Don Quixote tore a withered branch, which might serue him in some sort for a lance, and therfore he set thereon the yron of his owne, which he had reserued when it was broken. All that night Don Quixote slept not one winke, but thought vpon his Ladie Dulcinea that he might conforme himself to what he had read in his bookes of aduentures, when knights passed ouer many nights without sleepe in forrests and fields, onely intertained by the memory of their Maistresses: but Sancho spent not his time so vainely, for hauing his stomacke well stuffed, and that not with Succorie water, he carried smoothly away the whole night in one sleepe: and if his Master had not called him vp, neither the sunne-beames which strucke on his visage, nor the melodie of the birds which were many, and did cheerfully welcome the approach of the new-day, could haue bene able to awake him, at his arriuing he gaue one assay to the bottle, which he found to bee somewhat more weake then it was the night before, whereat his heart was somewhat grieued, for he mistrusted that they tooke not a course to remedy that defect so soone as he wished: nor could Don-Quixote breake his fast, who, as we haue said meant onely to sustaine himselfe with pleasant remembrances. Then did they returne to their commenced
 way towards the Port of Lapice, which they discouered about three of the clocke in the after-noone: heere (said Don-Quixote) as soone as he kend it, may we (friend Sancho) thrust our hands vp to the very elbows in that, which is called aduentures. But obserue well this Caueat which I shall giue thee, that although thou seest me in the greatest dangers of the world, thou must not set hand to thy sword in my defence, if thou dost not see that those which assault me be base and vile vulgar people; for in such a case thou maist assist me. Marry if they be Knights, thou maist not doe so in any wise, nor is it permitted by the Iawes of armes that thou maist helpe me, vntill thou beest likewise dubd Knight thy selfe. I doe assure you Sir, quoth Sancho, that herein you shal be most punctually obeyed: and therefore chiefly, in respect that I am of mine owne nature a quiet and peaceable man, and a mortall enemy of thrusting my selfe into stirres or quarrels: yet is it true that touching the defence of mine owne person, I wil not be altogether so obseruant of those lawes, seeing that both Diuine and Humane allow euery man to defend himselfe, from any one that would wrong him. I say no lesse, answered Don-Quixote, but in this of ayding me against any Knight, thou must set bounds to thy naturall impulses. I say that I will doe so, quoth Sancho, and I will obserue this commandement as punctually, as that of keeping holy the Saboth day.
Whilst thus they reasoned, there appeared in the way two Monkes of S. Benets order, mounted on two Dromedaries; for the Mules whereon they rode were but little lesse. They wore masks with Spectacles in them, to keepe away the dust from their faces, and each of them besides bore their Vmbrilles, after them came a Coach, and foure or fiue a horse-backe accompanying it, and two Lackeyes that ranne hard by it. There came therein, as it was after knowne, a certaine Biscaine Lady, which trauelled towards Siuil, where her husband soicurned at the
 present, and was going to the Indies, with an honourable charge: the Monkes rode not with her, although they trauelled the same way. Scarce had Don-Quixote perceiued them, when he said to his Squire, either I am deceiued or else this will proue the most famous aduenture, that euer hath beene seene. For these two great blacke bulkes which appeare there, are questionlesse Inchanters that steale or carrie away perforce some Princesse in that Coach; and therefore I must with all my power vndoe that wrong. This will be worse then the aduenture of the Windemils, quoth Sancho. Doe not you see Sir, that those are Fryers of S. Benets Order? and the Coach can be none other, then of some trauellers. Therefore listen to mine aduice, and see well what you doe, least that the diuell doe deceiue you. I haue said already to the Sancho, that thou art very ignorant in matter of aduentures. What I say is true, as now thou shalt see: and saying so, he spurd on his horse, and placed himselfe iust in the midst of the way, by which the Friars came, and when they approched so neere as he supposed they might he are him, hee said with a loude voyce: Diuellish and wicked people, leaue presently those high Princesses which you violently carie away with you in that Coach, or if you will not prepare your selues to receiue suddaine death, as a iust punishment of your bad workes. The Friers held their horses, and were amazed both at the shape and words of Don-Quixote. To whom they answered, Sir Knight we are neither diuellish nor wicked, but religious men of S. Benets Order, that trauell about our affaires, and we know not whether, or no, there comes any Princesses forced in this Coach. With me saire wordes take no effect, quoth Don-Quixote. For I know you very well treacherous knaues; and then without expecting their replie, he set spurs to Rozinante, and laying his Launce on the^ thigh, charged the first Friar with such fury and rage, that if he had not suffered himselfe willingly to fall off his
 Mule, he would not onely haue ouerthrowne him against his will, but likewise haue slaine, or at least wounded him very ill with the blow. The second religious man seeing how vgly his companion was vsed, made no wordes, but giuing the spurs to that Castell his Mule, did flie away through the field, as swift as the winde it selfe. Sancho Panca seeing the Monke ouerthrowne, dismounted very speedily off his Asse, and ran ouer to him, and would haue ransackt his habites. In this arriued the Monkes two Lackeyes, and demaunded of him, why he thus dispoyled the Friar? Sancho replied, that it was his due by the law of armes, as lawfull spoyles gained in battell by his Lord Don-Quixote. The Lackeyes which vnderstood not the jest, nor knew not what wordes of battell or spoyles meant, seeing that Don-Quixote was now out of the way, speaking with those that came in the Coach, set both at once vpon Sancho, and left him not a haire in his beard but they pluckt, and did so trample him vnder their feete, as they left him stretched on the ground without eyther breath or feeling: the Monke cutting off all delayes, mounted againe on horse-backe, all affrighted, hauing scarce any droppe of bloud left in his face through feare. And being once vp, he spurd after his fellow, who expected him a good way off, staying to see the successe of that assault; and being vnwilling to attend the end of that strange aduenture, they did prosecute their iourney, blessing and crossing themselues if the Diuell did pursue them.
Don-Quixote, as is rehearsed, was in this season speaking to the Lady of the Coach, to whom he said, Your beauty deere Lady, may dispose from henceforth of your person, as best ye liketh; for the pride of your robbers lies now prostrated on the ground, by this my inuincible arme. And because you may not be troubled to know your deliuerer his name, know that I am called Don-Quixote de la Mancha, a Knight errant and
 aduenturer, and Captiue to the Peerelesse and beautiful Ladie Dulcinea of Toboso: and in reward of the benefite which you haue receiued at my handes, I demaund nothing else, but that you returne to Toboso; and there present your selues in my name before my Lady, and recount vnto her, what I haue done to obtaine your libertie. To all these words which Don-Quixote said, a certaine Biscaine Squire that accompanied the Coach gaue eare, who seeing that Don-Quixote suffered not the Coach to passe onward, but said that it must presently returne backe to Toboso, he drew neere to him, and laying hold on his Launce, he said in his bad Spanish and worse Basquish; get thee away Knight in an ill houre, by the God that created me, if thou leaue not the Coach, I will kill thee, as sure as I am a Biscaine. Don-Quixote vnderstanding him, did answere with great staidnesse, if thou werest a Cauallero in Spanish is taken as well for a Gentleman, as for a Knight. Knight as thou art not, I would by this haue punished thy folly and presumption, caytife creature. The Biscaine replied with great furie, Not I a Gentleman? I sweare God thou liest as well as I am a Christian. If thou cast away thy Launce, and draw thy sword, Pag. 58. thou shalt see the water as soone as thou shalt carie away the Cat: A Biscaine by land, and a Gentleman by Sea, a Gentleman in despite of the Diuell, and thou liest if other things thou sayest. Straight thou shalt see that, said Agrages; replied Don-Quixote, and throwing his Launce to the ground, he out with his sword, and tooke his Bucklet, and set on the Biscaine, with resolution to kill him. The Biscaine seeing him approach in that manner, although he desired to allight off his Mule, which was not to be trusted, being one of those naughty ones which are wont to be hired, yet had he no leisure to do any other thing then to draw out his sword: but it befell him happily to be neere to the Coach, out of which he snatched a cushion that serued him for a shield, and presently the one made vpon the other like mortall enemies. Those that were present laboured
 all that they might, but in vaine to compound the matter betweene them; for the Biscaine swore in his bad language, that if they hindred him from ending the battell, he would put his Lady, and all the rest that dared to disturbe him to the sword.
The Ladie astonished and fearefull of that which shee beheld, commaunded the Coach-man to goe a little out of the way, and sate aloofe, beholding the rigorous conflict. In the progresse whereof the Biscaine gaue Don-Quixote ouer the Target a mighty blow on one of the shoulders, where if it had not found resistance in his armour, it would doubtlesly haue cleft him downe to the girdle. Don-Quixote feeling the waight of that vnmeasurable blow, cried with a loude voice, saying, O Dulcinea, Lady of my soule, the flowre of all beauty, succour this thy Knight, who to set forth thy worth, finds himself in this dangerous trance. The saying of these words, the griping fast of his sword, the couering of himselfe wel with his Buckler, and the assayling of the Biscaine, was done all in one instant, resoluing to venter all the successe of the battell on that one only blow. The Biscaine who perceiued him come in that manner, perceiued by his doughtinesse his intention, and resolued to doe the like; and therefore expected him very well couered with his Cushion, not being able to manage his Mule as hee wished from one part to another, who was not able to go a steppe, it was so wearied, as a beast neuer before vsed to the like toyes. Don-Quixote, as wee haue said, came against the weary Biscaine, with his sword lifted aloft, with a full resolution to part him in two, and all the beholders stood with great feare suspended, to see the successe of those monstrous blowes wherwithall they threatned one another. And the Lady of the Coach with her Gentlewomen made a thousand vowes, and offerings to all the deuoute places of Spaine, to the end that God might deliuer the Squire, and themselues out of that great danger wherein they were.

But it is to be deplored how in this very point and tearme, the author of this History leaues this battell depending, excusing himselfe that he could finde no more written of the actes of Don-Quixote, then those which he hath already recounted. True it is, that the second writer of this worke would not beleeue that so curious a History was drownd in the jawes obliuion, or that the wits of the Mancha were so little curious as not to reserue among their treasuries or records, some papers treating of this famous Knight: and therefore encouraged by this presumption, he did not dispaire to finde the end of this pleasant History; which heauen being propicious to him he got at last after the manner that shall be recounted in the second Part.





THE DELIGHTFVLL HSTORY OF THE WITTY KNIGHT DON-QVIXOTE of the MANCHA. THE SECOND PART.

CHAP. I.

Wherein is related the euents of the fearefull battell which the gallant Biscaine fought with Don-Quixote.

WEe left the valorous Biscaine, and the samous Don-Quixote in the first part, with their swords lifted vp and naked in terms to discharge one vpon another two furious Cleeuers, and such, as if they had allighted rightly, would cut and diuide them both from the top to the toe, and open them like a Pomgranat. And that in so doubtfull a taking the delightfull History stopped and remained dismembred, the authour thereof leauing vs no notice where we might finde the rest of the narration. This grieued me not a little, but wholly turned the pleasure I tooke in reading the beginning thereof,
 into disgust, thinking how small commodity was offered, to finde out so much as in mine opinion wanted of this so delectable a tale. It seemed vnto me almost impossible, and contrary to all good order, that so good a Knight should want some wise man, that would vndertake his wonderfull prowesses and feats of Chiualrie. A thing that none of those Knights errant euer wanted, of whom people speake; for each of them had one or two wise men of purpose, that did not only write their actes, but also depainted their very least thoughts and toyes, were they neuer so hidden. And surely so good a Knight could not be so vnfortunate as to want that, wherewith Platyr and others his like abounded; and therfore could not induce my selfe to beleeue, that so gallant a Historie might remaine maimed and lame, and did rather cast the fault vpon the malice of the time, who is a consumer and deuourer of all things, which had eyther hidden or consumed it. Me thought on the other side, seeing that among his bookes were found some moderne works, such as the Vndeceiuing of Iealousie, and The nymphs and sheephers of Henares. That also his owne History must haue bin new; and if that it were not written, yet was the memory of him fresh among the dwellers of his owne village, and the other villages adioyning. This imagination held me suspended and desirous to learne really and truely all the life and miracles of our famous Spaniard Don Quixote of the Mancha, the light and mirrour of all Manchicall Chiualrie; being the first who in this our age and time so full of calamities did vndergo the trauels and exercise of armes errant; and vndid wrongs, succourd widdowes protected damzels that rode vp and downe with their whips and Palfrayes, and with all their virginity on their backes from hill to hill, and dale to dale; for if it hapned not that some lewd miscreant, or some Clowne with a hatchet and long haire, or some monstrous Giant did force them, damzels there were in times past that at
 the end of fourescore yeares olde, all which time they neuer slept one day vnder a roose, went as intire and pure maydens to their graues, as the very mother that bore them. Therefore I say, that as well for this as for many other good respects, our gallant Don-Quixote is worthy of continuall and memorable prayses; nor can the like be iustly denied to my selfe, for the labour and diligence which I vsed to finde out the end of this gratefull History; although I know very well, that if Heauen, Chance, and Fortune had not assisted me, the world had been depriued of the delight and pastime, that he may take for almost two houres together, who shall with attention reade it. The manner therefore of finding it was this:
Being one day walking in the Exchange of Toledo a certain boy by chance would haue sold certain old quires and scroules of bookes to a Squire that walked vp and down in that place, and I being addicted to reade such scroules, though I found them torne in the streets, borne away by this my naturall inclination, tooke one of the quiers in my hand, and perceiued it to be written in Arabicall characters, and seeing that although I knew the letters, yet could I not read the substance, I looked about to view whether I might perceiue any more translated Spaniard, thereabouts that could read them: nor was it very difficult to finde there such an interpreter, for if I searched one of an other better and more ancient To wit, a Iew. language, that place might easily affoord him. In fine my good fortune presented one to me, to whom telling my desire, and setting the booke in his hand, he opened it, and hauing read a little therein, began to laugh. I demaunded of him why he laughed? and he answered, at that marginall note which the booke had. I bad him to expound it to me, and with that tooke him a little aside: and he continuing still his laughter said, there is written here on this margin these words. This Dulcinea of Toboso so many times spoken of in this historie, had the best hand for powdring of Porkes, of
 any woman in all the Mancha. When I heard it make mention of Dulcinea of To^^^ I rested amazed and suspended, and imagined forthwith that those quiers contained the Historie of Don Quixote, with this conceit I hastned him to read the beginning which he did, and translating the Arabicall into Spanish in a trice, he said that it began thus, The Historie of Don Quixote of the Mancha, written by Cyde Hamete Benengeli, an Arabicall Historiographer. Much discretion was requisite to dissemble the content of mind I conceiued, when I heard the title of the booke, and preuenting the Squire, I bought all the boyes scroles and papers for halfe a Riall, and were he of discretion, or knew my desire, he might haue promised himselfe easily, and also borne away with him more then sixe Reals for his Merchandize. I departed after with the Moore, to the Cloyster of the great Church, and I requested him to turne me all the Arabicall sheetes that treated of Don-Quixote into Spanish, without adding or taking away any thing from them, and I would pay him what he listed for his paines: he demaunded fifty pounds of Reasons and three bushels of Wheate, and promised to translate them speedily, well, and faithfully. But I, to hasten the matter more, least I should lofe such an vnexpected and welcome treasure, brought him to my house, where he translated all the worke in lesse then a moneth and a halfe, euen in the manner that it is here recounted.
There was painted in the first Quier very naturally the battell betwixt Don-Quixote and the Biscaine; euen in the same manner that the History relateth it, with their swords listed aloft, the one couered with his Buckler, the other with the Cushion: and the Biscaines Mule was deliuered so naturally, as a man might perceiue it was hired; although he stood farther off then the shot of a Crosbow: the Biscaine had a title written vnder his feete that said Don Sancho de Azpetia, for so belike he was called: and at Rozinante his feete there was another that said,
 Don-Quixote. Rozinante was maruellous well pourtrated, so long and lanke, so lanke and leane, so like one labouring with an incurable consumption, as he did shew very cleerely with what consideration and propriety hee had giuen vnto him the name Rozinante. By him stood Sancho Panca, holding his Asse by the halter; at whose feete was another scroule, saying, Sancho Cancas: and I thinke the reason thereof was, that as his picture shewed, he had a great belly, a short stature, and thick legges. And therfore I iudge he was called * Panca or Canca, for both these names are written of him indifferently in the History. There were other little things in it worthy the noting, but all of them are of no great importance, nor any thing necessary for the true relation of the Historie, for none is ill if it be true. And if any obiection be made against the truth of this, it can be none other then that the author was a Moore, and it is a knowne propriety of that nation to be lying: yet in respect that they hate vs so mortally, it is to be coniectured that in this History there is rather want and concealment of our Knights worthy actes, then any superfluity; which I imagine the rather, because I finde in the progresse thereof many times, that when he might and ought to haue aduanced his penne in our Knights prayses, he does as it were of purpose passe them ouer in silence. Which was very ill done, seeing that Historiographers ought and should be very precise, true, and vnpassionate, and that neither profite, or feare, rancor or affection should make them to treade awry from the truth, whose mother is History, the Emulatresse of Time, the depository of actions, the witnesse of things past, and aduertiser of things to come. In this Historie I know a man may finde all that he can desire in the most pleasing maner; and if they want any thing to be desired, I am of opinion that it is through the fault of that vngratious knaue that translated it, rather then through any defect in the subiect. Finally the second part thereof (according
 to the translation) began in this manner:
The trenchant swords of the two valorous and inraged combattants being listed a loft, it seemed that they threatned Heauen, the earth, and the depths. Such was their hardines and courage: and the first that discharged his blow was the Biscaine, which fell with such force and fury, as if the sword had not turned a little in the way, that onely blow were sufficient to set an end to the rigorous contention, and all other the aduentures of our Knight. But his good Fortune which rescrued him for greater affaires, did wrest his aduersaries sword awry in such sort, as though he stroke him on the left shoulder, yet did it no more harme, then disarme all that side, carying away with it a great part of his Beauer, with the halfe of his eare; all which fell to the ground with a dreadfull ruine, leauing him in very ill case for a good time. Good God! who is he that can well describe at this present the sury that entred in the heart of our Manchegan, seeing himselfe vsed in that manner? Let vs say no more, but that it was such, that stretching himselfe againe in the stirrops, and griping his sword fast in both his handes, he discharged such a terrible blow on the Biscaine, hitting him right vpon the Cushion, and by it on the head, that the strength and thickenesse thereof so little auailed him, that as if a whole mountaine had falne vpon him, the blood gushed out of his mouth, nose, and cares, all at once, and he tottered so on his Mule, that euery steppe he tooke he was ready to fall off, as he would indeede, if he had not taken him by the necke: yet neuerthelesse he lost the stirrops, and loosing his gripe of the Mule, it being likewise frighted by that terrible blow, ranne away as fast as it could about the fields, and within two or three winches, ouerthrew him to the ground. All which Don-Quixote stood beholding with great quietnesse, and as soone as he saw him fall he leapt off his horse, and ranne ouer to him very speedily, and setting the point of his sword on his eyes, he
 bad him yeeld himselfe or else he would cut off his head. The Biscaine was so amazed as hee could not speake a word, and it had succeeded very ill with him, considering Don-Quixotes fury, if the Ladies of the Coach, which vntill then had beheld the conflict with great anguish, had not come where he was, and earnestly besought him to doe them the fauour to pardon their Squires life. Don-Quixote answered with a great loftinesse and grauity; Truely faire Ladies I am well appaid to graunt your request, but it must be with this agreement and condition, that this Knight shall promise me to goe to Toboso, and present himselfe in my name to the Peerelesse Ladie Dulcinea, to the end she may dispose of him as shee pleaseth. The timerous and comfortlesse Lady without considering what Don-Quixote demaunded, or asking what Dulcinea was, promised that her Squire should accomplish all that he pleased to commaund. Why then quoth Don-Quixote, trusting to your promise, I'le do him no more harme, although he hath well deserued it at my handes.


CHAP. II.

Of that which after befell vnto Don-Quixote, when he had left the Ladies.

BY this Sancho Panca had gotten vp, though somewhat abused by the Friars Lackeyes, and stood attentiuely beholding his Lords combate, and prayed to God with all his hart, that it would please him to giue him the victory; and that he might therein winne some Island, wherof he might make him gouernour, as he had promised. And seeing the controuersie ended at last, and that his Lord remounted vppon
 Rozinante; he came to holde him the stirrop, and cast himselfe on his knees before him ere he got vp, and taking him by the hand, he kist it, saying, I desire that it will please you good my Lorde Don-Quixote, to bestow vpon me the gouernement of that Island which in this terrible battell you haue wonne; for though it were neuer so great, yet doe I finde my selfe able enough to gouerne it, as well as any other whatsoeuer that euer gouerned Island in this world. To this demand Don-Quixote answered, thou must note friend Sancho, that this aduenture, and others of this kind are not aduentures of Islands but of thwartings and high wayes, wherein nothing else is gained but a broken pate, or the losse of an eare. Haue patience a while, for aduentures will be offered, whereby thou shalt not only be made a gouernour, but also a greater man* Sancho rendred him many thankes, and kissing his hand againe, and the skirt of his Habergeon, hee did helpe him to get vp on Rozinante, and he leapt on his Asse, and followed his Lord: who with a swift pace, without taking leaue, or speaking to those of the Coach, he entred into a wood that was hard at hand. Sancho followed him as fast as his beast could trotte, but Rozinante went off so swiftly, as he perceiuing he was like to be left behinde, was forced to call aloude to his Master that he would stay for him. Which Don-Quixote did by checking Rozinante with the bridle, vntill his wearied Squire did arriue, who as soone as he came, said vnto him: Me thinkes (Sir) that it will not be amisse to retire our selues to some Church; for according as that man is ill dight with whom you fought, I certainly perswade my selfe that they will giue notice of the fact to the holy brotherhood, and they will seeke to apprehend vs; which if they doe, in good faith before we can get out of their clawes, I feare me we shall sweate for it. Peace, quoth Don-Quixote, where hast thou euer read or seene that Knight errant that hath been brought before the Iudge,
 though hee committed neuer so many homicides and slaughters. I know nothing of Omicilles, quoth Sancho, nor haue I cared in my life for any, but well I wote that it concernes the holy brotherhood to deale with such as fight in the fields, and in that other I wil not intermedle. Then be not afraid frie^d, quoth Don-Quixote, for I wil deliuer thee out of the hands of the Caldeans, how much more out of those of the brotherhood. But tell me in very good earnest whether thou didst euer see a more valorous Knight then I am, throughout the face of the earth? Didst thou euer reade in Histories of any other that hath, or euer had more courage in assayling, more breath in perseuering, more dexterity in offending, or more arte in ouerthrowing then I? The truth is, quoth Sancho, that I haue neuer read any History, for I can neither reade nor write, but that which I dare wager is, that I neuer in my life serued a bolder Master then you are, and I pray God that we pay not for this boldnes, there where I haue said. That which I request you is, that you will cure your selfe, for you loose much bloud by that eare; and here I haue linte and a little Vnguentum Album in my Wallet. All this night be excused, quoth Don-Quixote, if I had remembred to make a Violl full of the Balsamum of Fierebras, for with one drop of it we might spare both time, and want well al those other medicines. What Viall, and what Balsamum is that, said Sancho Panca? It is, answered Don-Quixote, a Balsamum whereof I haue the receit in memory, which one possessing he needes not feare death, nor ought he to thinke that he may be killed by any wound: and therefore after I haue made it, and giuen it vnto thee, thou hast nothing else to doe, but when thou shalt see that in any battell I be cleuen in twaine (as many times it happens) thou shalt take faire and softly that part of my body that is falne to the ground, and put it vp again with great subtilty on the part that rests in the saddle, before the blood congeale, hauing euermore great care that thou place it
 iust and equally; then presently after thou shalt giue me two draughts of that Balsamum, which I haue said, thou shalt see me streight become sounder then an apple. If that be true, quoth Sancho, I doe presently here renounce the gouernement of the Island you promised, and will demand nothing else in recompence of my seruices of you, but onely the receit of this precious liquor; for I am certaine that an ounce thereof will be worth two Reals in any place, and when I haue it I should neede nothing else to gaine my liuing easily and honestly. But let me know, is it costly in making? With lesse then three Reals, quoth Don-Quixote, a man may make three gallons of it. But I meane to teach thee greater secrets then this, and do thee greater fauours also. And now let me cure my selfe, for mine eare grieues me more then I would wish. Sancho then tooke out of his wallet his linte and oyntment to cure his Master. But when Don-Quixote saw that the vizar of his helmet was broken, he was ready to run mad; and setting his hand to his sword, and lifting vp his eyes to heauen, he said, I vow to the creator of all things, and to the foure Gospels where they are largest written, to leade such another life as the great Marquesse of Mantua did, when he swore to reuenge the death of his Nephew Valdouinos, which was, not to eate on Table-cloth, nor sport with his wife, and other things, which although I doe not now remember I giue them heere for expressed, vntil I take complete reuenge on him that hath done me this outrage. Sancho hearing this, said, you must note Sir Don-Quixote, that if the Knight hath accomplished that which you ordained, to goe and present himselfe before my Lady Dulcinea of Toboso, then hath he fully satisfied his debt, and deserues no new punishment, except he co^mit a new fault. Thou hast spoken wel and hit the marke right, said Don-Quixote, and therfore I disanull the oath in that of taking any new reuenge on him: but I make it, and confirme it againe, that I wil leade the life I haue said,
 vntill I take another helmet like, or as good as this perforce from some Knight. And do not thinke Sancho, that I make this resolution lightly, or as they say, with the smoake of strawes; for I haue an authour whom I may very well imitate herein, for the very like in euery respect past about Mambrinos helmet, which cost Sacriphante so deerly. I would haue you resigne those kinde of oathes to the Diuel, quoth Sancho, for they wil hurt your health, and preiudice your conscience. If not, tell me now, I befeech you, if we shal not these many daies encounter with any that weares a helmet, what shall we doe? Will you accomplish the oath, in despite of all the inconueniences and discommodities that ensue thereof? to wit, to sleepe in your clothes: not to sle^epe in any dwelling, and a thousand other penitencies, which the oath of the madde olde man, the Marquesse of Mantua contained, which you meane to ratifie now? Doe not you consider that armed men trauell not in any of these wayes, but Carriers and Waggoners, who not onely carie no helmets, but also for the most part neuer heard speake of them in their liues. Thou dost deceiue thy selfe saying so, replied Don-Quixote, for we shall not haunt these wayes two houres, before we shall see more armed Knights then were at the siege of Albraca, to conquer Angelica the faire. Well then, let it be so, quoth Sancho, and I pray God it befall vs well; whom I deuoutly beseech that the time may arriue of gaping that Island which costs me so deere, and after let me die presently and I care not. I haue already said to thee Sancho, quoth his Lord, that thou shouldst not trouble thy selfe in any wife about this affaire; for when an Island were wanting, we haue then the Kingdome of Denmarke or that of Sobradisa which will come as fit for thy purpose as a ring to thy finger, and principally thou art to reioyce, because they are on the continent. But omitting this till his owne time, see whether thou hast any thing in thy wallet, and let vs eate it, that afterward we may goe
 search out some Castle, wherin we may lodge this night, and make the Balsamum which I haue tolde thee. For I vow to God that this eare grieues me maruellously. I haue here an Onion, replied the Squire, a peece of Cheese and a few crustes of bread, but such grosse meates are not befitting so noble a Knight as you are. How ill dost thou vnderstand it, answered Don-Quixote? I let thee to vnderstand Sancho, that it is an honour for Knights errant not to eate once in a moneths space; and if by chaunce they should eate, to eate onely of that which is next at hand. And this thou mightest certainely conceiue, hadst thou read so many bookes as I haue done For though I past ouer many, yet did I neuer finde recorded in any that Knights errant did euer eate, but by meere chance and aduenture, or in some costly banquets that were made for them, and all the other daies they past ouer with hearbs and rootes: and though it is to be vnderstood that they could not liue without meate, and supplying the other needes of nature, because they were in effect men as wee are: it is likewise to bee vnderstood that spending the greater part of their liues in Forrests and desarts, and that too without a Cook, that their most ordinary meats were but course and rusticall, such as thou dost now offer vnto me. So that friend Sancho, let not that trouble thee which is my pleasure, nor goe not thou about to make a new world, or to hoist Chiualrie errant off of her hinges. Pardon me good Sir, quoth Sancho; for by reason I can neyther reade nor write, as I haue said once before, I haue not falne rightly in the rules and Iawes of Knighthood; and from henceforth my wallet shall be well furnished with all kindes of drie fruits for you, because you are a Knight: and for my selfe seeing I am none, I will prouide fowles and other things, that are of more substance. I say not Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote that it is a forcible law to Knights errant, not to eate any other things then such fruits, but that their most ordinary sustenance could be
 none other then those, and some hearbes they found vp and downe the fields, which they knew very well, and so doe I also. It is a vertue, quoth Sancho, to know those hearbes; for as I imagine that knowledge will some day stand vs in stead: and saying so, he tooke out the prouision he had, which they both cate together with good conformity. But being desirous to search out a place where they might lodge that night, they did much shorten their poore dinner, and mounting anone a horse-backe, they made as much hast as they could, to finde out some dwellings, before the night did fall, but the Sunne and their hopes did faile them, at once they being neare the Cabins of certaine Goat-heards; and therefore they concluded to take vp their lodging there for that night; for though Sanchoes griefe was great to he out of a village, yet Don-Quixotes ioy exceeded it farre, considering hee must sleepe vnder open heauen, because he made account as oft as this befell him, that he did a worthy acte, which did facilitate and ratifie the practise of his Chiualry.


CHAP. III.

Of that which past betweene Don-Quixote and certaine Goat-heards.

HE was intertained very cheerefully by the Goat-heards, and Sancho hauing set vp Rozinante and his Asse, as well as hee could, he presently repaired to the smell of certain peeces of Goat-flesh that stood boyling in a Kettle, ouer the fire, and although he thought in that very moment to trie whether they were in season to be translated out of the Kettle into the stomach he did omit it, because he saw the Heards take them off the fire, and spreading certaine Sheepskins,
 which they had for that purpose on the ground, lay in a trice their rusticall table, and inuited the Master and man with very cheerefull minde to come and take part of that which they had. There sate downe round about the skinnes sixe of them, which were all that dwelled in that Foulde, hauing first (vsing some course complements) placed Don-Quixote vpon a trough, turning the bottom vp. Don-Quixote sate downe and Sancho stood, to serue the cuppe, which was made of horne. His Master seeing him a foote, said, Sancho, to the end that thou mayest perceiue the good included in wandring Knighthood, and also in what possibility they are, which exercise themselues in any ministery thereof to arriue briefely to honour and reputation in the world. My will is, that thou dost sit here by my side, and in company with this good people, and that thou beest one and the very selfe same thing with me, who am thy Master and naturall Lord, that thou eate in my dish, and drinke in the same cup wherein I drinke: for the same may be said of Chiualrie that is of Loue, to wit, that it makes all things equall. I yeelde you great thankes, quoth Sancho, yet dare I auouch vnto you, that so I had wherewithall to eate well, I could eate it as well or better standing and alone, then if I sate by an Emperour. And besides, if I must say the truth, me thinkes that which I eate in a corner without ceremonies, curiosity, or respect of any, though it were but bread and an Onion, smackes a great deale better, then Turkey-Cockes at other tables, where I must chaw my meat leisurely, drinke but litle, wipe my handes often, must not neese nor cough though I haue a desire or be like to choake, nor doe other things that solitude and liberty bring with them. So that, (good Sir) I would haue you conuert these honours that you would bestow vpon me in respect that I am an adherent to Chiualry, as I am being your Squire, into things more essentiall and profitable for me then these; and though I remaine as thankefull for them, as if they were
 receiued, yet doe I here renounce from this time vntil the worlds end. For all that, thou shalt sit, for the humble shall be exalted; and so taking him by the arme, he forced him to sit downe neere himselfe.
The Goatherds did not vnderstand that Gibbrish of Squires and Knights errant, and therefore did nothing else but eate, and hold their peace, and looke on their guests, that tossed in with their fish whole slics, with good grace and stomacks. The course of flesh being ended, they serued in on the rugges a great quantity of sheld Akorns, and halfe a cheese harder then if it were made of roughcasting. The horne stood not the while idle, for it went round about so often now full, now empty much like a conduit Arcaduzed Noria. p. 76. of Noria. And in a trice it emptied one of the two wine bags that lay there in the publike view. After that Don-Quixote had satisfied his appetite well, he tooke vp a fish full of Acornes, and beholding them carnestly, he began to discourse in this manner. Happy time, and fortunate ages were those, whereon our ancestors bestowed the title of Goulden, not because Gould (so much prized in this our yron age) was gotten in that happy time, without any labours, but because those which liued in that time, knew not these two words Thine and Mine, in that holy age all things were in common: No man needed for his ordinarie sustenance to doe ought else then lift vp his hand, and take it from the strong Oke, which did liberally inuite them, gather his sweete and sauory fruite. The cleare fountaines and running riuers did offer them these sauorie and transparent waters in magnificent abundance. In the clifts of rocks and hollow trees did the carefull and disercete bees erect their commonwealth, offering to euery hand without interest, the fertile croppe of their sweetest trauailes. The loftie Corke tree did dismisse of the^selues without any other art then that of their natiue liberalitie, their broad and light rindes. Wherewithall
 horses were at first couered, being sustained by rusticall stakes, to none other end, but for to keepe backe the inclemencies of the Ayre. All then was peace, all amitie, and all concord: as yet the plowshade presumed not with rude encounter to open and search the compassionate bowels of our first mother; for she without compulsion offered vp through all the parts of her fertill and spacious bosome all that which might satisfie, sustaine, and delight those children which it then had: yea it was then that the simple and beautifull young Sheepheardesses went from valley to valley, and hill to hill, with their haires sometimes plaited, sometimes disheueld, without other apparrell then that which was requisite to couer comelily that which modesty wils and euer would haue concealed. Then were of no request the attires and ornaments which are now vsed, by those that esteem the purple of Tyre and the so-many-waies-martyrized Silke so much: but onely certaine greene leaues of Burdocks and Iuie intertexed and wouen together, wherewithall perhaps they went as gorgeously and comely deckt, as now our Court-dames with all the rare and out-landish inuentions that idlenesse and curiosity hath found out. Then, were the amorous conceits of the minde, simply and sincerely deliuered and imbellished in the very forme and manner that she had conceiued them, without any artificiall contexture of wordes to indeere them; fraude, deceit, or mallice had not then medled themselues with plainnesse and truth: Iustice was in her proper termes, fauor daring not to trouble or confound her, or the respect of profite which do now prosecute, blemish, and disturbe her so much. The law of corruption or taking bribes had not yet possest the vnderstanding of the Iudge; for then was neither Iudge nor person to be iudged. Maydens and honesty wandred then I say where they listed, alone signiorizing secure, that no stranger liberty or lasciuious
 intent could preiudice it, or their owne natiue desire or will any way endamage it. But now in these our detestable times no damzel is safe, although she be hid and shut vp in another new Labyrinth, like that of Creete; for euen there it selfe the amorous plague would enter, eyther by some cranie, or by the ayre, or by the continuall vrgings of cursed care, to infect her. For whose protection and security was last instituted. By successe of times the order of Knighthood; to defend damzels, protect widows, and assist Orphans and distressed wights. Of this order am I, friends Goatheards, whom I doe heartily thanke for the good intertainement which you giue vnto me and my Squire: for although that euery one liuing is obliged by the law of nature to fauour Knights errant; yet notwithstanding, knowing that you knew not this obligation, and yet did receiue and make much of me, it stands with all reason that I doe render you thankes with all my heart.
Our Knight made this long Oration (which might haue beene well excused) because the Acornes that were giuen vnto him, called to his minde the golden world: and therefore the humour tooke him to make the Goatheards that vnprofitable discourse, who heard him all amazed and suspended with very great attention all the while. Sancho likewise held his peace, eating Acornes, and in the meane while visited very often the second wine bagge, which because it might be fresh, lay hanged vpon a Corke tree. Don-Quixote had spent more time in his speech then in his supper; at the end whereof one of the Goat-heards said, to the end that you may more assuredly know, Sir Knight errant, that we doe intertaine you with prompt and ready will, we will likewise make you some pastime, by hearing one of our companions sing, who is a Heard of good vnderstanding, and very amorous withall; and can besides reade and write, and playes so well on a Rebecke, that there is nothing to be
 desired. Scarce had the Goat-heard ended his speech, when the sound of the Rebecke touched his eare, and within a while after he arriued that played on it, being a youth of some twenty years olde, and one of a very good grace and countenance. His fellowes demaunded if he had supped, and answering that he had; he which did offer the curtesie, said; then Anthony thou mayst doe vs a pleasure by singing a little, that this Gentleman our guest may see, that we enioy amidst these groues and woods, those that know what musicke is: we haue tolde him already thy good qualities, and therefore we desire that thou shew them, to verifie our wordes. And therefore I desire thee by thy life, that thou wilt sit and sing the Dittie which thy vncle the Prebendary made of thy loue, and was so wel liked of in our village. I am content, quoth the youth, and without further intreaty, sitting downe on the truncke of a lopped Oake, hee turned his Rebecke, and after a while began with a singular good grace to sing in this manner.

I Know Olalia! thou dost me adore,
Though yet to me, the same thou hast not said:
Nor showen it once, by one poore glaunce or more
Since loue is soonest, by such tongues bewrayde.


Yet cause I euer held thee to be wise
It me assures, thou bearest me good will:
And he is not vnfortunate that sees
How his affections are not taken ill.


Yet for all this, Olalia! tis true
I by obseruance gather to my woe:
Thy minde is framde of brasse, by art vndew
And flint thy bosome is, though it seemes snow.


And yet amidst thy rigor's Winter-face
And other shifts thou vsest to delay mee,
Sometime hope peeping out, does promise grace
But woe is mee, I feare tis to betray mee.



Sweetest! once in the ballance of thy minde
Poyse with iust waights my faith, which neuer yet
Diminisht though disfauor it did finde;
Nor can increase more, though thou fauourd'st it


If loue be courteous, as some men say;
By thy humanity, I must collect:
My hopes, hows' euer thou dost vse delay
Shall reape at last, the good I doe expect.


If many seruices be of esteeme
Or power to render a hard heart benigne:
Such things I did for thee, as make me deeme,
I haue the match gainde, and thou shalt be mine.


For if at any time, thou hast tane heede
Thou more then once might view, how I was clad,
To honour thee, on Mundayes with the weede,
Which worne on Sundayes, got me credit had,


For loue and brauery still themselues consort,
Because they both shoote euer at one end:
Which made me when I did to thee resort,
Still to be neat and fine I did contend.


Heere I omit the daunces I haue done
And Musiques I haue at thy window giuen:
When thou didst at Cockcrow listen alone,
And seemd'st hearing my voyce, to be in heauen.


I doe not eke, the prayses here recount
Which of thy beauty I so oft haue said:
Which though they all were true, were likewise wont
To make the enuious mee, for spight vpbraide.


When to Teresa, shee of Berrocal,
I of thy worthes discourse did sometime shape:
Good God! quoth shee, you seeme an Angels thrall,
And yet for Idoll, you adore an Ape.


Shee to her bugles, thankes may giue and chaines,
False haires, and other shifts that she doth vse,
to mend her beauty, with a thousand paynes
And guiles; which might loues very selfe abuse.



Wroth at her words, I gaue her streight the lie,
Which did her and her cousen so offend:
As me to fight, he challengd presently,
And well thou knowst of our debate the end:


I meane not thee, to purchase at a clap,
Nor to that end, doe I thy fauour sue:
Thereby thine honour either to intrap,
Or thee perswade, to take courses vndue.


The Church hath bands, which doe so surely hold,
As no silke string for strength comes to them neer:
To thrust thy necke once in the yoake be bold,
And see if I to follow thee will feare.


If thou wilt not, here solemnly I vow
By holliest Saint, enwrap't in precious shrine,
Neuer to leaue those hils where I dwell now,
If't be not to become a Capucine.

Heere the Goat-heard ended his duty, and although Don-Quixote intreated him to sing somewhat else, yet would not Sancho Panca consent to it; who was at that time better disposed to sleepe then to heare musicke: and therefore said to his Master, you had better prouide your selfe of a place wherein to sleepe this night, then to heare musicke, for the labour that these good men indure all the day long, doth n^t permit that they likewise spend the night in singing. I vnderstand thee well enough Sancho, answered Don-Quixote, nor did I thinke lesse, but that thy manifold visitations of the wine bottle, would rather desire to be recompenced with sleepe then with musicke. The wine liked vs all well, quoth Sancho: I doe not denie it, replied Don-Quixote, but goe thou and lay thee downe where thou pleasest, for it becomes much more men of my profession to watch then to sleepe. Yet notwithstanding it will not be amisse to lay somwhat againe to mine eare; for it grieues me very much. One of the Goat-heards beholding the hurt, bad him be of good
 cheere, for he would apply a remedie that should cure it easily. And taking some Rosemary leaues of many that grew thereabouts, he hewd them, and after mixed a little salt among them, and applied this medicine to the care, he bound it vp well with a cloth; assuring him that hee needed to vse no other medicine, as it proued after in effect.


CHAP. IIII.

Of that which one of the Goat-heards recounted to those that were with Don-Quixote.

ABout this time arriued another youth, one of those that brought them prouision from the Village, who said; Companions, doe not you know what passeth in the Village? How can we know it being absent? saies another of them. Then wit, quoth the youth, that the famous Sheepheard, and Student Ghrisostome died this morning, and they murmure that he died for loue of that diuellish lasse Marcela, William the rich his daughter, she that goes vp and downe these plaines and hils among vs in the habite of a Pastora. Dost thou meane Marcela, quoth one of them? Euen her, I say, answered the other; and the jest is, that he hath commaunded in his Testament, that he be buried in the fields as if he were a Moore; and that it be at the foote of the Rocke, where the fountaine stands of the Corke tree. For that according to fame, and as they say, he himselfe affirmed, was the place wherein he viewed her first. And he hath likewise commaunded such other things to be done, as the auncienter sort of the Village doe not allow, nor thinke fit to be performed; for they seeme to be ceremonies of the Gentiles. To all which obiections his
 great friend Ambrosio the Student, who likewise apparrelled himselfe like a Sheepheard, at once with him answers, that all shall be accomplished, without omission of any thing, as Ghrisostome hath ordayned, and all the Village is in an vprore about this affaire, and yet it is said that what Ambrosio and all the other Sheepheards his friends doe pretend shall in fine be done: and to morrow morning they will come to the place I haue named, to burie him with great pompe. And as I suppose it will be a thing worthy the seeing: at leastwise I will not omit to go and behold it, although I were sure that I could not return the same day to the Village. We will all doe the same, quoth the Goat-heards, and will draw lots who shall tarry here to keepe all our Heards. Thou sayest well Peter, quoth one of them, although that labour may be excused; for I meane to stay behinde for you all; which you must not attribute to any vertue, or little curiosity in me, but rather to the forke that prickt my foot the other day, and makes me vnable to trauell from hence. We doe thanke thee notwithstanding, quoth Peter, for thy good will. And Don-Quixote, who heard all their discourse, intreated Peter to tell him who that dead man was, and what the Sheepheardesse of whom they spoke.
Peter made answer, that what he knew of the affaire was, that the dead person was a rich Gentleman of a certaine Village, seated among those mountaines, who had studied many yeares in Salamanca, and after returned home to his house, with the opinion to be a very wise and learned man: but principally it was reported of him, that he was skilfull in Astronomie, and all that which passed aboue in heauen, in the Sunne and the Moone; for he would tell vs most punctually the clips of the Sunne and the Moone. Friend, quoth Don-Quixote, the darkening of these two greater Luminaries is called an Eclipse, and not a Clipse: but Peter stopping not at those trisles, did prosecute his History, saying, he did also prognosticate
 when the yeare would be abundant or Estil. Thou wouldest say Sterril, quoth Don-Quixote Sterril or Estil, said Peter, all is one for my purpose: and I say, that by his words, his father and his other friends, that gaue credite to him became very rich. For they did all that hee counselled them, who would say vnto them: sow Barley this yeare and no Wheate. In this you may sow Pease and no Barley. The next yeare will be good for Oyle. The three ensuing you shall not gather a drop. That science is called Astrologie, quoth Don-Quixote. I know not how it is called, replied Peter; but I know well, he knew all this and much more. Finally, a few moneths after he came from Salamanca, he appeared one day apparrelled like a Sheepheard with his flocke, and leather coat; hauing laid aside the long habites that hee wore, being a scholler, and ioyntly with him came also a great friend of his, and fellow Student called Ambrosio, apparrelled like a Sheepheard. I did almost forget to tell how Grisostome the dead man was a great maker of verses; insomuch that he made the Carrols of Christmas day at night, and the playes for Corpus Christi day, which the youthes of our Village did represent, and all of them affirmed, that they were most excellent. When those of the Village saw the two schollers so suddenly clad like Sheepheards, they were amazed and could not ghesse the cause that moued them to make so wonderfull a change. And about this time Grisostomes father died, and he remained possessed of a great deale of goods, as well moueable as immoueable; and no little quantity of cattell great and smal; and also a great summe of money; of all which the young man remained a dissolute Lord. And truely he deserued it all; for hee was a good fellow, and a charitable and a friend of good folke, and he had a face like a blessing. It came at last to be vnderstood, that the cause of changing his habite was none other, then for to goe vp and downe through these desarts after the Pastora Marcela, whom our Heard named
 before, of whom the poore dead Grisostome was become enamoured. And I will tell you now, because it is fit you should know it, what this wanton lasse is, perhaps, and I think without perhaps you haue not heard the like thing in all the dayes of your life, although you had liued more yeares then Sarna. Say Sarra, quoth Don-Quixote, being not able to heare him any longer to change one word for another. The Sarna or scabbe, quoth Peter, liues long enough too. And if you go this Sir, interrupting my tale at euery pace, we shall not be able to end it in a yeare. Pardon me friend, quoth Don-Quixote, for I speake to thee by reason there was such difference betweene Sarna and Sarra. But thou didst answere well; for the Sarna or scabbe liues longer then Sarra. And therefore prosecute thy Historie: for I will not interrupt thee any more. I say then deere Sir of my soule, quoth the Goatheard, that there was in our Village a farmer that was yet richer then Grisostomes father, who was called William, to whom fortune gaue in the end of his great riches a daughter called Marcela, of whose birth her mother died, who was the best woman that dwelled in all this circuit. Me thinkes I doe now see her quicke before me, with that face, which had on the one side the Sunne, and on the other the Moone, and aboue all she was a thriftie houswife, and a great friend to the poore. For which I beleeue that her soule is this very very houre enioying of the Gods in the other world. For griefe of the losse of so good a wife her husband William likewise died, leauing his daughter Marcela young and rich in the custody of his Vncle, who was a Priest, and Curate of our Village. The childe grew with such beauty, as it made vs remember that of her mother, which was very great. And yet notwithstanding they iudged that the daughters would surpasse hers, as indeed it did: for when shee arriued to the age of fourteene or fifteene yeares olde, no man beheld her, that did not blesse God for making her so faire:
 and most men remained enamoured and cast-away for her loue. Her Vncle kept her with very great care and closenesse: and yet neuerthelesse the fame of her great beautie did spread it selfe in such sort, that as well for it as for her great riches, her Vncle was not onely requested by those of our Village, but also was prayed, sollicited, and importuned by all those that dwelled many-leagues about, and that by the very best of them, to giue her to them in marriage. But he (who is a good Christian euery inch of him) although he desired to marrie her presently as soone as she was of age, yet would hee not doe it without her good will; without euer respecting the gaine and profite he might make by the possession of her goods, whilst he desired her marriage. And in good sooth this was spoken of, to the good Priest his commendation, in more then one meeting of the people of our Village. For I would haue you to wit, Sir errant, that in these little Villages they talke of all things, and make account, as I doe, that the Priest must haue beene too good, who could oblige his Parishioners to speake so well of him, and especially in the Villages: thou hast reason, quoth Don-Quixote, and therefore follow on, for the History is very pleasant; and thou good Peter dost recount it with a very good grace. I pray God, said Peter, that I neuer want our Heards; for it is that which makes to the purpose. And in the rest you shall vnderstand that although her Vncle propounded and told to his Niese the quality of euery woer of the many that desired her for wife, and intreated her to marrie and chuse at her pleasure; yet would shee neuer answer other, but that she would not marry as then, and that in respect of her ouer greene years, she did not finde her selfe able enough yet to beare the burden of marriage. With these iust excuses which shee seemed to giue, her Vncle left of importuning of her, and did expect vntill she were farther entred into yeares; and that shee might know how to chuse one that might like her. For
 he was wont to say, and that very wel, That Parents were not to place or bestow their children where they bore no liking. But see here when wee least imagined it, the coy Marcela appeared one morning to become a Pastora: and neyther her Vncle nor all those of the Village which disswaded her from it could worke any effect, but she would needes goe to the fieldes, and keepe her owne sheepe with the other young lasses of the towne. And she comming thus in publike, when her beauty was seene without hinderance, I cannot possibly tell vnto you, how many rich youthes as well Gentlemen as Farmers haue taken on the array of Grisostome, and follow woing of her vp and downe those fields. One of which, as is said already, was our dead man, of whom it is said, that leauing to loue her, he had at last made her his Idoll. Nor is it to be thought that because Marcela set her selfe in that liber^y, and so loose a life, and of so little or no keeping, that therefore she hath giuen the least token or shadow of dishonesty or negligence: nay rather such is the watchfulnesse wherewithall shee lookes to her honour, that among so many as serue and sollicite her, not one hath praised or can iustly vaunt himselfe to haue receiued at her hands, the least hope that may be to obtaine his desires. For although she did not slie or shunne the company and conuersation of Sheepheards, and doth vse them courteously and friendlily, whensoeuer anyone of them begin to discouer their intention be it euer so iust and holy, as is that of Matrimony, she casts them away from her, as with a sling. And with this manner of proceeding shee does more harme in this countrey, then if the plague had entred into it by her meanes: for her affability and beauty doth draw to it the hearts of those which do serue and loue her. But her disdaine and resolution doe conduct them to termes of desperation; and so they know not what to say vnto her, but to call her with a loude voyce cruell and vngratefull, with other titles like vnto this, which
 doe cleerely manifest the nature of her condition. And Sir, if you staid here but a few daies, you should heare these mountaines resound with the lamentations of those wretches that follow her. There is a certaine place not farre off, wherein are about two douzens of Beech trees, and there is not any one of them in whose rinde is not ingrauen Marcelas name, and ouer some names grauen also a crowne in the same tree, as if her louer would plainly deuote that Marcela beares it away, and deserues the garland of all humane beauty. Heere sighes one Sheepheard; there another complaines, in another place are heard amorous ditties, heere in another dolefull and dispayring laments. Some one there is that passeth ^uer all the whole houres of the night at the foote of an Oake or a rocke; and there without foulding once his weeping eyes, swallowed and transported by his thoughts, the Sunne findes him there in the morning. And some other there is, who without giuing wade or truce to his sighes, doth amidst the feruor of the most sastidious heate of the Summer, stretcht vpon the burning sand, breathe his pittifull complaints to heauen: and of this, and of him, and of those, and these, the beautifull Marcela doth indifferently and quietly triumph: all we that know her, doe await to see wherein this her loftinesse will finish, or who shall be so happy as to gaine dominion ouer so terrible a condition; and enioy so Peerelesse a beauty. And because all that I haue recounted is so notorious a truth, it makes me more easily beleeue that our companion hath tolde, that is said of the occasion of Grisostomes death: and therefore I doe counsell you Sir, that you doe not omit to be present to morrow at his buriall, which will be worthy the seeing, for Grisostome hath many friends, and the place wherein he commaunded himselfe to bee buried is not halfe a league from hence. I doe meane to be there, said Don-Quixote, and doe render thee many thankes for the delight thou hast giuen me, by the relation of so pleasant
 a History. O quoth the Goat-heard, I doe not yet know the halfe of the aduentures succeeded to Marcelas louers, but peraduenture we may meere some Sheepheard on the way to morrow that will tell them vnto vs. And for the present you will do well to goe take your rest vnder some roofe, for the ayre might hurt your wound, although the medicine be such that I haue applied to it, that any contrary accidents needes not much to bee feared. Sancho Panca being wholly out of patience with the Goat-heards long discourse, did sollicite for his part his Master so effectually as he brought him at last into Peters Cabin to take his rest for that night; whereinto after he had entred, he bestowed the remnant of the night in remembrances of his Lady Dulcinea in imitation of Marcelas louers. Sancho Panca did lay himselfe downe betweene Rozinante and his Asse, and slept it out, not like a disfauored louer, but like a man stamped and bruised with tramplings.


CHAP. V.

Wherein is finished the History of the Pastor a Marcecela, with other accidents.

BVT scarce had the day begun to discouer it selfe by the Orientall windowes, when fiue of the sixe Goat-heards arising, went to awake Don-Quixote, and demanded of him whether he yet intendde to go to Grisostomes buriall, and that they would accompany him. Don-Quixote that desired nothing more, got vp and commaunded Sancho to saddle and empannell in a trice; which he did with great expedition, and with the like they all presently began their iourney. And they had not yet gone a quarter of a league,
 when at the crossing of a path-way they saw sixe Sheepheards comming towards them, apparrelled with blacke skinnes, and crowned with Garlands of Cypresse and bitter Enula campana. Euery one of them caried in his hand a thicke trun cheon of Elme. There came likewise with them two Gentlemen a horse-backe, very well furnished for the way, with other three Lackeyes that attended on them. And as soone as they encountred, they saluted one another courteously, and demaunded whether they trauelled; and knowing that they all went towards the place of the buriall they began their iourney together. One of the horse-men speaking to his companion, said, I thinke (M. Viualdo) we shal account the time wel imployed that we shall stay to see this so famous an intertainment; for it cannot chuse but be famous according to the wonderfull things these Shephers haue recounted vnto vs, as well of the dead Sheepheard, as also of the murthering Pastora. It seemes so to me likewise, quoth Viualdo. And I say I would not onely stay one day, but a whole weeke rather then misse to behold it. Don-Quixote demaunded of them what they had heard of Marcela and Chrisostome? The traueller answered, that they had encountred that morning with those Sheepheards, and that by reason they had seene them apparrelled in that mournfull attire, they demaunded of them the occasion thereof, and one of them rehearsed it, recounting the strangenesse and beauty of a certaine Pastora called Marcela; and the amorous pursuits of her by many, with the death of that Chrisostome, to whose buriall they rode. Finally, he tolde all that againe to him, that Peter had tolde the night before.
This discourse thus ended, another began, and was, that he who was called Viualdo, demaunded of Don-Quixote the occasion that moued him to trauell thus armed thorough so peaceable a countrey? To whom Don-Quixote answered, the profession of my exercise doth not license
 or permit me to doe other: good dayes, cockering and ease were inuented for soft Courtiers; but trauell, vnrest, and armes were only inuented and made for those which the world termes Knights errant, of which number I my selfe (although vnworthy) am one, and the least of all. Scarce had they heard him say this, when they all helde him to be wood. And to finde out the truth better, Viualdo did aske him againe, what meant the word Knights errant? Haue not you read then, quoth Don-Quixote, the Histories and Annals of England, wherein are treated the famous actes of King Arthur, whom we continually call in our Castilian Romance King Artus? of whom it is an auncient and common tradition in the Kingdome of Great Brittaine that hee neuer died, but that he was turned by art of inchantment into a Crow, and that in processe of time he shall returne againe to raigne, and recouer his Scepter and Kingdome. For which reason, it cannot be proued that euer since that time vntill this, any Englishman hath killed a Crow. In this good Kings time was first instituted the famous order of Knighthood of the Knights of the Round Table, and the loue that is there recounted, did in euery respect passe as it is laid down betweene Sir Launcelot du Lake, and Queene Geneuer the honourable Ladie Quintaniona being a dealer, and priuie thereto. Whence sprung that so famous a dittie, and so celebrated here in Spaine of, Neuer was Knight of Ladies so well serued as Launcelot when that he in Britanie arriued, etc. With that progresse so sweet and delightfull of his amorous and valiant actes: and from that time forward the order of Knight went from hand to hand, dilating and spreading it selfe through many and sundry parts of the world: and in it were famous and renouned for their feats of armes, the valiant Amadis du Gaule, with all his progenie vntill the fift generation: and the valorous Felixmarte of Hircania, and the neuer-duely praysed
 sed Tirante the white, together with Sir Beuis of Hampton, Sir Guy of Warwicke, Sir Eglemore, with diuers others of that nation and age. And almost in our dayes we saw, and communed, and heard of the inuincible and valiant Knight Don Belianis of Greece. This then good Sirs is to be a Knight errant, and that which I haue said is the order of Chiualry: wherein, as I haue already sayd, I although a sinner, haue made profession, and the same doe I professe, that those Knights professed, whom I haue aboue mentioned; and therefore I trauell thorough these solitudes and desarts, seeking aduentures, with full resolution to offer mine owne arme and person to the most dangerous that fortune shall present, in the aide of weake and needy persons.
By these reasons of Don-Quixotes the trauellers perfectly perceiued that he was none of the wisest, and knew the kinde of folly wherewithall he was crossed, whereat those remained wonderfully admired: that by the relation of the others came to vnderstand it: and Viualdo who was very discreete, and likewise of a pleasant disposition, to the end they might passe ouer the rest of the way without heauines vnto the rock of the burial, which the Sheepheards said was neere at hand, hee resolued to giue him further occasion to passe onward with his follies, and therfore said vnto him. Me thinkes, Sir Knight, that you haue profest one of the most austere professions in the world. And I doe constantly hold that euen that of the Charter-house Monkes is not neere so straight. It may bee as straight as our profession, quoth Don-Quixote, but that it should be so necessary for the world, I am within the breadth of two fingers to call it in doubt. For if wee would speake a truth, the souldier that puts in execution his Captaines commaund, doth no lesse then the very Captaine that commaunds him. Hence I inferre that religious men doe with all peace and quietnesse seeke of heauen the good of the earth. But souldiers and we
 Knights doe put in execution that which they demand, defending it with the valour of our armes, and files of our swords: not vnder any roofe, but vnder the wide heauens, made as it were in Summer a marke to the insupportable Sunne beames, and in Winter to the rage of withering frosts. So that wee are the ministers of God on earth, and the armes wherewith he executeth here his iustice. And as the affaires of warre and things therunto pertayning, cannot be put in execution without sweate, labour and trauell; it followes that those which professe warfare take questionlesse greater paine then those which in quiet peace and rest doe pray vnto God, that he will fauour, and assist those that neede it. I meane not therefore to affirme, nor doth it once passe through my thought, that the state of a Knight errant is as perfect as that of a retyred religious man, but only would inferre through that which I my selfe suffer, that it is doubtlesly more laborious, more battered, hungry, thirsty, miserable, torne and lowsie. For the Knights errant of times past did without all doubt suffer much woe and miserie in the discourse of their life. And if some of them ascended at last to Empires, won by the force of their armes, in faith it cost them a great part of their sweate and bloud: and if those which mounted to so high a degree had wanted those inchanters and wisemen that assisted them, they would haue remained much defrauded of their desires, and greatly deceiued of their hopes. I am of the same opinion replied the traueller: but one thing among many others hath seemed to me very ill in Knights errant, which is when they perceiue themselues in any occasion to begin any great and dangerous aduenture: in which appeares manifest perill of losing their liues, they neuer in the instant of attempting it, remember to commend themselues to God, as euery Christian is bound to doe in like dangers, but rather doe it to their Ladies with so great desire
 and deuotion as if they were their Gods; a thing which in mine opinion smelles of gentility. Sir quoth Don-Quixote, they can doe no lesse in any wise, and the Knight errant which did any other, would digresse much from his duety. For now it is a receiued vse and custome of errant Chiualry, that the Knight aduen^urous, who attempting of any great feate of armes shall haue his Lady in place, do mildely and amorously turne his eyes towards her, as it were by them demaunding that she doe fauour and protect him in that ambiguous traunce which he vndertakes; and moreouer if none doe heare him he is bound to say certaine wordes betweene his teeth, by which he shall with all his heart commend himselfe to her: and of this we haue innumerable examples in Histories. Nor is it therefore to be vnderstood that they do omit to commend themselues to God, for they haue time and leisure enough to doe it, in the progresse of the worke.
For all that, replied the traueller, there remaines in me yet one scruple, which is, that oftentimes as I haue read, some speech begins betweene two Knights errant, and from one word to another their choler begins to be inflamed, and they to turne their horses, and to take vp a good piece of the fielde, and without any more adoe to runne as fast as euer they can driue to incounter againe; and in the midst of their race, doe commend themselues to their dames, and that which commonly ensues of this incountring is, that one of them fals downe throwne ouer the crouper of his horse, past thorow and thorow by his enemies Launce, and it befals the other, that if he had not caught fast of his horse mane, he had-likewise falne. And here I cannot perceiue how he that is slaine had any leisure to commend himselfe vnto God in the discourse of this so accelerate and hasty a worke? Me thinkes it were better that those words which he spent in his race on his Lady, were bestowed as they ought, and as euery Christian
 is bound to bestow them. And the rather, because I coniecture that all Knights errant haue not Ladies to whom they may commend themselues, for all of them are not amorous.

That cannot be answered Don-Quixote, I say it cannot be that there's any Knight errant without a Lady; for it is as proper and essential to such to be enamored, as to heauen to haue starres: and I dare warrant that no History hath yet bin seene, wherin is found a Knight errant without loues: for by the very reason that hee were found without them, he wold be conuinced to be no legitimate Knight, but a bastard, and that he entred into the Fortresse of Chiualrie, not by the gate, but by leaping ouer the Staccado like a robber and a thiefe.

Yet notwithstanding replied the other, I haue read (if I doe not forget my selfe that Don Gataor, brother to the valorous Amadis du Gaule, had neuer any certain Maystresse, to whom he might commend himselfe; and yet for all that he was nothing lesse accounted of, and was a most valiant and famous Knight. To that obiection our Don-Quixote answered, one Swallow makes not a Summer. How much more that I know, that the Knight whom you alleage, was secretly very much enamoured: besides that, that his inclination of louing all Ladies well, which he thought were faire, was a naturall inclination, which he could not gouerne so well. But it is in conclusion sufficiently verified, that yet he had one Lady whom he crowned Queen of his will, to whom he did also commend himselfe very often and secretly, for hee did not a little glory to be so secret in his loues.
Then Sir, if it be of the essence of all Knights errant to be in loue, quoth the traueller, then may it likewise bee presumed that you are also enamoured, seeing that is annext to the profession? And if you doe not prize your selfe to be as secret as Don Gataor, I doe intreate you as earnestly as I may, in all this companies name and mine
 owne, that it will please you to tell vs the name, countrey, quality and beauty of your Ladie; for I am sure shee would account her selfe happy to think that all the world doth know shee is beloued and serued by so worthy a Knight as is your selfe. Here Don-Quixote breathing forth a deepe sigh, said, I cannot affirme whether my sweete enemy delight or no, that the world know how much she is beloued, or that I serue her. Onely I dare auouch (answering to that which you so courteously demaunded) that her name is Dulcinea, her countrey Toboso, a Village of Mancha: her calling must be at least of a Princesse, seeing she is my Queene and Lady, her beauty soueraigne; for in her are verified and giue glorious lustre to all those impossible and Chimericall attributes of beauty, that Poets giue to their Maystresses: that her haires are golde, her forehead the Elisian fields, her brows the Arkes of heauen, her eyes Sunnes, her cheekes Roses, her lips currall, her teeth Pearles, her neck Alablaster, her bosome Marble, Iuorie her hands, and her whitenesse Snow, and the parts which modesty conceales from humane sight, such as I thinke and vnderstand, that the discreete consideration may prize, but neuer be able to equalize them: her linage, progeny, and pedegree wee desire to know likewise, quoth Viualdo. To which Don-Quixote answered, she is not of the ancient Romane Curcios, Cayos, or Scipios, nor of the moderne Colomnas or Vrsinos, nor of the Moncadas or Requesenes of Catalunia, and much lesse of the Rebelias and Villanouas of Valencia, Palafoxes, Nucas, Rocabertis, Corelias, Alagones, Vrreas, Fozes and Gurreas of Aragon, Credas Manziquez Mendocas, and Guzmanes of Castile, Lancasters, Palias and Meneses of Portugal; but she is of those of Toboso of the Mancha; a linage, which though it be moderne is such as may giue a generous beginning to the most noble families of ensuing ages. And let none contradict me in this, if it be not
 with those conditions that Cerbino put at the foote of Orlandos armour, to wit:

Let none from hence presume these armes at all to moue,
But he that with Orlando dares his force for to proue.

Although my linage be of the Cachopines of Laredo, replied the traueller, yet dare I not to compare it with that of Toboso in the Mancha, although to speake sincerely, I neuer heard any mention of that linage you say vntill now. What, quoth Don-Quixote, is it possible that you neuer heard of it ti^^ ^ow?
All the company trauelled, giuing maruellous attention to the reasons of those two; and euen the very Goatheards and Sheepeheards began to perceiue the great want of iudgement that was in Don-Quixote, only Sancho Panca did verily beleeue, that all ^^s Masters wordes were most true, as one th^^ knew w^^^ he was, from the very time of ^^^^^th. But that wherein his beleefe staggered somewhat w^^ of the beautifull Dulcinea of Toboso; for he had (...) heard speake in his life before of such a name, or P^^^^^e, although hee had dwelled so many yeares (...) ^oso.
And as t^^^ trauell^^ in these discourses, they beheld discending betwixt the clift of two loftie mountaines to the number of twenty Sheepheards, all apparrelled in skinnes of blacke wooll, and crowned with garlands; which as the^ ^^receiued afterward, were all of Ewe and Cipresse; sixe^^^ them carried a be^^e, couered with many sorts of flowers and boughes. Which one of the Goatheards es^^^ng, hee said, those that come there are they which (...) Grisostoms body, and the foot of that mountain is the place where hee hath commaunded them to burie him. These wordes were occasion to make them hast to arriue in time; which they did iust about the instant that the others had laid downe the corpes on the ground: and foure of them with sharpe pickaxes did digge the graue at the side of a hard rocke. The one and the others saluted
 themselues very courteously, and then Don-Quixote, and such as came with him, began to behold the Beare, wherein they saw laid a dead body all couered with flowers, and apparrelled like a Sheepheard of some thirtie years old; and his dead countenance shewed that he was very beautifull and an able bodied man. He had placed round about him in the Beare certaine bookes, and many papers, some open and some shut, and altogether, as well those that beheld this as they which made the graue, and al the others that were present (...) a maruellous silence, vntill one of them which had c^^^ed the dead man, said to another. See well Ambrosio, ^hether this be the place that Grisostome said, seeing that ^^ou wou^dest haue all so punctually obserued, which h^^ commaunded in his Testament? This is it, answered Ambrosio, for many times my vnfortunate friend recounted to me in it the History of his mishaps: euen there he tolde me that he had seene that cruell enemy of mankinde first; and there it was, wher he first broke his affection to as honest as they were amorous: and there was the last time, wherein Marcela did end to resolue, and began to disdaine him, in such sort as she set end to the Tragedie of his miserable life. And here in memory of so many misfortunes, he commaunded himselfe to be committed to the bowels of eternall obliuion, and conuerting himselfe to Don Quixote, and to the other trauellers he said: I his body Sirs which you do now behold with pitifull eyes, was the depository of a soule wherein heauen had hourded vp an infinite part of his treasures. This is the body of Grisostome, who was peerelesse in wit, without fellow for courtesie, rare for comlinesse, a Phoenix for friendship, magnificent without measure, graue without presumption, pleasant without offence; and finally the first in all that which is good, and second to none in all vnfortunate mischances. He loued well, and was hated; he adored and was disdained; hee prayed to one no lesse sauage then a beast; he importuned
 a heart as hard a Marble; he pursued the winde, he cried to desarts, he serued ingratitude, and he obtayned for reward the spoyles of death in the midst of the Cariere of his life: to which a Sheepheardesse hath giuen end whom he laboured to eternize, to the end she might euer liue in the memories of men: as those papers which you see there might very well proue, had he not commanded me to sacrifice them to the fire, as soone as his body was rendred to the earth.
If you did so quoth Viualdo, you would vse greater rigour and crueltie towards them then their very Lord, nor is it discreete or iustly done that his will bee accomplished, who commands any thing repugnant to reason. Nor should Augustus Caesar himselfe haue gained the reputation of wisedome, if he had permitted that to be put in execution which the diuine Mantuan had by his will ordeined. So that Seignior Ambrosio, now that you commit your friends body to the earth, do not therfore commit his labour to obliuion: for though hee ordeined it as one iniured, yet are not you to accomplish it, as one void of discretion: but rather cause, by giuing life to these Papers, that the crueltie of Marcela may liue eternally, that it may serue as a document to those that shall breathe in insuing ages that how they may auoide and shunne the like downefals: for both my selfe and all those that come here in my companie, doe already know the Historie of your enamoured and despairing friend, the occasion of his death, and what he commaunded eare hee deceased. Out of which lamentable relation may be collected how great hath beene the crueitie of Marcela the loue of Grisostome, the faith of your affection, and the conclusion which those make, which doe rashly runne through that way, which indiscreete loue doeth present to their view. Wee vnderstood yesternight of Grisostomes death, and that he should be entred in this place, and therefore wee omitted our intended iournyes both for curiositie and pitie,
 and resolued to ^ome and behold with our eyes, that, the relation wherof did so much grieue vs in the hearing; and therefore we desire thee (discreete Ambrosio) both in reward of this our compassion, and also of the desire which springs in our brests to remedie this disaster if it were possible; but chiefly I for my part request thee, that omitting to burne these Papers thou wilt licence mee to take away some of them. And saying so without expecting the Shepheards answere, he stretched out his hand and tooke some of them that were next to him. Which Ambrosio perceiuing, said, I will consent Sir for courtesies sake, that you remaine Lord of those which you haue ceased vpon, but to imagine that I would omit to burne these that rest, were a very vaine thought. Viualdo, who did long to see what the papers contained which he had gotten, did vnfould presently one of them, which had this title, A Ditty of dispaire. Ambrosio ouerheard him and said; that is the last paper which this vnfortunate Sheepheard wrote, and because Sir that you may see the termes to which his mishaps conducted him: I pray you to reade it, but in such manner as you may be heard; for you shall haue leisure enough to doe it whilst the graue is a digging. I will doe it with all my heart, replied Viualdo, and all those that were present, hauing the like desire to heare it, they gathered about him, and he reading it with a cleere voyce pronounced it thus:



CHAP. VI.

Wherein are rehearsed the dispayring of Verses of the dead Sheepheard, with other vnexpected accidents.


The Canzone of Grisostome.
SInce cruell thou (I publish) dost desire,
From tongue to tongue, and th' one to th'other pole
The efficacy of thy rigor sharp
I'le hell constrain t' assist my soules desire,
And in my brest infuse a tune of dole,
Wheron my voice, as it is wont may harp,
And labour as I wish, at once to carpe,
And tell my sorrowes and thy murdring deedes:
The dreadfull voyce and accent shall agree,
And with them meete for greater torture bee,
Lumpes of my wretched bowels, which still bleedes.
Then listen, and lend once attentiue eare,
Not well consorted tunes, but howling t'heare,
That from my bitter bosoms depth takes flight:
And by constrayned rauing borne away,
Issues forth for mine ease and thy despight.


 The Lions roaring and the dreadfull howles
Of rauening Wolfe; and hissing terrible
Of squamy Serpent: and the fearefull bleate
Of some sad monster: of foretelling soules
The Pies crackling, and rumor horrible
Of the contending winde, as it doth beate
The Sea: and implacable bellowing, yet
Of vanquisht Bull: and of the Turtle sole
The feeling mourning, and the dolefull song
Of th' enuious Owle, with the dyre plaints among,
Of all th' infernall Squadron full of dole,
Sallie with my lamenting soule a round,

All mixed with so strange vnusuall sound,
As all the senses may confounded bee.
For my fierce torments a new way exact,
Wherein I may recount my miserie.


 The dolefull Ecchoes of so great confusion,
Shall not resound o're father Tagus sands,
Nor touch the Oliue watring Betis eares.
Of my dyre pangs I'le onely make effusion
Mongst those steepe rockes, and hollow bottom lands,
With mortified tongue, but liuing teares,
Sometimes in hidden dales where nought appeares,
Or in vnhaunted plaines free from accesse:
Or where the Sunne could ne're intrude a beame,
Amidst the venemous crue of beasts vncleane,
Whose wants with bounty, the free plaines redresse.
For though among those vast and desart downes
The hollow Eccho indistinctly sounds,
Thy matchles rigor, and my cruell paine.
Yet by the priuiledge of my niggard fates,
It will their force throughout the world proclaime.


 A disdaine kils; and patience runs a ground,
By a suspicion eyther false or true:
But iealousie with greater rigour sleese,
A prolixe absence doth our life confound.
Against feare of obliuion to insue,
Firme hope of best successe, giues little ease.
Ineuitable death lurkes in all these.
But I (O vnseene miracle) doe still liue
Iealous, absent, disdainde, and certaine too
Of the suspicious that my life vndoo,
Drownde in obliuion which my fire reuiues.
And amongst all those paines I neuer scope
Got, to behold the shadow once of hope:
Nor thus dispaired would I it allow.
But cause I may more aggrauate my moanes,
To liue euer without it, here I vow.



 Can hope and feare at once in one consist?
Or is it reason that it should be so?
Seeing the cause more certaine is of feare.
If before me dyre Iealousie exist,
Shall I deflect mine eyes? since it willshow
It selfe by a thousand wounds in my soule there.
Or who will not the gates vnto dispaire
Wide open set, after that he hath spide
Murdring disdaine? and noted each suspicion,
To seeming truths transformde, O sowre conuersion!
Whilst verity by falshood is belide?
O Tyrant of Loues state sierce iealousie
With cruell chaines, these hands together tie,
VVith stub cords couple them rough disdaine.
But wo is me with bloudy victory,
Your memory, is by my sufferance slaine.


 I die in fine, and cause I le not expect
In death or life for the least good successe:
I obstinate will rest in Fantasie.
And say he doth well, that does affect.
And eke the soule most liberty possesse,
That is most thrall to loues old Tyrannie.
And will affirme mine euer enemie.
In her faire shrine, a fairer soule containes:
And her obliuion from my fault to spring,
And to excuse her wrongs will witnesse bring,
That loue by her in peace his state maintaines.
And with a hard knot and this strange opinion,
I will accelerate the wretched summon,
To which guided I am by her scornes rife.
And offer to the ayre body and soule,
VVithout hope or reward of future life.


 Thou that by multiplying wrongs dost show,
The reason forcing me t'vse violence,
Vnto this loathsome life, growne to me hatefull,
Since now by signes notorious thou mayst know

From my hearts deepest wound; how willingly sense
Doth sacrifice me to thy scornes vngratefull.
If my deserts haue seemde to thee so bootefull,
As thy faire eyes cleere heauen should be ore cast,
And clouded at my death: yet doe not so,
For I'le no recompence take for the woe
By which, of my soules spoyles possest thou wast.
But rather laughing at my funerals sad,
Shew how mine end, begins to make thee glad.
But tis a folly to aduise thee this,
For I know in my deaths acceleration
Consists thy glory, and thy chiefest blisse.


 Let Tantalus from the profoundest deepes,
Come, for it is high time now, with his thirst:
And Sisifus with his oppressing stone.
Let Ticius bring his Rauen that neuer sleepes;
And Ixion make no stay with wheele accurst,
Nor the three sisters euer labouring on.
And let them all at once their mortall moane,
Translate into my brest, and louely sound
(If it may be a debt due to dispaire)
And chaunt sad obsequies with dolefull ayre,
Ouer a corse vnworthy of the ground.
And the threefac' a infernall porter grimme,
With thousand Monsters and Chymaeras dimme,
Relish the dolorous descant out amaine.
For greater Pompe then this I thinke not fit
That any dying louer should obtaine.


 Despayring Canzone doe not thou complaine,
When thou my sad society shalt refraine:
But rather since the cause whence thou didst spring
By my misfortune growes more fortunate,
Euen in the graue, thou must shunne sorrowing.

Grisostomes Canzone liked wonderfully all the hearers, although the reader thereof affirmed that it was not
 conformable to the relation that hee had receiued of Marcelas vertue and care of her selfe. For in it Grisostome did complaine of iealousies, suspicions and absence, being all of them things that did preiudice Marcelas good fame. To this obiection Ambrosio answered (as one that knew very well the most hidden secrets of his friend) you must vnderstand Sir, to the end you may better satisfie your owne doubt, that when the vnfortunate Sheepheard wrote that Canzone, he was absent from Marcela; from whose presence he had wittingly withdrawn himselfe, to see if he could deface some part of his excessiue passions, procured by absence. And as euery thing doth vexe an absent louer, and euery feare afflict him; so was Grisostome likewise tormented by imagined iealousies, and feared suspicions as much as if they were reall and true. And with this remaines the truth in her perfection and point of Marcelas vertue, who excepting that she is cruell, and somewhat arrogant, and very disdainefull, very enuy it selfe neyther ought nor can attaint her of the least defect. You haue reason, quoth Viualdo, and so desiring to reade another paper, hee was interrupted by a maruellous vision (for such it seemed) that vnexpectedly offered it selfe to their view. Which was, that on the top of the rocke wherein they made the graue, appeared the Sheepheardesse Marcela, so faire, that her beauty surpassed farre the fame that was spread thereof; such as had not beheld her before, did looke on her then with admiration and silence: and those which were wont to view her remained no lesse suspended then the others, which neuer had seene her. But scarce had Ambrosio eyed her, when with an irefull and disdayning minde, he spake these words; Com'st thou by chance, O fierce Basiliske of these mountaines, to see whether the wounds of this wretch will yet bleed at thy presence? Or dost thou come to insult and vaunt in the Tragicall feats of thy sterne nature? Or to behold from that height, like another merciles Nero, the
 fire of inflamed Rome? Or arrogantly to trample this infortunate Carkasse, as the ingratefull daughter did her father Tarquines? Tell vs quickly, why thou commest, or what thou dost most desire: for seeing I know that Grisostomes thoughts neuer disobeyed thee in life, I will likewise cause that all those his friends shall serue and reuerence thee.
I come not here good Ambrosio, to any of those ends thou sayest, quoth Marcela, but onely to turne for mine honour, and giue the world to vnderstand how little reason haue all those which make me the authour eyther of their owne paines or of Grisostomes death; and therefore I desire all you that bee here present, to lend attention vnto me; for I meane not to spend much time, or words to perswade to the discreete, so manifest a truth. Heauen as you say, hath made me beautifull, and that so much that my feature moues you to loue, almost whether you will or no. And for the affection you shew vnto me, you say, I and you affirme that I ought to loue you againe: I knowe by the naturall instinct that Ioue hath bestowed on me that each faire thing is amiable, but I cannot conceiue, why for the reason of being beloued, the partie that is so beloued for her beautie, should be bound to loue her louer, although he be foule. And seeing that foule things are worthy of hate, it is a bad argument to say I loue thee because faire; therefore thou must affect me, although vncomely. But set the case that the beauties occurre equall on both sides, it followes not therefore that their desires should runne one way. For all beauties doe not enamour, for some doe onely delight the sight, and subiect not the will; for if all beauties did enamour and subiect together, mens wils would euer runne confused and straying, without being able to make any election; for the beautifull subiects being infinite, the desires must also perforce be infinite: and as I haue heard, true loue
 brookes no diuision, and must needes be voluntary, and not enforced. Which being so, as I presume it is, why would you haue me subiect my will forcibly, without any other obligation then that, that you say you loue me? If not, tell me, if heauen had made me soule, as it hath made me beautifull, could I iustly complaine of you because you affected mee not? How much more, seeing you ought to consider, that I did not chuse the beauty I haue, for such as it is, heauen bestow it gratis, without my demaunding or electing it. And euen as the Viper deserues no blame for the poyson she caries, although therewithall shee kill, seeing it was bestowed on her by nature, so doe I as little merite to be reprehended because beautifull; for beautie in an honest woman is like fire a farre off, or a sharpe edged sword, for neyther that burnes nor this cuttes any but such as comme neere them. Honour and vertues are the ornaments of the soule, without which, the fairest body is not to be esteemed such. And if that honesty be one of the vertues that adorneth and beautifies most the body and soule, why should she that is beloued because faire, aduenture the losse thereof, to answere his intention which onely for his pleasures sake labours that she may lose it with all his force and industry? I was borne free, and because I might liue freely, I made election of the solitude of the fields. The trees of these mountains are my companions, the cleere water of these streames my mirrours. With the trees and waters I communicate my thoughts and beauty, I am a parted fire, and a sword laid aloofe. Those whom I haue enamoured with my sight, I haue vndeceiued with my wordes: And if desires be sustained by hopes, I neuer hauing giuen any to Grisostome or to any other, it may well be said that hee was rather slaine by his owne obstinacy, then by my cruelty: and if I be charged that his thoughts were honest, and that I was therefore obliged to answere vnto
 them, I say that when in that very place where you make his Sepulchre he first broke his minde vnto mee, I told him that mine intention was to liue in perpetuall solitude, and that onely the earth should gather the fruits of my solitarinesse, and the spoyles of my beauty; and if hee would after this my resolution persist obstistinately without all hope, and saile against the winde, what wonder is it that he should bee drowned in the midst of the gulfe of his rashnesse? If I had intertained him, then were I false: if I had pleased him, then should I doe against my better purposes and proiects. He striued being perswaded to the contrary: he dispaired e're he was hated. See then if it be reason that I beare the blame of his torment? Let him complaine who hath beene deceiued; let him dispaire to whom his promised hopes haue failed; let him confesse it whom I shall euer call, let him vaunt whom I shall admit. But let him not call me cruell or an homicide, whom I neuer promised, deceiued, called or admitted. Heauen hath not yet ordained that I should loue by destiny, and to thinke that I will doe it by election may be excused. And let this generall caueat serue euery one of those which sollicite me for his-particular benefite: and let it be knowne that if any shall hereafter die for my loue, that he dies not iealous or vnfortunate: for whofoeuer loues not any, breedes not in reason iealousie in any, nor should any resolutions to any be accounted disdaynings. He that calles me a sauage and Basiliske, let him shunne me as a hurtfull and preiudiciall thing: he that cals me vngratefull, let him not serue me: he that's strange, let him not know me: he that's cruell, let him not follow me: for this sauage, this Basiliske, this ingrate, this cruell and strange one, will neither seeke, serue, know or pursue any of them. For if Grisostomes impatience and headlong desire slew him, why should mine honest proceeding and care bee inculped therewithal?
 if I preserue mine integrity in the society of these trees, why would any desire me to lose it, seeing euery one couets to haue the like himself, to conuerse the better among men? I haue, as you all know, riches enough of mine own, and therfore doe not couet other mens. I haue a free condition, and I doe not please to subiect me. Neyther doe I loue or hate any. I do not deceiue this man or solicite that other; not doe I jest with one, and passe the time with another. The honest conuersation of the Pastoras of these Villages, and the care of my Goats doe intertaine me. My desires are limited by these mountaines, and if they doe issue from hence, it is to contemplate the beauty of Heauen, steps wherewithal the soule trauels towards her first dwelling. And ending here, without desiring to heare any answer, shee turned her backe and entred into the thickest part of the wood, that was there at hand, leauing all those that were presently maruellously admired at her beauty and discretion.
Some of the Sheepheards present that were wounded by the powerfull beames of her beautiful eyes, made proffer to pursue her, without reaping any profite out of her manifest resolution made there in their hearing; which Don-Quixote nothing, and thinking that the vse of this Chiualry did iump fitly with that occasion, by succouring distressed damzels; laying hand on the pommell of his sword, he said in loude and intelligible words: Let no person of whatsoeuer state or condition he be, presume to follow the faire Marcela, vnder paine of falling into my furious indignation. She hath showne by cleere and sufficient reasons, the little or no fault she had in Grisostomes death, and how far she liues from meaning to condiscend to the desires of any of her louers; for which respect it is iust that in stead of being pursued and persecuted, she be honored and esteemed by all the good men of the world; for she showes in it, that it is
 onely she alone, that liues therein with honest intention. Now whether it was through Don-Quixotes menaces, or whether because Ambrosio requested them to conclude with the obligation they ought to their good friend; none of the Sheepheards moued or departed from thence vntill the graue being made, and Grisostomes papers burned, they laid the body into it, with many teares of the beholders. They shut the Sepulchre with a great stone, vntill a monument were wrought, which Ambrosio said he went to haue made, with an Epitaph to this sense.

HEere of a louing Swaine
The Frozen Carkasse lies:
Who was a Heard likewise,
And died through disdaine.
Sterne rigour hath him slaine,
Of a coy, faire, ingrate,
By whom loue doth dilate
Her Tyrannie amaine.

They presently strowed on the graue many flowers and boughes, and euery one condoling a while with his friend Ambrosio, did afterward bid him farewell and departed. The like did Viualdo and his companion: and Don-Quixote bidding his hoste and the trauellers adieu, they requested him to come with them to Siuill, because it was a place so fit, for the finding of aduentures, as in euery streete and corner of it, are offered more then in any other place whatsoeuer. Don-Quixote rendred them thankes for their aduice, and the good will they seemed to haue, to gratifie him, and said, he neyther ought, nor would goe to Siuill, vntill hee had freed all those mountaines of theeues and robbers, whereof as fame ranne, they were sull. The trauellers perceiuing his good intention, would not importune him more, but bidding him againe farewell, they departed, and followed on their iourney:
 In which they wanted not matter of discourse, as well of the History of Marcela and Grisostome, as of the follies of Don-Quixote; who determined to goe in the search of the Pastora Marcela, and offer vnto her all that he was able to doe in her seruice. But it befell him not as he thought, as shall be rehearsed in the discourse of this true Historie, giuing end heere to the second PART.




THE DELIGHTFVLL HISTORY OF THE WITTY KNIGHT DON-QVIXOTE of the MANCHA. THE THIRD PART.

CHAP. I.

Wherein is rehearsed the vnfortunate aduenture hapned to Don-Quixote, by encountring with certaine Yanguesian Carriers.

THE wise Cid Hamete Venengeli recounteth that as soone as Don-Quixote had taken leaue of the Goatheards his hostes the night before, and of all those that were present at the buriall of the Sheepheard Grisostome, he and his Squire did presently enter into the same wood, into which they had seene the beautifull Sheepheardesse Marcela enter before. And hauing trauelled in it about the space of two houres without finding of her, they arriued in fine to a pleasant meadow, inriched with abundance of flourishing grasse, neere vnto which runnes a delightful and refreshing streame, which did inuite, yea constraine them thereby to passe ouer the heat of the day, which did then beginne to enter with great feruour and
 vehemencie. Don-Quixote and Sancho alighted, and leauing the Asse and Rozinante to the spaciousnesse of these plaines, to feede on the plenty of grasse that was there, they ransackt their Wallet, where without any ceremony the master and man did eate, with good accord and fellowship, what they found therein. Sancho had neglected to tie Rozinante sure, that hee knew him to be so sober and little wanton, as all the Mares of the Stood of Cordoua could not make him to think the least sinister thought. But fortune did ordaine, or rather the Diuell who sleepes not at all houres, that a troupe of Galician Mares belonging to certaine Yanguesian Carriers, did feede vp and downe in the same valley: which Carriers are wont with their beasts to passe ouer the heats in places situated neere vnto grasse and water. And that wherein Don-Quixote hapned to be, was very fit for their purpose. It therefore befell that Rozinante tooke a certaine desire to sollace himselfe with the Ladie Mares, and therefore as soone as he had smelt them, abandoning his naturall pace and custome, without taking leaue of his Master, he began a litle swift trot, and went to communicate his necessities to them. But they, who as it seemed, had more desire to feed then to sollace them, entertained him with their heeles and teeth in such sort, as they broke all his gyrts, and left him in his naked haire, hauing ouerthrowne the Saddle. But that which surely grieued him most was, that the Carriers perceiuing the violence that was offered by him to their Mares, repaired presently to their succours, with clubs and trunchions, and did so belabour him, as they fairely laid him along. Now in this season Don-Quixote and Sancho (which beheld the bombasting of Rozinante) approached breathlesse, and Don-Quixote said to Sancho; for as much as I can perceiue friend Sancho, these men are no Knights, but base rascally people of vile quality: I say it, because thou mayest helpe me to take due reuenge, for the outrage which they haue done before
 our face to Rozinante. What a diuell, quoth Sancho, what reuenge should we take, if these be more then twentie, and we but two, and peraduenture but one and a halfe. I am worth a hundred, replied Don-Quixote, and without making any longer discourse, hee set hand to his sword, and flew vpon the Yanguesians, and Sancho Panca mooued by his Lords example did the like: when with the first blow Don-Quixote piercing a buffe coate that one of them wore, wounded him grieuously in the showlder. The Yanguesians seeing themselues so rudely handled by two men onely, they being so many, ran to the stakes and trunchions of their carriage, and hemming in their aduersaries in the midst of them, they laid on them with admirable speede and vehemencie. True it is that at the second peale they strucke Sancho downe to the ground, and the like hapned to Don-Quixote, his dexterity and courage being nothing auailable in that traunce: and his fate so ordayning he fell iust at his coursers feete, who had not yet gotten vp: by which we may ponder the fury wherewithall trunchions batter, being placed in wrathfull and rusticall fists. The Carriers perceiuing the euill they had committed, trussing vp their loading with all possible speede, followed on their way, leauing both the aduenturers in a bad fashion, and a worse talent. The first that came to himselfe was Sancho Panca, who seeing his Lord neere vnto him, said with a weake and pitifull voyce, Sir Don-Quixote! O Sir Don-Quixote! What wouldest thou haue brother Sancho, replied the Knight with the like effeminate and dolefull tune? I would, quoth Sancho haue of your worship, a draught or two of the liquor of Feoblas, if you haue any of it at hand, perhaps it is good to cure broken bones, as well as it helpes wounds. What would we want vnhappy that I am, replied Don-Quixote, if I had it here, but I sweare vnto thee Sancho Panca, by the faith of a Knight errant, that before two daies passe (if fortune dispose not otherwise) I will haue it in my power,
 or it shall hardly escape my hands. I pray you, quoth Sancho, within how many dayes thinke you, shall we be able to stir our feete? I can say of my selfe, quoth the crushed Knight, that I cannot set a certaine terme to the dayes of our recouery, but I am in the fault of all, for I should not haue drawne my sword against men that are not Knights, as well as I am, and therefore I beleeue that the God of battels hath permitted that this punishment should be giuen vnto mee, in paine of transgressing the lawes of Knighthood. Wherefore brother Sancho, it is requisite that thou beest aduertised of that which I shall say vnto thee now, for it importeth both our goods very much, and is, that when thou beholdest that the like rascally Kenell doe vs any wrong, do not wait till I set hand to my sword against them; for I will not doe it in any sort. But draw thou thine, and chastise them at thy pleasure: and if any Knights shall come to their assistance and succour, I shal know then how to defend thee, and offend them with all my force; for thou hast by this perceiued by a thousand signes and experiences, how farre the valor of this mine inuincible arme extendeth it selfe (so arrogant remained the poore Knight, through the victory he had gotten of the hardy Biscaine.) But this aduice of his Lord seemed not so good to Sancho Panca, as that hee would omit to answer vnto him, saying, Sir, I am a peaceable, quiet, and sober man, and can dissemble any iniurie, for I haue wife and children to maintaine and bring vp: wherefore let this likewise be an aduice to you (seeing it cannot be a commandement) that I will not set hand to my sword in any wise, be it against Clowne or Knight: and that from this time forward I do pardon before God all the wrongs that they haue done, or shall doe vnto me, whether they were, be, or shall be done by high or low person, rich or poore, Gentleman or Churle, without excepting any state or condition. Which being heard by his Lord, hee said; I could wish to haue breath enough,
 that I might answere thee with a little more case, or that the griefe which I feele in this ribbe were asswaged euer so little, that I might Panca make thee vnderstand the errour wherein thou art. Come here poore foole, if the gale of Fortune hitherto so contrarie, doe turne in our fauour swelling the sayles of our desire in such sort as we may securely and without any hinderance arriue at the Hauen of any of those Ilands, which I haue promised vnto thee what would become of thee, if I conquering it did make thee Lord thereof, seeing thou wouldest disable thy selfe in respect thou art not a Knight, nor desirest to be one, nor wouldst haue valour or will to reuenge thine iniuries, or to defend thy Lordships? For thou must vnderstand that in the Kingdomes and Prouinces newly conquered, the minds of the inhabitants are neuer so thoroughly appeased or wedded to the affection of their new Lord, that it is not to be feared, that they wil worke some noueltie to alter things againe, and turne as men say afresh to trie fortune. And it is therefore requisite that the new possessour haue vnderstanding to gouerne, and valour to offend and defend himself in any aduenture whatsoeuer. In this last that hath befallen vs quoth Sancho, I would I had had that vnderstanding and valour of which you speake; but I vow vnto you by the faith of a poore man, that I am now fitter for plaisters then discourses. I pray you trie whether you can arise, and wee will helpe Rozinante, although he deserues it not, for he was the principall cause of all these troubles; I would neuer haue beleeued the like before of Rozinante, whom I euer held to bee as chaste and peaceable a person as my selfe. In fine, they say well, that one must haue a long time to come to the knowledge of bodies, and that thers nothing in this life secure. Who durst affirme that after those mightie blowes which you gaue to that vnfortunate Knight Errant, would succeede so in peste, and as it were in your pursuite this so furious a tempest of staues, that
 hath discharged it selfe on our shoulders? Thine Sancho replied Don-Quixote are perhaps accustomed to beare the like showers, but mine nursed betweene Sinabasas. Cottons and Hollands, it is most euident that they must feele the griefe of this disgrace. And were it not that I imagine, (but why doe I say I imagine?) I know certainely that all these incommodities are annext to the exercise of armes, I would here die for very wrath and displeasure. To this the Squire answered, Sir, seeing these disgraces are of the Cosecha. essence of Knighthood, I pray you whether they succeede very often, or whether they haue certaine times limited wherein they befall. For mee thinkes that within two aduentures more, we shall wholly remaine disinabled for the third, if the Gods in mercy doe not succour vs. Know friend Sancho, replied Don-Quixote, that the life of Knights errant is subiect to a thousand dangers and misfortunes; and it is also as well in the next degree and power to make them Kings and Emperours, as experience hath showne in sundry Knights, of whose Histories I haue intire notice. And I could recount vnto thee now, (did the paine I suffer permit me) of some of them which haue mounted to those high degrees which I haue said, onely by the valour of their arme. And the very same men found them both before and after in diuers miseries and calamities. For the valorous Amadis of Gaule saw himselfe in the power of his mortall enemy Arcalaus the inchanter, of whom the opinion runnes infallible, that he gaue vnto him being his prisoner, more then two hundred stripes with his horse bridle, after he had tied him to a piller in his base-court. And there is moreouer a secret Authour of no little credite, who sayes that the Caualier del Febo, being taken in a ginne like vnto a snatch that slipt vnder his feet, in a certaine Castell, after the fall found himselfe in a deep dungeon vnder the earth bound hands and feete; and there they gaue vnto him a glister of snow water and sand, which brought him almost to the end of
 his life, and were it not that hee was succoured in that great distresse, by a wise man his very great friend, it had gone ill with the poore Knight. So that I may very well passe among so many worthy persons: for the danger^ and disgraces they suffred were greater then those which we doe now indure. For Sancho I would haue thee to vnderstand, that these wounds which are giuen to one with those instruments that are in ones hand by chaunce, doe not disgrace a man; and it is written in the lawes of single combat in expresse termes, that if the Shoe-maker strike another with the Last which hee hath in his hand, although it be certainly of wood, yet cannot it be said, that he who was striken got the Bastanado. I say this to the end thou maist not thinke, although we remain bruised in this last conflict, that therefore we be disgraced; for the armes which those men bore, and wherewithall they belaboured vs, were none other then their packe staues, and as farre as I can remember, neuer a one of them had a tucke, sword, or dagger. They gaue mee no leisure, answered Sancho, to looke to them so neerely, for scarce had I laide hand on my Trunchant, when they blist my shoulders with their Pines, in such sort as they wholly depriued me of my sight, and the force of my feete together, striking mee downe on the place where I yet lie straught, and where the paine of the disgrace receiued by our Cudgelling, doeth not so much pinch me, as the griefe of the blowes, which shall remaine as deepely imprinted in my memorie as they doe in my backe. For all this thou shalt vnderstand brother Panca, replied Don-Quixote, that there is no remembrance, which time will not end, nor griefe which death will not consume. What greater misfortune quoth Sancho can there be then that, which onely expecteth time and death to end and consume it? If this our disgrace were of that kind, which might bee cured by a payre or two of playsters, it would not be so euill; but I begin to perceiue, that all the salues
 of an Hospitall will not suffice to bring them to any good termes. Leaue off Sancho, and gather strength out of weakenesse, said Don-Quixote, for so will I likewise doe, and let vs see how doth Rozinante; for me thinks that the lest part of this mishap hath not falne to his lot: you ought not to maruell at that, quoth Sancho, seeing he is likewise a Knight errant; that whereat I wonder, is thatmine Asse remaines there without payment, where wee are come away without ribbes. Fortune leaues alwayes one doore open in disasters, quoth Don-Quixote, whereby to remedie them. I say it, because that little beast may supply Rozinantes want, by carying of me from hence vnto some Castell, wherein I may be cured of my wounds. Nor do I hold this kinde of riding dishonourable; for I remember to haue read that the good old Stlenus tutor of the merry God of laughter, when hee entred into the Citie of the hundred gates, rode very fairely mounted on a goodly Asse. It is like, quoth Sancho, that he rode as you say vppon an Asse; but there is great difference betwixt riding and being cast athwart vpon one like a Sacke of rubbish. To this Don-Quixote answered, the wounds that are receiued in battell, doe rather giue honour, then depriue men of it. Wherefore friend Panca doe not reply any more vnto me, but as I haue said, arise as well as thou canst, and lay me as thou pleasest vpon thy beast, and let vs depart from hence, before the night ouertake vs in these desarts. Yet I haue heard you say, quoth Panca, that it was an ordinary custome of Knights errant to sleepe in Downes and desarts, the most of the yeare, and that so to do they hold for very good hap. That is said Don-Quixote, when they haue none other shift, or when they are in loue; and this is so true, as there hath beene a Knight that hath dwelt on a rocke exposed to the Sunne, and the shadow, and other annoyances of heauen for the space of two years, without his Ladies knowledge, and Amadis was one of that kind, when calling himself Beltinebros, he
 dwelt in the Poore Rocke, nor doe I know punctually eight yeares or eight monethes, for I doe not remember the History well; let it suffice that there hee dwelt doing of pennance, for some disgust which I know not, that his Ladie Oriana did him. But leauing that apart Sancho, dispatch and away before some other disgrace happen like that of Rozinante to the Asse. Euen there lurkes the Diuell, quoth Sancho, and so breathing thirty sobs and threescore sighes, and a hundred and twenty discontents and execrations against him that had brought him there, he a rose, remayning bended in the midst of the way, like vnto a Turkish bow, without being able to addresse himselfe: and notwithstanding all this difficulty, he harnessed his Asse (who had beene also somewhat distracted, by the ouermuch liberty of that day) and after he hoysted vp Rozinante, who were he indued with a tongue to complain, would certainly haue borne his Lord and Sancho companie. In the end Sancho laid Don-Quixote on the Asse, and tied Rozinante vnto him, and leading the Asse by the halter, trauelled that way which he deemed might conduct him soonest towards the high way. And fortune which guided his affaires from good to better, after he had trauelled a little league, discouered it vnto him, neere vnto which he saw an Inne, which in despite of him, and for Don-Quixotes pleasure must needes be a Castle. Sancho contended that it was an Inne, and his Lord that it was not, and their controuersie indured so long, as they had leisure before they could decide it, to arriue at the lodging; into which Sancho without farther verifying of the dispute, entred with all his loading.



CHAP. II.

Of that which hapned vnto the ingenuous Knight, within the Inne, which he supposed to be a Castle.

THe Inkeeper seeing Don-Quixote laid ouerthwart vpon the Asse, demaunded of Sancho, what disease he had? Sancho answered that it was nothing but a fal down from a rock, and that his ribs were therby somewhat bruised. This Inkeeper had a wife, not of the condition that those of that trade are wont to be, for she was of a charitable nature, and would grieue at the calamities of her neighbours, and did therefore presently occurre to cure Don-Quixote, causing her daughter a very comely yong mayden to assist her to cure her guest. There likewise serued in the Inne an Asturian wench, who was broad-faced, flat-pated, saddle-nosed, blinde of one eye, and the other almost out; true it is that the comelinesse of her bodie supplied all the other defects. She was not seuen palmes long from her feete vnto her head, and her shoulders which did somwhat burden her, made her look oftner to the ground then she would willingly. This beautifull piece did assist the young mayden, and both of them made a very bad bedde for Don-Quixote in an olde wide chamber, which gaue manifest tokens of it selfe, that it had sometimes serued many yeares only to keepe chopt straw for horses; in which was also lodged a Carrier, whose bedde was made a little way off from Don-Quixotes, which though it was made of Canuasse, and couerings of his Mules, was much better then the Knights, that onely contained foure boords roughly plained, placed on two vnequall tressels; A flockebed, which in the thinnesse seemed rather a Quilt; full of pellets, and had not they showen that they were wooll, through certaine breaches
 made by antiquity on the Ticke, a man would by the hardnesse rather take them to be stones: a paire of sheets made of the skinnes of Sargets, and a couerlet whose threedes, if a man would number, he should not lose one onely of the account. In this vngratious bed did Don-Quixote lie, and presently the hostesse and her daughter annoint him all ouer, and Maritornes (for so the Asturian wench was called) did holde the candle. The Hostesse at the playstring of him, perceiuing him to be so bruised in sundry places, she said vnto him that those signes rather seemed to proceed of blowes then of a fall. They were not blowes, replied Sancho, but the rocke had many sharpe ends and knobs on it, whereof euery one left behinde it a token; and I desire you good Masters, quoth he, to leaue some flaxe behinde, and there shall not want one that needeth the vse of them; for I assure you my backe doth likewise ake. If that be so, quoth the Hostesse, it is likely that thou didst also fall: I did not fall, quoth Sancho Panca, but with the suddaine affright that I tooke at my Masters fall, my body doth so grieue me, as mee thinkes, I haue beene handsomely belaboured. It may wel happen as thou saiest, quoth the Hostlers daughter: for it hath befalne me sundry times to dreame, that I fell downe from some high tower, and could neuer come to the ground: and when I awaked, I did finde my selfe so troubled, and broken as if I had verily falne. There is the point Masters, quoth Sancho Panca, that I without dreaming at all, but being more awake then I am at this houre, found my selfe to haue very few lesse tokens and markes then my Lord Don-Quixote hath. How is this Gentleman called, quoth Maritornes the Asturian? Don-Quixote of the Mancha, replied Sancho Panca, and he is a Knight errant, and one of the best and strongest that haue beene seene in the world these many ages. What is that, a Knight errant quoth the wench? Art thou so yong in the world, that thou knowest it not, answered Sancho
 Panca? Know then sister mine, that a Knight errant is a thing, which in two words you see wel cudgelled, and after becomes an Emperour. Today he is the most vnfortunate creature of the world, and the most needy; and to morrow he wil haue two or three crowns of Kingdomes to bestow vpon his Squire. If it be so, quoth the Hostesse, why then hast not thou gotten at least an Earledome, seeing thou art this good Knight his Squire? It is yet too soone, replied Sancho, for it is but a moneth sithence wee began first to seeke aduentures; and we haue not yet encountred any worthy of the name. And sometimes it befals that searching for one thing we encounter another. True it is that if my Lord Don-Quixote recouer of this wound or fall, and that I be not changed by it, I would not make an exchange of my hopes for the best title of Spaine. Don-Quixote did very attentiuely listen vnto all these discourses, and sitting vp in his bedde as well as hee could, taking his Hostesse by the hand, hee said vnto her: Beleeue me beautifull Lady, that you may count your selfe fortunate; for hauing harboured my person in this your Castle, which is such, that if I doe not praise it, it is because men say, that proper praise stinkes, but my Squire will informe you what I am: onely this I will say my selfe, that I will keepe eternally written in my memory the seruice that you haue done vnto me, to be gratefull vnto you for it whilst I liue. And I would it might please the highest heauens that loue held mee not so inthralled and subiect to his lawes as he doth, and to the eyes of that ingratefull faire, whose name I secretly mutter, then should those of this beautifull damzell presently signiorize my liberty. The Hostesse, her daughter, and the good Maritornes remained confounded, hearing the speech of our Knight errant, which they vnderstood as well as if hee had spoken Greeke vnto them, but yet they conceiued that they were wordes of complements and loue, and as people vnused to heare the
 like language, they beheld and admired him, and hee seemed vnto them a man of the other world, and so returning him thankes, with Tauernly phrase for his large offers, they departed. And the Asturian Maritornes cured Sancho, who needed her helpe no lesse then his Master.
The Carrier and she had agreed to passe the night together, and she had giuen vnto him her word, that when the guests were quiet and her Master sleeping, she would come vnto him, and satisfie his desire, as much as he pleased. And it is said of this good wench, that she neuer passed the like promise, but that she performed it, although it were giuen in the midst of a wood, and without any witnesse; for shee presumed to be of gentle bloud, and yet shee held it to be no disgrace to serue in an Inne, for shee was wont to affirme that disgraces and misfortunes brought her to that state. The hard, narrow, niggard, and counterfait bedde, whereon Don-Quixote lay, was the first of the foure, and next vnto it was his Squires, that only contained a matte and a couerlet, and rather seemed to be of shorne Canuasse, then wooll. After these two beddes followed that of the Carrier, made as wee haue said, of the pannels and furniture of two of his best Mules, although they were twelue all in number, faire, fat, and goodly beasts, for he was one of the richest Carriers of Areualo, as the Author of this history affirmeth, who maketh particular mention of him, because he knew him very well, Here the Author taxeth some one cunningly to be descended of a Moorishrace. and besides some men say that hee was somewhat a kinne vnto him. Omitting that Cid Mahamat Benengeli was a very exact Historiographer, and most curious in all things, as may be gathered very well, seeing that those which are related being so minute and triuiall; he would not ouer slip them in silence.
By which those graue Historiographers may take example, which recount vnto vs matters so short and succinctly, as they doe scarse arriue to our knowledge, leauing the most substantiall part of the works drowned in
 the inkehorne, either through negligence, malice, or ignorance. Many good fortunes beside the Authour of Tablante de Ricamonte, and him that wrote the booke wherein are rehearsed the acts of the Counte Tomillas, Lord with what precisenesse doe they describe euery circumstance? to conclude, I say, that after the Carrier had visited his Mules, and giuen vnto them their second ration, he stretched himselfe in his couerlets, and expected the comming of the most exquisite Maritornes. Sancho was also by this plaistered and laid downe in his bedde, and though he desired to sleepe, yet would not the griefe of his ribbes permit him. And Don-Quixote with the paine of his sides, lay with both his eyes open like a hare. All the Inne was drowned in silence, and there was no other light in it, then that of a lampe, which hung lighting in the midst of the entry. This maruailous quietnesse, and the thoughts which alwaies represented to our Knight the memory of the successes, which at euery pace are recounted in bookes of Knighthood (the principall Authours of his mishap) called to his imagination one of the strangest follies that easily may be coniectured, which was, he imagined that he arriued to a famous Castle (for as we haue said, all the Innes wherein he lodged seemed vnto him to be such) and that the Inne-keepers daughter was the Lord of the Castels, who ouercome by his comlinesse and valour, was enamoured of him, and had promised, that shee would come to solace with him for a good space, after her Father and Mother had gone to bedde. And howling all this quimera and fiction, which he himselfe had built in his braine for most firme and certaine, he beganne to be vexed in minde, and to thinke on the dangerous trance, wherein his honesty was like to fall, and did firmely purpose in heart not to commit any disloyaltie against his Lady Dulcinea of Toboso, although very Queene Geneuer with her Lady Queintanonia, should come to sollicite him. Whilest thus hee lay thinking of
 these Desperates. follies, the houre approched (that was vnlucky for him) wherein the Asturian wench should come, who entred into the chamber in search of her Carrier, in her smocke, barefooted, and her haire trust vp in a coife of fustian, with soft and wary steps. But shee was scarse come to the dore, when Don-Quixote felt her, and arising and sitting vp in his bedde in despite of his Bismas. plasters, and with great griefe of his ribbes, he stretched forth his armes to receiue his beautifull Damzell, the Asturian, who crouching, and silently went groping with her hands, to finde out her sweet heart, and incountred with Don-Quixotes armes, who presently seazed very strongly vpon one of her wrests, and drawing her towards him (shee daring not to speake a word) be caused her to sit vpon his beddes side, and presently groped her smocke, and although it was of Harpiller. the strongest Canuasse, hee thought it was most subtile and fine holland. Shee wore on her wrests certaine bracelets of glasse, which he esteemed to be precious, Orientall pearles. Her haire which was almost as rough as a horse taile, he held to be wires of the glistringest gold of Arabia, whose brightnesse did obscure that of the Sunne. And her breath which certainly smelled like to stale salt fish, reserued from ouer night, seemed vnto him a most redolent, aromaticall and sweet smell, and finally he painted her in his phantasie of the same very forme and manner; as hee had read in his bookes of Knighthood, of a certaine Princesse which came to visit a Knight who was grieuously wounded, being ouercome by his loue, embellished with all the ornaments that here we haue recounted: and the blindnesse of this poore Gallant was such, as neither the touching, sauour, or other things that accompanied the good Damzell, could vndeceiue him, being such as were able to make any other, saue a Carrier, vomit vp his bowels, but rather he made full account, that he held the Goddesse of loue betweene his armes, and holding her still
 very fast, hee beganne to court her with a low and amorous voice in this manner. I could wish to finde my selfe in termes most high and beautifull Lady, to be able to recompence so great a fauour, as that which with the presence of your matchlesse feature you haue shewen vnto me: but fortune (who is neuer weary of persecuting the good) hath pleased to lay mee in this bedde, therein I lie so broken and brused, that although I were desirous to satisfie your will, yet is it impossible; specially seeing to thy impossibility may bee added a greater, to wit the promised faith which I haue giuen to the vnmatchable Dulcinea of Toboso, the only Lady of my most hidden thoughts, for did not this let mee, doe not hold me to be so senselesse and madde a Knight as to ouerslip so fortunate an occasion as this, which your bounty hath offered to me.
Maritornes remained sweating through anxiety to see her selfe held so fast by Don-Quixote, and without either vnderstanding, or giuing attention to his wordes, shee laboured all that shee could to free her selfe from him without speaking a word. The Carrier whose badde intention kept him still waking, did feare his Lady from the time that shee first entred into the roome, and did attentiuely giue eare to all Don-Quixotes discourses, and iealous that the Asturian should breake promise with him for any other, he drew nearer vnto Don-Quixotes bedde, and stoode quiet to see whereunto those wordes which hee could not vnderstand tended. But viewing that the wench striued to depart, and Don-Quixote laboured to with-hold her, the iest seeming euill vnto him, he vp with his arme, and discharged so terrible a blow on the inamoured Knights jawes, as hee bathed all his mouth in bloud, and not content here withall, he mounted vpon the Knight, and did treade on his ribbes, and passed them all ouer with more then a trotte. The bedde which was somewhat Endeble. vveake, and not very firme of foundation,
 being vnable to suffer the addition of the Carrier, fell downe to the ground, vvith so great a noise, as it vvaked the Innekeeper; vvho presently suspecting, that it vvas one of Maritornes conflicts, because shee answered him not, hauing called her lowdly, hee forthwith arose and lighting of a lampe he vvent towards the place vvhere he heard the noise. The vvench perceiuing that her Master came, and that he vvas extreme chollericke, did all ashamed and troubled runne into Sancho Panca's bedde, who slept all this vvhile very soundly, and there crouched, and made her selfe as little as an egge. Her Master entered crying, vvhoore vvhere art thou? I dare vvarrant that these are some of thy doings. By this Sancho avvaked, and feeling that bulke lying almost vvholly vpon him, he thought it vvas the night Mare, and beganne to lay vvith his fists here and there about him very swiftly, and among others wraught Maritornes I know not how many blows; vvho grieued for the paine shee indured there casting all honesty aside, gaue Sancho the exchange of his blowes so trimly, as shee made him to awake in despite of his sluggishnesse. And finding himselfe to be so abused of an vncouth person, vvhom he could not behold, he arose and caught hold of Maritornes as vvell as he could, and they both beganne the best fight and pleasantest skirmish of the vvorld.
The Carrier perceiuing by the light vvhich the Innekeeper brought in vvith him, the lamentable state of his Mistris, abandoning Don-Quixote, he instantly repaired to giue her the succor that vvas requisite, vvhich likewise the Innekeeper did, but vvith an other meaning, for hee approched vvith intention to punish the vvench, beleeuing that shee vvas infallibly the cause of all that harmony. And so as men say, the Cat to the Rat, the Rat to the Cord, the Cord to the Post; so the Carrier strucke Sancho, Sancho the vvench, shee returned him againe his liberality vvith interest, and the Innekeeper laide lode vppon
 his maide also. And all of them did mince it with such expedition, as there was no leasure at all allowed to any one of them for breathing. And the best of all was, that the Innekeepers lampe went out, and then finding themselues in darkenesse, they belaboured one another so without compassion, and at once, as wheresoeuer the blow fell, it brused the place pittifully.
There lodged by chance that night in the Inne one of the Squadron of these, which are called of the old The holy brotherhood or the Sa^cta Herm^ndad, are a certaine number of m^n whose chiefe office is to f^ee the high way from robbers. holy brotherhood of Toledo, he likewise hearing the wonderfull noise of the fight, he laid hand on his rodde of office, and the tinne boxe of his titles, and entred into the chamber without light, saying, stand still to the officer of Iustice, and to the holy brotherhood. And saying to the first whom hee met, was the poore battered Don-Quixote, who lay ouerthrowne in his bedde, stretched, with his face vpward without any feeling, and taking hold of his beard, he cryed out incessantly, helpe the Iustice. But seeing that hee whom hee held fast bowed neither hand or foote, hee presently thought that hee was dead, and that those battaillants that fought so eagerly in the roome had slaine him; wherefore hee listed his voice and cryed out lowdly, saying, shut the Inne dore, and see that none escape, for here they haue kild a man. This word astonished all the combattants so much, as euery one left the battaile in the very termes, wherein this voice had ouertaken them. The Innekeeper retyred himselfe to his chamber, the Carrier to his couerlets, the wench to her couch, and only the vnfortunate Don-Quixote and Sancho, were not able to moue themselues from the place wherein they lay. The officer of the holy brotherhood in this space, letting slip poore Don-Quixotes beard, went out for light, to search and apprehend the delinquents, but he could not finde any, for the Innekeeper had purposely quenched the lampe, as hee retyred to his bedde wherefore the officer was constrained to repaire to the
 chimney, where with great difficulty, after he had spent a long while doing of it, he at last lighted a candle.


CHAP. III.

Wherein are rehearsed the innumerable misfortunes which Don-Quixote and his good Squire Sancho suffered in the Inne, which he to his harme thought to be a Castle.

BY this time Don-Quixote was come to himselfe againe out of his trance, and with the like lamentable note, as that wherewithall he had called his Squire the day before, when he was ouerthrowne in the value of the Packe-slaues, he called to him, saying, friend Sancho art thou a sleepe? sleepest thou friend Sancho? what I a sleepe? I renounce my selfe quoth Sancho, full of griefe and despite, if I thinke not all the Diuels in hell haue beene visiting of mee here this night. Thou maiest certainly beleeue it replyed Don-Quixote, for either I know very little, or else this Castle is inchanted. For I let thee to wit, but thou must first sweare to keepe secret that which I meane to tell thee now vntill after my death. So I sweare, quoth Sancho. I say it, quoth Don-Quixote, because I cannot abide to take away any bodies honour. Why, quoth Sancho againe, I sweare that I will conceale it vntill after your Worships daies, and I pray God that I may discouer it to morrow. Haue I wrought thee such harme, Sancho replied the Knight, as thou wouldest desire to see me end so soone? it is not for that Sir quoth Sancho, but because I cannot abide to keepe things long, lest they should rotte in my custody; let it be for what thou pleasest said Don-Quixote,

for I doe trust greater matters then that to thy loue and curtesie. And that I may rehearse it vnto thee briefly, know that a little while since the Lord of this Castels Daughter came vnto me, who is the most faire and beautifull Damzell, that can bee found in a great part of the earth, what could I say vnto thee of the ornaments of her person? what of her excellent wit? what of other secret things, which, that I may preserue the faith due vnto my Lady Dulcinea of Toboso, I passe ouer in silence? I will only tell thee, that heauen enuious of the inestimable good that fortune had put in my hands. Or perhaps (and that is most probable) this Castell, as I haue said, is inchanted, iust at the time when wee were in most sweet and amourous speech, I being not able to see or know from whence it came, there arriued a hand ioyned to the arme of some mighty Giant, and gaue mee such a blow on the jawes, as they remaine all bathed in bloud, and did after so thumpe and brusemee, as I feele my selfe worse now, then yesterday when the Carriers through Rozinantes madnesse, did vse vs as thou knowest. By which I coniecture that the treasure of this Damzels beauty, is kept by some inchanted Moore, and is not reserued for me. Nor for me quoth Sancho, for I haue beene bumbasted by more then foure hundred Moores, which haue hammered me in such sort, as the brusing of the Packe-slaues, was gilded bread and spice cakes in comparison of it: but Sir I pray you tell me, how can you call this a good and rare aduenture, seeing we remaine so pittifully vsed after it? and yet your harmes may be accounted lesse, in respect you haue held, as you said, that incomparable beauty betweene your armes: but I, what haue I had other then the greatest blowes that I shall euer haue in my life. Vnfortunate that I am, and the Mother which bare me, that neither am an errant Knight, nor euer meanes to be any, and yet the greatest part of our mishaps stil fals to my lot. It
 seemes that thou wast likewise beaten, replyed Don-Quixote, euill befall my linage quoth Sancho, haue not I told you I was? be not grieued friend replied the Knight, for I will now compound the precious Balsamum, which will cure vs in the twinkling of an eye.
The officer hauing by this time alighted his lampe, entred into the roome to see him, whom he accounted to be dead, and as soone as Sancho saw him, seeing him to come in, in his shirt, his head lapt vp in a kerchiffe, the lampe in his hand, hauing withall a very euill fauoured countenance, hee demaunded of his Lord. Sir is this by chance the inchanted Moore, that turnes a new to torment vs, for somwhat that is yet vnpunished? He cannot be the Moore answered Don-Quixote, for Nigromancers suffer not themselues to bee seene by any. If they suffer not themselues to bee seene quoth Sancho, they suffer themselues at least to bee felt, if not, let my shoulders beare witnesse. So might mine also said Don-Quixote, but notwithstanding this is no sufficient argument to proue him, whom wee see to bee the inchanted Moore; as thus they discoursed, the officer arriued, and finding them to commune in so peaceable and quiet manner, he rested admired. Yet Don-Quixote lay with his face vpward as he had left him, and was not able to stirre himselfe, he was so beaten and be plaistered. The officer approching demaunded of him. Well how dost thou good fellow? I would speake more mannerly quoth Don-Quixote, if I were but such a one as thou art, is it the custome of this Countrey you bottle-head, to talke after so rude a manner to Knights errant? The other impatient, to see one of so vile presence, vse him with that badde language, could not indure it, but lifting vp the lampe oile and all, gaue Don-Quixote such a blow on the pate with it, as he broke his head in one or two places, and leauing all in darkenesse behinde him, departed presently out of the chamber, without doubt (quoth Sancho seeing this accident) Sir
 that was the inchanted Moore, and I thinke he keepeth the treasure for others, and reserueth only for vs fists, and lampe blowes. It is as thou saiest, quoth Don-Quixote, and therefore wee are not to make account of these inchantments, or be wroth and angry at them, for in respect that they are inuisible and fantasticall, wee shall not find him on whom we may take reuenge, though wee labour euer so much to doe it. Arise therefore Sancho if thou beest able, and call to the Constable of this Fortresse, and procure me some oile, wine, salt, and vineger, that I make the wholsome Balsamum, for verily I beleeue that I doe neede it very much at this time, the bloud runneth so fast out of the wound which the spirit gaue mee euen now. Sancho then got vp with griefe enough of his bones, and went without light towards the Innekeepers, and incountred on the way the officer of the holy brotherhood who stood hearkning what did become of his enemy; to whom hee said; Sir whosoeuer thou beest I desire thee, doe vs the fauour and benefit to giue me a little Rosmary, Oile, Wine, and Salt, to cure one of the best Knights errant that is in the earth, who lieth now in that bed sorely wounded by the hands of an inchanted Moore, that is in this Inne. When the officer heard him speake in that manner, hee held him to bee out of his wits, and because the dawning beganne, he opened the Inne dore, and told vnto the Host, that which Sancho demanded. The Innekeeper presently prouided all that he wanted, and Sancho carried it to his Master, who held his head betweene both his hands, and complained much of the griefe that the blow of his head caused, which did him no other hurt then to raise vp two blisters somwhat great, and that which hee supposed to bee bloud, was only the humour which the anxiety and labour of minde he past in this last darke aduenture, had made him to sweate.
In resolution Don-Quixote tooke his simples, of which he made a compound, mixing them altogether, and then
 boiling of them a good while, vntill they came (as hee thought) to their perfection, he asked for a violl wherein he might lay this precious liquor, but the Inne being vnable to afford him any such, hee resolued at last to put it into Hosa de lata. a tinne oilepot, which the Host did make freely giue him, and forthwith he said ouer the pot eighty Pater nosters, and as many Aues, Salues, and Creedes, and accompanied euery word with a Crosse, in forme of benediction, at all which ceremonies Sancho, the Innekeeper, and the Officer of the holy brotherhood were present, for the Carrier went very soberly to dresse and make ready his Mules.
The liquor being made, he himselfe would presently make experience of the vertue of that precious Balsamum, as he did imagine it to be, and so did drinke a good draught of the ouerplus that could not enter into his pot, being a quart or there abouts, and scarce had he done it; when he began to vomit so extremely, as he left nothing vncast vp in his stomacke, and through the paine and agitation caused by his vomits, hee fell into a very aboundant and great sweate, and therefore commanded himselfe to bee well couered, and left alone to take his ease. Which was done forthwith, and hee slept three houres, and then awaking, found himselfe so wonderfully eased, and free from all brusing and paine, as hee doubted not but that he was throughly whole; and therefore did verily perswade himselfe, that hee had hapned on the right manner of compounding the Balsamum of Fierabras: and that hauing that medicine, hee might boldly from thence forth, vndertake any ruines, battailes, conflicts, or aduentures, how dangerous soeuer: Sancho Panca who likewise attributed the suddaine cure of his Master to miracle, requested, that it would please him to giue him leaue to sippe vp the remainder of the Balsamum, which rested in the kettle, and was no small quantity; which Don-Quixote granted, and he lifting it vp between
 both handes, did with a good faith, and better talent, quaffe it off all, being little lesse then his Master had drunke. The successe then of the History is, that poore Sanchos stomacke, was not so delicate as his Lords, wherefore before hee could cast hee was tormented with so many cruell pangues, loathings, sweats, and dismayes, as hee did verily perswade himselfe, that his last houre was come: and perceiuing himselfe to bee so afflicted and troubled, hee cursed the Balsamum, and on the Theese which had giuen it to him. Don-Quixote seeing of him in that pittifull taking, said, I beleeue Sancho, all this euill befalleth thee, because thou art not dubbed Knight: for I perswade my selfe, that this liquor cannot helpe any one that is not. If your Worship knew that, quoth Sancho, (euill befall mee and all my Image) why did you therefore consent that I should tast it?
In this time the drench had made his operation, and the poore Squire did so swift and vehemently discharge himselfe by both channels, as neither his mat, or canuasse couering, could serue after to any vse. Hee swet and swet againe with such excessiue swoonings, as not only himselfe, but likewise all the beholders, did verily deeme, that his life was ending. This storme and mishappe endured about some two howres, after which hee remayned not cured as his Master, but so vveary and indisposed, as hee vvas not able to stand.
But Don-Quixote, vvho as vvee haue said felt himselfe eased and cured, vvould presently depart to seeke aduentures, it seeming vnto him that all the time vvhich hee aboade there, vvas no other then a depriuing, both of the world and needefull people, of his fauour and assistance; and more through the security and confidence that hee had in his Balsamum.
 And carried thus away by this desire, hee himselfe sadled his Horse Rozinante, and did empannell his Squires beast, whome hee likewise holpe to apparell himselfe, and to mount vppon his Asse. And presently getring a Horse-backe, hee roade ouer to a corner of the Inne, and laide hand on a Iaueline that vvas there, to make it serue him in steede of a Launce. All the people that were in the Inne stoode beholding of him, vvhich were aboue twenty in number.
The Innekeepers Daughter did also looke vppon him, and hee did neuer withdraw his eye from her, and would euer and anon breathe foorth so dolefull a sigh, as if hee had plucked it out of the bottome of his heart, vvhich all the beholders tooke to proceede from the griefe of his ribbes, but specially such as had seene him playstered the night before. And being both mounted thus a Horse-backe, hee called the Innekeeper and said vnto him with a graue and stayed voyce. Many and great are the fauours, Sir Constable, vvhich I haue receiued in this your Castell, and doe remayne most obliged to gratifie you for them all the dayes of my life. And if I may pay or recompence them by reuenging of you vpon any prowde Miscreant, that hath done you any vvrongs, know that it is mine Office to helpe the weake, to reuenge the wronged, and to chastise Traytours. Call therefore to memory, and if you finde any thing of this kinde to commend to my correction, you neede not but once to say it, for I doe promise vnto you by the Order of Knighthood, which I haue receiued to satisfie and appay you according vnto your owne desire.
The Innekeeper answered him againe with like grauity and stayednesse, saying, Sir Knight, I shall not neede
 your assistance when anywrong is done to me, for I know very well my selfe, how to take the reuenge that I shall thinke good when the iniury is offered. That only which I require is that you defray the charges whereat you haue beene here in the Inne this night, as well for the Straw and Barly giuen to your two horses, as also for both your beddes. This then is an Inne? quoth Don-Quixote. That it is and an honourable one too, replyed the Innekeeper. Then haue I hitherto liued in an errour, quoth Don-Quixote, for in very good sooth I tooke it till nowe to bee a Castell, and that no meane one neyther. But since that it is no Castell but an Inne, that which you may doe for the present time is to forgiue me those expences, for I cannot doe ought against the customes of Knights Errants; of all which I most certainely knowe (without euer hauing read vntill this present any thing to the contrarie) that they neuer paide for their lodging, or other thing, in any Inne wheresoeuer they lay. For by all Law and right, any good entertainement that is giuen vnto them is their due, in recompence of the insupportable trauels they indure, seeking of aduentures both day and night, in Summer and Winter, a foote and a horsebacke, with thirst and hunger, in heate and cold, being subiect to all the distemperatures of Heauen, and all the discommodities of the earth. All that concernes me nothing replied the Inkeeper, pay vnto me my due, and leaue these tales and Knighthoods apart, for I care for nothing else, but how I may come by mine owne. Thou art a mad and a bad Hoste, quoth Don-Quixote, and saying so he spurd Rozinante, and flourishing with his Iaueline, hee issued out of the Inne, in despight of them all, and without looking behind him to see once whether his squire followed, he roade a good way off from it.
The Inkeeper seeing hee departed without satisfying him, came to Sancho Panca, to get his money of
 him, who answered, that since his Lord would not pay, he would likewise giue nothing, for being, as hee was Squire to a Knight Errand, the very same rule and reason that exempted his Master from payments in Innes and Tauernes ought also to serue, and be vnderstood as well of him. The Inkeeper grew wroth at these words and threatned him, that if hee did not pay him speedily, hee would recouer it in manner that would grieue him. Sancho replied, swearing by the order of Knighthood which his Lord had receiued, that hee would not pay one denier, though it cost him his life, for the good and auncient customes of Knights Errants, should neuer through his default bee infringed, nor should their Squires which were yet to come into the world euer complaine on him, or vpbraide him for transgressing or breaking so iust a duetie. But his bad fortune ordained that there were at the very time in the same Inne fowre Clothiers of Segouia, and three Point-makers of the Stewes of Cordoua, and two neighbours of the Market of Siuill, all pleasant folke, well minded, malicious, and playsome, all which pricked and in a manner moued all at one time and by the very same spirit came neere to Sancho, and pulling him downe off his Asse, one of them ranne in for the Inkeepers Couerlet, and casting him into it, they looked vp and seeing the House was somewhat too low for their intended businesse, they determined to goe into the base Court, which was ouer head onely limitted by heauen, and then Sancho being laide in the midst of the Blanket, they began to tosse him aloft and sport themselues with him, in the maner they were wont to vse Dogges at Shrouetide. The out-cries of the miserable betossed Squire were so many and so lowde, as they arriued at last to his Lords hearing, who standing a while to listen attentiuely what it was, belieued that some new aduenture did approach, vntill hee perceiued at last that hee which cried was his Squire,
 wherefore turning the Raignes, hee made towards the Inne with a loathsome galloppe, and finding it shut, he rode all about it to see whether hee might enter into it. But scarce was he arriued at the walles of the base court which were not very hie, when he perceiued, the foule play that was vsed towards his Squire, for hee saw him descend and ascend into the ayre againe with such grace and agilitie, that did his choller permit, I certainely perswade my selfe hee would haue burst for laughter. He assayed to mount the wall from his Horse, but hee was so bruised and broken, as he could not doe as much as a light from his backe. Wherefore from his backe he vsed such reprochfull and vile language to those which tossed Sancha, as it is impossible to lay them downe in writing. And notwithstanding all his scornefull speech, yet did not they cease from their laughter and labour, nor the flying Sancho, from his complaints, now and then medled with threats, now and then with intreaties; but auailed very little, nor could preuaile, vntill they were constrained by wearinesse to giue him ouer. Then did they bring him his Asse againe, and helping him vp vpon it, they lapt him in his Gauay. mantle. And the compassionate Maritornes beholding him so afflicted and orelaboured, thought it needfull to helpe him to a draught of water, and so brought it him from the well, because the water thereof was coolest. Sancho tooke the pot and laying it to his lips, he abstained from drinking by his Lords perswasion, who cryed to him aloud saying, Sonne Sancho drinke not water, drinke it not Sonne, for it will kill thee. Behold I haue here with me the most holy Balsamum (and shewed him the oile pot of the drenches he had compounded) for with only two drops that thou drinkest, thou shalt without all doubt remaine whole and sound. At those wordes Sancho looking behinde him, answered his Master with a lowder voice, haue you forgotten perhaps so soone, how
 that I am no Knight, or doe you desire, that I vomit the remnant of the poore bowels that remaine in mee since yesternight, keepe your liquor for your selfe in the Diuels name, and permit me to liue in peace; and the conclusion of this speech and his beginning to drinke, was done all in one instant, but finding at the first draught that it was water, he would not tast it any more, but requested Maritornes that shee would giue him some wine, which shee did streight with a very good will, and likewise paied for it out of her owne purse; for in effect it is written of her, that though shee followed that trade, yet had shee some shadowes and lineaments in her of Christianity. As soone as Sancho had drunken, he visited his Asse ribs with his heeles twise or thrise, and the Inne being opened he issued out of it, very glad that he had payed nothing, and gotten his desire, although it were to the cost of his ordinary sureties, to wit, his shoulders. Yet did the Innekeeper remaine possest of his wallets, as a payment for that he ought him, but Sancho was so distracted when he departed, as he neuer missed them. After he departed, the Innekeeper thought to haue shut vp the Inne doore againe, but the Gentlemen tossers would not permit, being such folke, that if Don-Quixote were verily one of the Knights of the round Table, yet would not they esteeme him two chips.



CHAP. IIII.

Wherein are rehearsed the discourses passed betweene Sancho Panca, and his Lord Don-Quixote, with other aduentures worthy the recitall.

SAncho arriued to his Master all wanne and dismayed, in so much as he was scarce able to spur on his beast. When Don-Quixote beheld him in that case, hee said to him, now do I wholly perswade my selfe friend Sancho, that that Castle or Inne, is doubtlesly inchanted. For those which made pastime with thee in so cruell manner, what else could they be but spirits, or people of an other world: which I doe the rather beleeue, because I saw, that whilest I stoode at the barrier of the yard, beholding the acts of thy sadde Tragedy; I was not in any wise able either to mount it, or alight from Rozinante, for as I say, I thinke they held me then inchanted. For I vow to thee by mine honour, that if I could haue either mounted or alighted, I would haue taken such vengeance on those lewde and treacherous Caitiss, as they should remember the iest for euer, though I had therefore aduentured to transgresse the lawes of Knighthood. Which as I haue oftimes said vnto thee permitteth not any Knight to lay hands on one that is not Knighted, if it bee not in defence of his proper life and person, and that in case of great and vrgent necessity. So would I also haue reuenged my selfe, quoth Sancho, if I might, were they Knights or no Knights, but I could not: and yet I do infallibly belieue, that those which tooke their pleasure with me, were neither ghosts, nor inchanted men as you say, but men of flesh and bones as we are, and all of them as I heard them cald whilest they tossed-mee had proper names, for one was tearmed Peter Martinez, and another
 Tenorio Herriander, and I heard also the Innekeeper called Iohn Palameque the deafe, so that for your inability of not leaping ouer the barriers of the yard, or alighting off your horse was only inchauntments in you. Whereby I doe clearly collect this much, that these aduentures which we goe in search of, will bring vs at last to so many disuentures, as wee shall not be able to know which is our right foote. And that which wee might doe best according to my little vnderstanding, were to returne vs againe to our village, now that is reaping time, and looke to our goods, omitting to leape thus as they say, out of the frying pan into the fire.
How little doest thou know Sancho, replyed Don-Quixote, what appertaineth to Chiualry; peace and haue patience, for a day will come wherein thou shalt see with thine owne eyes, how honourable it is to follow this exercise. If not, tell me, what greater content may there be in this world, or what pleasure can equall that of winning a battaile, and of triumphing ouer ones enemy? none without doubt. I thinke it be so, quoth Sancho, although I doe not know it; only this I know, that since we became Knights errant, or that you are one (for there is no reason why I should count my selfe in so honourable a number) wee neuer ouercame any battaile, if it was not that of the Biscaine, and you came euen out of the very same with halfe your eare and beauer lesse. And euer after that time, we haue had nothing but cudgels, and more cudgels, blowes, and more blowes. I carrying with me besides of ouerplus, the tossing in the blanket, and that, by reason it was done to me by inchanted persons, I cannot be reuenged, and by consequence shall not know that true gust and delight, that is taken by vanquishing mine enemies, whereof you speake euen now. That is it which grieues me, as it should thee also, Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote: but I will procure hereafter to get a sword, made with such art, that whosoeuer shall weare it, no
 kinde of inchantment shall hurt him. And perhaps fortune will present mee the very same which belonged to Amadis, when he called himselfe the Knight of the burning sword, which was one of the best, that euer Knight had in this world: for besides the vertue that I told, it did also cut like a Razer, and no armour were it euer so strong or inchanted could stand before it. I am so fortunate, quoth Sancho, that when this befell, and that you found such a sword, it would only serue and be beneficiall, and stand in stead such as are dubbed Knights, as doth your Balsamum, whilest the poore Squires are cramd full with sorrowes. Feare not that Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, for fortune will deale with thee more liberally then so.
In these discourses Don-Quixote and his Squire roade, when Don-Quixote perceiuing a great and thicke dust to arise in the way, wherein he trauailed, turning to Sancho said, this is (Sancho) the day, wherein shall bee manifest the good which Fortune hath reserued for me. This is the day, wherein the force of mine arme must bee showen as much as in any other whatsoeuer, and in it will I doe such feates, as shall for euer remaine recorded in the books of fame; doest thou see Sancho the dust which ariseth there? know that it is caused by a mighty army and sundry and innumerable Nations, which come marching there; if that be so, quoth Sancho, then must there be two armies, for on this other side is raised as great a dust. Don-Quixote turned backe to behold it, and seeing it was so indeede, he was maruailous glad, thinking that they were doubtlessely two armies, which came to fight one with an other, in the midst of that spacious plaine. For he had his fantasie euer replenished with these battailes, inchantments, successes, rauings, loues, and challenges, which are rehearsed in bookes of Knighthood: and all that euer he spoke, thought, or did, was addrest and applyed to the like things: and the dust which hee had seene was raised by two great flocks of Sheepe, that came through the
 same field by two different wayes, and could not be discerned by reason of the dust, vntill they were very neare. Don-Quixote did affirme that they were two armies, with so very good earnest as Sancho beleeued it, and demanded of him, Sir what then shall we two doe? What should we do? (quoth Don-Quixote) but assist the needfull and weaker side. For thou shalt know Sancho, that he who comes towards vs is the great Emperor Alifamfaron, Lord of the great Island of Trapobana. The other who marcheth at our backe is his enemy the King of the Garamantes, Pentapoline of the naked arme, so called because hee still entereth in battayle, with his right arme naked. I pray you good Sir, quoth Sancho, to tell me why these two Princes hate one another so much? they are enemies, replyed Don-Quixote, because that this Alifamfaron is a furious Pagan, and is enamoured of Pentapolins Daughter, who is a very beautifull and gracious Princesse, and moreouer a Christian. And her Father refuseth to giue her to the Pagan King, vntill first he abandon Mahomets false sect, and become one of his religion. By my beard, quoth Sancho, Pentapolin hath reason, and I will helpe him all that I may. By doing so, quoth Don-Quixote, thou performest thy duty; for it is not requisite that one be a Knight, to the end hee may enter into such battailes. I doe apprehend that my selfe, quoth Sancho, very well, but where shall we leaue this Asse in the meane time, that we may be sure to finde him againe after the conflict, for I thinke it is not the custome to enter into battaile, mounted on such a beast. It is true, quoth Don-Quixote, that which thou maist doe is, to leaue him to his aduentures, and care not whether hee be lost or found, for we shall haue so many horses, after comming out of this battaile victors, that very Rozinante himselfe, is in danger, to be changed for another. But be attentiue, for I meane to describe vnto thee the principall Knights of both the armies. And to the end
 thou maiest the better see and note all things, let vs retire our selues there to that little hillocke, from whence both the Armies may easily be deseryed.
They did so, and standing on the toppe of a hill, from whence they might haue seene both the flocks, which Don-Quixote called an army very well, if the cloudes of dust had not hindred it and blinded their sight, yet notwithstanding our Knight seeing in conceit that which really hee did not see at all, beganne to say with a lowde voice.
That Knight which thou seest there with the yellow armour, who beares in his shield a Lyon crownd, crouching at a Damzeis feete, is the valorous Laurcalio, Lord of the Siluer Bridge: the other whose armes are powdred with flowers of gold, and Beares in an Azure field, three Crownes of siluer is the dreaded Micocolembo, great Duke of Quirocia: the other limmed like a Giant, that standeth at his right hand, is the vndaunted Brandabarbaray of Boliche, Lord of the three Arabias: and comes armed with a Serpents skinne, bearing for his shield as is reported one of the gates of the Temple, which Sampson at his death ouerthrew, to be reuenged of his enemies. But turne thine eyes to this other side, and thou shalt see first of all, and in the front of this other army the euer victor and neuer vanquished Timonel of Carcaiona, Prince of new Biskaye, who comes armed, with armes parted into Blew, Greene, White, and Yellow quarters, and beares in his shield in a field of Tawney a Catte of gold, with a letter that saies Miau, which is the beginning of his Ladies Catte. name, which is as the report runnes, the peerelesse Miaulina, Daughter to Duke Alfeniquen of Algarue. The other that burdens and oppresseth the backe of that mighty Alfana. Courser, whose armour is as white as snow, and also his shield without any deuise is a Knight nouell of France, called Pierres Papin, Lord of the Barony
 of Vtrique. The other that beates his horse sides with his armed heeles, and beares the armes of pure Azure, is the mighty Duke of Nerbia Espart afilardo of the Wood. Who beares for his deuise a Esparraguera. Harrow, with a Motto that saies, So trailes my Fortune. And thus he proceeded forward, naming many Knights of the one and the other squadron, euen as hee had imagined them, and attributed to each one, his armes, his colours, imprese, and Mottoes, suddainly borne away by the imagination of his wonderfull distraction. And without stammering he proceeded, saying. This first squadron containeth folke of many Nations, in it are those which tast the sweet waters of famous Xante. The Mountainous men that treade the Mafilical fields. Those that doe sift the most pure and rare gold of Arabia Foelix. Those that possessed the famous and delightfull bankes of cleare Termodonte. Those that let bloud many and sundry waies the golden Pactolus. The Numides vnsteadfast in their promise. The Persians famous for Archers. The Parthes and Medes that fight flying. The Arabs inconstant in their dwellings. The Scithes as cruell as white. The Aethiops of boared lips, and other infinite Nations whose faces I know and behold, although I haue forgotten their denominations. In that other army come those that tast the Christaline streams of the Oliue-bearing Betis, those that dippe and polish their faces with the liquor of the euer-rich and golden Tagus. Those that possesse the profitable fluent of diuine Genile. Those that trample the Tartesian fields so abundant in pasture. Those that recreat themselues in the Elisean fields of Xerez. The rich Manchegans crowned with ruddy eares of corne: Those apparelled with yron, the ancient relikes of the Gothish bloud. Those that bathe themselues in Pisuerga, renowmed for the smothnesse of his current. Those that feede their flocks in the vast fields of the wreathing Guadiana, so celebrated
 for his hidden course. Those that tremble through the cold of the busty Pirens, and the Or white crested. lofty Apenines. Finally, all those that Europe in it selfe contayneth.
Good God, how many Prouinces repeated he at that time, and how many Nations did he name, giuing to euery one of them, with maruailous celerity and briefnesse, their proper attributes, being swallowed vp and ingulfed in those things which hee had read in his lying bookes. Sancho Panca stood suspended at his speech, and spoke not a word, but only would now and then turne his head to see whether he could marke those Knights and Giants, which his Lord had named; and by reason he could not discouer any, he said. Sir I giue to the Diuell any man, Giant, or Knight, of all those you said that appeareth: at least I cannot discerne them. Perhaps all is but inchantment, like that of the Ghosts of yesternight. How? saiest thou so, quoth Don-Quixote? Doest not thou heare the horses neigh, the trumpets sound, and the noyse of the drummes? I heare nothing else, said Sancho, but the great bleating of many Sheepe. And so it was indeede, for by this time, the two flocks did approch them very neare. The feare that thou conceiuest Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, maketh thee that thou canst neither heare nor see aright, for one of the effects of feare is to trouble the senses, and make things appeare otherwise then they are, and seeing thou fearest so much, retire thy selfe out of the way, for I alone am sufficient to giue the victory to that part which I shall assist, and hauing ended his speech, hee set spurres to Rozinante, and setting his Lance in the rest hee flung downe from the hillocke like a thunderbolt. Sancho cryed to him as lowd as he could, saying, returne good Sir Don-Quixote, for I vow vnto God that all those which you goe to charge, are but Sheepe and Muttons. Returne I say, alas that euer I was borne, what madnesse is this? looke, for there is neither Giant, nor Knight, nor
 Cats, nor Armes, nor Shields, parted, nor whole, nor pure Azures, nor diuelish. What is it you doe wretch that I am? For all this Don Quixote did not returne, but rather roade, saying with a lowde voice; On on Knights, all you that serue and march vnder the banners of the valorous Emperour Pentapolin of the naked Arme, follow mee all of you, and you shall see how easily I will reuenge him on his enemy Alifamfaron of Trapobana, and saying, so hee entred into the middest of the flocke of Sheepe, and beganne to Launce them with such courage and fury, as if hee did in good earnest encounter his mortall enemies.
The Sheepe-heards that came with the flocke, cryed to him to leaue off, but seeing their wordes tooke no effect, they vnloosed their slings and beganne to salute his pate with stones as great as ones fist. But Don-Quixote made no account of their stones, and did fling vp and downe among the Sheepe, saying, where art thou prowde Alifamfaron, where art thou? come to mee, for I am but one Knight alone, vvho desires to proue my forces with thee man to man, and depriue thee of thy life, in paine of the wrong thou doest to the valiant Pentapolin the Garamiante. At that instant a stone gaue him such a blow on one of his sides, as did bury two of his ribbes in his body. Hee beholding himselfe so ill dight, did presently beleeue that hee vvas either slaine or sorely wounded; and remembring himselfe of his liquor, hee tooke out his oyle pot, and set it to his mouth to drinke, but ere he could take as much as hee thought was requisite to cure his hurts, there commeth another Almond which strucke him so full vppon the hand and oyle pot as it broke it into pecces, and carryed away with it besides three or foure of his cheeke teeth, and did moreouer bruise very sorely two of his fingers. Such was the first and the second blowe, as the poore Knight
 was constrained to fall downe off his horse. And the Sheep-heards arriuing did verily beleeue they had slaine him; and therefore gathering their flocke together with all speede, and carrying away their dead Muttons, which were more then seuen, they went away without verifying the matter any further.
Sancho remained all this while on the height, beholding his Masters follies, pulling the haires of his beard for very despite, and cursed the houre and moment wherein hee first knew him; but seeing him ouer throwne to the earth, and the Sheep-heards fled away, hee came downe to him, and found him in very badde taking, yet had hee not quite lost the vse of his senses, to whom he said. Did not I bidde you Sir Knight returne, and told you that you went not to inuade an army of men, but a flocke of sheep. That theefe the wiseman who is mine aduersary, quoth Don-Quixote, can counterfait, and make men to seeme such, or vanish away as he pleaseth, for Sancho thou oughtest to know, that it is a very easie thing for those kinde of men, to make vs seeme what they please, and this Maligne that persecuteth mee, enuying the glory which hee saw I was like to acquire in this battaile, hath conuerted the enemies squadrons into Sheepe; and if thou wilt not beleeue me Sancho; yet doe one thing for my sake, that thou maiest remoue thine errour, and perceiue the truth which I affirme, get vp on thine Asse and follow them faire and softly aloofe, and thou shalt see that as soone as they are parted any distance from hence, they will turne to their first forme, and leauing to be sheepe, will become men, as right and straight as I painted them to thee at the first, but goe not now for I haue neede of thy helpe and assistance, draw nearer to me and see, how many cheeke teeth and others I want, for mee thinks there is not one left in my mouth. With that Sancho approched so neare, that he laid almost his eyes on his Masters mouth, and it was iust at the time that the Balsamum had now wrought
 his effect in Don-Quixote his stomacke, and at the very season that Sancho went about to looke into his mouth, he disgorged all that he had in his stomacke, with as great violence as it had beene shot out of a Musket, iust in his compassiue Squires beard. O holy Mother Mary, quoth Sancho, what is this that hath befallen mee, the poore man is mortally wounded without doubt, for hee vomiteth vp bloud at his mouth. But looking a little nearer to it, hee perceiued in the colour and smell that it was not bloud, but the Balsamum of his Masters oile-bottle, wherat hee instantly tooke such a loathing, that his stomacke likewise turned, and hee vomited out his very bowels almost, all in his Masters face. And so they both remained like Pearles. Soone after, Sancho ranne to his Asse to take somewhat to cleare himselfe, and to cure his Lord out of his wallet, which when he found Hauing left it behinde him in the Jnne when he ranne away and paid nothing for his lodging. wanting, he was ready to runne out of his wits: there hee beganne a new to curse himselfe, and made a firme resolution in minde, that he would leaue his Master and turne to his Countrey againe, although he were sure both to loose his wages, and the hope of the Gouernment of the promised Island.
By this Don-Quixote arose, and setting his left hand to his mouth, that the rest of his teeth might not fall out, he caught hold on the raignes of Rozinantes bridle with the other, who had neuer stird from his Master: (such was his loyaltie and good nature) hee went towards his Squire, that leaned vpon his Asse, with his hand vnder his cheeke, like one pensatiue and malecontent. And Don-Quixote seeing of him in that guise, with such signes of sadnesse, said vnto him. Know Sancho that one man is not more then another, if he doe not more then another. All those stormes that fall on vs are arguments that the time will waxe calme very soone, and that things will haue better successe hereafter, for it is not possible that either good or ill be durable. And hence wee may collect that our misfortunes hauing lasted so long, our fortune
 and weale must bee likewise neare. And therefore thou oughtest not thus to afflict thy selfe for the disgraces that befall mee, seeing no part of them fall to thy lot. How not, quoth Sancho? was hee whom they to fled yesterday in the couerlet by fortune, any other mans Sonne then my Fathers? and the wallet that I want to day, with all my prouision, was it any others then mine owne? what doest thou want thy wallet Sancho? quoth Don-Quixote. I, that I doe, quoth hee. In that manner replyed Don-Quixote, wee haue nothing left vs to eate to day? that would be so, quoth Sancho, if we could not finde among these fields the hearbs which I haue heard you say you know, wherewithall such vnlucky Knights errant as you, are wont to supply like needes. For all that, quoth Don-Quixote, I would rather haue now a quarter of a loafe, or a cake and two pilchers heads, then all the hearbs that Dioscorides describeth, although they came glosed by Doctor Lagima himselfe. But yet for all that get vpon thy beast Sancho the good, and follow me, for God who is the prouider for all creatures, will not faile vs. And principally seeing we doe a worke so greatly to his seruice as we doe, seeing he doeth not abandon the little flies of the aire, nor the wormelings of the earth, nor the spawnlings of the water. And he is so mercifull that he maketh his Sunne shine on the good and the euill, and raines on sinners and iust men. You were much fitter, quoth Sancho, to be a Preacher, then for a Knight errant. Knights errant knew and ought to know some what of all things, quoth Don-Quixote. For there hath beene a Knight errant in times past, who would make a Sermon or discourse in the midst of a campe riall, with as good grace as if hee were graduated in the Vniuersity of Paris: by which we may gather that the Lance neuer dulled the Pen, nor the Pen the Lance. Well then, quoth Sancho, let it be as you haue said, and let vs depart hence, and procure to finde a lodging for this night, where, I pray God, may be no couerlets
 and tossers, nor Spirits, nor inchanted Moores, for if there bee, Ile bestow the flocke and the hooke on the Diuell. Demaund that of God Sonne Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, and leade me where thou pleasest, for I will leaue the election of our lodging to thy choice for this time: yet I pray thee giue mee thy hand, and feele how many cheeke teeth or others I want in this right side of the vpper jaw, for there I feele most paine. Sancho put in his fingers, and whilest he felt him, demanded how many cheeke teeth were you accustomed to haue on this side? foure, quoth hee, besides the hindermost; all of them very whole and sound. See well what you say Sir, quoth Sancho. I say foure, quoth Don-Quixote, if they were not fiue, for I neuer in my life drew or lost any tooth, nor hath any fallen or beene worme-eaten, or mard by any rhume. Well then, quoth Sancho, you haue in this nether part but two cheeke teeth and a halfe, and in the vpper, neither a halfe, nor any, for all there is as plaine as the palme of my hand. Vnfortunate I (quoth Don-Quixote) hearing the sorrowfull newes that his Squire told vnto him) for I had rather loose one of mine armes, so it were not that of my sword. For Sancho thou must wit, that a mouth without cheeke teeth, is like a Mill without a milstone: and a tooth is much more to bee esteemed then a Diamant.
But wee which professe the rigorous Lawes of Armes, are subiect to all these disasters, wherefore mount gentle friend and giue the way, for I will follow thee what pace thou pleasest. Sancho obeyed, and roade the way where hee thought hee might finde lodging, without leauing the high way, which was there very much beaten. And going thus by little and little (for Don-Quixote his paine of his jawes did not suffer him rest, or make ouermuch hast,) Sancho to entertayne him and diuert his thought by saying some things, beganne to aboord
 him in the forme we meane to rehearse in the Chapter ensuing.


CHAP. V.

Of the discreet discourses passed betweene Sancho and his Lord: with the aduenture succeeding of a dead body: and other notable occurrences.

ME thinks, good Sir, that all the mishaps that befell vs these dayes past, are without any doubt in punishment of the sinne you committed against the order of Knighthood, by not performing the Oath you swore, not to eate bread on table clothes, nor to sport with the Queene, with all the rest which insueth, and you vowed to accomplish, vntil you had wonne the Helmet of Malandrino, or I know not how the Moore is called, for I haue forgotten his name. Thou saiest right Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, but to tell the truth in deede, I did wholly forget it: and thou maiest likewise thinke certainly, that because thou didest not remember it to mee in time, that of the couerlet was inflicted as a punishment on thee. But I will make amends, for we haue also manners of reconciliation for all things in the order of Knighthood. Why did I by chance sweare any thing, quoth Sancho? it little imports, quoth Don-Quixote, that thou hast not sworne, let it suffice that I know thou art not very cleare from the fault of an accessary. And therefore at all aduentures it will not bee ill to prouide a remedy. If it bee so, quoth Sancho, beware you doe not forget this againe, as you did that of the Oath, for if you should, perhaps those spirits will take againe a fancy to solace themselues with mee, and
 peraduenture with you your selfe, if they see you obstinate.
Being in these and other such discourses, the night ouertooke them in the way, before they could discouer any lodging, and that which was worst of all, they were almost famisht with hunger, for by the losse of their wallets, they lost at once both their prouision and warderhouse. And to accomplish wholly this disgrace, there succeeded a certaine aduenture, which certainly hapned as wee lay it downe without any addition in the world, and was this; the night did shut vppe with some darkenesse, yet notwithstanding they trauailed on still, Sancho beleeuing that since that was the high way, there must be within a league or two in all reason some Inne. Trauailing therefore as I haue said, in a darke night, the Squire being hungry, and the Master hauing a good stomacke, they saw comming towards them in the very way they trauailed, a great multitude of lights, resembling nothing so well as wandering starres. Sancho beholding them was strucke into a wonderfull amazement, and his Lord was not much better. The one drew his Asse halter, the other held his horse, and both of them stoode still, beholding attentiuely what that might be, and they perceiued that the lights drew still nearer vnto them; and the more they approched, they appeared the greater, at the sight Sancho did tremble like one infected by the fauour of Quicksiluer, and Don-Quixotes haire did stand vp like bristles, who animating himselfe a little, said, Sancho this must be questionlesse a great and most dangerous aduenture, wherein it is requisite that I shew all my valour and strength. Vnfortunate I, quoth Sancho if by chance this aduenture were of Ghosts, as it seemeth to me that it is, where will there bee ribbes to suffer it? bee they neuer so great Ghosts, said Don-Quixote, I will not consent that they touch one haire of thy garment: For if they lested with thee the other time, it was because I could not leape
 ouer the walles of the yard, but now wee are in plaine field where I may brandish my sword as I please. And if they inchant and benumme you as they did the other time quoth Sancho, what will it then auaile vs to bee in open field or no? For all that replyed Don-Quixote, I pray thee Sancho bee of good courage, for experience shall shew thee how great my valour is; I will and please God, quoth Sancho, and so departing somewhat out of the way, they beganne againe to view earnestly what that of the trauailing lights might bee; and after a very little space they espied many white things, whose dreadfull visions did in that very instant conclude Sancho Panca his courage, and now beganne to chatter with his teeth, like one that had the cold of a Quartane, and when they did distinctly perceiue what it was, then did his beating and chattering of teeth increase, for they discouered about some twenty all couered with white a horse-backe, with Tapers lighting in their hands, after which followed a litter couered ouer with blacke, and then insued other sixe a horse-backe, attired in mourning, and likewise their Mules, euen to the very ground; for they perceiued that they were not horses, by the quietnesse of their pace. The white folke rode murmuring somewhat among themselues with a low and compassiue voice. Which strange vision, at such an houre, and in places not inhabited, was very sufficient to strike feare into Sanchos heart, and euen in his Masters. If it had beene any other then Don-Quixote, but Sancho tumbled here and there, being quite ouerthrowne with terrour. The contrary hapned to his Lord, to whom in that same houre his imagination represented vnto him most liuely, the aduenture wherein hee was to bee such a one, as hee oftimes had read in his bookes of Chiualry. For it is figured vnto him, that the litter was a beere, wherein was carryed some grieuously wounded or dead Knight, whose reuenge was only reserued for him. And without making any other discourse
 hee set his Launce in the rest, seated himselfe surely in his saddle, and put himselfe in the middest of the way by which the white folke must forcibly passe, with great spirit and courage. And when he saw them draw neare, he said with a lowde voice: stand Sir Knight, whosoeuer you be, and render me account what you are? from whence you come? where you goe? and what that is which you carry in that beere? for according as you shew, either you haue done to others, or others to you some iniury. And it is conuenient and needfull that I know it, either to chastice you for the ill you haue co^mitted, or else to reuenge you of the wrong which you haue suffered, we are in hast quoth one of the white men, and the Inne is farre off, and therefore cannot expect to giue so full relation as you request, and with that spurring his Mule, passed forward. Don-Quixote, highly disdayning at the answere, tooke by the bridle and held him, saying, stay prowde Knight, and bee better mannered another time, and giue mee account of that which I demanded, if not, I defie you all to mortall battaile. The Mule whereon the white man rode was somewhat fearefull and skittish, and being taken thus rudely by the bridle, shee tooke such a fright, that rising vp on her hinder legges, shee vnhorsed her Rider; one of the Lackeyes that came with them seeing him fallen, beganne to reuile Don-Quixote, who being by this throughly enraged, without any more adoe, putting his Launce in the rest, runne vpon one of the mourners, and threw him to the ground very sore wounded: and turning vpon the rest, it was a thing worthy the noting with what dexterity he did assault, breake vpon them, and put them all to flight, and it seemed none other, but that Rozinante had gotten then wings, hee bestirred himselfe so nimbly and couragiously.
All those white men were fearefull people, and vnarmed, and therefore fled away from the skirmish in a trice, and beganne to trauerse that field with their Tapers lighting,
 that they seemed to bee maskers that vse to runne vp and downe in nights of Ioue and recreation. The mourners likewise were so lapped vp and muffled, by their mourning weedes as they could scarce stirre them, so that Don-Quixote did without any danger of his person giue them all the Bastonado. And caused them to forsake their roomes whether they would or no, for all of them did verily thinke that he was no man but a Diuell of hell, that met them to take away the dead body which they carried in the litter. All this did Sancho behold, maruailously admired at his Masters boldnes, which made him say to himself, my master is infallibly as strong and valiant as he said.
There lay on the ground by him whom his Mule had first ouerthrowne, a waxe Taper still burning, by whose light, Don-Quixote perceiued him, and comming ouer to him, he laid the point of his Launce vpon his face, saying, that he should render himselfe, or else he would slay him. To which the other answered, I am already rendred more then enough, seeing I cannot stirre mee out of the place, for one of my legges is broken. And if you be a Christian, I desire you not to kill mee, for therein you would commit a great sacriledge, I being a Licenciate, and haue receiued the first Orders. Well then, quoth Don-Quixote, what Diuell brought thee hither being a Church-man? Who Sir replied the ouerthrowne but my misfortune? yet doth a greater threaten thee, said Don-Quixote, if thou doest not satisfie me in all that which I first demanded of thee. You shall easily be satisfied, quoth the Licenciate, and therefore you shall wit, that although first of all I said I was a Licenciate, I am none, but a Batcheler, and am called Alonso Lopez, borne at Alcouendas, and I came from the Citty of Baeca, with eleuen other Priests, which are those that fled away with the Tapers; we trauailed towards Segonia, accompanying the dead body that lies in that litter of a certaine Gentleman who dyed in Baeca, and was there deposited for a while, and now as
 I say, we carry his bones to his place of buriall, which is in Segonia, the place of his birth. And who killed him, quoth Don-Quixote? God, quoth the Batcheler, with certaine pestilentiall feauers that he tooke. In that manner, quoth Don-Quixote, our Lord hath deliuered mee from the paines I would haue taken to reuenge his death, if any other had slaine him. But hauing kild him, he that did it, there is no other remedy but silence, and to lift vp the shoulders, for the same I must my selfe haue done, if hee were likewise pleased to slea me. And I would haue your reuercnce to vnderstand, that I am a Knight of the Mancha, called Don-Quixote, and mine office and exercise is to goe throughout the world righting of wrongs, and vndoing of iniuries. I cannot vnderstand how that can be of righting wrongs, quoth the Batcheler, seeing you haue made me who was right before, now very crooked by breaking of my legge, which can neuer be righted againe, as long as I liue, and the iniury which you haue vndone in me, is none other but to leaue me so iniuried, as I shall remaine iniuried for euer. And it was very great disuenture to haue encountred with you, that goe about to see aduentures. All things, quoth Don-Quixote, succeede not of one fashion: the hurt was Master Batcheler Alonso Lopez, that you trauailed thus by night couered with those Surplices, with burning Tapers, and couered with weedes of dole, so that you appeared most properly some badde thing, and of the other world, and so I could not omit to fulfill my duty, by assaulting you, which I would haue done although I verily knew you to bee the Sathans themselues of hell. For, for such I iudged and accounted you euer till now.
Then since my badde fortune hath so disposed it, quoth the Batcheler; I desire you good Sir Knight errant (who hath giuen me so euill an errant) that you will helpe me to get vp from vnder this Mule, who holds still my legge betwixt the stirrop and saddle. I would haue staid talking
 vntill to morrow morning, quoth Don-Quixote, and why did you expect so long to declare your griefe to me? he presently called to Sancho Panca to come ouer: but hee had little minde to doe, for hee was otherwise imployed, ransacking of a sumpture Mule, which those good folke brought with them, well furnished with belly ware. Sancho made a bagge of his Casacke, and catching all that he might, or could containe, he laid it on his beast, and then presently after repaired to his Master, and holpe to deliuer the good Batcheler from the oppression of his Mule. And mounting him againe on it, he gaue him his Taper, and Don-Quixote bade him to follow his fellowes, of whom he should desire pardon in his name, for the wrong hee had done them. For it lay not in his hands to haue done the contrary. Sancho said to him also, if those Gentlemen would by chance know, who the valorous Knight is, that hath vsed them thus, you may say vnto them that hee is the famous Don-Quixote of Mancha, otherwise called the Knight of the Il fauourd face.
With this the Batcheler departed, and Don-Quixote demaunded of Sancho, what had moued him to call him the Knight of the Il fauoured face, more at that time, then at any other? I will tell you that, quoth Sancho; I stood beholding of you a pretty while by the Taper light, which that vnlucky man carrieth, and truly you haue one of the euill-fauouredst countenances of late, that euer I saw. Which either proceedeth of your being tyred after this battaile, or else through the losse of your teeth. That is not the reason, said Don-Quixote. But rather, it hath seemed fit to the wise man, to whose charge is left the writing of my History that I take some appellatiue name, as all the other Knights of yore haue done: for one called himselfe, The Knight of the burning sword. Another that of the Vnicorne, this, him of the Phoenix. The other, that of the Damzels. Another the Knight of the Griphen. And some other the Knight of Death, and by these names
 and deuices, they were knowne throughout the compasse of the earth. And so I say, that the wiseman whom I mentioned, set in thy minde and tongue the thought to cal me the Knight of the Il fauoured face, as I meane to call my selfe from hencefoorth, and that the name may become me better, I will vpon the first occasion cause to be painted in my shield, a most ill fauoured countenance. You neede not, quoth Sancho, spend so much time and money in hauing the like countenance painted; but that which you may more easily doe, is, to discouer your owne, and looke directly on those that behold you, and I will warrant you, that without any more adoe, or new painting in your shield, they will call you, him of the Il fauoured face. And let this be said in iest, that hunger and the want of your teeth, haue giuen you, as I haue said, so euill fauoured a face, as you may well excuse all other heauy portraitures. Don-Quixote laught at his Squires conceit, and yet neuerthelesse he purposed to call himselfe by that name, as soone as euer he should haue commodity to paint his shield, or buckler. And after hee had paused a while, he said to Sancho, I beleeue Sancho that I am excommunicated, for hauing laid violent hands vpon a consecrated thing. Canon. 72. Distinct. 134. Iuxta illud: si quis suadente diabolo, etc. Although I am certaine I laid not my hands vpon him, but only this Iaueline: and besides I did not any way suspect that I offended Priests or Church men, which I doe respect and honour as a Catholike and faithfull Christian; but rather that they were shadowes and spirits of the other world. And if the worst hapned, I remember well that which befell the Cid Ruy Diaz, when he broke that other Kings Embassadours chaire before the Popes holinesse, for which he excommunicated him, and yet for all that the good Rodericke Viuar behaued himselfe that day like an honourable and valiant Knight.
About this time the Batcheler departed, as is said, without speaking a word, and Don-Quixote would faine
 haue seene whether the corps that came in the litter, was bones or no, but Sancho would not permit him, saying, Sir, you haue finished this perilous aduenture, most with your safety of any one of those I haue seene. This people although ouercome and scattered, might perhaps fall in the consideration, that he who hath ouercome them is but one person alone, and growing ashamed thereof, would perhaps ioyne and vnite themselues, and turne vpon vs, and giue vs enough businesse to doe. The Asse is in good plight according to my desire, and the mountayne at hand, and hunger oppresseth vs; therefore wee haue nothing else to doe at this time, but retire our selues with a good pace, and as it is said, to the graue with the dead, and let them liue to the bread. And pricking on his Asse, he requested his Master to follow him, who seeing that Sancho spoke not without reason, he spurd after him without replying. And hauing trauailed a little way, betweene two small mountaines they found a large and hidden valley, where they alighted, and Sancho lighting his beast; and lying both along vpon the greene grasse, holpen by the sauce of hunger, they broke their fasts, dyned, ate their beauer, and supper all at one time; satisfying their appetites with more then one dish of cold meate, which the dead Gentlemans Chaplaines (which knew how to make much of themselues) had brought for their prouision. But here succeeded another disco^modity which Sancho accounted not as the least, and was, that they had no wine to drinke; no, nor as much as a droppe of water to rinse their mouthes, and being scorched with drought, Sancho perceiuing the field where they were full of thicke and greene grasse, said that which shall ensue in the Chapter following.



CHAP. VI.

Of a wonderfull aduenture, atchieued with lesse hazard, then euer any other Knight did any, by the valorous Don-Quixote of Mancha.

IT is not possible my Lord, but that these greene hearbs doe argue, that neere vnto this place must bee some Fountayne or streame that watereth them, and therefore I pray you let vs goe a little farther, and wee shall meete that which may mitigate the terrible thirst that afflicts vs, which sets vs questionlesse in more paine then did our hunger. This counsell was allowed by Don-Quixote, and therefore leading Rozinante by the bridle, and Sancho his Asse by the halter, after laying vp the reuersion of their supper, they set on through the plaine, onely guided by their ghesse, for the night was so darke as they could not see a iot. And scarce had they trauailed two hundred paces, when they heard a great noise of water, as if it fell headlong from some great and steepe rocke. The noise did cheare them very much, and standing to heare from whence it sounded, they heard vnawares another noise, which watered all the continent; they conceiued before, specially in Sancho, who as I haue noted was naturally very fearefull and of little spirit. They heard I say certaine blowes strucken with proportion, with a kinde of ratling of yrons and chaines, which accompanied by the furious sound of the water, might strike terrour into any other heart but Don-Quixotes.
The night as we said was darke, and they hapned to enter in among certaine tall and loftie trees, whose leaues moued by a soft gale of wind, made a fearefull and still noyse. So that the solitude, situation, darknesse and the noyse of the water and trembling of the leaues, concurring
 did breede horrour and affright. But specially seeing that the blowes neuer ceased, the wind slept not, nor the morning approached; whereunto may be added that they know not the place where they were. But Don-Quixote accompanied with his valiant heart, leaped on Rozinante, and embracing his Buckler, brandished his Launce and said. Friend Sancho, I would haue thee know that I was borne by the disposition of heauen in this our age of iron, to refuscitate in it that of golde, or the golden world as it is called. I am hee for whom are reserued all dangerous, great, and valorous feats. I say againe that I am he which shall set vp againe those of the Round Table, the twelue peeres of Fraunce, and the nine worthies. I am he who shall cause the actes to be forgotten of those Platires, Tablantes, Oliuantes, and Tirantes. The Phebusses, Beliamses, with all the crew of the famous Knights errant of times past, doing in this wherin I liue such great and wonderfull feats of armes, as shall obscure the brauest that euer they atchieued. Thou notest well faithfull and loyall Squire, the darkenes of this night, the strange silence, the deafe and confused trembling of these trees, the dreadfull noyse of that water in whose search we come, which seemes to throw it selfe headlong downe from the steepe mountaines of the Moone, the inceassable blowes which doth still wound our eares, all which together, and euery one apart, are able to strike terrour, feare, and amazement into the very minde of Mars, how much more in his that is not accustomed to the like chances and aduentures. Yet all this which I haue depainted to thee are inciters and rowsers of my minde, which now causeth my heart almost to burst in my breast, with the desire it hath to trie this aduenture, how difficult soeuer it shewes it selfe. Wherefore tie my horse gyrts a little straighter, and farewell: here in this place thou mayest expect mee three dayes and no more. And
 if I shal not returne in that space, thou mayest go backe to our village, and from thence (for my sake) to Toboso, where thou shalt say to my incomparable Lady Dulcinea, that her captiue Knight died, by attempting things that might make him worthy to be called hers.
When Sancho heard his Lord speake these wordes, he began to weepe with the greatest compassion of the world, and say vnto him, Sir, I see no reason why you should vndertake this fearefull aduenture: it is now night, and no body can perceiue vs, wee may very well crosse the way, and apart our selues from danger, although we should therefore want drinke these three dayes. And seeing none behold vs, there will be much lesse any one to take notice of our cowardize; the rather because I heard oft-times the Curate of our Village whom you know very well, preach That he which seekes the danger perisheth therein; so that, it is not good to tempt God, vnderstaking such a huge affaire, out of which you cannot escape, but by miracle: and let those which heauen hath already wrought for you suffice, in deliuering you from being tost in a Couerlet, as I was, and bringing you away a Victor, free, and safe, from among so many enemies, as accompanied the dead man. And when all this shall not moue or soften your hard heart, let this moue it, to thinke and certainly beleeue, that scarce shall you depart from this place, when through very feare I shall giue vp my soule to him that pleaseth to take it. I left my countrey, wife, and children to come and serue you, hoping thereby to be worth more and not lesse: but as couetousnesse breakes the sacke, so hath it also torne my hopes, seeing when they were most pregnant and liuely to obtain that vnlucky and accursed Island, which you promised mee so often: I see that in exchange and pay thereof you meane to forsake mee here in a desart, out of all frequentation. For Gods sake doe not mee such a wrong my Lord; and if you will not wholy desist from your purpose, yet deferre
 it at least till the morning, for as my little skill that I learned when I was a sheep-heard, telleth me, the dawning is not three houres off, Porque la boca de la bozina esla lucina de la cabeca. p. 168. for the mouth of the fish is ouer the head and maketh mid-night in the line of the left arme. How canst thou Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, see where is the line, or that mouth, or that taile, of which thou speakest, seeing the night is so darke that one starre alone appeareth not? that is true, quoth Sancho, but feare hath eyes, which can see things vnder the ground, and much more in the skies. And besides, we may gather by good discourse, that the day is not farre off. Let it be as little off as it lists, quoth Don-Quixote, it shall neuer bee recorded of mee that either teares or prayers could euer disswade me from performing the duty of a Knight, and therefore good Sancho hold thy peace, for God who hath inspired me to attempt this vnseene and fearefull aduenture, will haue an eye to my weale, and also to comfort thy sorrow. And that thou hast therefore to doe, is to make straight my gyrts, and remaine here, for I will returne shortly either aliue or dead.
Sancho perceiuing his Lords last resolution, and how little his teares, counsailes, or prayers, could auaile, resolued to profit himselfe a little of his wit, and make him if hee could to expect vntill day, and so when hee did fasten the gyrts, hee softly without being felt tied his Asses halter to both Rozinantes legges so sast that when Don-Quixote thought to depart he could not, for that his horse could not goe a steppe, but leaping. Sancho seeing the good successe of his guile; said, behold Sir, how heauen moued by my teares and prayers, hath ordained that Rozinante ^^uld not goe a stoppe, and if you will bee still contending, ^^d spurring, and striking him, you will doe nothing but inrage fortune, and as the prouerbe faies, But spurne against the pricke. Don-Quixote grew woode at this, and yet the more he spurted him, he was the lesse able to goe, wherefore without perceiuing the cause of
 his horses stay, he resolued at last to be quiet, and expect either till the morning, or else till Rozinante would please to depart, beleeuing verily that the impediment came of some other cause, and not from Sancho, and therefore said vnto him. Since it is so Sancho, that Rozinante cannot stirre him, I am content to tarry till the dawning, although her tardinesse cost me some teares. You shall haue no cause to weepe replyed Sancho, for I will entertaine you telling of Histories vntill it be day, if you will not alight and take a nap vpon these greene hearbs, as Knights errant are wont; that you may be the fresher and better able to morrow to attempt that monstrous aduenture which you expect. What doest thou call alighting, or sleeping, quoth Don-Quixote? am I peraduenture one of those Knights that repose in time of danger? sleepe thou who wast borne to sleepe, or doe what thou please, for I will doe that which I shall see fittest for my pretense. Good Sir be not angry, quoth Sancho, for I did not speake with that intention: and so drawing neare vnto him hee set one of his hands on the pomell of the saddle, and the other hinder in such sort that hee rested imbracing his Lords left thigh, not daring to depart from thence the breadth of a finger, such was the feare he had of those blowes, which all the while did sound without ceasing.
Then Don-Quixote commanded him to tell some tale to passe away the time, as he had promised, and Sancho said he would, if the feare of that which he heard would suffer him. Yet, quoth he for all this I will encourage my selfe to tell you one, whereon if I can hit aright, and that I bee not interrupted, is the best history that euer you heard, and be you attentiue for now I begi^ne. It was that it was, the good that shall befall be for vs all, and the harme for him that searches it. And you must be aduertised good Sir, that the beginning that Ancient men gaue to their tales, was not of ordinary things, and it was a sentence of Cato the Romaine Conrozin: Which saies and the
 harme be for him that searches it. Which is as fit for this place, as a ring for a finger, to the end that you may bee quiet, and not to goe seeke your owne harme to any place, but that wee turne vs another way, for no body ^ompelleth vs to follow this, where so many feares doe surprise vs. Prosecute this tale Sancho, said Don-Quixote, and leaue the charge of the way we must goe to me. I say then, quoth Sancho, that in a village of Estremadura, there was a Sheepe-heard, I would say a Goate-heard. And as I say of my tale, this Goate-heard was called Lope Ruyz: and this Lope Ruyz was enamoured of a Pastora, who was called Torralua; the which Pastera called Torralua was Daughter to a rich heard-man, and this rich heard-man. If thou tellest thy tale Sancho after that manner, quoth Don-Quixote, repeating euery thing twise that thou sayest, thou wilt not end it this two dayes. Tell it succinctly and like one of iudgement, or else say nothing. Of the very same fashion that I tell, are all tales told in my Countrey, and I know not how to tell it any other, nor is it reason that you should aske of me to make new customes. Tell it as thou pleasest, quoth Don-Quixote, for since fortune will not otherwise, but that I must heare thee, goe forward. So that my deare Sir of my soule quoth Sancho, that as I haue said already, this Sheepe-heard was in loue with Torralua the Pastora, who was a round Wench, scornefull, and drew somewhat neare to a man, for shee had Mochachoes, for me thinkes I see her now before my face. Belike then, quoth Don-Quixote, thou knowest her? I did not know her, quoth Sancho, but hee that told mee the tale, said it was so certaine and true, that I might when I told it to any other, very well sweare and affirme that I had seene it all my selfe. So that dayes passing and dayes comming, the Diuell who sleepes not, and Yque todo lo annasca. Pag. 171. that troubles all, wrought in such sort, as the loue that the Sheep-heard bore to the Pastora, turned into man-slaughter and ill will, and the cause was according
 to badde tongues, a certaine quantity of little iealousies that shee gaue him, such as they past the line, and came to the forbidden A Spanish Prouerbe touching their iealousie.. And the Sheep-heard did hate her so much afterward, that hee was content to leaue all that Countrey, because hee would not see her, and goe where his eyes should neuer looke vpon her. Torralua that saw her selfe disdained by Lope, did presently loue him, better then euer shee did before: That is a naturall condition of women, quoth Don-Quixote, to disdaine those that loue them, and to affect those which hate them. Passe forward Sancho. It hapned, quoth Sancho, that the Sheep-heard set his purpose in execution, and gathering vp his Goates, he trauailed through the fields of Estremadura, to passe into the Kingdome of Portugall. Torralua which knew it well followed him a foote and bare legged a farre off, with a pilgrims staffe in her hand, and a wallet hanging at her necke, where they say that shee carried a peece of a looking glasse, and another of a combe, and I know not what little bottle of changes for her face. But let her carry what shee carries, for I will not put my selfe now to verifie that. Only Ile say that they say, that the Sheep-heard arriued with his Goates to passe ouer the Riuer Guadiana, which in that season was swollen very much, and ouerflowed the banks, and at the side where hee came there was neither boate nor barke, nor any to passe himselfe or his Goates ouer the Riuer, for which he was very much grieued, because hee saw that Torralua came very neare, and shee would trouble him very much with her prayers and teares. But he went so long looking vp and downe that hee espyed a fisher who had so little a boate, as it could only hold one man and a Goate at once, and for all that hee spoke and agreed with him to passe himselfe and three hundred Goates that hee had ouer the Riuer. The fisherman entred into the boate, and carried ouer one Goate, he returned and past ouer another, and turned backe againe and past-ouer another. Keepe you
 Sir good account of the Goates, that the fisherman ferries ouer; for if one onely be forgotten, the tale will end, and it will not be possible to tell one word more of it. I follow on then, and I say, that the landing place on the other side was very dirty and slippery, which made the fisherman spend much time comming too and fro. Yet for all that he turned for another Goate, and another, and another.
Make account, quoth Don-Quixote, that thou hast past them all ouer, for otherwise thou wilt not make an end of passing them in a whole yeares space. How many, said Sancho, are already past ouer? What a Diuell know I, said Don-Quixote? See there that which I said, quoth Sancho, that you should keepe good account. By Ioue the tale is ended therefore, for there is no passing forward. How can that be, said Don-Quixote, is it so greatly of the essence of this History to know the Goates that are past so exactly and distinctly, that if one of the number be missed, thou canst not follow on with thy tale? no Sir, in no sort, said Sancho, for as soone as I demaunded of you to tell mee how many Goates past ouer, and that you answered mee you knew not, in that very instant it went from mee out of my memory all that was to bee told, and yfaith it vvas of great vertue and content. So then, quoth Don-Quixote, the tale is ended? it is as certainely ended as is my Mother, quoth Sancho. Surely, replyed Don-Quixote, thou hast recounted one of the rarest tales or Histories that any one of the world could thinke vpon, and that such a manner of telling or finishing a tale, was neuer yet seene or shall bee seene againe, although I neuer expected any other thing from thy good discourse. But I doe not greatly maruaile, for perhaps those senselesse strokes, haue troubled thine vnderstanding. All that may bee said Sancho, but I know in the discourse of my tale there is no more to bee said, but that there it ends,
 where the errour of counting the Goates that were wafted ouer the riuer begins, let it end in a good houre where it lists, answered Don-Quixote, and let vs trie whether Rozinante can yet stirre himselfe, then did he turne againe to giue him the spurres, and hee to leape as he did at the first and rest anew, being vnable to doe other, hee was so well shackled.
It hapned about this time, that eyther through the colde of the morning, or that Sancho had eaten at supper some lenatiue meates, or that it was a thing naturall (and that is most credible) he had a desire to doe that which others could not doe for him; but such was the feare that entred into his heart, as hee dared not depart from his Lord the breadth of a straw: and to thinke to leaue that which he had desired vndone was also impossible, therefore his resolution in that perplexed exigent, be it spoken with pardon, was this; he losed his right hand, wherewithall he held fast the hinderpart of the saddle, and therwithall very softly and without any noyse hee vntled the Codpi^^e-point, wherewithall his breeches were onely supported, which, that being let slippe, did presently fall downe about his legges like a paire of bolts: after this, lifting vp his shirt the best he could, hee exposed his buttockes to the ayre, which were not the least: this being done, which as he thought was the chiefest thing requisite to issue out of that terrible anguish and plunge; hee was suddenly troubled with a greater, to wit, that hee knew not how to disburden himselfe without making a noyse: which to auoyde first he shut his teeth close, lifted vp his shoulders, and gathered vp his breath as much he might, yet notwithstanding all these diligences, he was so vnfortunate, that he made a litle noise at the end, much different from that which made him so fearefull. Don-Quixote heard it, and said, What noyse is that Sancho? I know it not Sir, quoth he, I thinke it be some new thing for aduentures, or rather disuentures neuer begin with a
 little. Then turned he once againe to trie his happe, and it succeeded so well that without making any rumour or noyse, but that which he did at the first, he found himselfe free of this loading that troubled him so much.
But Don-Quixote hauing the sense of smelling as perfect as that of his hearing; and Sancho stood so neere, or rather ioyned to him, as the vapours did ascend vpward, almost by a direct line, he could not excuse himselfe but that some of them must needs touch his nose. And scarce had they arriued but that he occurd to the vsuall remedy, and stopped it very well betweene his fingers, and then said with a snaffling voyce; Me thinkes Sancho that thou art much affraid. I am indeed, replied Sancho, but wherin I pray you, doe you perceiue it now more then euer? In that thou smelst now more then euer, quoth Don-Quixote, and that not of Ambar. It may be so, quoth Sancho, yet the fault is not mine but yours, which brings me at such vnseasonable houres, through so desolate and fearefull places. I pray thee friend retire thy selfe two or three steps back, quoth Don-Quixote, holding his fingers still vpon his nose, and from henceforth haue more care of thy person, and of the respect thou owest to mine; for I see the ouermuch familiarity that I vse with thee, hath ingendred this contempt. I dare wager, quoth Sancho, that you thinke I haue done somewhat with my person that I ought not. Friend Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, it is the worse to stirre it thus. And thus in these and such like conuersation the Master and the man passed ouer the night. And Sancho seeing that the morning approached, he loosed Rozinante very warily, and tied vp his hose. Rozinante feeling himselfe (although he was not naturally very couragious) hee seemed to reioyce, and began to beate the ground with his hooffes; for by his leaue hee could neuer yet curuet. Don-Quixote seeing that Rozinante could now stirre, accounted it to be a good signe, and an incouragement of him to attempt that timorous aduenture.

By this Aurora did display her purple mantell ouer the face of Heauen, and euery thing appeared distinctly, which made Don-Quixote perceiue that he was among a number of tall Chesnut-trees, which commonly make a great shadow. He heard likewise those incessable strokes, but could not espy the cause of the^; wherfore giuing Rozinante presently the spurre, and turning backe again to Sancho to bid him farewell, he commaunded him to stay for him there three dayes at the longest, and that if he returned not after that space, he should make full account, that Ioue was pleased he should end his daies in that dangerous aduenture. He repeated to him againe the embassage and errant hee should carrie in his behalfe to his Ladie Dulcinea, and that touching the reward of his seruices, he should not feare any thing, for he had left his Testament made before he departed from his village, where he should finde himselfe gratified, touching all that which pertained to his hire, according to the rate of the time he had serued. But if God would bring him off, from that aduenture safe and sound, and without danger, he might full account to receiue the promised Island. Here Sancho began anew to weepe, hearing againe the pittifull discourses of his good Lord, and determined not to abandon him vntill the last traunce and end of that affaire, and out of these teares and honourable resolution of Sancho, the authour of this History collects, that it is like he was well borne, or at the very least an olde Christian, whose griefe did moue his Master a little, but not so much as he should shew the least argument of weakenes, but rather dissembling it the best that he could, he followed on his way towards the way of the water, and that where the stroakes were heard. Sancho followed him a foote, leading as he was wont, his Asse by the halter, who was the inseparable fellow of his prosperous or aduerse fortunes.
And hauing trauelled a good space among those Chesnut and shady trees, they came out into a little plaine that
 stood at the foot of certaine steepe rockes, from whose tops did precipitate it selfe a great fall of water. There were at the foot of those rockes certaine houses, so ill made, as they rather seemed ruines of buildings then houses; from whence as they perceiued, did issue the fearfull rumour and noyse of the stroakes, which yet continued. Rozinante at this dreadfull noyse did start, and being made quiet by his Lord Don-Quixote, did by little and little draw neere to the houses, recommending himselfe on the way most deuoutly to his Ladie Dulcinea, and also to Ioue, desiring him that he would not forget him. Sancho neuer departed from his Lords side, and stretched out his necke and eyes as farre as he might through Rozinante his legges, to see if he could perceiue that which helde him so fearefull and suspended. And after they had trauelled about a hundred paces, more at the dubling of a point of a mountaine they saw the very cause, patent and open (for rhere could be none other) of that so hideous and fearefull a noyse that had kept them all the night so doubtfull and affrighted, and was (O Reader if thou wilt not take it in bad part) sixe yron Maces that fulled cloath, which with their interchangeable blowes, did forme that maruellous noyse.
When Don-Quixote saw what it was, he waxed mute and all ashamed. Sancho beheld him, and saw that hee hanged his head on his breast with tokens that hee was somewhat ashamed. Don-Quixote looked also on his Squire, and saw that his cheekes were swolne with laughter, giuing withall euident signes that he was in danger to burst, if he did not permit that violent passion to make a sally, whereat all Don-Quixotes melancholy little preuailing, he could not beholding Sancho, but laugh also himselfe. And when Sancho saw that his Master had begun the play, he let slip the prisoner in such violent manner to presse his sides hardly with both his hands to saue himselfe from bursting. Foure times he ended, and other
 foure he renued his laughter with as great impulse and force as at the first, whereat Don-Quixote was wonderfully inraged, but chiefly hearing him say in gibing manner: I would haue thee know friend Sancho, that I was born by the disposition of heauen in this our age of yron, to renue in it that of gold or the golden world. I am hee for whom are reserued all dangerous, great, and valorous feats. And in this sort he went repeating all or the greatest part of the words, Don-Quixote had said the first time that they heard the timorous blowes, Don-Quixote perceiuing that Sancho mockt him, grew so ashamed and angry withall, that lifting vp the end of his launce, he gaue him two such blowes on the backe, as if he had receiued them on his pate, would haue freed his Master from paying him any wages, if it were not to his hayres. Sancho seeing that he gained so ill earnest by his iests, fearing that his Master should goe onward with it, he said vnto him with very great submission; Pacifie your selfe good Sir, for by Ioue I did but iest. But why dost thou iest? I tell thee, I doe not iest, quoth Don-Quixote. Come here Master Merriman, thinkest thou that as those are yron Maces to full cloth, they were some other dangerous aduenture, that I haue not shown resolution enough to vndertake and finish it? Am I by chance obliged being as I am a Knight to know and distinguish noyses, and perceiue which are of a fulling Mill or no? And more it might (as it is true) that I neuer saw any before as thou hast done, base villain that thou art, borne and brought vp among the like: if not, make thou that these sixe Maces be conuerted into sixe Giants, and cast them in my beard one by one, or all together: and when I doe not turne all their heeles vp, then mocke me as much as thou pleasest.
No more good Sir, quoth Sancho, for I confesse I haue beene somewhat too laughsome. But tell me I pray you, now that we are in peace, as God shall deliuer you out of all aduentures that may befall you as whole and sound, as
 he hath done out of this, hath not the great feare we were in, beene a good subiect of laughter, and a thing worthy the telling? At least I, for of you I am certaine that you doe not yet know what feare or terror is. I doe not denie, quoth Don-Quixote, but that which befell vs is worthy of laughter: yet ought it not to be recounted, for as much as all persons are not so discreete, as to know how to discerne one thing from another, and set euery thing in his right point. You know at least wise, quoth Sancho, how to set your Iaueline in his point, when pointing at my pate, you hit me on the shoulders, thanks be to God, and to the diligence I put in going aside. But farewell it, for all will away in the bucking; and I haue heard olde folke say, That man loues thee well, who makes thee to weepe: and besides great Lords are wont after a badde word which they say to one of their Seruingmen, to bestow on him presently a paire of hose. But I know not yet what they are wont to giue them after blowes, if it be not that Knights errant giue after the bastanado Islands, or Kingdomes on the continent. The Die might runne so fauourably, quoth Don-Quixote, as all thou hast said, might come to passe: and therefore pardon what is done since thou art discreete, and knowest that a mans first motions are not in his hand. And be aduertised of one thing from hence forward (to the end to abstaine, and carry thy selfe more respectiuely in thy ouer-much liberty of speech with mee) that in as many bookes of Chiualry as I haue read, which are infinite, I neuer found that any Squire spoke so much with his Lord, as thou dost with thine; which in good sooth I do attribute to thy great indiscretion and mine, thine in respecting me so little, mine in not making my selfe to be more regarded. Was not Gandalin Amadis du Gaules Squire Earle of the firme Island? and yet it is read of him that hee spoke to his Lord with his Cap in his hand, his head bowed, and his body bended (more Turcesco). What then shall we say of Gasabel Don
 Gataors Squire, who was so silent, as to declare vs the excellencie thereof, his name is but once repeated in all that so great and authenticall a History? Of all which my wordes, Sancho, thou must inferre, that thou must make difference betweene the Master and the man, the Lord and his Seruingman, the Knight and his Squire. So that from this day forward we must proceede with more respect, not letting the clew runne so much, for after what way soeuer I grow angry with thee, it will be badde for the Pitcher. The rewards and benefites that I haue promised thee, will come in their time, and if they doe not, thy wages cannot be lost (as I haue already said to thee).
You say very well quoth Sancho, but faine would I learne (in case that the time of rewards came not, and that I must of necessity trust to my wages) how much a Knight errants Squire did gain in times past? Or if they did agree for moneths or by dayes as Masons men. I doe not thinke quoth Don-Quixote, that they went by the hire, but onely trusted to their Lords curtesie. And if I haue assigned wages to thee in my sealed Testament which I left at home, it was to preuent the worst, because I know not yet what successe Chinalrie may haue in these our so miserable times, and I would not haue my soule suffer in the other world for such a minuity as is thy wages. For thou must vnderstand that in this world there is no state so dangerous as that of Knights errant. That is most true replied Sancho, seeing the onely sound of the Maces of a fulling Mill, could trouble and disquiet the heart of so valiant a Knight as you are. But you may be sure that I will not hereafter once vnfolde my lips to iest at your doings, but onely to honour you as my Master and naturall Lord. By doing so, replied Don-Quixote, thou shalt liue on the face of the earth, for next to our parents we are bound to respect our Masters, as if they were our fathers.



CHAP. VII.

Of the high aduenture and rich winning of the helmet of Mambrino, with other successes befalne the inuincible Knight.

IT began about this time to raine, and Sancho would faine haue entred into the fulling Mils, but Don-Quixote had conceiued such hate against them for the iest recounted, as he would in no wise come neere them, but turning his way on the right hand, he fell into a high way, as much beaten as that wherein they rode the day before; within a while after Don-Quixote espied one a horsebacke, that bore on his head somewhat that glistred like gold; and scarce had he seene him, when hee turned to Sancho, and said, Me thinks Sancho that there's no prouerbe that is not true, for they are all sentences taken out of experience it selfe, which is the vniuersall mother of sciences; and specially that prouerbe that sayes, Where one doore is shut another is opened. I say this, because if fortune did shut yesternight the doore that we searched deceiuing vs in the aduenture of the yron Maces, it layes vs now wide open the doore that may addresse vs to a better and more certaine aduenture, whereon if I cannot make a good entry, the fall shall be mine, without being able to attribute it to the little knowledge of the fulling Maces, or the darkenesse of the night: which I affirme because if I be not deceiued, there comes one towards vs, that weares on his head the helmet of Mambrino, for which I made the oath. See well what you say Sir, and better what you doe, quoth Sancho, for I would not wish that this were new Maces to batter vs and our vnderstanding. The Diuell take thee for a man, replied Don-Quixote, what difference is there betwixt a helmet and fulling
 Maces? I know not, quoth Sancho, but if I could speake as much now as I was wont, perhaps I would giue you such reasons as you your selfe should see how much you are deceiued in that you speake. How may I be deceiued in that I say scrupulous traytor, quoth Don-Quixote? Tell mee, seest thou not that Knight which comes riding towards vs on a dapple gray horse, with a helmet of golde on his head? That which I see and finde out to be so answered Sancho, is none other then a man on a gray Asse like mine owne, and brings on his head somewhat that shines. Why that is Mambrinos helmet, quoth Don-Quixote, stand aside and leaue me alone with him, thou shalt see how without speech to cut of delayes, I will conclude this aduenture and remain with the helmet as mine owne which I haue desired so much, I will haue care to stand off, but I turne againe to say, that I pray God, that it be a purchase of gold and not fulling Mils. I haue already said to thee, that thou doe not make any more mention, no not in thought of those Maces; for if thou dost said Don-Quixote I vow, I say no more, that I will batter thy soule. Hereat Sancho fearing lest his Master would accomplish the vow which he had throwne out as round as a bowle, held his peace.
This therefore is the truth of the History of the helmet, horse and Knight which Don-Quixote saw: There was in that Commarke two villages, the one so little as it had neyther shop nor Barber, but the greater that was neere vnto it was furnished of one, and he therefore did serue the little village when they had any occasion, as now it befell that therein lay one sicke and must bee let bloud, and another that desired to trimme his beard; for which purpose the Barber came, bringing with him a brazen Bason: and as hee trauelled, it by chance began to raine, and therefore clapt his Bason on his head to saue his hatte from stayning, because it belike was a new one. And the Bason being cleane skowred, glistred halfe a
 league off. He rode on a gray Asse as Sancho said; and that was the reason why Don-Quixote tooke them to be a dapple gray Steede, a Knight and a helmet of gold; for he did with all facility apply euery thing which he saw to his rauing Chiualry and ill-errant thoughts. And when he saw that the poore Knight drew neere, without setling himselfe to commune with him, he inrested his Sancon. Iaueline low on the thigh, and ranne with all the force Rozinante might, thinking to strike him thorow and thorow. And drawing neere vnto him, without stopping his horse, hee cryed, defend thy selfe Caytise, or else render vnto mee willingly, that which is my due by all reason. The Barber who so without fearing or surmising any such thing, saw that Fantasiue and spirit come vpon him, had no other remedy to auoyde the blow of the Launce but to fall off of his Asse to the ground: and scarce had hee touched the earth, when rising vp againe as light as a Deere, he runne away so swistly through the plaine, as the winde could scarce ouertake him; leauing behinde him on the ground his Bason, wherewithall Don-Quixote rested content, and said, that Pagan which lost it was discreete, and did imitate the Castor, who seeing himselfe hotly pursued by the hunters, which teares and cuts away that with his teeth, for which he knows by naturall instinct he followed. Then he commaunded Sancho to take vp the helmet, who lifting it, said the Bason is a good one By God, and is as well worth a Riall of eight as a marnedie; and giuing it to his Lord, he presently set it on his head, turning about euery way, to see whether he could get the Beauer, and seeing he could not finde it, hee said, The Pagan for whom this famous helmet was first forged, had doubtlesly a very great head; and that which grieues me principally is, that this helmet wants the one halfe.
When Sancho heard him call the Bason a helmet, hee could not containe his laughter, but presently remembring on his Masters choler, he checkt it in the midst. Why
 dost thou laugh Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote? I laugh, said he, to thinke on the great head the Pagan owner of this helmet had. For it is for all the world like a Barbers Bason. Know Sancho that I imagine, quoth Don-Quixote, that this famous piece of this inchanted helmet did fall by some strange accident into some ones handes that knew not the worth thereof, and seeing it was of pure gold, without knowing what lie did, I thinke hee hath moulten the halfe, to profite himselfe therewithall, and made of the other halfe this which seemes a Barbers Bason, as thou sayest. But be what it list, to me who knowes well what it is his transmutation makes no matter, for I will dresse it so in the first towne, where I shall finde a Smith, as that which the God of forges made for the God of warre, shall not surpasse, no nor come neere it; and in the meane while I will weare it as I may: for something is better then nothing; and more, seeing it may very well defend me from the blow of a stone. That's true, quoth Sancho, if it be not throwne out of a sling, such as that of the battell of the two armies, when they blissed your Worships checke teeth, and broke the bottle wherin you carried the most blissed drench which made me vomit vp my guts. I doe not much care for the losse of it Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, for as thou knowest, I haue the receit in memory; so haue I likewise, quoth Sancho, but if euer I make it or taste it again in my life, I pray God that here may be mine end. How much more I neuer meane to thrust my selfe into any occasion wherin I should haue neede of it; for I meane with all my fiue senses to keepe my selfe from hurting any, or being hurt. Of being once againe tost in a Couerlet I say nothing, for such disgraces can hardly be preuented, and if they befall, there is no other remedy but patience, and to lift vp the shoulders, keepe in the breath, shut the eyes, and suffer our selues to bee borne where Fortune and the Couerlet pleaseth.

Thou art a badde Christian Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, hearing him say so; for thou neuer forgettest the iniuries that are once done to thee: know that it is the duty of noble and generous minds not to make any account of toyes. What legge hast thou brought away lame, what ribbe broken, or what head hurte, that thou canst not yet forget that jest? for the thing being well examined, it was none other then a jest or pastime; for if I did not take it to be such, I had returned by this to that place, and done more harme in thy reuenge, then that which the Greekes did for the rape of Helen: who if she were in these times, or my Dulcinea in hers, she might be sure she should neuer haue gained so much fame for beauty as she did: and saying so, he pierced the skie with a sigh. Then said Sancho, let it passe for a jest, since the reuenge cannot passe in earnest. But I know well the quality both of the jests and earnest, and also that they shall neuer fall out of my memory, as they will neuer out of my shoulders. But leauing this apart, what shall we doe with this dapple gray Steed that lookes so like a gray Asse, which that Martin left behinde, whom you ouerthrew, who according as he laide feete on the dust and made hast, hee mindes not to backe for him againe, and by my beard the gray beast is a good one. I am not accustomed, quoth Don-Quixote, to ransacke and spoyle those whom I ouercome, nor is it the practise of Chiualry to take their horses, and let them goe a foote: if that it befall the Victor to lose in the conflict his owne; for in such a case it is lawfull to take that of the vanquished, as wonne in faire warre. So that Sancho leaue that horse, or Asse, or what else thou pleasest to call it, for when his owner sees vs departed, he will returne againe for it. God knowes, quoth Sancho, whether it will be good or no for me to take him, or at least change for mine owne, which me thinkes is not so good. Truely the lawes of Knighthood are straight, since they extend not themselues to licence the exchang of one Asse
 for another: and I would know whether they permit at least to change the one harnesse for another. In that I am not very sure, quoth Don-Quixote, and as a case of doubt (vntill I be better informed) I say that thou exchange them, if by chance thy neede bee extreme: so extreme, quoth Sancho, that if they were for mine owne very person, I could not neede them more. And presently enabled by the licence, he made mutatio Caparum, and set forth his beast like a hundred holy-dayes.
This being done, they broke their fast with the relickes of the spoyles they had made in the Campe of Sumpture horse, and drunke of the Milles streames, without once turning to looke on them (so much they abhord them for the maruellous terror they had strucken them in) and hauing by their repast cut away all cholericke and melancholicke humours, they followed on the way which Rozinante pleased to leade them (who was the depository of his Masters will, and also of the Asses, who followed him alwayes wheresoeuer hee went in good amitie and company. For all this they returned to the high way, wherein they trauelled at randome, without any certaine deliberation which way to goe. And as they thus trauelled, Sancho said to his Lord, Sir, will you giue me leaue to commune a little with you; for since you haue imposed vpon me that sharpe commaundement of silence more then foure things haue rotted in my stomacke, and one thing that I haue now vpon the tippe of my tongue, I would not wish for any thing that it should miscarry? Say it, quoth Don-Quixote, and be briefe in thy reasons, For none is delightfull if it be prolix. I say then, quoth Sancho, that I haue beene these later dayes, considering how little is gained by following these aduentures, that you doe thorow these desarts and crosse waies, where though you ouercome and finish the most dangerous, yet no man sees nor knowes them, and so they shall remaine in perpetu all silence, both to your preiudice, and that of the fame
 which they deserue. And therefore me thinkes it were better (still excepting your better iudgement herein) that we went to serue some Emperour, or other great Prince that maketh warre, in whose seruice you might show the valour of your person, your maruellous force, and wonderfull iudgement: which being perceiued by the Lord whom we shall serue, he must perforce reward vs, euery one according to his deserts; and in such a place will not want one to record your noble acts for a perpetuall memory: of mine I say nothing, seeing they must not transgresse the Squire-like limits: although I dare auouch that if any notice be taken in Chiualry of the feats of Squires, mine shall not fall away betwixt the lines.

Sancho thou sayest not ill, quoth Don-Quixote, but before such a thing come to passe, it is requisite to spend some time vp and downe the world, as in probation, seeking of aduentures, to the end that by atchieuing some, a man may acquire such fame and renoune, as when he goes to the Court of any great Monark, he be there already knowne by his workes, and that he shall scarcely be perceiued to enter at the gates by the boyes of that Citie, when they all will follow and inuiron him, crying out aloude; This is the Knight of the Sunne, or the Serpent, or of some other deuice vnder which hee hath atchieued strange aduentures. This is he (will they say) who ouercame in single fight the huge Giant Brocabruno of the inuincible strength. He that disinchanted the great Sophie of Persia, of the large inchantment wherein he had lien, almost nine hundred yeares. So that they will thus goe proclayming his actes from hand to hand; and presently the King of that Kingdome, moued by the great bruit of the boyes and other people, will stand at the windowes of his Palace to see what it is; and as soone as hee shall eye the Knight, knowing him by his armes, or by the Impresa of his shield, he must necessarily say, vp, goe all of you my
 Knights, as many of you as are in my Court forth, to receiue the flower of Chiualry, which comes there: at whose commandement they all wil sally, and he himselfe will come downe to the midst of the staires, and will embrace him most straightly, and will giue him the peace, kissing him on the cheeke: and presently will carrie him by the hand to the Queenes chamber, where the Knight shall finde her accompanied by the Princesse her daughter, which must be one of the fairest and debonaire damzels that can be found throughout the vast compasse of the earth; after this will presently and in a trice succeed that she will cast her eye on the Knight, and he on her, and each of them shall seeme to the other no humane creature but an Angell, and then without knowing how, or how not, they shall remaine captiue and intangled in the intricable amorous nette, and with great care in their mindes, because they know not how they shall speake to discouer their anguish and feeling. From thence the King will carrie him without doubt to some quarter of his Palace richly hanged; where hauing taken off his armes, they will bring him a rich mantell of Scarlet, furred with ermines to weare: and if hee seemed well before being armed, he shall now looke as well or better out of them. The night being come, he shal sup with the King, Queene and Princesse, where he shal neuer take off his eye off her, beholding vnawares of those that stand present: and she will do the like with as much discretion; for as I haue said she is a very discreete damzell. The Tables shall be taken vp, there shall enter vnexpectly in at the hal an^l fauored little dwarffe, with a faire Ladie that comes behinde the dwarffe betweene two Giants, with a certaine aduenture wrought by a most auncient wiseman, and that he who shal end it, shal be held for the best Knights of the world. Presently the King wil command al those that are present to proue it, wch they do
none of them can finish it, but onely the new come Knight to the great proofe of his fame. Whereat the Princesse will remaine very glad, and will be very ioyfull and well appaide, because fhee hath setled her thoughts in so high a place. And the best of it is that this King, or Prince, or what else he is, hath a very great warre with another as mighty as hee; and the Knight his guest doth aske him (after he hath bin in the Court a few dayes) licence to go and serue him in that warre. The King will giue it with a very good will, and the Knight will kisse his handes courteously for the fauour he doth him therein: and that night he will take leaue of his Ladie the Princesse by some window of a garden that lookes into her bed-chamber; by the which hee hath spoken to her oft-times before, being a great meanes and helpe therto, a certaine damzell which the Princesse trusts very much. He sighes, and shee will fall in a sound, and the damzell will bring water, to bring her to her selfe againe. She will be also full of care because the morning drawes neere, and she would not haue them discouered for any her Ladies honour. Finally the Princesse will returne to her selfe, and will giue out her beautifull handes at the window to the Knight, who will kisse them a thousand and a thousand times, and will bathe them all in teares. There it will remaine agreed betweene them two, the meanes that they will vse to acquaint one another with their good or badde successes; and the Princes will pray him to stay a way as little time as he may, which he shall promise vnto her, with many oathes and protestations. Then will he turne againe to kisse her handes, and take his leaue of her with such feeling, that there will want but litle to end his life in the place he goes from thence to his chamber, and casts himselfe vpon his bedde, but he shall not be able to sleepe a nappe for sorrow of his departure: he will after get vp very early, and will goe
 to take leaue of the King, the Queene and Princesse. They tell him (hauing taken leaue of the first two) that the Princesse is ill at ease, and that she cannot be visited: the Knight thinkes that it is for griefe of his departure, and the which tidings launceth him anew to the bottom of his heart, wherby he will be almost constrained to giue manifest tokens of his griefe: the damzel that is priuy to their loues will be present, and must note all that passeth, and goe after to tell it to her Mistresse, who receiues her with teares, and sayes vnto her that one of the greatest afflictions she hath is, that she does not know who is her Knight, or whether hee be of blood royall or no: Her damzell will assure her againe that so great bountie, beauty and valor as is in her Knight, could not find place but in a great and royall subiect. The carefull Princesse will comfort her selfe with this hope; and labour to bee cheerefull lest shee should giue occasion to her parents to suspect any sinister thing of her: and within two dayes againe she will come out in publique. By this the Knight is departed, he fights in the warre, and ouercomes the Kings enemy, he winnes many Cities, and triumphes for many battels, he returnes to the Court, he visits his Lady, and speakes to her at the accustomed place, he agreeth with her to demaund her of the King for his wife, in reward of his seruices, whereunto the King will not consent, because he knowes not what he is: but for all this, eyther by carrying her away, or by some other maner the Princesse becomes his wife, and he accounts himselfe therefore very fortunate, because it was after knowne that the same Knight is sonne to a very valorous King of I know not what Countrey; for I beleeue it is not in all the Mappe. The father dies, and the Princesse doth inherite the Kingdome, and thus in two wordes our Knight is become a King. Heere in this place enters presently the commoditie to reward his Squire, and all
 those that holpe him to ascend to so high an estate. He marries his Squire with one of the Princesses damzels, which shall doubtlesly bee the very same that was acquainted with his loue, who is some principall Dukes daughter.

That's it I seeke for, quoth Sancho, and all will goe right; therefore I will leane to that, for euery whit of it which you said will happen to your selfe, without missing a iot, calling your selfe The Knight of the ill fauoured face. Neuer doubt it Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, for euen in the very same maner, and by the same steppes that I haue recounted here Knights errant doe ascend and haue assended to be Kings and Emperours. This only is expedient, that we enquire what King among the Christians or Heathens makes warre and hath a faire daughter: but we shall haue time enough to bethinke that, since as I haue said we must first acquire fame in other places, before we goe to the Court. Also I want another thing, that put case that we find a Christian or Pagan King, that hath warres and a faire daughter, and that I haue gained incredible fame throughout the wide-world, yet cannot I tell how I might finde that I am descended from Kings, or at the least cousen Germaine remoued of an Emperour? For the King will not giue me his daughter, vntill this be first very well proued, though my workes deserue it neuer so much; so that I feare to lose through this defect, that which mine owne hath merited so well. True it is, that I am a Gentleman of a knowne house of propriety and possession; and perhaps the wise man that shall write my History will so beautifie my kindred and discent, that hee will find me to be the fift or sixt descent from a King; for thou must vnderstand Sancho, that there are two maners of lineages in the world. Some that deriue their pedegree from Princes and Monarkes, whom time hath by little and little diminished and confumed, and ended in a point like Pyramydes. Others that tooke their beginning
 from base people, and ascend from degree vnto degree, vntill they become at last great Lords. So that all the difference is, that some were that which they are not now, and others are that which they were not. And it might be that I am of those, and after good examination my beginning might be found to haue beene famous and glorious; wherewithall the King my father in law ought to be content, whosoeuer he were: and when he were not, yet shall the Princesse loue me in such sort, that she shall in despite of her fathers teeth, admit me for her Lord and Spouse, although she knew me to be the sonne of a Water-bearer. And if not, here in this place may quader well, the carrying of her away perforce, and carrying of her where best I liked; for eyther time or death must needes end her fathers displeasure.
Here comes well to passe that Sancho, which some damned fellowes are wont to say; Seeke not to get that with a good will, which thou mayest take perforce; although it were better said, The leape of a shrubbe is more worth then good mens intreaties. I say it to this purpose, that if the King your father in law will not condiscend to giue vnto you the Princesse my Mistresse, then there's no more to be done, but as you say to her, steale away and carie her to another place: but all the harme is, that in the meane while that composition is vnmade, and you possesse not quietly your Kingdome, the poore Squire may whistle for any benefite or pleasure you are able to doe him, if it be not that the damzell of whom you spoke euen now, runne away with her Ladie, and that he passe away his misfortunes now and then with her, vntil heauen ordaine some other thing: for I doe thinke that his Lord may giue her vnto him presently, if he please to be his lawfull Spouse. There's none that can depriue thee of that, quoth Don-Quixote. Why, so that this may befall, quoth Sancho, there's no more but to commend our selues to God, and let fortune runne where it may best addresse vs. God
 bring it so to passe, quoth Don-Quixote, as I desire, and thou hast neede of Sancho? and let him be a wretch that accounts himselfe one. Let him be so, quoth Sancho, for I am an olde Christian; and to be an Earle there is no more requisite. I, and tis more then enough, quoth Don-Quixote for that purpose: and though thou werest not, it made not much matter; for I being a King I may giue thee nobility, without eyther buying of it, or seruing me with nothing. For in creating thee an Earle, loe thereby thou art a Gentleman: and let men say what they please, they must in good faith call thee right honourable, although it grieue them neuer so much. And thinke you, quoth Sancho, that I would not authorize my Litado. Thou must say Dictado or dignity, quoth Don-Quixote, and not Litado, for that's a barbarous word. Let it be so, quoth Sancho Panca, I say that I would accommodate all very well, for I was once by my life: the warner of a Confratriety, and the warners gowne became me so well, that euery one said I had a presence fit for the prouost of the same. Then how much more when I shall set on my shoulders the Reall of a Duke, or be apparrelled with golde and pearles after the custome of strange Earles; I doe verily beleeue that men will come a hundred leagues to see me. Thou wilt seeme very well, quoth Don-Quixote, but thou must shaue that beard very often, for as thou hast it now so bushie, knit, and vnhandsome, if thou shauest it not with a razor at the least euery other day, men will know that thou art as farre from Gentilitie as a Musket can carie. What more is there to be done, quoth Sancho, then to take a Barber, and keepe him hired in my house; yea, and if it be necessary, he shall ride after me, as if he were a Master of horse to some Nobleman: how knowest thou, quoth Don-Quixote, that Noblemen haue their Masters of horses riding after them? Some few years agoe I was a moneth in the Court, and there I saw that as a young little Lord rode by for his pleasure, they said
 he was a great Grande: there followed him still a horsebacke a certaine man turning euery way that he went, so as he verily seemed to be his horse taile. I then demaunded the cause why that man did not ride by the others side, but still did follow him so? They answered me that he was Master of his horses, and that the Grandes were accustomed to carrie such men after them. Thou sayest true, quoth Don-Quixote, and thou mayest carry thy Barber in that manner after thee; for customes came not altogether, nor were not inuented at once. And thou mayest be the first Earle that carried his Barber after him. And I doe assure thee that it is an office of more trust to trim a mans beard then to saddle a horse. Let that of the Barber rest to my charge, quoth Sancho, and that of procuring to be a King, and of creating me an Earle to yours. It shall be so, quoth Don-Quixote; and thus lifting vp his eyes, he saw that which shall be recounted in the chapter following.


CHAP. VIII.

Of the liberty Don-Quixote gaue to many wretches, who were a carrying perforce to a place they desired not.

CIde Hamete Benengeli, an Arabicall and Machegan Author recounts in this most graue, lofty, diuine, sweet, conceited History, that after these discourses past between Don-Quixote and his Squire Sancho Panca, which we haue laid downe in the last Chapter. Don-Quixote lifting vp his eyes, saw that there came in the very same way wherein they rode, about some twelue men in a company on foote, inserted like Bead-stones in a great chaine of yron that was tyed
 about their neckes, and euery one of them had manacles besides on their handes. There came to conduct them two on horsebacke, and two others a foot; the horsemen had firelocke pieces, those that came a foote darts and swords. And as soone as Sancho saw them, he said; This is a chaine of Gally-slaues, people forced by the King to go to the Gallies. How? people forced, demanded Don-Quixote, is it possible that the King will force any body? I say not so, answered Sancho, but that it is people which are condemned for their offences to serue the King in the Gallies perforce. In resolution, replyed Don-Quixote, (howsoeuer it be) this folke, although they be conducted goe perforce, and not willingly. That's so, quoth Sancho. Then if that be so, here fals in iustly the execution of my function, to wit, the dissoluing of violences and outrages, and the succouring of the afflicted and needefull. I pray you Sir, quoth Sancho, to consider that the Iustice, who represents the King himselfe, doth wrong or violence to no body, but onely doth chastice them for their committed crimes.
By this the chaine of slaues arriued, and Don-Quixote with very courteous termes requested those that went in their guard, that they would please to informe him of the cause wherefore they carried that people away in that manner? One of the guardians a horse-backe answered, that they were slaues condemned by his Maiestie to the Gallies, and there was no more to be said, neither ought he to desire any farther knowledge. For all that, replied Don-Quixote, I would faine learne of euery one of them in particular the cause of his disgrace: and to this did adde other such and so courteous wordes, to moue them to tell him what he desired, as the other guardian a horsebacke said. Although we carie here the Register and testimony of the condemnations of euery one of these wretches, yet this is no time to hold them here long, or take out the processes to reade, draw you neerer and demand
 it of themselues, for they may tel it and they please, and I know they will; for they are men that take delight both in acting and relating knaueries.
With this licence, which Don-Quixote himselfe would haue taken, although they had not giuen it him, he came to the chaine, and demanded of the first for what offence he went in so ill a guise? Hee answered that his offence was no other then for being in loue; for which cause only he went in that manner. For that and no more, replied Don-Quixote? Well, if enamoured folke be cast into the Gallies, I might haue beene rowing there a good many dayes agoe. My loue was not such as you coniecture, quoth the slaue, for mine was that I loued so much a basket well heaped with fine linnen, as I did embrace it so straightly, that if the Iustice had not taken it away from me by force, I would not haue forsaken it to this houre by my good will. All was done in Flagrante, there was no leisure to giue me torment, the cause was concluded, my shoulders accommodated with a hundred, and for a supplement three prices of Garrupes, and the worke was ended. What are Garrupes, quoth Don-Quixote? Garrupes are Gallies, replied the slaue, who was a young man of some foure and twenty yeares old, and said he was borne in Piedrahita.
Don-Quixote demaunded of the second his cause of offence, who would answere nothing he went so sad and melancholy. But the first answered for him, and said, Sir this man goes for a Canarie bird, I meane for a Musitian and Singer. Is it possible, quoth Don-Quixote, that Musitians and Singers are likewise sent to the Gallies? Yes Sir, quoth the slaue, for there's nothing worse then to sing in anguish. Rather, quoth Don-Quixote, I haue heard say that he which sings doth affright and chase away his harms. Here it is quite contrary, quoth the slaue, for He that sings once, weepes all his life after. I doe not vnderstand it, said Don-Quixote; but one of the guardians said to him, Sir
 Knight, to sing in anguish, is said among this people non Sancta, to confesse vpon the racke. They gaue this poore wretch the torture, and he confessed his delight that hee was a Quartrezo, that is a stealer of beastes. And because he hath confessed, he is likewise condemned to the Gallies for sixe years, with an Amen of two hundred blowes, which he beares already with him on his shoulders; and he goes alwayes thus sad and pensatiue, because the other theeues that remaine behinde, and also those which goe heere doe abuse, despise, and scorne him for confessing, and not hauing a courage to say Non. For they say a No, hath as many letters as an Ye, and that a delinquent is very fortunate, when his life or his death onely depends of his owne tongue, and not of witnesses or proofes: and in mine opinion they haue very great reason. I likewise thinke the same, quoth Don-Quixote.
And passing to the third, he demaunded that which he had done of the rest, who answered him out of hand, and that pleasantly. I goe to the Lady Garrupes for fiue yeares because I wanted tenne Duccats. I will giue twenty with all my heart to free thee from that misfortune, quoth Don-Quixote. That, quoth the slaue, would be like to one that hath money in the midst of the Gulfe, and yet dies for hunger, because he can get no meat to buy for it. I say this, because if I had those twenty Duckets which your Worships liberality offers me in due season, I would haue so annoynted with them the Notaries penne, and whetted my Lawyers wit so well, that I might to day see my selfe in the midst of the Market of Cocodouer of Toledo, and not in this way trayled thus like a Grey-hound: but God is great. Patience; and this is enough.
Don-Quixote went after to the fourth, who was a man of a venerable presence, with a long white beard which reached to his bosome. Who hearing himselfe demanded the cause why he came there, began to weepe, and answered not a word. But the fift flaue lent him a tongue,
 and said, This honest man goes to the Gallies for foure yeares, after he had walked the Ordinary apparrelled in pompe, and a horsebacke. That is, quoth Sancho Panca, as I take, after he was caried about to the shame and publike view of the people. You are in the right, quoth the slaue, and the crime for which hee is condemned to this paine, was, for being a Broker of the eare, I and of all the body too; for in effect I meane that this Gentleman goeth for a Baude, and likewise for hauing a little smacke and entrance in witch-craft. If that smacke and insight in witchcraft were not added, quoth Don-Quixote, hee merited not to goe and row in the Gallies for being a pure Baude, but rather deserued to gouerne and be their Generall. For the office of a Baude is not like euery other ordinary office, but rather of great discretion and most necessary in any Common-wealth well gouerned, and should not be practised but by people well borne; and ought besides to haue a Veedor is an office in Spaine of great trust, set by the King to examine and search the dealing of other vnder-officers, an Ouersecr or Controuler. Veedor, and examinator of them, as are of al other trades, and a certain appointed number of men known, as are of the other brokers of the exchange. And in this manner many harmes that are done might be excused, because this trade and office is practised by indiscreete people of little vnderstanding; such as are women of little more or lesse, young Pages and Iesters of few yeares standing, and of lesse experience, which in the most vrgent occasions, and when they should contriue any thing artificially, the crummes freeze in their mouthes and fists, and they know not which is their right hand. Faine would I passe forward, and giue reasons why it is conuenient to make choise of those which ought in the Common-wealth to practise this so necessary an office: but the place and season is not fit for it. One day I will say it to those which may prouide and remedy it: onely I say now, that the assumpt or addition of a Witch, hath depriued me of the compassion I should otherwise haue, to see those gray haires and venerable face in such distresse
 for being a Baude. Although I know very well that no sorcery in the world can moue or force the will, as some ignorant persons thinke (for our will is a free power, and ther's no hearb nor charme can constrain it.) That which certain simple women, or cousening companions make, are some mixtures and poysons, wherewithall they cause men runne madde, and in the meane while perswade vs that they haue force to make one loue well, being (as I haue said) a thing most impossible to constraine the Will. That is true, quoth the olde man, and I protest Sir, that I am wholly innocent of the imputation of Witchcraft: as for being a Baude, I could not denie it: but yet I neuer thought that I did ill therein; for all mine intention was that all the world should disport them, and liue together in concord and quietnesse without griefes or quarrels: but this my good desire auailed me but little to hinder my going there; from whence I haue no hope euer to returne, my yeares doe so burden me, and also the stone, which lets me not rest an instant. And saying this, he turned againe to his lamentation as at the first, and Sancho tooke such compassion on him, as setting his hand into his bosome, he drew out a couple of shillings, and gaue it him as an almes.
From him Don-Quixote past to another, and demaunded his fault; who answered with no lesse but with much more pleasantnesse then the former: I goe heere because I haue jested somewhat too much with two cousen Germaines of mine owne, and with two other sisters, which were none of mine: finally, I jested so much with them all, that thence resulted the increase of my kindred so intricately, as there is no Casuist that can well resolue it. All was proued by me, I wanted fauour, I had no money, and was in danger to lose my head: finally, I was condemned for sixe yeares to the Gallies. I consented, it is a punishment of my fault; I am young, and let my life but holde out a while longer, and all will goe well. And if you Sir
 Knight carry any thing to succour vs poore folke, God will reward you it in heauen, and we will haue care here on earth to desire God in our daily prayers for your life and health, that it be as long and as good as your good countenance deserues. He that said this, went in the habite of a student, and one of the guard tolde him that hee was a great talker, and a very good Latinist.
After all these came a man of some thirty yeares olde, of very comely personage, saue onely that when he looked, he seemed to thrust the one eye into the other. Hee was differently tied from the rest; for he carried about his legge so long a chain, that it tired all the rest of his body: and he had besides two yron rings about his necke, the one of the chaine, and the other of that kinde which are called A keepe friend, or the foote of a friend. From whence descended two yrons vnto his middle, out of which did sticke two manacles, wherein his hands were lookt vp with a great hanging looke; so as he could neyther set his hands to his mouth, nor bend down his head towards his hands. Don-Quixote demanded why he was so loaden with yron more then the rest? The guard answered, because he alonehad committed more faults then all together, and was a more desperate knaue, and that although they carried him tied in that sort, yet went they not sure of him, but feared hee would make an escape. What faults can he haue so grieuous, quoth Don-Quixote, since he hath onely deserued to be sent to the Gallies? he goeth, replied the guard to them for tenne yeares, which is equiualent to a ciuill death: neuer striue to know more but that this man is the notorious Gines of Passamonte, who is otherwise called Ginesilio of Parapilla. Master Commissarie, quoth the slaue, hearing him say so, go faire and softly, and runne not thus dilating of names and surnames, I am called Gines and not Ginesilio, and Passamonte is my surname, and not Parapilla, as you say, and let euery one turne about him, and he shall not doe little. Speake
 with lesse swelling, quoth the Commissarie, Sir thiefe of more then the Marke, a certaine length appointed in Spaine for swords, which if any transgresse he is punished, and the sword forfeited. Marke. If you will not haue me to make you hold your peace, maugre your teeth. It seemes well (quoth the slaue) that a man is carried as pleaseth God; but one day some body shall know whether I be called Ginesilio of Parapilla. Why doe not they call thee so cousener, quoth the guard? They doe, said Gines, but I will make that they shall not call me so, or I will fleece them; there where I mutter vnder my teeth. Sir Knight if you haue any thing to bestow on vs, giue it vs now, and bee gone in the name of God; for you doe tire vs with your too curious search of knowing other mens liues: and if you would know mine, you shall vnderstand that I am Gines of Passamonte, whose life is written (shewing his hand) by these two fingers. Hee sayes true, quoth the Commissary, for he himselfe hath penned his owne historie so well as there is nothing more to bee desired: and leaues the booke pawned in the prison for two hundred Rials: and likewise meane to redeeme it, quoth Gines, though it were in for as many duckets. Is it so good a worke said Don-Quixote? It is so good, replied Gines, that it quite puttes downe Lazarillo de Tormes, and as many others as are written or shall write of that kinde: for that which I dare affirme to you is, that it treates of true accidents, and those so delightfull that no like inuention can be compared to them. And how is the booke intituled, quoth Don-Quixote? it is called, said he, The life of Gines of Passamonte. And is it yet ended, said the Knight? How can it be finished, replied he, my life being not yet ended? since all that is written is from the hou^e of my birth vntill that instant that I was sent this last time to the Gallies. Why then belike you were there once before (quoth Don-Quixote?) to serue God and the King, I haue beene in there another time foure yeares, and I know already how the Bisket and Prouant agree with my stomacke (quoth Gines) nor doth it grieue mee
 very much to returne vnto them; for there I shall haue leisure to finish my booke, and I haue many things yet to say: and in the Gallies of Spaine, there is more resting time then is requisite for that businesse, although I shall not neede much time to penne what is yet vnwritten; for I can if neede were, say it all by roate. Thou seemest to be ingenuous, quoth Don-Quixote: and vnfortunate withall, quoth Gines; for mishaps doe still persecute the best wits. They persecute knaues, quoth the Commissary. I haue already spoken to Mast. Commissary, quoth Passamonte, to go faire and softly; for the Lords did not giue you that rode, to the end you should abuse vs wretches that goe here, but rather to guide and carrie vs where his Maiesty hath commanded, if not by the life of, tis enough that perhaps one day may come to light, the spottes that were made in the Inne. And let all the world peace and liue well, and speake better, for this is now too great a digression. The Commissary held vp his rodde to strike Regedeo. p. 202 Passamonte in answere of his threates, but Don-Quixote put himselfe betweene them, and intreated him not to vse him hardly, seeing it was not much that one who carried his handes so tyed, should haue his tongue somewhat free: and then turning himself towards the slaues he said:
I haue gathered out of all that which you haue said, deere brethren, that although they punish you for your faults, yet that the paines you goe to suffer, doe not very well please you, and that you march towards them with a very ill will, and wholly constrayned, and that perhaps the little courage this fellow had on the racke, the want of money that the other had, the small fauour that a third enioyed; and finally the wrested sentence of the Iudge, and the not executing that iustice that was on your sides haue beene cause of your miserie. All which doth present it selfe to my memory in such sort, as it perswadeth, yea and forceth me to effect that for you for which heauen sent me into the world, and made me professe that order
 of Knighthood which I follow, and that vow which I made therein to fauour and assist the needfull, and those that are oppressed by others more potent. But for as much as I know that it is one of the partes of prudence, not to doe that by foule means, which may be accomplished by faire; I will intreate those Gentlemen your guardians and Commissary, they will please to loose and let you depart peaceably; for there will not want others to serue the King in better occasions; for it seemes to me a rigorous maner of proceeding, to make slaues of them whom God and nature created free. How much more good Sirs of the guard (added Don-Quixote) seeing these poore men haue neuer committed any offence against you; let them answere for their sinnes in the other world: there is a God in heauen, who is not negligent in punishing the euill, nor rewarding the good: and it is no wise decent, that honourable men should be the executioners of other men, seeing they cannot gaine or loose much thereby. I demaund this of you in this peaceable and quiet manner, to the end that if you accomplish my request I may haue occasion to yeeld you thankes; and if you will not doe it willingly, then shall this Launce and this Sword, guided by the inuincible valour of mine arme force you to it.
This is a pleasant doting, answered the Commissary, and an excellent jest, wherewithall you haue finished your large reasoning. Would you haue vs leaue vnto you those the King forceth? as if we had authority to let them goe, or you to commaund vs to doe it. Go on your way in a good houre gentle Sir, and settle the Bason you beare on your head somwhat righter, and search not thus whether the Catte hath three feete. Thou art a Catte, and a Rat, and a Knaue, quoth Don-Quixote, and so with word and deed at once, he assaulted him so suddenly, as without giuing him leisure to defend himselfe, he struck him down to the earth very sore wounded with a blow of his Lance, and as fortune would, this was he that had the fire-locke
 piece, the rest of the guard remained astonished at the vnexpected accident; but at last returning againe to themselues, the horsemen set hand to their swords, and the footmen to their dartes, and all of them set vpon Don-Quixote, who did expect them very quietly: and doubtlesly he would haue beene in danger, if the slaues perceiuing the occasion offered to be so fit to recouer libertie, had not procured it by breaking the chaine wherein they were linked. The hurliburly was such, as the guards now began to runne to hinder the slaues from vntying themselues, now to offend Don-Quixote, who assaulted them; so that they could doe nothing auaileable to keepe their prisoners. Sancho for his part holpe to lose Gines of Passamonte, who was the first that leaped free into the fielde without clogge, and setting vpon the ouerthrown Commissary, he disarmed him of his sword and piece, and now ayming at the one and then at the other with it, without discharging, made all the guards to abandon the fielde, as well for feare of Passamontes piece, as also to shunne the maruellous showre of stones that the slaues now deliuered, powred on them. Sancho grew maruellous sadde at this successe; for he suspected that those which fledde away, would goe and giue notice of the violence committed to the Holy brotherhood: which would presently issue in troupes to search the delinquents: and said as much to his Lord, requesting him to depart presently from thence and imboske himselfe in the mountaine, which was very neere. All is well, quoth Don-Quixote; I know now what is fit to be done, and so calling together al the slaues that were in a tumult, and had stript the Commissary naked, they came all about him to heare what he commanded, to whom he said:
It is the part of people well borne to gratifie and acknowledge the benefits they receiue, ingratitude being one of the sinnes that most offendeth the highest. I say it Sirs to this end, because you haue by manifest triall seene,
 that which you haue receiued at my hand, in reward whereof I desire, and it is my will that all of you loaden with that chain from which I euen now freed your necks, goe presently to the city of Toboso, and there present your selues before the Lady Dulcinea of Toboso, and recount vnto her that her Knight of the Ilfauoured face sends you there to remember his seruice to her: and relate vnto her at large the manner of your freedome, all you that haue had such noble fortune, and this being done you may after goe where you please.
Gines de Passamonte answered for all the rest, saying; that which you demand good Sir (our releaser) is most impossible to be performed, by reason that we cannot go altogether through these wayes, but alone and deuided, procuring each of vs to hide himselfe in the bowels of the earth, to the end we may not be found by the Holy brotherhood, which will doubtlesly set out to search for vs: that therefore which you may and ought to doe in this exigent is, to change this seruice and homage of the Lady Dulcinea of Toboso, into a certaine number of Aue Maries and Creedes, which we will say for your intention, and this is a thing that may be accomplished by night or by day, running or resting, in peace or in warre; but to thinke that wee will returne againe to take vp our chaines, or set our selues in the way of Toboso, is as hard as to make vs beleeue, that it is now night, it being yet scarce ten of the clocke in the morning, and to demaund such a thing of vs, is as likely as to seeke for Peares of the Elme tree. I sweare by such a one (quoth Don-Quixote throughly inraged) Sir sonne of a whoore, Don Ginefilio of Paropillio, or howsoeuer you are called, that thou shalt goe thy selfe alone with thy taile betweene thy legges, and beare all the chaine in thy necke. Passamonte who was by nature very cholericke, knowing assuredly that Don-Quixote was not very wise (seeing he had attempted such a desperate act, as to seeke to giue them liberty)
 seeing himselfe thus abused, winked on his companions, and going a little aside, they sent such a shower of stones on Don-Quixote, as he had no leasure to couer himselfe with his Buckler, and poore Rozinante made no more account of the spurre, then if his sides were made of Brasse. Sancho ranne behinde his Asse, and by his meanes sheltred himselfe from the clowde and showre of stones, that rained vpon both. And Don-Quixote could not couer himselfe so well, but that a number of stones strucke him in the body with so great force, as they ouerthrew him at last to the ground, and scarce was he fallen when the student leapt vpon him and tooke the bason off his head, and gaue him three or foure blowes with it on the shoulders, and after strucke it so oft about the ground as hee almost broke it to peeces. They tooke from him likewise a cassocke which he wore vpon his armour, and thought also to take away his stockings, but that they were hindred by his grieues. From Sancho they tooke away his Cassocke, and left him in his haire, and diuiding all the spoiles of the battaile among themselues, they departed, euery one by the way he pleased troubled with greater care how to escape from the Holy brotherhood which they feared, then to lade themselues with the yron chaine, and goe and present themselues before the Lady Dulcinea of Toboso. The Asse, and Rozinante, Sancho, and Don-Quixote, remained alone. The Asse stood pensatiue, with his head hanging downewards, shaking now and then his eares, thinking that the storme of stones was not yet past, but that they still buzzed by his head. Rozinante lay ouerthrowne by his Master, who was likewise strucke downe by another blow of a stone; Sancho in feare of the bullets of the Holy brotherhood, and Don-Quixote most discontent to see himselfe so misused by those very same, to whom he had done so much good.



CHAP. IX.

Of that which befell the famous Don-Quixote in Siera Morena, which was one of the most rare aduentures, which in this or any other so authenticall a History is recounted.

DOn-Quixote seeeing himselfe in so ill plight, said to his Squire Sancho, I haue heard say oft-times, that to doe good to men vnthankfull, is to cast water into the Sea. If I had beleeued what thou saidst to me, I might well haue preuented all this griefe: but now that is past, patience, and be wiser an other time: you wil take warning as much by this, quoth Sancho, as I am a Turke. But since you say, that if you had beleeued me you had auoyded this griefe, beleeue mee now and you shall eschue a greater: for you must wit, that no Knighthood nor Chiualry is of any authority with the Holy brotherhood; for it cares not two farthings for all the Knights errant in the world, and know, that mee thinkes I heare their arrows buzze about mine eares already. Sancho thou art a naturall coward, quoth Don-Quixote, but because thou mayest not say that I am obstinate, and that I neuer follow thine aduice, I will take thy counsell this time, and conucy my selfe from that furie which now thou fearest so much: but it shal be on a condition, that thou neuer tell aliue nor dying to any mortall creature, that I retired or withdrew my selfe out of this danger for feare, but onely to satisfie thy requests. For if thou sayest any other thing, thou shalt belie mee most falsly: and euen from this very time till that, and from thence vntil now I giue thee the lie herein, and I say thou liest, and shalt lie as oft-times as thou sayest or doest thinke the contrary: and doe not replie to me. For in
 onely thinking that I withdraw my selfe out of any peril, but principally this, which seemes to cary with it some shadow of feare, I am about to remaine and expect heere alone, not onely for the Holy brotherhood, which thou namest and fearest, but also for the brethren of the Twelue Tribes, for the Seuen Macchabees, for Castor and Pollux, and for all the other brothers and brotherhoods in the world. Sir, answered Sancho, to retire is not to flie, nor to expect is wisedome, when the danger exceedeth all hope; and it is the part of a wiseman to keepe himselfe safe to day for to morrow; and not to aduenture himselfe wholly in one day. And know, that although I be but a rude Clowne, yet doe I for all that vnderstand somewhat of that which men call good gouernement: and therfore do not repent your selfe for following mine aduice, but mount on Rozinante if you be able; if not, I wil helpe you, and come after me, for my mind giues me that we shall now haue more vse of legges then of hands.
Don-Quixote leaped on his horse without replying a word, and Sancho guiding him on his Asse they both entred into that part of A great and large mountaine of Spain. Sierra Morena that was neare vnto them; Sancho had a secret designe to crosse ouer it all, and issue at Viso or Amodouar of Campo, and in the meane time to hide themselues for some dayes among those craggie and intricate rockes, to the end they might not be found by the Holy brotherhood, if it did make after them. And he was the more encouraged to doe this, because he saw their prouision which he carried on his Asse had escapt safely out of the skirmish of the Gally-slaues: a thing which he accounted to be a miracle, considering the diligence that the slaues had vsed to search and carrie away all things with them. They arriued that night in to the very midst and bowels of the mountain, and there Sancho thought it fittest to spend that night, yea and some other few dayes also, at least as long as their victuals indured, and with this resolution they tooke vp their lodging among
 a number of Corke trees that grew betweene two Rockes. But fatall chaunce, which according to the opinion of those that haue not the light of faith, guideth, directeth, and compoundeth all as it liketh, ordayned that that famous cousener and thiefe Gines de Passamonte, who was before deliuered out of chains by Don-Quixotes force and folly, perswaded through feare he conceiued of the Holy brotherhood (whom hee had iust cause to feare) resolued to hide himselfe likewise in that mountaine, and his fortune and feares ledde him iust to the place where it had first addrest Don-Quixote and his Squire, iust at such time as he might perceiue them, and they both at that instant fallen asleepe. And as euill-men are euermore ingratefull, and that necessity forceth a man to attempt that which it vrgeth, and likewise that the present redresse preuents the expectation of a future, Gines who was neither gratefull nor gratious, resolued to steale away Sancho his Asse, making no account of Rozinante, as a thing neyther saleable nor pawnable. Sancho slept soundly, and so he stole his beast, and was before morning so farre off from thence, as he feared not to be found.
Aurora sallied forth at last to refresh the earth, and affright Sancho with a most sorrowfull accident, for he presently missed his Asse, and so seeing himselfe depriued of him, he began the most sadde and dolefull lamentation of the world: in such sort as he awaked Don-Quixote with his out-cries, who heard that hee said thus. O childe of my bowels, borne in mine owne house, the sport of my children, the comfort of my wife, and the enuie of my neighbours; the ease of my burdens, and finally the sustainer of halfe of my person; for with sixe and twentie Maruedijs that I gained daily by thee, I did defray halfe of mine expences. Don-Quixote who heard the plaint, and knew also the cause did comfort Sancho with the best words he could deuise, and desired him to haue patience, promising to giue a letter of exchange, to the end that
 they of his house might deliuer him three Asses of fiue, which he had left at home.
Sancho comforted himselfe againe with th^^ promise, and dried vp his teares, moderated his sighes, and gaue his Lord thankes for so great a fauour. And as they entred in farther among those mountains we cannot recount the ioy of our Knight, to whom those places seemed most accommodate to atchieue the aduentures he searched for. They reduced to his memory the maruellous accidents that had befalne Knights errant in like solitudes and desarts: and hee rode so ourwhelmed and transported by these thoughts, as he remembred nothing else. Nor Sancho had any other care (after he was out of feare to be taken) but how to fill his belly with some of these relikes which yet remained of the Clericall spoyles; and so hee followed his Lord taking now and then out of a basket, (which Rozinante caried for want of the Asse) some meat and lining there with all his paunch; and whilst he went thus imployed, hee would not haue giuen a mite to encounter any other aduenture how honourable soeuer.
But whilst he was thus busied, he espyed his Master laboured to take vp with the point of his Iaueline, some bulke or other that lay on the ground, and went towards him to see whether he needed his helpe iust at the season that he lifted vp a saddle cushion and a Portmantew fast to it, which were halfe rotten, or rather wholly rotted by the weather; yet they weighed so much that Sanchoes assistance was requisite to take them vp: and straight his Lord commaunded him to see what was in the Wallet. Sancho obeyed with expedition. And although it was shut with a chaine and hanging locke, yet by the parts which were torne he saw what was within, to wit foure fine holland shirts, and other linnens both curious and cleane: and moreouer a handkercher, wherein was a good quantity of gold: which he perceiuing said, Blessed be heauen which hath once presented to vs a beneficiall
 aduenture: and searching for more, he found a Tablet very costly bound. This Don-Quixote tooke of him, commaunding him to keepe the golde with himselfe; for which rich fauour Sancho did presently kisse his handes: and after taking all the linnen, he clapt it vp in the bagge of their victuals. Don-Quixote hauing noted all these things, said, Me thinkes Sancho (and it cannot be possible any other) that some traueller hauing left his way, past through this mountaine, and being encountred by thieues, they slew him, and buried him in this secret place? It cannot be so, answered Sancho, for if they were theeues they would not haue left this money behinde them. Thou sayest true, quoth Don-Quixote, and therefore I cannot coniecture what it might be: but stay a while, we will see whether there be any thing written in these Tablets, by which wee may vent and finde out that which I desire. Then he opened it, and the first thing that he found written in it, as it were a first draught, but done with a very faire Character, was a Sonnet which he read aloude, that Sancho might also heare it, and was this which ensues.

OR loue of vnderstanding quite is voyde:
Or he abounds in cruelty, or my paine
Th'occasion equals not; for which I bide
The torments dyre, he maketh me sustaine.
But if loue be a God, I dare maintaine
He nought ignores: and reason aye decides
Gods should not cruell be: then who ordaines
This paine I worship, which my heart diuides?
Filis! I erre, if thou I say it is:
For so great ill and good cannot consist.
Nor doth this wracke from heau'n befall but yet.
That shortly I must die, can no way misse:
For th'euill whose cause is hardly well exprest
By miracle alone, true cure may get.

Nothing can be learned by that verse, quoth Sancho,
 if by that An allusion to the Spanish word Hilo, signifying a threed. Hilo or threed which is said there, you gather not where lies the rest of the clue, what Hilo is heere, quoth Don-Quixote? Me thought, quoth Sancho, that you read Hilo there. I did not but Fili, said Don-Quixote, which is without doubt the name of the Lady, on whom the Authour of this Sonnet complaines, who in good truth seemes to be a reasonable good Poet, or els I know but little of that arte. Why then, quoth Sancho, belike you doe also vnderstand Poetry? That I doe, and more then thou thinkest, quoth Don-Quixote; as thou shalt see when thou shalt carry a letter from me to my Lady Dulcinea del Toboso, written in verse from the one end to the other: For I would thou shouldest know Sancho, that all or the greater number of Knights errant in times past were great Versifiers and Musitians, for these two qualities, or graces as I may better terme them, are annext to amourous Knights aduentures. True it is that the verses of the auncient Knights are not so adorned with words, as they are rich in conceits. I pray you reade more, quoth Sancho, for perhaps you may finde somewhat that may satisfie. Then Don-Quixote turned the leafe, and said, This is prose, and it seemes to be a letter. What Sir, a missiue letter, quoth Sancho? No but rather of loue, according to the beginning, quoth Don-Quixote. I pray you therefore, quoth Sancho, reade it loude enough, for I take great delight in these things of loue. I am content, quoth Don-Quixote, and reading it loudly as Sancho had requested, it said as ensueth.
Thy false promise and my certaine misfortune, do carry me to such a place, as from thence thou shalt sooner receiue newes of my death, then reasons of my iust complaints. Thou hast disdained me (O ingrate) for one that hath more, but not for one that is worth more then I am: but if vertue were a treasure of estimation, I would not emulate other mens fortunes, nor weep thus for mine own misfortunes. That which thy beauty erected, thy works
 haue ouerthrowne: by it I deemed thee to be an Angell, and by these I certainely know thee to be but a woman. Rest in peace (O causer of my warre) and let heauen worke so that thy spouses deceipts remaine still concealed, to the end thou maist not repent what thou didst, and I bee constrained to take reuenge of that I desire not.
Hauing read the letter, Don-Quixote said, we can collect lesse by this then by the letter. What the Authour is, other then that he is some disdayned louer, and so passing ouer all the booke, he found other Verses and Letters, of which hee could read some, others not at all. But the summe of them all were, accusations, plaints, and mistrusts, pleasures, griefes, fauours, and disdaines, some solemnized, others deplored. And whilest Don-Quixote past ouer the booke, Sancho past ouer the mallet, without leauing a corner of it, or the cushion vnsearched, or a seame vnript, nor a locke of wooll vncarded, to the end nothing might remaine behinde for want of diligence, or carelessenesse, they found gold which past a hundred crowns, had stird in him such a greedinesse to haue more. And though he got no more then that which he found at the first, yet did he account his flights in the couerlet, his vomiting of the drench, the benedictions of the packe slaues, the blowes of the Carrier, the losse of his wallet, the robbing of his Cassocke, and all the hunger, thirst, and wearnesse that he had past in the seruice of his good Lord and Master, for well imployed; accounting himselfe to be more then well paied, by the gifts receiued of the money they found. The Knight of the Il fauoured face was the while possessed with a maruailous desire to know who was the owner of the mallet, coniecturing by the Sonnet, and letter, the gold, and linuen, that the enamoured was some man of worth, whom the disdaine and rigour of his Lady had conducted to some desperate termes. But by reason that no body appeared, through
 that inhabitable and desart place, by whom he might be informed; he thought on it no more, but only roade^ on, without choosing any other way, then that which pleased Rozinante to trauaile, who tooke the plainest and easiest to passe through: hauing still an imagination that there could not want some strange aduenture, amidst that Forrest.
And as he roade on, with this conceipt he saw a man on the toppe of a little mountaine that stood iust before his face, leape from rocke to rocke, and tuffe to tuffe with wonderfull dexterity. And as he thought he was naked, had a blacke and thicke beard, the haires many and confusedly mingled, his feete and legges bare, his thighes were couered with a paire of hose, which seemed to bee of Murry veluet, but were so torne that they discouered his flesh in many places: his head was likewise bare, and although he past by with the hast we haue recounted, yet did the Knight of the Il fauoured face, note all these particularities, and although he indeuoured, yet could not hee follow him, for it was not in Rozinantes power, in that weake state wherein he was to trauaile so swiftly among those rocks, chiefly being naturally very flow and flegmatike. Don-Quixote after espying him did instantly imagine him to be owner of the cushion and mallet; and therefore resolued to goe on in his search, although hee should spend a whole yeare therein among those mountaines: and commanded Sancho to goe about the one side of the mountaine, and he would goe the other, and quoth hee, it may befall that by vsing this diligence wee may incounter with that man, which vanished so suddainely out of our sight. I cannot doe so, quoth Sancho, for that in parting one step from you, feare presently so assaults mee with a thousand visions and affrightments. And let this serue you hereafter for a warning, to the end you may not from henceforth part me the blacke of a naile from your presence. It shall bee so, answereth
 the Knight of the ill-fauoured face. And I am very glad that thou dost thus build vpon my valour, the which shall neuer faile thee, although thou didst want thy very soule: and therefore follow me by little and little, or as thou maist, and make of thine eyes two Lant-hornes, for wee giue a turne to this little rocke, and perhaps wee may meete with this man whom we saw euen now, who doubtlesly can be none other then the owner of our bootie. To which Sancho replyed, it were much better not to finde him: for if we should meet him, and were by chance the owner of this money, it is most euident that I must restore it to him, and therefore it is better without vsing this vnprofitable diligence to let me possesse it bona fide, vntill the true Lord shall appeare by some way lesse curious and diligent: which perhaps may fall at such a time as it shall be all spent; and in that case I am freed from all processes by priuiledge of the King. Thou deceiuest thy selfe Sancho therein, quoth Don-Quixote, for seeing wee are falne already into suspition of the owner, wee are bound to search and restore it to him: and when wee would not seeke him out, yet the vehement presumption that we haue of it hath made vs possessors mala fide, and renders vs as culpable, as if he whom we surmise, were verily the true Lord. So that friend Sancho, be not grieued to seeke him, in respect of the griefe whereof thou shalt free me if he be found. And saying so, spurd Rozinante, and Sancho followed after a foote, animated by the hope of the young Asses his Master had promised vnto him: and hauing compassed a part of the mountain, they found a little stream, wherin lay dead, and halfe deuoured by dogs and crows, a Mule sadled and bridled, al which confirmed more in them the suspition that hee which fledde away was owner of the Mule and cushion. And as they looked on it, they heard a whistle, much like vnto that which Sheepheards vse, as they keepe their flockes, and presently appeared at their left hand a great number of Goates,
 after whom the Goatheard that kept them, who was an aged man, followed on the toppe of the mountaine; and Don-Quixote cried to him, requesting him to come down to them, who answered them againe as loudly, demaunding of them who had brought them to those desarts, rarely troden by any other then Goats, Wolues, or other sauage beastes which frequented those mountaines? Sancho answered him; that if hee would descend where they were, they would giue him account thereof. With that the Sheepheard came downe, and arriuing to the place where Don-Quixote was, he said, I dare wager that you looke on the hyred Mule which lies dead there in that bottom; well, in good faith he lies in that very place these sixe moneths. Say, I pray you, haue not you met in the way with the master thereof? We haue encountred no body but a cushion and a little Mallet which wee found not very farre off from hence. I did likewise finde the same, replyed the Goatheard, but I would neuer take it vp nor approach to it, fearefull of some misdemeanor, or that I should be hereafter demaunded for it as for a stealth. For the Diuell is crafty, and now and then something riseth, euen from vnder a mans feete, whereat hee stumbles and falles, without knowing how, or how not. That is the very same I say, quoth Sancho, for I likewise found it, but would not approach it the cast of a stone. There I haue left it, and there it remaines as it was; for I would not haue a dogge with a bell. Tell me good fellow, quoth Don-Quixote, dost thou know who is the owner of all these things?
That which I can say, answered the Goatheard, is that about some sixe moneths past, little more or lesse; there arriued at a certaine sheepe-fold some three leagues off, a young Gentleman of comely personage, and presence, mounted on that very Mule which lies dead there, and with the same Cushion and Mallet which you say you met, but touched not. He demaunded of vs which was
 the most hidden and inaccessable part of the mountaine, and we told him that this wherein we are now: and it is true; for if you did enter but halfe a league farther, perhaps you would not finde the way out againe so readily: and I doe greatly maruell how you could finde the way hither it selfe; for there is neyther high way nor path that may addresse any to this place. I say then, that the young man as soone as he heard our answere, hee turned the bridle, and trauelled towards the place wee shewed to him, leauing vs all with very great liking of his comelines and maruell, at his demaund and speed wherewith he departed and made towards the mountaine: and after that time we did not see him a good many of daies, vntill by chance one of our sheepheards came by with our prouision of victuals, to whom he drew neere, without speaking a word, and spurned and beate him welfauourdly, and after went to the Asse which carried our victuals, and taking away all the bread and cheese that was there, hee sled into the mountaine with wonderfull speede. When we heard of this, some of vs Goatheards, wee went to search for him, and spent therein almost two dayes in the most solitary places of this mountaine, and in the end found him lurking in the hollow part of a very tall and great Corke tree; who as soone as he perceiued vs, came forth to meete vs, with great stayednes: his apparrell was all torne, his visage disfigured, and tosted with the Sunne in such manner, as we could scarce know him, if it were not that his attire, although rent, by the notice we had of it did giue vs to vnderstand, that hee was the man for whom we sought. He saluted vs courteously, and in briefe and very good reasons he said, that we ought not to maruell, seeing him goe in that manner: for that it behoued to doe so, that hee might accomplish a certaine penance inioyned to him, for the many sinnes he had committed. We prayed him to tell vs what he was, but we could neuer perswade him to it. We requested him likewise that
 whensoeuer he had any neede of meat (without which he could not liue) he should tell vs where wee might finde him and we would bring it to him with great loue and diligence; and that if he also did not like of this motion, that he would at leastwise come and aske it, and not take it violently as he had done before from our Sheepheards. He thanked vs very much for our offer, and intreated pardon of the assaults passed, and promised to aske it from thence forward for Gods sake, without giuing annoyance to any one. And touching his dwelling or place of abode, he said that he had none other then that where the night ouertooke him, and ended his discourse with so feeling laments, that we might well be accounted stones which heard him, if therein we had not kept him company, considering the state wherein we had seene him first; and that wherein now he was. For as I said he was a very comely and gracious young man, and shewed by his courteous and orderly speech, that he was well borne, and a courtlike person. For though wee were all Clownes, such as did heare him, his Gentility was such, as could make it selfe knowne, euen to rudenesse it selfe: and being in the best of his Discourse, he stopt and grew silent, fixing his eyes on the ground a good while, wherein wee likewise stood still suspended, expecting in what that distraction would end, with no little compassion to behold it; for we easily perceiued that some accident of madnes had surprised him, by his staring and beholding the earth so fixedly, without once mouing the eye-lidde, and other times by the shutting of them, the biting of his lips, and bending of his browes. But very speedily after he made vs certaine thereof himselfe: for rising from the ground (whereon he had throwne himselfe a little before) with great furie, he set vpon him that sate next vnto him, with such courage and rage, that if wee had not taken him away, he would haue slaine him with blows and bites, and he did all this, saying, O treacherous Fernando here, heere
 thou shalt pay me the iniurie that thou didst me: these handes shall rent out the heart, in which do harbour and are heaped all euils together, but principally fraude and deceit: and to these he added other wordes, all address to the dispraise of that Fernando, and to attach him of treason and vntruth. Wee tooke from him at last, not without difficulty our fellow, and hee without saying a word departed from vs, embushing himselfe presently among the bushes and brambles, leauing vs wholly disabled to follow him in those rough and vnhaunted places. By this we gathered that his madnes comes to him at times, and that some one called Fernando, some ill worke of such waight, as the terms shew, to which i^ hath brought him. All which hath after beene yet confirmed as often, (which were many times) as he came out to the fieldes, sometimes to demaund meat of the Sheepheards, and other times to take it of them perforce: for when hee is taken with this fit of madnesse, although the Sheepheards doe offer him meat willingly, yet will not he receiue, vnlesse he take it with buffets: and when hee is in his right sense he askes it for Gods sake, with courtesie and humanity, and renders many thankes, and that not without teares. And in very truth Sirs, I say vnto you, quoth the Goatheard, that I and foure others, whereof two are my men, other two my friends, resolued Yesterday to search vntill we found him; and being found, eyther by force or faire meanes, we will carry him to the towne of Almodauar, which is but eight leagues from hence; and there will we haue him cured, if his disease may be holpen, or at least we shall learne what he is, when he turnes to his wits, and whether he hath any friends to whom notice of his misfortune may be giuen. This is Sirs, all that I can say concerning that which you demaunded of me; and you shall vnderstand that the owner of those things which you saw in the way is the very same, whome you saw passe by you so naked and nimble. For Don-Quixote
 had told him by this, that hee had seene that man goe by leaping among the Rockes.
Don-Quixote rested maruellously admired at the Goatheards tale, and with greater desire to know who that vnfortunate mad-man was, purposed with himselfe, as hee had already resolued to search him throughout the mountaines, without leauing a corner or Caue of it vnsought, vntill he had gotten him. But fortune disposed the matter better then he expected, for he appeared in that very instant in a clift of a Rocke, that answered to the place where they stood speaking, who came towards them murmuring somewhat to himselfe which they could not bee vnderstood neere at hand, and much lesse a farre off His apparell was such as we haue deliuered, onely differing in this as Don-Quixote perceiued when he drew neerer, that he wore on him, although torne, a leather Ierkin of Ambar. By which he throughly collected, that the person which wore such attire, was not of the least qualitie. When the young man came to the place where they discoursed, he saluted them with a hoarse voyce, but with great courtesie: and Don-Quixote returned him his greetings with no lesse complement; and allighting from Rozinante, he aduanced to embrace him with very good carriage and countenance, and held him a good while straightly betweene his armes, as if he had knowne him of long time; the other whom we may call the vnfortunate Knight of the Rocke, as well as Don-Quixote the Knight of the ill fauoured face, after hee had permitted himselfe to be embraced a while, did stop a little off from our Knight; and laying his hand on his shoulders, began to behold him earnestly, as one desirous to call to minde whether he had euer seene him before: being perhaps no lesse admired to see Don-Quixotes figure, proportion and armes, then Don-Quixotes was to view him. In resolution the first that spoke after the embracing was the ragged Knight, and said what we will presently recount.



CHAP. X.

Wherein is prosecuted the aduenture of Sierra Morena.

THe History affirmes that great was the atention, wherewithall Don-Quixote listened to the vnfortunate Knight of the Rock, who began his speech in this manner: Truely good Sir, whatsoeuer you be (for I know you not) I doe with all my heart gratifie the signes of affection and courtesie which you haue vsed towards me, and wish heartily that I were in termes to serue with more then my will, the good will you beare towards me as your courteous entertainment denotes: but my fate is so niggardly, as it affoords me no other meanes to repay good workes done to me, then only to lend me a good desire sometime to satisfie them. So great is mine affection, replied Don-Quixote, to serue you, as I was fully resolued neuer to depart out of these mountaines vntill I had found you, and known of your selfe whether there might be any kind of remedie found for the griefe, that this your so vnusuall a kinde of life argues, doth possesse your soule. And if it were requisite to search it out with all possible diligence: and when your disaster were known of those which clap their doors in the face of comfort, I intended in that case to beare a part in your lamentations, and plaine it with the dolefullest note; for it is a consolation in afflictions to haue one that condoles in them. And if this my good intention may merite any acceptance, or be gratified by any courtesie, let me intreat you Sir by the excesse therof, which I see accumulated in your bosom, and iointly I coniure you by that thing which you haue, or do presently most affect that you will please to disclose vnto me who you are, and what the cause hath bin that perswaded you to come, to liue and die into these desarts, like a bruit beast, seeing you liue among such, so alienated from your selfe, as both your attire and
 countenance demonstrate. And I doe vow (quoth Don-Quixote) by the high order of Chiualry, which I (although vnworthy and a sinner) haue receiued, and by the profession of Knights errant, that if you do pleasure me herein, to assist you with as good earnest as my profession doth binde me, either by remedying your disaster, if it can be holpen; or els by assisting you to lament it, if it be so desperate.
The Knight of the Rocke, who heard him of the ill fauoured face speake in that maner, did nothing else for a great while, but behold him again and again, and rebehold him from top to toe. And after viewing him wel he said, if you haue any thing to eate, I pray you giue it me for Gods sake, and after I haue eaten I will satisfie your demand thorowly, to gratifie the many courtesies and vndeserued prosfers you haue made vnto me. Sancho and the Goatheard presents the one out of his Wallet, the other out of his Scrip, tooke some meat and gaue it to the Knight of the Rocke to allay his hunger, and he did eate so fast, like a distracted man, as he left no intermission between bit and bit, but clapt them vp so swiftly, as he rather seemed to swallow then to chew them, and whilst he did eate, neither he or any of the rest spoke a word: and hauing ended his dinner, he made them signes to follow him, as at last they did, vnto a little meadow seated hard by that place, at the folde of a mountain; where being arriued, he stretched himselfe on the grasse, which the rest did likewise in his imitation, without speaking a word, vntill that he after setling himselfe in his place, began in this manner: if Sirs, you please to heare the immanity of my disasters briefly rehearsed, you must promise me, that you will not interrupt the file of my dolefull narration, with either demaund or other thing; for in the very instant that you shall do it, there also must remain that which I say depending. These words of our ragged Knights, called to Don-Quixotes remembrance the tale which his Squire had told vnto him when he erred in the account of his Goats, which had passed the
 riuer, for which that History remained suspended. But returning to our ragged man; hee said, this preuention which now I giue, is to the end that I may compendiously passe ouer the discourse of my mishaps, for the reuoking of them to remembrance only, serues me to none other steed, then to increase the olde by adding of new misfortunes; and by how much the fewer your questions are, by so much the more speedily shal I haue finished my pittifull Discourse; and yet I meane not to omit my essential point of my woes vntoucht, that your desires may be herein sufficiently satisfied. Don-Quixote in his own, and his other companions name, promised to performe his request; whereupon hee began his relation in this manner:
My name is Cardenic, the place of my birth, one of the best Cities in Andaluzia, my linage noble, my parents rich, and my misfortunes so great, as I thinke my parents haue e're this deplored, and my kinsfolke condoled them; being very little able with their wealth to redresse them; for the goods of fortune are but of smal vertue to remedy the disasters of heauen. There dwelt in the same Citie a heauen, wherin loue had placed all the glory that I could desire; so great as the beauty of Luscinda, a damzell as noble and rich as I: but more fortunate and lesse constant then my honourable desires expected. I loued, honoured and adored this Luscinda, almost from my very infancy; and she affected me likewise, with all the integrity and good will, which with her so young yeares did accord. Our parents knew our mutuall amity; for which they were nothing aggrieued, perceiuing very well, that although we continued it, yet could it haue none other end but that of Matrimony; a thing which the equality of our blood and substance did of it selfe almost inuite vs to. Our age and affection increased in such sort, as it seemed fit to Luscindas father, for certaine good respects to denie me the entrance of his house any longer; imitating
 in a manner therein Tisbi, so much solemnized by the Poets, her parents; which hinderance serued onely to adde flame to flame, and desire to desire: for although it set silence to our tongues, yet could they not impose it to our pens, which are wont to expresse to whom it pleased, the most hidden secrecies of our soules with more liberty then the tong; for the presence of the beloued doth often distract, trouble, and strike dumbe the boldest tongue and firmest resolution. O heauens, how many letters haue I written vnto her? What cheerefull and honest answers haue I receiued? How many ditties and amorous verses haue I composed, wherein my foule declared and published her passions, declined her enflamed desires, entertained her remembrance, and recreated her will? In effect perceiuing my selfe to be forced, and that my soule consumed with a perpetuall desire to behold her, I resolued to put my desires in execution, and finish in an instant that which I deemed most expedient for the better atchieuing of my desired and deserued reward; which was (as I did indeede) to demaund her of her father for my lawfull Spouse. To which he made answere, that he did gratifie the good will which I shewed by honouring him, and desire to honour my selfe with pawnes that were his: but yet seeing my father yet liued, the motion of that matter properly most concerned him. For if it were not done with his good liking and pleasure, Luscinda was not a woman to be taken or giuen by stealth. I rendred him thankes for his good will, his wordes seeming vnto mee very reasonable, at that my father would agree vnto them, as soone as I should explane the matter; and therefore departed presently to acquaint him with my desires; who at the time which I entred into a chamber, wherein he was, stood with a letter open in his hand; and espying me, e're I could breake my minde vnto him, gaue it me, saying: by that letter Cardenio, you may gather the desire that Duke Ricardo beares, to doe you any pleasure or
 fauour. This Duke Ricardo, as I thinke you know Sirs already, is a Grande of Spaine, whose Dukedome is seated in the best part of all Andalnzia. I tooke the letter and read it; which appeared so vrgent; as I my selfe accounted it would be ill done, if my father did not accomplish the contents thereof, which were indeed, that he should presently addresse me to his Court, to the end I might be companion (and not seruant) to his eldest sonne; and that he would incharge himselfe with the aduancing of me to such preferments as might be answerable vnto the value and estimation he made of my person. I past ouer the whole letter, and was strucken dumbe at the reading thereof, but chiefly hearing my father to say Cardenio, thou must depart within two dayes, to accomplish the Dukes desire; and omit not to render Almighty God thankes, which doth thus open the way, by which thou mayest attaine in fine to that which I know thou doest merite; and to these words added certaine others of fatherly counsaile and direction. The terme of my departure arriued, and I spoke to my Luscinda on a certaine night, and recounted vnto her all that passed, and likewise to her father, intreating him to ouerslip a few daies, and deferre the bestowing of his daughter else-where, vntill I went to vnderstand Duke Ricardo his will: which he promised me, and shee confirmed it with a thousand oathes and promises. Finally, I came to Duke Ricardoes Court, as was so friendly receiued and entertained by him, as euen very then enuie began to exercise her accustomed function, being forthwith emulated by the auncient Seruiters; perswading themselues, that the tokens the Duke shewed to doe me fauours, could not but turne to their preiudice. But hee that reioyced most at mine arriuall, was a second sonne of the Dukes called Fernando, who was young, gallant, very comely, liberall, and amorous; who within a while after my comming held me so deerely, as euery one wondred thereat: and though the elder loued me well, and did me
 fauour, yet was it in no respect comparable to that wherwithall Don Fernando loued and treated me. It therefore befell, that as there is no secresie amongst friends so great, but they will communicate it the one to the other and the familiarity which I had with Don Fernando, was now past the limits of fauour, and turned into deerest amity, he reuealed vnto me all his thoughts, but chiefly one of his loue, which did not a little molest him. For he was enamoured on a Farmers daughter that was his fathers vassall, whose parents were maruellous rich, and she her selfe so beautifull, wary, discreete, and honest, as neuer a one that knew her could absolutely determine wherein in which of all her perfections she did most excell or was most accomplished. And those good parts of the beautifull countrey-maide reduced Don Fernando his desires to such an exigent, as he resolued that he might the better gaine her good will, and conquere her integrity, to passe her a promise of marriage, for otherwise he should labour to effect that which was impossible, and but striue against the streame. I, as one bound thereunto by our friendship, did thwart and dislwade him from his purpose with the best reasons, and most efficacious words I might: and seeing all could not preuaile, I determined to acquaint the Duke Ricardo his father therewithall. But Don Fernando being very crafty and discreete, suspected and feared as much, because he considered that in the law of a faithfull seruant, I was bound not to conceale a thing that would turne so much to the preiudice of the Duke my Lord: and therefore both to diuert and deceiue me at once, that he could finde no meanes so good, to deface the remembrance of that beauty out of his minde, which held his hart in such subiection, then to absent himself for certaine moneths: and he would likewise haue that absence to be this, that both of vs should depart together, and come to my fathers house, vnder pretence (as hee would informe the Duke) that he went to see and cheapen
 certaine great horses that were in the Citie wherein I was borne; a place of breeding the best horses in the world. Scarce had I heard him say this (when borne away by the naturall propension each one hath to his countrey, and my loue ioynde) although his designment had not beene so good, yet would I haue ratified it, as one of the most expedient that could be imagined, because I saw occasion and oportunity so fairely offred, to returne and see againe my Luscinda. And thereof set on by this thought and desire, I approued his opinion, and did quicken his purpose, perswading him to prosecute it with all possible speede, for absence would in the end work her effect in despite of the most forcible and vrgent thoughts; and when he said this to me, hee had already vnder the title of a husband (as it was afterward knowne) reaped the fruits of his longing desires, from his beautifull countrey maide, and did onely await an oportunity to reueale it without his owne detriment; fearefull of the Duke his fathers indignation, when he should vnderstand his errour.
It afterward hapned that as loue in young men is not for the most part loue but lust, the which (as it euer proposeth to it selfe as his last end and period is delight) so as soone as it obtaineth the same, it likewise decaieth and maketh forcibly to retire that which was termed loue; for it cannot transgresse the limits which Nature hath assigned it, which boundings or meares nature hath in no wise allotted to true and sincere affection. I would say that as soone as Don Ferdinando had inioyed his Country lasse, his desires weakned, and his importunities waxed colde; and if at the first he fained an excuse to absent himselfe, that he might with more facility compasse them, he did now in very good earnest procure to depart to the end he might not put them in execution. The Duke gaue him license to depart, and commaunded me to accompany him. We came to my Citie, where my father
 entertayned him according to his calling. I saw Luscinda, and then againe were reuiu'd (although indeede they were neither dead nor mortified) my desires, and acquainted Don Fernando (alas to my totall ruine) with them, because I thought it was not lawfull by the law of amity to keepe any thing concealed from him. There I dilated to him, on the beauty, wit, and discretion of Luscinda in so ample manner, as my prayses stirred in him a desire to view a damzell so greatly adorned, and inriched with so rare endowments: and this his desire I through my misfortune satisfied, shewing her vnto him by the light of a candle, at a window where we two were wont to parle together; where he beheld her to be such, as was sufficient to blot out of his memory al the beauties which euer he had viewed before. He stood mute, beside himselfe and rauished: and moreouer rested so greatly enamoured, as you may perceiue in the Discourse of this my dolefull narration. And to inflame his desires the more, (a thing which I fearefully auoyded, and onely discouered to heauen) fortune so disposed that he found after me one of her letters, wherein she requested that I would demand her of her father for wife; which was so discreet, honest and amorously penned, as he said after reading it, that in Luscinda alone were included all the graces of beauty and vnderstanding ioyntly, which were diuided and separate in all the other women of the world. Yet in good sooth I wil here confesse the truth, that although I saw cleerely how deseruedly Luscinda was thus extolde by Don Ferdinando, yet did not her praises please me so much pronounced by him; and therefore began to feare and suspect him, because he let no moment ouerslip vs without making some mention of Luscinda, and wo^^d still himselfe begin the discourse, were the occasion euer so far-fetched: a thing which rowsed in me I cannot tell what iealousie; nor that I did feare any trauerse in Luscindas loyalty, but yet for all my fates made me the very
 thing which they most assured me: and Don Ferdinando procured to read all the papers I sent to Luscinda, or she to me, vnder pretext that he tooke extraordinary delight to note the witty conceits of vs both. It therefore fell out, that Luscinda hauing demaunded of me a booke of Chiualry to reade, wherein she tooke maruellous delight, and was that of Amadis du Gaule.
Scarce had Don-Quixote well heard him make mention of bookes of Knighthood, when he replied to him; if you had good Sir but once tolde me at the beginning of your Historicall narration, that your Lady Luscinda was affected to the reading of Knightly aduentures, you needed not to haue vsed any amplification to indeere or make plaine vnto me the eminencie of her wit; which certainly could not in any wise be so excellent and perspicuous as you haue figured it, if she wanted the propension and feeling you haue rehearsed, to the perusing of so pleasing discourses: so that henceforth with me, you need not spend any more words to explane and manifest the height of her beauty, worthes and vnderstanding; for by this onely notice I haue receiued of her deuotion two books of Knighthood, I do confirm her for the most faire and accomplished woman for all perfections in the world: and I would to God good Sir, that you had also sent her together with Amadis the Histories of the good Don Rugel of Grecia; for I am certaine the Lady Luscinda would haue taken great delight in Darayda and Garaya, and in the wittie conceits of the Sheepheard Darinel, and in these admirable verses of his Bucolickes, sung and rehearsed by him with such grace, discretion and liberty. But a time may come, wherein this fault may be recompenced, if it shall please you to come with me to my village; for there I may giue you three hundred bookes, which are my soules greatest contentment, and the intertainment of my life; although I doe now verily beleeue that none of them are left, thankes be to the malice
 of euill and enuious inchanters. And I beseech you to pardon me this transgression of our agreement at the first, promised not to interrupt your Discourses: for when I heare any motion made of Chiualry or Knights errant, it is no more in my power to omit to speake of them, then in the Sunne-beames to leaue off warming, or in the Moones to render things humid. And therefore I intreat pardon, and that you will prosecute your History, which is that which most imports vs.
Whilest Don-Quixote spoke those wordes Cardenio hanged his head on his brest, giuing manifest tokens that he was exceeding sad. And although Don-Quixote requested him twice to follow on with his Discourse, yet neither did he lift vp his head, or answer a word, till at last after he had stood a good while musing, hee held vp his head and said; it cannot be taken out of my minde, nor is there any one in the world can depriue me of the conceit, or make me beleeue the contrary: and hee were a bottle-head that would thinke or beleeue otherwise then that the great villaine, Master Elisabat the Barber kept Queene Madasima as his Lemman. That is not so I vow by such and such, quoth Don-Quixote in great choler (and as he was wont, rapt out three or foure round oathes) and it is great malice, or rather villany to say such a thing. For Queene Madasima was a very noble Lady, and it ought not to be presumed that so high a Princesse would fall in loue with a Quack-saluer: and whosoeuer thinkes the contrary, lies like an arrant villaine; as I will make him vnderstand a horsebacke or a foote, armed or disarmed, by night or by day, or as he best liketh. Cardenio stood beholding him very earnestly as he spoke these wordes, whom the accident of his madnesse had by this possessed, and was not in plight to prosecute his History: nor would Don-Quixote giue eare to it, he was so mightily disgusted to heare Queene Madasima detracted. A maruellous accident, for he tooke her defence as earnestly,
 as if she were verily his true and naturall Princesse; his wicked bookes had so much distracted him. And Cardenio being by this furiously madde, hearing himselfe answered with the lie, and the denomination of a villaine, with other the like outrages, he tooke the rest in ill part, and lifting vp a stone that was neere vnto him, gaue Don-Quixote such a blow therewithall, as he ouerthrew him to the ground on his backe. Sancho Panca seeing his Master so roughly handled, set vpon the foole with his fist shut; and the ragged man receiued his assault in such manner, as he likewise ouerthrew him to his feete with one fist, and mounting afterward vpon him, did worke him with his feete like a piece of dough: and the Goatheard who thought to succour him, was like to incurre the same danger. And after hee had ouerthrowne and beaten them all very well, he departed from them and entred into the wood very quietly. Sancho arose, and with rage to see himselfe so belaboured without desert, he ran vpon the Goatheard to be reuenged on him, saying that he was in the fault, who had not premonished them, how that mans rauing fits, did take him so at times; for had they beene aduertised thereof, they might haue stood all the while on their guard. The Goatheard answered, that he had already aduised them thereof; and if hee had not beene attentiue thereunto, yet he was therefore nothing the more culpable. Sancho Panca replied, and the Goatheard made a reioyndrie thereunto, but their disputation ended at last, in the catching hold of one anothers beards, and befisting themselues so vncompassionately, as if Don-Quixote had not pacified them, they would haue torne one another to pieces. Sancho holding still the Goatheard fast, said vnto his Lord, Let mee alone Sir Knight of the ill fauoured face, for on this man who is a Clowne as I am my selfe, and dubbed Knight, I may safely satisfie my selfe of the wrong he hath done me, by fighting with him hand to hand like an honourable man. It is
 true, quoth Don-Quixote, but I know well that he is no wise culpable of that which hath hapned. And saying so appeased them; and turned againe to demaund of the Goatheard, whether it were possible to meet again with Cardenio; for he remained possessed with an exceeding desire to know the end of his History. The Goatheard turned againe to repeat what he had said at the first, to wit, that he knew not any certaine place of his abode; but if he haunted that Commarke any while, he would sometime meete with him; eyther in his madde or modest humour.


CHAP. XI.

Which treates of the strange aduentures that hapned to the Knight of the Mancha, in Sierra Morena: and of the penance he did there, in imitation of Beltinebros.

Don-Quixote took leaue of the Goatheard, and mounting once again on Rozinante, he commanded Sancho to follow him, who obayed, but with a very ill will; and thus they trauelled by little and little, entring into the thickest and roughest part of all the mountaine: and Sancho went almost burst with a desire to reason with his Master, and therefore wished in minde that he would once begin, that he might not transgresse his commaundement of silence imposed on him, but growing at last wholly impotent to containe himselfe speechlesse any longer: Good Sir Don-Quixote, I pray you giue me your blessing, and licefise; for I meane to depart from this place, and return to my house, my wife and children, with whom I shall be at least admitted to reason and speake my pleasure; for that you would desire to
 haue me keepe you company through these desarts night and day, and that I may not speake when I please, is but to bury me aliue: Yet if fortune had so happily disposed our affaires, as that beastes could speake as they did in Guisopetes time, the harme had beene lesse, for then would I discourse a while with Rozinante (seeing my niggardly fortune hath not consented I might doe it with mine Asse) what I thought good, and in this sort would I weaue my mishaps; for it is a stubborne thing, and that cannot be borne with patience, to trauell all the dayes of our life, and not to encounter any other thing then tramplings vnder feete, tossings in Couerlets, blowes of stones, and buffets, and be besides all this forced to sow vp our mouthes, a man daring not to breake his minde, but to stand mute like a post. Sancho I vnderstand thee now, quoth Don-Quixote, thou diest with longing to speake that which I haue forbidden thee to speake: account therefore that commaundement reuoked, and say what thou pleasest, on condition that this reuocation be onely auaileable and of force whilest we dwell in these mountaines, and no longer.
So be it, quoth Sancho, let me speake now, for what may after befall, God onely knows; and then beginning to take the benefite of his license, he said, I pray you tell me what benefite could you reape by taking Queene Magimasa? Or what was it to the purpose that that Abbat was her friend or no? For if you had let it slip, seeing you were not his Iudge, I verily beleeue that the foole had prosecuted his tale, and we should haue escaped the blow of the stone, the trampling vnder feete and spurnings, yea and more then fiue or sixe good buffets. Yfaith Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, If thou knewest as well as I did how honourable and principall a La. was Queene Madasima, thou wouldest rather say, that I had great patience, seeing I did not strike thee on the mouth out of which such blasphemies issued: for it is a very great dishonour to auerre
 or thinke that any Queene would fall in loue with a Barber. For the truth of the History is, that Master Elisabat, of whom the madde man spoke, was very prudent, and a man of a sound iudgement, and serued the Queene as her Tutor and Phisition; but to thinke that she was his I emmon is a madnesse worthy the seuerest punishment: and to the end thou mayest see that Cardenio knew not what he said, thou must vnderstand that when he spoke it, hee then was wholly beside himselfe.
That's it which I say, quoth Sancho, that you ought not to make account of wordes spoken by a foole; for it fortune had not assisted you, but dressed the stone to your head as it did to your brest, we should haue remained in good plight; for hauing turned so earnestly in that my Ladies defence, whom God confound: and thinke you that Cardenio would not escape the dangers of the law, by reason of his madnesse. Any Knight errant, answered Don-Quixote, is bound to turne for the honour of women, of what quality soeuer, against mad or vnmad men: How much more for Queenes of so high degree and worth, as was Queene Madesina, to whom I beare particular affections for her good partes: for besides her being maruellous beautifull, shee was moreouer very prudent and patient in her calamities, which were very many, and the company and counsels of Master Elisabat proued very beneficiall, and necessary to induce her to beare her mishaps with prudence and patience: and hence the ignorant and ill-meaning vulgar tooke occasion to suspect and affirme, that she was his friend, but I say againe they lie, and all those that doe either thinke or say it, doe lie a thousand times. Why quoth Sancho, I neyther say it nor thinke it; let those affirme any such thing, eate that lie and swallow it with their bread: and if they of whom you spoke, liued lightly, they haue giuen account to God thereof by this. I come from my Vineyard, I know nothing. I am not a friend to know other mens liues. For
 he that byes and lyes shall feele it in his purse. How much more seeing I was borne naked, and am now naked, I can neither win nor lose. And if they were leuyed, what is that for me? And many thinke there is Bacon, and there is but slakes? But how can they set gates to the field, specially seeing they spake ill of God himselfe? Good God, quoth Don-Quixote, how many follies hast thou inserted here, and how wide from our purpose are those prouerbs which thou hast recited? Honest Sancho hold thy peace, and from henceforth endeauour to serue thy Master, and do not meddle in things which concern thee nothing; and vnderstand with al thy fiue senses, that whatsoeuer I haue done, do, or shall do is wholly guided by reason, and conformable to the rules of Knighthood, which I know better then all the other Knights that euer profest them in the world. Sir, quoth Sancho, and is it a good rule of Chiualry, that we goe wandring and lost among these mountains in this sort, without path or way in the search of a mad-man, to whom peraduenture after he is found, will returne a desire to finish what he began, not of his tale, but of your head and my ribbes, by endeuouring to breake them soundly and throughly? Peace I say Sancho, once againe, quoth Don-Quixote, for thou must wit, that the desire of finding the mad-man alone, brings me not into these parts so much, as that which I haue in my mind to archieue a certaine aduenture, by which I shall acquire eternall renowne and fame, throughout the vniuersall face of the earth: and I shall therewithall seale all that which may render a Knight errant complete and famous. And is the aduenture very dangerous, quoth Sancho Panca? No, answered the Knight of the ill fauoured face, although the Die might runne in such sort, as we might cast a hazard in steed of an incounter; but all consists in thy diligence. In mine, quoth Sancho? Yes (quoth Don-Quixote) for if thou returnest speedily from the place whereunto I meane to send thee, my paine will also end
 shortly, and my glory commence very soone after: and because I will not hold thee long suspended, awayting to heare the effect of my words, I would haue thee to know, that the famous Amadis du Gaule, was one of the most accomplished Knights errant. I do not say well, saying he was one; for he was the onely, the first, the vnike and the Lord of as many as liued in his age. An euill yeare, and a worse moneth for Don Belianis or any other that shall dare presume to compare with him; for I sweare that they all are questionlesse deceiued. I also say that when a Painter would become rare and excellent in his arte, he procures to imitate the patternes of the most singular Masters of his science. And this very rule runnes currant throughout all other trades and exercises of account, which serue to adorne a well disposed Common-wealth; and so ought and doth he that meanes to obtain the name of a prudent and patient man, by imitating Vlysses, in whose person and dangers doth Homer delineate vnto vs the true portaiture of patience and sufferance; as likewise Virgil demonstrates vnder the person of Eneas, the duety and valour of a pious sonne, and the sagacity of a hardy and expert Captaine, not shewing them such as indeede they were, but as they should be, to remaine as an example of Vertue, to ensuing posterities. And in this very manner was Amadis the North-star, and the Sunne of valorous and amorous Knights, whom all we ought to imitate which march vnder the ensignes of loue and Chiualry. And this being so manifest as it is, I finde friend Sancho, that the Knight errant who shall imitate him most, shall likewise be neerest to attaine the perfection of armes: and that wherein this Knight bewrayed most his prudence, valour, courage, patience, constancy and loue was when he retyred himselfe to doe penance, being disdained by his Lady Oriana to the Poore Rocke, changing his name vnto that of Beltenebros, a name certainly most significatiue and proper for the life which hee had then
 willingly chosen. And I may more easily imitate him herein, then in cleauing of Giants, beheading of Serpents, killing of Monsters, ouerthrowing of armies, putting Nauies to flight, and finishing of inchantments. And seeing that this Mountaine is so fit for that purpose, there is no reason why I should ouerslip the occasion, which doth so commodiously proffer me her lockes. In effect, quoth Sancho, what is it you mean to do inthese remote places? Haue not I tolde to thee already said Don-Quixote, that I meane to follow Amadis, by playing heere the dispaired, wood, and furious man. To imitate likewise the valiant Orlando where he found the tokens by a fountaine that Angelica the faire had abused her selfe with Medozo, for griefe whereof he ran mad, and pluckt vp trees by their rootes, troubled the water of cleere fountaines, slew Sheepheards, destroyed their flocks, fired the sheep-folds, ouerthrew houses, trayled Mares after him, and committed a hundred thousand other insolencies, worthy of eternall fame and memory. And although I meane not to imitate Roldan, or Orlando, or Rowland (for hee had all these names) exactly in euery madde prancke which hee played. Yet will I doe it the best I can, in those things which shall seeme vnto me most essentiall. And perhaps I may rest contented with the only imitation of Amadis, who without indamaging any by his rauings, and only vsing these of feeling laments, arriuing to as great fame therby as any one whatsoeuer.
I beleeue, replied Sancho, that the Knights which performed the like penances, were moued by some reasons to doe the like austerities and follies: but good Sir, what occasion hath beene offered vnto you to become madde? What Lady hath disdained you? Or what arguments haue you found that the Lady Dulcinea of Toboso hath euer dallied with Moore or Christian? There is the point, answered our Knight, and therein consists the perfection of mine affaires; for that a Knight errant doe runne mad
 vpon any iust occasion, deserues neyther prayse nor thankes: the wit is in waxing madde without cause, whereby my Masters may vnderstand, that if drie, I could doe this, what would I haue done being watered? How much more seeing I haue a iust motiue through the prolixe absence that I haue made from my euer-supremest Lady Dulcinea of Toboso. For as thou mightest haue heard read in Marias Ambrosio his Sheepheard:

To him that absent is
All things succeed amisse.

So that friend Sancho, I would not haue thee lauish time longer in aduising to let slip so rare, so happy, and singular an imitation. I am madde, and will be madde, vntill thou returne again with answere vpon a letter, which I meane to send with me to my Lady Dulcinea: and if it be such as my loyaltie deserues, my madnesse and penance shall end: but if the contrary, I shall runne wood in good earnest, and be in that state that I shall apprehend nor feele any thing. So that howsoeuer I be answered, I shall issue out of the conflict and paine wherein thou leauest me, by ioying the good thou shalt bring me, as wise, or not feeling the euill thou shalt denounce as wood. But tell me Sancho, keepest thou charily yet the helmet of Mambrino, which I saw thee take vp from the ground the other day, when that vngrateful fellow thought to haue broken it into pieces, but could not; by which may be collected the excellent temper thereof?
Sancho answered to this demaund, saying, I cannot suffer or beare longer Sir Knight of the ill fauoured face, nor take patiently many things which you say, and I begin to suspect by your words that all that which you haue said to me of Chiualry, and of gaining Kingdomes and Empires, of bestowing Ilands and other gifts and great things, as Knights errant are wont, are all matters of ayre and lies, all cousenage or cousening, or how else you please to terme it: for he that shall heare you name a Barbers Bason
 Mambrinos helmet, and that you will not abandon that errour in more then foure dayes; what other can he thinke, but that he who affirmes such a thing doth want wit and discretion. I carry the Bason in my bagge all battered and bored, and will haue it mended, and dresse my beard in it at home, if God shall doe me the fauor that I may one day see my wife and barnes. Behold Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, I doe likewise sweare that thou hast the shallowest pate that euer any Squire had or hath in the world: is it possible, that in all the time thou hast gone with me, thou couldest not perceiue, that all the aduentures of Knights errant doe appeare Chimeras, follies and desperate things, being quite contrary? Not that they are indeed such, but rather by reason that we are still haunted by a crew of inchanters, which chaunge and transforme our actes, making them seeme what they please, according as they like to fauour or annoy vs. And so this which seemes to thee a Barbers bason, is in my conceit Mambrino his Helmet; and to another will appeare in some other shape. And it is doubtlesly done by the profound science of the wiseman my friend, to make that seeme a Bason, which really and truely is Mambrinos helmet: because that it being so precious a Iewell, all the world would pursue me to depriue me of it; but now seeing that it is so like a Barbers bason, they endeuour not to gaine it; as was cleerely shewed in him that thought to breake it the other day, and would not carry it with him, but left it lying behind him on the ground, for yfaith he had neuer left it, did he know the worthinesse thereof. Keepe it friend, for I neede it not at this present wherein I must rather disarme my selfe of the armes I weare, and remaine as naked as I was at the houre of my birth: if I shall take the humour rather to imitate Orlando in doing of my penance then Amadis.
Whilst thus he discoursed, he arriued to the foote of a losty mountaine, which stood like a hewen rocke, diuided
 from all the rest; by the spirit whereof glided a smooth Riuer hemmed in on euery side by a greene and flourishing meddow, whose verdance did maruellously delight the greedy-beholding eye. There were in it also many wilde trees, and some plants and flowers which rendred the place much more pleasing. The Knight of the ill-fauoured face made choice of this place to accomplish therin his penance: and therefore as soone as he had viewed it, he began to say with a loud voyce, like a distracted man these words ensuing: This is the place where the humor of mine eyes shall increase the liquid veynes of this Crystall current: and my continuall and deepe sighes shall giue perpetuall motion to the leaues of these mountainy trees, in testimony of the paine which my oppressed heart doth suffer. O you, whosoeuer ye be rusticall Gods, which haue your Mansion in this inhabitable place, giue care to the plaints of this vnfortunate louer, whom a long absence, and a few imagined suspitions haue conducted to deplore his state among these desarts; and make him exclaime on the rough condition of that ingrate and faire, who is the toppe, the Sunne, the period, terme and end of all humane beauty. Oye Napeas and Driades, which do wontedly inhabite the Thickets and Groues, so may the nimble and lasciuious Satyres, by whom (although in vaine) you are beloued, neuer haue power to interrupt your sweete rest, as you shall assist me to lament my disasters, or at least attend them whilest I dolefully breath them. O Dulcinea of Toboso, the day of my night, the glory of my paine, North of my trauels, and starre of my fortunes: so heauen inrich thee with the highest, whensoeuer thou shalt demaund it, as thou wilt consider the place and passe vnto which thine absence hath conducted me, and answere my faith and desires in compassionate and gracious manner. O solitary trees (which shall from hence forward keepe company with my solitude) giue tokens with the soft motion of your bowes, that my presence
 doth not dislike you. O thou my Squire, and gratefull companion in all prosperous and aduerse successes, beare well away, what thou shalt see me doe here, to the end that thou mayest after promptly recount it to the totall cause of my ruine. And saying so, he allighted from Rozinante, and taking off in a trice his bridle and saddle, he strucke him on the buttocke, saying, He giues thee liberty, that wants it himselfe: O horse, as famous for thy workes as thou art vnfortunate by thy fates. Goe where thou pleasest, for thou bearest written in thy forchead, how that neyther the Hippogriphon of Astolpho, nor the renowned Frontino, which cost Bradamant so deerely could compare with thee for swiftnesse.
When Sancho had viewed and heard his Lord speake thus, he likewise said, Good betide him that freed vs from the paines of vnpannelling the gray Asse; for if hee were here yfaith he should also haue two or three claps on the buttockes, and a short Oration in his praise: yet if hee were here, I would not permit any other to vnpannell him, seeing there was no occasion why; for he good beast was nothing subiect to the passions of loue, or dispaire no more then I, who was his Master when it pleased God. And in good sooth Sir Knight of the ill-fauoured face, if my departure and your madnesse be in good earnest, it will be needfull to saddle Rozinante againe, that hee may supply the want of mine Asse; for it will shorten the time of my departure, and returne againe: and if I make my voyage a foote, I know not when I shall arriue there, or returne here backe vnto you; for in good earnest I am a very ill footman. Let it be as thou likest, quoth Don-Quixote, for thy designe displeaseth me nothing; and therefore I resolue that thou shalt depart from hence after three dayes, for in the meane space thou shalt beholde what I will doe and say for my Ladies sake, to the end thou maiest tell it to her. Why, quoth Sancho, what more can I view, then that which I haue seene already? Thou
 art altogether wide of the matter, answered Don-Quixote, for I must yet teare mine apparrel, throw away mine armour, and strike my head about these rockes, with many other things of that kinde, that will strike thee into admiration. Let me beseech you, quoth Sancho, see well how you giue your selfe those knockes about the rockes; for you might happen vpon some one so vngracious a rocke, as at the first rappe would dissolue all the whole Machina of your aduentures and penance. And therefore I would be of opinion, seeing that you doe holde it necessary that some knockes be giuen, with the head, and that this enterprise cannot bee accomplished without them, that you content your selfe, seeing that all is but fained, counterfeited, and a iest, that you should, I say, content your self with striking it on the water, or on some other soft thing, as Cotton or Wooll, and leaue to my charge the exaggeration thereof, for I will tell to my Ladie that you strike your head against the point of a rocke, which was harder then a Diamond.
I thanke thee Sancho for thy good will, quoth Don-Quixote, but I can assure thee that all these things which I doe are no iests, but very serious earnests, for otherwise we should transgresse the Statutes of Chiualry, which commaund vs not to auouch any vntruth, on paine of relapse, and to doe one thing for another is as much as to lie. So that my head-knockes must be true, firme, and sound ones, without any sophisticall or fantasticall shaddow: and it will be requisite that thou leaue me some linte to cure me, seeing that fortune hath depriued vs of the Balsamum which we lost. It was worse to haue lost the Asse, quoth Sancho, seeing that at once with him we haue lost our linte, and all our other prouision: and I intreat you most earnestly not to name againe that accursed drinke, for in onely hearing it mentioned, you not only turne my guts in me, but also my soule. And I request you moreouer to make account that the terme of three dayes is already expired, wherein you would haue mee
 take notice of your follies; for I declare them already for seene, and will tell wonders to my Ladie: wherefore go write your Letter, and dispatch me with all hast; for I long already to returne, and take you out of this Purgatory, wherein I leaue you. Dost thou call it a Purgatory Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote? Thou hadst done better hadst thou called it hell, or rather worse, if there be any thing worse then that. I call it so (quoth Sancho) quia in inform nulla est retentio, as I haue heard say. I vnderstand not, said Don-Quixote, what retentio meaneth. Retentio (quoth Sancho) is that, whosoeuer is in hell, neuer comes, nor can come out of it. Which shall fall out contrary in your person, or my feet shall goe ill if I may carry spurs to quicken Rozinante: and that I may safely arriue before my Lady Dulcinea in Toboso, for I will recount vnto her such strange things of your follies and madnesse (for they be all one) that you haue done, and doe daily, as I will make her as soft as a gloue, although I found her at the first harder then a Corke tree: with whose sweet and honie answere I will returne in the aire as speedily as a Witch, and take you out of this Purgatory, which is no hell although it seemes one, seeing there is hope to escape from it; which as I haue said they want which are in hell: and I beleeue you will not contradict me herein. Thou hast reason, answered the Knight of the ill fauoured face, but how shall I write the Letter? and the warrant for the receit of the Colts also, added Sancho. All shall be inserted together, quoth Don-Quixote: and seeing wee haue no paper, we may doe well, imitating the auncient men of times past, to write our mind in the leaues of trees or waxe; yet waxe is as hard to be found here as paper. But now that I remember my selfe, I know where wee may write our minde well, and more then well, to wit in Cardenios Tablets, and thou shalt haue care to cause the letters to be written out againe fairely in the first village, wherein thou shalt finde a Schoole-master; or if such a
 one be wanting, by the Clerke of the Church: and beware in any sort, that thou giue it not to a Notary or Court-Clerke to bee copied; for they write such an intangling-confounded processe letter, as Sathan himselfe would scarce be able to reade it. And how shall we doe for want of your name and subscription, quoth Sancho? Why, answered Don-Quixote, Amadis was neuer wont to subscribe to his Letters. I but the warrant to receiue the three Asses must forcibly be subsigned: and if it should afterward be copied, they would say the former is false, and so I shall rest without my Coltes. The warrant shall be written and firmed with my hand in the Tablets, which as soone as my Niece shall see, she will make no difficulty to deliuer thee them. And as concerning the loue letter, thou shalt put this subscription to it; Yours vntill death, the Knight of the ill fauoured face. And it makes no matter though it be written by any stranger, for as much as I can remember Dulcinea can neyther write nor read: nor hath she seene any Letrer, no nor as much as a Character of my writing all the dayes of her life. For my loue and hers haue beene euer Platonicall, neuer extending themselues farther, then to an honest regard, and view the one of the other: and euen this same so rarely as I dare boldly sweare, that in these dozen yeares which I loue her more deerely then the light of these mine eyes, which the earth shall one day deuoure, I haue not seene her foure times, and perhaps of those same foure times she hath scarce perceiued once that I beheld her. Such is the care and closenesse wherewithall her parents Lorenco Corcuelo and her mother Aldonca Nogales, haue brought her vp. Ta ta, quoth Sancho, that the Lady Dulcinea of Toboso is Lorenco Corchuelo his daughter, called by another name Aldonca Lorenco? The same is shee, quoth Don-Quixote, and it is she that merites to be Empresse of the vast Vniuerse. I know her very well, replied Sancho, and I dare say, that she can throw an Iron barre
 as well as any the strongest ladde in our Parish. I vow by the giuer, that tis a wench of the marke tall and stout, and so sturdy withall, that she will bring her chinne out of the mire, in despite of any Knight errant, or that shall erre, that shall honour her as his Lady. Out vpon her, what a strength and voyce she hath? I saw her on a day stand on the toppe of the Church steeple to call certaine seruants of her fathers, that labored in a fallow field; and although they were halfe a league from thence, they heard her as well as if they were at the foote of the Steeple: and the best that is in her is, that she is nothing coy, for she hath a very great smacke of Courtship, and playes with euery one, and gibes and iests at them ^l^. And now I affirme Sir Knight of the ill fauoured face, that not only you may, and ought to commit rauing follies for her sake, but eke you may with iust title also dispaire and hang your selfe: for none shall heare thereof but will say you did very well, although the Diuell carried you away. And faine would I be gone, if it were for nothing else but to see her: for it is many a day since I saw her, and I am sure she is changed by this: for womens beauty is much impaired by going alwaies to the fielde, exposed to the Sunne and weather. And I will now Sir Don-Quixote, confesse a truth vnto you, that I haue liued vntill now in a maruellous errour, thinking well and faithfully that the Lady Dulcinea was some great Princesse, on whom you were enamoured, or such a person as merited those rich presents which you bestowed on her, as well of the Biscaines, as of the Slaues, and many others that ought to be, as I suppose, correspondent to the many victories which you haue gained, both now and in the time that I was not your Squire. But pondering well the matter, I cannot conceiue why the Lady Aldonca Lorenco; I meane the Lady Dulcinea of Toboso, of these should care whether these vanquished men which you send or shall send, do goe and kneele before her? For it may befall that she at the very time of
 their arriuall bee combing of flaxe, or threshing in the barne, whereat they would be ashamed, and she likewise laugh and be somewhat displeased at the present.
I haue else told thee Sancho many times that thou art too great a pratler, quoth Don-Quixote, and although thou hast but a grosse witte, yet now and then thy frumps nippe: but to the end thou mayest perceiue the faultinesse of thy braine and my discretion, I will tell thee a short history, which is this: There was once a widdow faire; young, free, rich, and withall very pleasant and iocund, that fell in loue with a certaine round and wel-set seruant of a Colledge: his regent came to vnderstand it, and therefore said on a day to the widdow by the way of fraternall correction. Mistresse I do greatly maruell, and not without occasion that a woman so principal, so beautifull, and so rich, and specially so wittie, could make so ill a choice, as to waxe enamoured on so foule, so base, and foolish a man as such a one, we hauing in this house so many Masters Art^^, Graduates, and Diuines, amongst whom you might haue made choise as among Peares, saying I will take this, and I will not haue that? But she answered him thus, with a very pleasant and good grace; You are Sir greatly deceiued, if you deeme that I haue made an ill choise in such a one, let him seeme neuer so great a foole, for to the purpose that I meane to vse him, he knowes as much or rather more Philosophy then Aristotle. And so Sancho likewise is Dulcinea of Toboso as much worth as the highest Princesse of the world, for the effect I meane to vse her. For all the Poets which celebrate certaine Ladies at pleasure, thinkest thou that they all had Mistresse? No. Dost thou beleeue that the Amarillis, the Files, Siluias, Dianas, Galateas, Alcidas, and others such like, wherewithall the bookes, ditties, Barbers shops, and Theaters are filled, were truely Ladies of flesh and bones, and their Mistresses which haue and doe celebrate them thus? No certainly, but were for the greater
 part fained, to serue as a subiect of their verses, to the end the authours might be accounted amorous, and men of courage enough to be such. And thus it is also sufficient for me to beleeue and thinke that the good Aldonca Lorenco is faire and honest: as for her parentage it matters but little; for none will send to take information thereof, to giue to her an habite; and I make account of her as of the greatest Princesse in the world. For thou oughtest to know Sancho, if thou knowest it not already, that two things alone incite man to loue more then all things else, and those be surpassing beauty, and a good name. And both these things are found in Dulcinea in their prime: for none can equall her in fairenesse, and few come neere her for a good report. And for a finall conclusion, I imagine that all that which I say, is really so, without adding or taking ought away. And I doe imagine her in my fantasie to be such, as I could wish her as well in beauty as principality: and neyther can Helen approch, nor Lucrece come neere her, no nor any of those other famous women, Greeke, Barbarous, or Latine, of forgoing ages. And let euery one say what he pleaseth; for though I should be reprehended for this by the ignorant, yet shall I not therfore be chastised by the more obseruant and rigorous sort of men. I auouch, quoth Sancho, that you haue great reason in all that you say, and that I am my selfe a very Asse. But alas why doe I name an Asse with my mouth, seeing one should not make mention of a Rope in ones house that was hanged? But giue me the letter, and farewell, for I will change. With that Don-Quixote drew out his Tablets, and going a little aside he began to indite his Letter with a great grauity; and hauing ended it, called Sancho to him and said, that he would reade it to him, to the end he might beare it away in memory, lest by chance he did lose the Tablets on the way, for such were his crosse fortunes, as made him feare euery euent. To which Sancho answered, saying,
 write it there twise or thrise in the booke, and giue me it after; for I will carry it safely by Gods grace. For to thinke that I will be euer able to take by rote is a great folly; for my memory is so short, as I doe many times forget mine owne name. But yet for all that reade it to me good Sir, for I would be glad to heare it, as a thing which I suppose to be as excellent, as if it were cast in a mould. Heare it then, sayes Don-Quixote, for thus it sayes.

The Letter of Don-Quixote to DVLCINEA of Toboso

Soueraigne Ladie,

THE wounded by the point of absence, and the hurt by the Darts of thy heart, sweetest Dulcinea of Toboso, doth send thee that health which he wanteth himselfe. If thy beauty disdaine me, if thy valour turne not to my benefit, if thy disdaine conuert themselues to my harme, maugre all my patience, I shall be ill able to sustaine this care, which besides that it is violent, is also too durable. My good Squire Sancho will giue thee certaine relation, O beautifull ingrate, and my deerest beloued enemy of the State wherein I remaine for thy sake: if thou please to fauour me, I am thine; and if not, doe what thou likest; for by ending of my life, I shall both satisfie thy cruelty and my desires.

Thine vntill death, The Knight of the ill fauoured face.


By my fathers life, quoth Sancho, when hee heard the Letter, it is the highest thing that euer I heard in my life.
 Good God, and how well doe you say euery thing in it, and how excellently haue you applyed the subscription of the Knight of the ill fauoured face! I say againe in good earnest, that you are the Diuell himselfe, and there's nothing but you know it. All is necessary answered Don-Quixote, for the office that I professe. Put then (quoth Sancho) in the other side of that leafe, the warrant of the three Coults, and firme it with a leagible letter, that they may know it at the first sight. I am pleased, said Don-Quixote, and so writing it, he read it after to Sancho, and it said thus:
You shall please good Niece, for this first of Colts to deliuer vnto my Squire Sancho Panca, three of the fiue that I left at home, and are in your charge: the which three Colts I commaund to bee deliuered to him, for as many others counted and receiued here, for with this, and his acquitance they shall be iustly deliuered. Giuen in the bowels of Sierra Morena, the two and twentieth of August, of this present yeare.
It goes very well (quoth Sancho) subsigne it therefore I pray you. It needes no seale (quoth Don-Quixote) but onely my Rubricke, which is as valible as if it were subscribed, not onely for three Asses, but also for three hundred. My trust is in you, answered Sancho, permit mee, for I will goe saddle Rozinante, and prepare your selfe to giue me your blessing, for I purpose presently to depart before I see any madde pranke of yours; for I will say that I saw you play so many, as no more can be desired. I will haue thee stay Sancho (and that because it is requisite) at least to see me starke naked, playing a douzen or two of rauing trickes, for I will dispatch them in lesse then halfe an houre; because that thou hauing viewed them with thine owne eyes, mayest safely sweare al the rest that thou pleasest to adde; and I assure thee that thou canst not tell so many as I meane to performe. Let me intreate you good Sir, that I may not see you naked, for it wil turne my
 stomacke, and I shall not be able to keepe my selfe from weeping: and my head is yet so sore since yesternight through my lamentations, for the losse of the gray beast, as I am not strong enough yet to endure new plaints: but if your pleasure be such, as I must necessarily see some follies: doe them in Ioues name in your clothes briefely, and such as are most necessarie. Chiefly seeing none of these things were requisite for me; and as I haue said, we might excuse time (that shall now be lauished in these trifles) to returne speedily with the newes you desire and deserue so much. And if not, let the Lady Dulcinea prouide her selfe well; for if she answere not according to reason, I make a solemne vow to him that I may, that Ile make her disgorge out of her stomacke a good answere, with very kickes and fists. For how can it be suffered that so famous a Knight errant as your self should thus run out of his wits, without, nor for what, for one? Let not the Gentlewoman constraine me to say the rest, for I will out with it, and venter all vpon twelue, although it neuer were solde.
In good faith Sancho (quoth Don-Quixote) I thinke thou art growen as madde as my selfe. I am not so mad, replied Sancho, but I am more cholerick. But setting that aside, say what will you eate vntill my returne? Doe you meane to doe as Cardenio, and take by the high waies side perforce from the Sheepheards? Care thou not for that, replied Don-Quixote, for although I had it, yet would I not eate any other thing then the hearbes and fruits that this field and trees doe yeeld; for the perfection of mine affaire consists in fasting, and the exercise of other castigations. To this Sancho replied, Doe you know what I feare? That I shall not finde the way to you againe heere where I leaue you, it is so difficult and obscure. Take well the markes, and I will endeauour to keepe hereabouts, quoth Don-Quixote, vntill thou come backe againe: and will moreouer about the time of thy returne mount to
 the tops of these high Rockes, to see whether thou appearest: but thou shouldest doe best of all, to the end thou maiest not stay and misse me, to cut downe here and there certain boughes, and strow them on the way as thou goest, vntill thou beest out in the plaines, and those may after serue thee as bounds and marks, by which thou mayst againe finde me when thou returnest, in imitation of the clew of Theses Labyrinth. I wil doe so, quoth Sancho: and then cutting downe certaine boughes, he demanded his Lords blissing, and departed not without teares on both sides. And mounting vpon Rozinante, who^ Don-Quixote commended very seriously to his care, that he should tender him as he would his owne person, hee made on towards the plaines, strowing here and there on the way his branches, as his Master had aduised him; and with that departed, although his Lord importuned him to beholde two or three follies ere he went away. But scarce had he gone a hundred paces, when he returned and said, I say Sir that you said wel, that to the end I might sweare with a safe conscience that I haue seene you play these madde trickes, it were necessary that at least I see you doe one, although that of your abode here is one great enough. Did not I tell thee so, quoth Don-Quixote, stay Sancho, for I will doe it in the space of a Creede; and taking off with all hast his hose, he remained the halfe of him naked, and did instantly giue two or three ierkes in the aire, and two tumbles ouer and ouer on the ground, with his head downeward and his legges aloft, where hee discouered such things as Sancho, because he would not see them againe, turned the bridle and rode away, resting contented and satisfied, that he might swear that his Lord was mad. And so we will leaue him trauelling on his way, vntil his returne, which was very soone after.



CHAP. XII.

Wherein are prosecuted the pranckes played by Don-Quixote in his amorous humors, in the mountains of Sierra Morena.

AND turning to recount what the Knight of the ill fauoured face did when he was all alone, the History sayes that after Don-Quixote had ended his friskles and leaps, naked from the gyrdle downward, and from that vpward apparrelled; seeing that his Squire Sancho was gone, and would behold no more of his madde pranckes; hee ascended to the toppe of a high rocke, and began there to thinke on that whereon he had thought oftentimes before, without euer making a full resolution therein, to wit, whether were it better to imitate Orlando in his vnmeasurable furies, then Amadis in his melancholy moods: and speaking to himselfe, would say; if Orlando was so valorous and good a Knight, as men say; what wonder, seeing in fine he was inchanted and could not be slaine, if it were not by a denier pinne, thrust in at the sole of his foote; and therefore did weare shooes still, that had seuen foulds of Iron in the soles: although these his draughts stood him in no steede at Roncesuales against Bernardo del Carpio, which vnderstanding them, pressed him to death betweene his armes. But leauing his valour apart, let vs come to the losing of his wits; which it is certaine he lost through the signes hee found in the Forrest, and by the newes that the Sheepeheard gaue vnto him, that Angelica had slept more then two noonetydes with the little Moore Medoro of the curled lockes, him that was Page to King Agramante: and if he vnderstood this, and knew his Lady had played beside the cushion, what wonder was it that hee should
 runne madde? But how can I imitate him in his furies, if I cannot imitate him in their occasion; for I dare fweare for my Dulcinea of Toboso, that all the dayes of her life she hath not seene one Moore, euen in his owne attire as he is, and she is now right as her mother bore her: and I should doe her a manifest wrong, if vpon any false suspition, I should turne madde, of that kinde of folly that did distract furious Orlando. On the other side I see that Amadis du Gaule, without loosing his wits or vsing any other rauing tricke, gained as great fame of being amorous as any one else whatsoeuer. For that which his Historie recites was none other, then that seeing himselfe disdained by his Lady Oriana, who had commaunded him to withdraw himselfe from her presence, and not appeare againe in it, vntill she pleased: he retired himselfe in the company of a certaine Hermit to the poore rocke, and there crammed himselfe with weeping, vntill that heauen assisted him in the midst of his greatest cares and necessitie. And this being true, as it is, why should I take now the paines to strip my selfe all naked, and offend these trees, which neuer yet did me any harme? Nor haue I any reason to trouble the cleer waters of these brooks, which must giue me drinke when I am thirsty. Let the remembrance of Amadis liue, and be imitated in euery thing as much as may be by Don-Quixote of the Mancha: of whom may be said, what was said of the other, that though he atchieued not great things, yet did he die in their pursuit. And though I am not contemned or disdaired by my Dulcinea, yet it is sufficient as I haue said already, that I be absent from her: therefore handes to your taske, and ye famous actions of Amadis occurre to my remembrance, and instruct me where I may best begin to imitate you. Yet I know already that the greatest thing he did vse was prayer, and so will I. And saying so, he made him a paire of Beades of great Gaules, and was very much vexed in minde for want of an Eremite, who
 might heare his confession, and comfort him in his afflictions: and therefore did entertaine himselfe walking vp and downe the little greene fielde, writing and grauing in the rindes of trees, and on the smooth sandes many verses, all accommodated to his sadnesse, and some of them in the praise of Dulcinea. But those that were found throughly finished, and were ledgible after his owne finding againe in that place, were onely these ensuing.

OYe plants, ye hearbes, and ye Trees,
That flowrish in this pleasant site;
In lofty and verdant degrees
If my harmes doe you not delight,
Heare my holy plaints, which are theese.


And let not my griefe you molest
Though it euer so feelingly went,
Since heere for to pay your rest
Don-Quixote his teares hath addrest
Dulcinea's want to lament
Of Toboso.


In this very place was first spied
The loyallest louer and true,
Who himselfe from his Lady did hyde.
But yet felt his sorrowes anew,
Not knowing whence they might proceede.


Loue doth him cruelly wrest
With a passion of euill discent;
Which rob'd Don-Quixote of rest,
Till a pipe with teares was full prest
Dulcinea's want to lament
Of Toboso.


He searching aduentures blinde,
Among these dearne woods, and rockes,
Still curseth on pittilesse mind:
For a wretch amidst bushie lockes,
And cragges, may misfortunes finde.



Loue with his whip wounded his brest,
And not with soft bands him pent,
And when he his noddle had prest,
Don-Quixote his teares did forth wrest,
Dulcinea's want to lament,
Of Toboso.

The addition of Toboso to the name of Dulcinea, did not cause small laughter in those which found the verses recited, because they imagined that Don-Quixote conceiued, that if in the naming of Dulcinea he did not also adde that Of Toboso, the rime could not be vnderstood; and in truth it was so, as he himselfe did afterward confesse. He co^posed many others, but as we haue related none could be well copied, or found intire but these three stanza's. In this, and in sighing, and inuoking the Faunes and Siluanes of these woods, and the Nymphes of the adioyning streams, with the dolorous and hollow Eccho, that it would answere, and they consort and listen vnto him; and in the search of some hearbes to sustaine his languishing forces; he intertained himselfe al the time of Sancho his absence: who had be staied three weekes away, as he did but three dayes, The Knight of the ill fauoured face should haue remained so disfigured, as the very mother that bore him would not haue knowne him.
But now it is congruent that leauing him swallowed in the gulphes of sorrow and versifying, we turne and recount what hapned to Sancho Panca in his Embassage; which was that issuing out to the high way, he presently tooke that, which ledde towards Toboso, and arriued the next day following to the Inne, where the disgrace of the Couerlet befell him: and scarce had he well espied it, but presently he imagined that he was once againe flying in the ayre, and therefore would not enter into it, although his arriuall was at such an houre, as he both might and ought to haue stayed, being dinner time, and he himselfe
 likewise possest with a maruellous longing to taste some warme meate; for many dayes past he had fedde altogether on colde viands. This desire inforced him to approch to the In, remaining still doubtfull notwithstanding whether he should enter into it or no. And as he stood thus suspended, there issued out of the Inne twopersons, which presently knew him, and the one faid to the other, tell me Master Licenciat, is not that horseman that rides there Sancho Panca, him whom our aduenturers olde woman said to depart with her Master for his Squire? It is quoth the Licenciat, and that is our Don-Quixote his horse: and they knew him thus well, as those that were the Curate and Barber of his own village; and were those that made the search and formall processe against the bookes of Chiualry: and therefore as soone as they had taken full notice of Sancho Panca and Rozinante, desirous to learne newes of Don-Quixote, they drew neere vnto him, and the Curate called him by his name, saying, friend Sancho Panca, where is your Master? Sancho Panca knew them instantly, and desirous to conceale the place and manner wherein his Lord remained, did answere them that his Master was in a certaine place with-held by affaires for a few daies, that were of great consequence and concerned him very much, and that hee durst not for both his eyes discouer the place to them. No, no (quoth the Barber) Sancho Panca, if thou dost not tell vs where hee soiourneth, we must imagine as we doe already, that thou hast rob'd and slaine him, specially seeing thou commest thus on his horse; and therefore thou must in good faith get vs the horses owner, or else stand to thine answere. Your threats feare me nothing, quoth Sancho, for I am not a man that robs or murthers any one, euery man is slaine by his destinie, or by God that made him. My Lord remaines doing of penance in the midst of this mountaine, with very great pleasure. And then he presently recounted vnto them, from the beginning to the end the fashion wherein
 he had left him; the aduentures which had befalne, and how he carried a Letter to the Lady Dulcinea of Toboso, who was Lorenco Corchuelo his daughter, of whom his Lady was enamoured vp to the liuers.
Both of them stood greatly admired at Sanchoes relation, and although they knew Don-Quixotes madnesse already, and the kinde thereof, yet as often as they heard speake thereof they rested newly amazed. They requested Sancho to shew them the letter that he caried to the Lady Dulcinea of Toboso. He told them that it was written in Tablets, and that he had expresse order from his Lord to haue it fairely copied out in paper, at the first village whereunto he should arriue. To which the Curate answered, bidding shew it vnto him, and he would write out the copie very fairly. Then Sancho thrust his hand into his bosome, and searched the little booke, but could not finde it, nor should not though hee had searched till Doomes day, for it was in Don-Quixotes power, who gaue it not to him, nor did he euer remember to demaund it. When Sancho perceiued that the booke was lost, his visage waxed as pale and wanne as a dead man, and turning againe very speedily to feele all the parts of his body, he saw cleerely that it could not be found, and therefore without making any more adoe, he laid, holde on his owne beard with both his fiftes, and drew almost the one halfe of the haire away, and afterward bestowed on his face and nose in a memento halfe a douzen such cuffes, as he bathed them all in bloud; which the Curate and Barber beholding, they asked of him, what had befalne him, that he intreated himselfe so ill? what should befall me answered Sancho? But that I haue lost at one hand, and in an instant three Colts, whereof the least was like a Castle. How so, quoth the Barber? Marry said Sancho I haue lost the Tablets wherein were written Dulcineas Letter, and a schedule of my Lords, addrest to his Niece, wherein he commaunded her to deliuer vnto me three
 Colts, of foure or fiue that remained in his house. And saying so, hee recounted the losse of his gray Asse: The Curate comforted him, and said, that as soone as his Lord were found, he would deale with him to renew his grant, and write it in paper, according to the common vse and practise; for as much as those which were written in Tablets were inualid, and would neuer be accepted, nor accomplished. With this Sancho tooke courage, and said, if that was so he cared not much for the losse of Dulcineas Letter; for he knew it almost all by rote. Say it then Sancho quoth the Barber, and we will after write it. Then Sancho stood still, and began to scratch his head, to call the letter to memory, and now would he stand vpon one legge, and now vpon another. Sometimes he looked on the earth, others vpon heauen, and after he had gnawen off almost the halfe of one of his nailes and held them all the while suspended, expecting his recitall thereof, he said after a long pause: On my soule, Master Licenciat, I giue to the Diuell any thing that I can remember of that Letter, although the beginning was thus; High and vnsauorie Ladie: I warrant you, quoth the Barber, he said not so, but Super humaine or Soueraigne Ladie. It is so, quoth Sancho; and presently followed, if I well remember, He that is wounded and wants sleepe, and the hurt man doth kisse your worships hands, ingrate and very scornefull faire. And thus he went rouing vntill he ended in. Yours vntill death, the Knight of the ill fauoured face. Both of them tooke great delight to see Sanchos good memory, and praysed it to him very much, and requested him to repeat the Letter once or twice more to them, that they might also beare it in memorie, to write it at the due season. Sancho turned to recite it againe and againe, and at euery repetition said other three thousand errours. And after this he tolde other things of his Lord, but spoke not a word of his owne tossing in a Couerlet, which had befalne him in that Inne, into which he refused to enter. He
 added besides, how his Lord in bringing him a good dispatch from his Ladie Dulcinea of Toboso, would forthwith set out to endeauour how he might become an Emperour, or at the least a Monarch; for they had so agreed betweene themselues both: and it was a very easie matter for him to become one, such was the valour of his person and strength of his arme. And that when hee were one, he would procure him a good marriage; for by that time he should be a widdower at the least. And he would giue him one of the Emperours Ladies to wife, that were an Inheretrix of some great and rich state on the firme land, for now he would haue no more Islands. And all this was related so seriously by Sancho, and so in his perfect sense, he scratching his nose euer and anon as hee spoke; so as the two were strucken into a new amazement, pondering the vehemencie of Don-Quixotes frensie, which caried quite away with it in that sort the iudgement of that poore man, but would not labour to dispossesse him of that errour, because it seemed to them that since it did not hurt his conscience, it was better to leaue him in it, that the recital of his follies might turne to their greater recreation: and therefore exhorted him to pray for the health of his Lord; for it was a very possible and contingent thing to arriue in the discourse of time to the dignity of an Emperour, as he said, or at least to that of an Archbishop, or other calling equiualent to it.
Then Sancho demanded of them, Sirs, if fortune should turne our affaires to another course, in such sort, as my Lord abandoning the purpose to purchase an Empire, would take in his head that of becomming a Cardinall, I would faine learne of you heere, what Cardinall errants are wont to giue to their Squires? They are wont to giue them (quoth the Curate) some simple Benefice, or some Parsonage, or to make them Clerkes or Sextons, or Vergers of some Church, whose liuing amounts to a good penny rent, beside the profite of the Altar, which is ofttimes
 as much more: for that it is requisite (quoth Sancho) that the Squire be not married, and that he know how to helpe Masse at least: and if that be so vnfortunate, I, that both am married, and knowes not besides the first letter of the A. B. C. What will then become of me, if my Master take the humour to be an Archbishop, and not an Emperour, as is the custome and vse of Knights errant? Doe not afflict thy minde for that friend Sancho (quoth the Barber) for we will deale with thy Lord heere, and we will counsaile him, yea we wil vrge it to him as a matter of conscience, that he become an Emperour, and not an Archbishop; for it will be more easie for him to bee such a one, by reason that he is more valorous then learned. So me thinkes (quoth Sancho) although I know he hath ability enough for all. That which I meane to doe for my part is, I will pray vnto our Lord to conduct him to that place, wherein he may serue him best, and giue me greatest rewardes. Thou speakest like a discreet man (quoth the Curate) and thou shalt doe therein the duetie of a good Christian. But that which we must endeuour now, is to deuise how we may winne thy Lord from prosecuting that vnprofitable penance hee hath in hand, as thou sayest: And to the end we may thinke on the manner how, and eate our dinner withall, seeing it is time, let vs all enter into the Inne. Sancho bad them goe in and he would stay for them at the doore, and that he would after tell them the reason why he had no minde to enter, neither was it in any sort conuenient that he should: but he intreated them to bring him somewhat forth to eate, that were warme, and some prouand for Rozinante. With that they departed into the lodging, and within a while after the Barber brought forth vnto him some meate: and the Curate and Barber, after hauing pondered well with themselues what course they were to take to attaine their designe. The Curate fel on a deuice very fit both for Don-Quixotes humour, and also to bring their purpose
 to passe; and was as he tolde the Barber, that he had bethought him, to apparrell himselfe like a Lady aduenturous, and that he therefore should doe the best that hee could to fit himselfe like a Squire, and that they would go in that habite to the place where Don-Quixote soiourned, fayning that fhe was an afflicted and distressed Damzell, and would demaund a boone of him, which hee as a valorous Knight errant would in no wise denie her; and that the gift which he meaned to desire, was to intreate him to follow her where she would carry him, to right a wrong which a naughtie Knight had done vnto her: and that she would besides pray him not to commaund her to vnmaske her selfe, or inquire any thing of her estate, vntill he had done her right, against that badde Knight. And by this meanes he certainely hoped, that Don-Quixote would graunt all that he requested in this manner. And in this sort they would fetch him from thence, and bring him to his village, where they would labour with al their power, to see whether his extrauagaut frensie could be recouered by any remedy.


CHAP. XIII.

How the Curate and the Barber put their designe in practise, with many other things, worthy to be recorded in this famous Historie.

THe Curates inuention disliked not the Barber, but rather pleased him so well, as they presently put it in execution. They borrowed therfore of the Inkeepers wife a Gowne and a Kerchife, leauing her in pawne therof a faire new Cassocke of the Curates. The Barber made him a great beard of a pyed Oxes tayle, wherein the Inkeeper was wont to hang his
 Horse-combe. The Hostesse demaunded of them the occasion why they would vse these things? The Curate recounted in briefe reasons of Don-Quixotes madnesse, and how that disguisement was requisite, to bring him away from the mountaine, wherein at that present he made his abode. Presently the Inkeeper and his wife remembred themselues how he had beene their guest, and of his Balsamum, and was the tossed Squires Lord; and then they rehearsed againe to the Curate all that had passed betwene him and them in that Inne, without omitting the accident that had befalne Sancho himselfe; and in conclusion the Hostesse tricked vp the Curate so handsomly, as there could be no more desired: for she attired him in a gowne of broad-cloth, laid ouer with guardes of blacke Veluet, euery one being of a span breadth, full of gashes and cuts: the bodies and sleeues of greene Veluet, welted with white Sattin: which gowne and doublet as I suspect were both made in the time of King Bamba. The Curate would not permit them to vaile and bekerchife him, but set on his head a white-quilted-linuen-nightcap; which he carried for the night, and guirded his forehead with a blacke Taffata garter, and with the other he masked his face, wherewithall he couered his beard and visage very neatly. Then did he incaske his pate in his hat, which was so broad, as it might serue him excellently for a Quitafoli, and lapping himselfe vp handsomly in his long cloke, he went to horse, and rode as women vse. Then mounted the Barber likewise on his Mule, with his beard hanging downe to the gyrdle, halfe red and halfe white, as that which as wee haue said was made of the taile of a pyed coloured Oxe: then taking leaue of them all, and of the good Maritornes, who promised (although a sinner) to say a rosary to their intention, to the end that God might giue them good successe, in so Christian and difficult an aduenture, as that which they vndertooke. But scarce were they gone out of the Inne, when the Curate
 began to dread a little that he had done ill, in apparrelling himselfe in that wise, accounting it a very indecent thing that a Priest should dight himselfe so, although the matter concerned him neuer so much. And acquainting the Barber with his surmise, he intreated him that they might change attires, seeing it was much more iust that he, because a lay-man, should faine the oppressed Ladie, and himselfe would become his Squire, for so his dignity would be lesse prophaned: to which if he would not condiscend, he resolued to passe on no farther, although the Diuell should carie therefore Don-Quixote away. Sancho came ouer to them about this season; and seeing of them in that habite, he could not containe his laughter. The Barber to bee briefe did all that which the Curate pleased, and making thus an exchange of inuentions, the Curate instructed him how he should behaue himselfe; and what wordes he should vse to Don-Quixote, to presse and moue him to come away with him, and forsake the propension and loue to that place, which he had chosen to performe his vaine penance. The Barber answered that he would set euery thing in his due point and perfection, though he had neuer lessoned him; but would not set on the array, vntill they came neere to the place where Don-Quixote abode, and therfore folded vp his clothes, and Master Parson his beard, and forthwith went on their way, Sancho Panca playing the guide; who recounted at large to them all that had hapned with the mad-man, whom they found in the mountaine; concealing notwithstanding the booty of the Malet, with the other things found therein: for although otherwise most simple, yet was our yong man an ordinary vice of fooles, and had a spice of couetousnesse.
They arriued the next day following to the place where Sancho had left the tokens of boughes, to finde that wherein his Master soiourned: and hauing taken notice thereof, he said vnto them that, that was the entry,
 and therfore they might do well to apparrell themselues, if by change that might be a meane to procure his Lords libertie; for they had tolde him already, that on their going and apparrelling in that manner, consisted wholly the hope of freeing his Lord, out of that wretched life he had chosen; and therefore did charge him on his life not to reueale to his Lord in any case what they were, nor seeme in any sort to know them: and that if he demaunded (as they were sure he would) whether he had deliuered his letter to Dulcinea, he should say that he did, and that by reason she could not reade, she answered him by word of mouth, saying, that she commanded vnder paine of her indignation, that presently abandoning so austere a life, he would come and see her; for this was most requisite, to the end that moued therwithall, and by what they meant likewise to say vnto him, they made certaine account to reduce him to a better life, and would besides perswade him to that course instantly, which might set him in the way how to become an Emperor or Monark; for as concerning the being an Archbishop, hee needed not to feare it at all. Sancho listened to all the talke and instructions, and bore them away well in memory and gaue them great thankes for the intention they had to counsell his Lord to become an Emperour, and not an Archbishop: for as he said, hee imagined in his simple iudgement that an Emperours were of more ability to reward their Squires then an Archbishops errant. Hee likewise added that he thought it were necessary he went somewhat before them to search him, and deliuer his Ladies answere: for perhaps it alone would be sufficient to fetch him out of that place, without putting them to any further paines. They liked of Sancho Pancas deuice, and therefore determined to expect him, vntil his returne with the newes of finding his Master. With that Sancho entred in by the clifts of the rockes (leauing them both behinde together) by which ran a little smooth streame,
 to which other Rockes and some trees that grew neere vnto it, made a fresh and pleasing shaddow. The heates, and the day wherein they arriued there, was one of those of the moneth of August, when in those places the heate is intollerable: the houre, about three in the afternoone. All which did render the place more grateful, and inuited them to remaine therein vntill Sanchoes returne. Both therefore arresting there quietly vnder the shadow, there arriued to their hearing the sound of a voyce, which without being accompanied by any instrument, did resound so sweet and melodiously, as they remained greatly admired, because they esteemed not that to be a place wherein any so good a Musitian might make his abode. For although it is vsually said that in the woods and fields are found Shepheards of excellent voyces, yet is this rather a Poetical indeerement, then an approued truth; and most of a I when they perceiued that the verses they heard him singing were not of rusticke composition, but rather of delicate and Courtly inuention. The truth whereof is confirmed by the verses, which were these:

WHo doth my weale diminish thus and staine?
Disdaine.
And say by whom, my woes augmented be?
by Iealousie.
And who my patience doth by triall wrong?
an absence long.
If that be so, then for my grieuous wrong
No remedie at all, I may obtaine,
Since my best hopes I cruelly finde slaine
By Disdaine, Iealousie, and Absence long.
Who in my minde, those dolors still doth moue?
Dire Loue.
And who my glories ebbe, doth most importune?
Fortune.
And to my plaints, by whom increase is giuen?
By heauen.

If that be so, then my mistrust iumps euen,
That of my wondrous euill, I needes must die:
Since in my harme ioynd and vnited be.
Loue, wauering Fortune, and a rig'rous Heauen.
Who, better hap, can vnto me bequeath?
Death.
From whom his fauors doth not loue estrange?
From change.
And his too serious harmes, who cureth wholie?
Follie.
If that be so, it is no wisedome truely
To thinke by humane meanes to cure that care,
Where th'only Antidotes, and med'cines are:
Desired death, light change, and endlesse folly.

The houre, the time, the solitarines of the place, voice, and arte of him that sung, strucke wonder and delight in the hearers mindes, which remained still quiet, listning whether they might heare any thing else: but perceiuing that the silence continued a pretie while, they agreed to issue and seeke out the Musitian, that sung so harmoniously. And being ready to put their resolution in practise, they were againe arrested by the same voyce; the which touched their cares anew with this Sonnet.




A SONNET.

HOly Amitie! which with nimble wings
Thy semblance leauing heere on earth behinde,
Among the blissed soules of heauen, vp-flings,
To those Imporiall roomes to cheere thy minde.


And thence to vs, is when thou lik'st assignd
Iust peace, whom shadie vaile so couer'd brings:
As oft in steed of her, deceit we finde
Clad in the weedes of good and vertuous things.


Leaue heau'n o Amitie! doe not permit

Foule fraude thus openly thy robest' inuest;
With which sincere intents, destroy does it.
For if thy likenesse from't thou dost not wrest,


The world will turne, to the first conflict soone,
Of discord Chaos and confusion.





The song was concluded with a profound sigh; and both the others lent attentiue eare to heare if hee would sing any more; but perceiuing that the musicke was conuerted into throbs and dolefull plaints, they resolued to goe and learne who was the wretch, as excellent for his voyce, as dolorous in his sighes: and after they had gone a little at the doubling of the point of a cragge, they perceiued one of the very same forme and fashion that Sancho had painted vnto them, when he tolde them the History of Cardenio: which man espying them likewise, shewed no semblance of feare, but stood stil with his head hanging on his brest like a malecontent, not once lifting vp his eyes to behold them from the first time, when they vnexpectedly arriued.
The Curate who was a man very well spoken (as one that had already intelligence of his misfortune, for hee knew him by his signes) drew neerer to him, and prayed and perswaded him with short, but very forcible reasons, to forsake that miserable life, lest he should there eternally lose it, which of all miseries would proue the most miserable. Cardenio at this season was in his right sense, free from the furious accident, that distracted him so often; and therefore viewing them both attired in so strange and vnusuall a fashion from that which was vsed among those desarts, he rested somewhat admired; but chiefely hearing them speake in his affaire, as in a matter knowne (for so much he gathered out of the Curates speeches) and therefore answered in this manner: I perceiue well, good Sirs (whosoeuer you be) that heauen which hath alwayes care to succour good men, yea euen and the wicked
 many times, hath without any desert addrest vnto me by these desarts and places so remote from vulgar haunt, persons, which laying before mine eyes with quicke and pregnant reasons the little I haue to leade this kinde of life, doe labour to remoue me from this place to a better: and by reason they know not as much as I doe, and that after escaping this harme, I shall fall into a farre greater, they account me perhaps for a man of weake discourse, and what is worse for one wholly deuoide of iudgement. And were it so, yet is it no maruell; for it seemes to me that the force of the imagination of my disasters is so bent and powerfull in my destruction, that I without being able to make it any resistance, do become like a stone, voyde of all good feeling and knowledge: and I come to know the certainty of this truth, when some men doe recount and shew vnto me tokens of the things I haue done, whilest this terrible accident ouer rules me: and after I can doe no more, then be grieued though in vaine, and curse without benefite my too froward fortune; and render as an excuse of my madnesse, the relation of the cause thereof, to as many as please to heare it: for wisemen perceiuing the cause, will not wonder at the effects. And though they hiue me no remedie, yet at least wil not condemne me, for it will conuert the anger they conceiue at my misrules, into compassion of my disgraces. And Sirs if by chance it be so, that you come with the same intention that others did, I request you ere you inlarge farther your discreet perswasions, that you will giue eare a while to the relation of my mishaps: for perhaps when you haue vnderstood it, you may saue the labour that you would take, conforting an euill wholly incapable of consolation.
Both of them which desired nothing so much then to vnderstand from his owne mouth, the occasion of his harmes, did intreate him to relate it, promising to do nothing else in his remedie or comfort, but what himselfe
 pleased. And with this the sorrowfull Gentleman began his dolefull Historie, with the very same wordes almost that he had rehearsed it to Don-Quixote and the Goatheard a few dayes past, when by occasion of Master Elisabat and Don-Quixotes curiositie in obseruing the Decorum of Chiualry, the tale remained imperfect, as our History left it aboue. But now good fortune so disposed things, that his foolish fit came not vpon him, but gaue him leisure to continue his storie to the end; and so arriuing to the passage that spoke of the Letter Don Ferdinando found in the booke of Amadis du Gaule, Cardento said that he had it very well in memory; and the sense was this.

LVSCINDA to CARDENIO.
I Discouer daily in thee worthes, that oblige and inforce me to holde thee deere: and therefore if thou desirest to haue me discharge this debt, without seruing a writ on my honour, thou mayest easily doe it. I haue a father that knowes thee, and loues me likewise well; who without forcing my will, will accomplish that which iustly thou oughtest to haue: if it be so, that thou esteemest me as much as thou sayest, and I doe beleeue.

This Letter moued me to demand Luscinda of her father for my wife, as I haue already recounted; and by it also Luscinda remained in Don Ferdinandos opinion crowned, for one of the most discreete women of her time. And this billet Letter was that which first put him in minde to destroy me, e're I could effect my desires. I tolde to Don Ferdinando wherein consisted all the difficultie of her fathers protracting of the marriage; to wit, in that my father should first demaund her; the which I dared not to mention vnto him, fearing lest hee would not willingly consent therunto; not for that the qualitie, bountie, vertue, and beautie of Luscinda, were to him
 vnknowne, or that she had not partes in her able to ennoblish and adorne any other linage of Spaine whatsoeuer: but because I vnderstood by him that he desired not to marrie me vntill hee had seene what Duke Ricardo would doe for me. Finally, I tolde him that I dared not reueale it to my father, as well for that inconnenience, as for many others that made me so affraid, without knowing what they were, as me thought my desires would neuer take effect. To all this Don Ferdinando made me answere that he would take vpon him to speake to my father, and perswade him to treate of that affaire also with Luscindas. O ambitious Marius. O eruell Cataline. O facinorous Quila. O treacherous Galalon. O trayterous Vellido. O reuengefull One who for the rape of his daughter, committed by Rodericke King of Spaine, brought in the Moores and destroyed all the Countrey. Iulian. O conetous Iudas. Traytor, cruell, reuengefull, and cousening, what indeserts did this wench commit, who with such plaines discouered to thee the secrets and delights of his heart? What offence committed I against thee? What words did I speake, or counsel did I giue, that were not all addrest to the increasing of thine honour and profite? But on what doe I of all wretches the worst complaine, seeing that when the current of the starres do bring with it mishaps; by reason they come downe precipitarely from aboue, there is no earthly force can with-hold, or humane industry preuent or euacunt them? Who would haue imagined that Don Fernando a noble Gentleman, discreete, obliged by my deserts, and powerfull to obtaine whatsoeuer the amorous desire would exact of him, where and whensoeuer it seazed on his heart (would as they say) become so corrupt as to depriue me of one onely sheepe, which yet I did not possesse? But let these considerations be laide apart as vnprofitable, that we may knit vp againe the broken threede of my vnfortunate History. And therefore I say, that Don Ferdinando beleeuing that my presence was a hinderance to put his treacherous and wicked designe in execution, he resolued to send me to his eldest brother,
 vnder pretext to get some money of him, for to buy sixe great horses, that he had of purpose, and onely to the end I might absent my selfe, bought the very same day that he offered to speake himselfe to my father, and would haue me goe for the money (because he might bring his treacherous intent the better to passe) could I preuent this treason? Or could I perhaps but once imagin it? No truly; but rather glad for the good merchandize hee had made, did make proffer of my selfe to depart for the money very willingly. I spoke that night to Luscinda, and acquainted her with the agreement past betweene mee and Don Ferdinando, bidding her to hope firmely that our good iust desires would sort a wished and happie end. She answered me againe (as little suspecting Don Ferdinandos treason as my selfe) bidding me to returne with all speede, because she beleeued that the conclusion of our affections should be no longer deferred, then my father deferred to speake vnto hers. And what was the cause I know not, but as soone as she had said this vnto me, her eyes were filled with teares, and somewhat thwarting her throate, hindered her from saying many other things, which me thought she striued to speake.
I rested admired at this new accident vntill that time neuer seene in her: for alwaies as many times as my good fortune and diligence graunted it, we conuersed with all sport and delight, without euer intermedling in our discourses, any teares, sighes, complaints, suspitions, or fears. All my speech was to aduance my fortune; for hauing receiued her from heauen as my Ladie and Mistresse, then would I amplifie her beautie, admire her worth, and praise her discretion. She on the other side would returne mee the exchange, extolling in me, what she as one enamoured accounted worthy of laude and commendation. After this we would recount a hundred thousand toyes and chaunces befalne our neighbours and acquaintance, and that to which my presumption dared farthest to extend it
 selfe, was sometimes to take her beautifull and Iuorie hands perforce, and kisse them as well as I might through the rigorous strictnesse of a niggardly Iron grate which deuided vs. But the precedent night to the day of my sad departure, she wept, sobd, and sighed, and departed, leauing me full of confusion and inward assaults, amazed to beholde such new and dolefull tokens of sorrow and feeling in Luscinda. But because I would not murder my hopes, I did attribute all these things to the force of her affection towards me, and to the griefe which absence is wont to stirre in those that loue one another deerely. To be briefe, I departed from thence sorrowfull and pensiue, my soule being ful of imaginations and suspitions, and yet know not what I suspected or imagined. Cleere tokens, foretelling the sadde successe and misfortune which attended me. I arriued to the place where I was sent, and deliuered my letters to Don Ferdinandos brother, and was well intertained, but not wel dispatched; for he commanded me to expect (a thing to me most displeasing) eight dayes, and that out of the Duke his fathers presence; because his brother had written vnto him to send him certaine moneyes vnknowne to his father. And all this was but false Don Ferdinandos inuention, for his brother wanted not money wherewithall to haue dispatched me presently, had not he written the contrary.
This was so displeasing a commandement and order, as almost it brought me to termes of disobeying it, because it seemed to me a thing most impossible to sustaine my life so many daies in the absence of my Luscinda. And specially hauing left her so sorrowfull as I haue recounted; yet notwithstanding I did obey like a good seruant, although I knew it would be with the cost of my health. But on the fourth day after I had arriued, there came a man in my search with a letter, which he deliuered vnto me, and by the indorsement I knew it to be Luscindas; for the hand was like hers. I opened it not without feare
 and assailement of my senses, knowing that it must haue beene some serious occasion, which could moue her to write vnto me, being absent, seeing she did it so rarely, euen when I was present. I demaunded of the bearer before I read, who had deliuered it to him, and what time he had spent in the way. He answered me that passing by chaunce at mid-day through a streete of the Citie, a very beautifull Ladie did call him from a certaine window: Her eyes were all beblubbered with teares; and said vnto him very hastily: Brother, if thou beest a Christian, as thou appearest to be one, I pray thee for Gods sake, that thou doe forth with addresse this letter to the place and person that the superscription assigneth, (for they be well knowen) and therein thou shalt doe our Lord great seruice. And because thou mayest not want meanes to doe it, take what thou shalt finde wrapped in that Handkerchife: and saying so, she threw out of the window a handkerchife, wherein were lapped vp a hundred Rials, this ring of golde which I carie here, and that letter which I deliuered vnto you; and presently without expecting mine answere she departed, but first saw me take vp the handkerchife and letter; and then I made her signes that I would accomplish herein her command: and after perceiuing the paines I might take in bringing you it so well considered, and seeing by the indorsement, that you were the man to whom it was addrest. For Sir I know you verie well; and also obliged to doe it by the teares of that beautiful Ladie, I determined not to trust any other with it, but to come and bring it you my selfe in person: and in sixteene houres since it was giuen vnto me, I haue trauelled the iourney you know, which is at least eighteene leagues long. Whilest the thankefull new messenger spake thus vnto me, I remained in a manner hanging on his words, and my thighes did tremble in such manner, as I could very hardly sustaine my selfe on foote: yet taking courage, at last I opened the letter, whereof these were the Contents.

The word that Don Ferdinando hath past vnto you to speake to your father, that he might speake to mine, he hath accomplished more to his owne pleasure then to your profite. For Sir you shall vnderstand, that he hath demaunded mee for his wife; and my father borne away by the aduantage of worthes which he supposes to be in Don Ferdinando more then in you, hath agreed to his demaund in so good earnest, as the espousals shall bee celebrated within these two daies, and that so secretly and alone, as onely the heauens and some folke of the house shall be witnesses. How I remaine, imagine, and whether it be conuenient you should returne you may consider: and the successe of this affaire shall let you to perceiue, whether I loue you well or no. I beseech Almighty God that this may arriue vnto your hands, before mine shall see it selfe in danger to ioyne it selfe with his, which keepeth his promised faith so ill.
These were in some, the contents of the letter, and the motiues that perswaded me presently to depart, without attending any other answere, or other monies: for then I conceiued clearly, that it was not the buyall of the horses, but that of his delights, which had moued Don Ferdinando to send me to his brother. The rage which I conceiued against him ioyned with the feare to lose the iewell which I had gained by so many yeares seruice, and desires, did set wings on mee, for I arriued as if I had flien the next day at mine owne Citie, in the houre and moment fit to goe speake to Luscinda. I entred secretly, and left my Mule whereon I rode in the honest mans house, that had brought mee the letter and my fortune proposing then to be fauourable to me, disposed so mine affaires that I found Luscinda sitting at that yron grate, which was the sole witnesse of our loues. Luscinda knew me straight and I her, but not as we ought to know one another. But who is hee in the world which may truly vaunt, that he hath penetrated, and throughly exhausted the consused thoughts, and mutable nature of
 women? truly none. I say then to proceede with my tale, that as soone as Luscinda perceiued me she said Cardenio I am attired with my wedding garments, and in the Hall doe waite for mee, the traitor Don Ferdinando, and my couetous father with other witnesses, which shall rather be such of my death, then of mine espousals; bee not troubled deare friend, but procure to be present at this sacrifice, the which if I cannot hinder by my perswasions and reasons, I carry hidden about me a poynard secretly which may hinder more resolute forces, by giuing end to my life, and a beginning to thee, to know certaine the affection which I haue euer borne, and doe beare vnto thee. I answered her troubled and hastily, fearing I should not haue the leasure to reply vnto her, saying sweete Ladie, let thy works verifie thy words, for if thou carriest a poynard to defend thy credit, I doe heere likewise beare a sword wherewithall, I will defend thee, or kill my selfe if fortune proue aduerse and contrary. I beleaue that she could not heare all my words by reason she was called hastily away as I perceiued, for that the bridegroome expected her comming. By this the night of my sorrowes did throughly fall, and the Sunne of my gladnesse was set: and I remained without light in mine eyes, or discourse in my vnderstanding. I could not finde the way into her house, nor could I moue my selfe to any part: yet considering at last how important my presence was, for that which might befall in that aduenture, I animated my selfe the best I could, and entred into the house; and as one that knew very well all the entries and passages thereof, and specially by reason of the trouble and businesse that was then in hand, I went in vnperceiued of any. And thus without being seene, I had the oportunitie to place my selfe in the hollow roome of a window of the same Hall, which was couered by the endes of two incountring peeces of tapestry, from whence I could see all that was done in the Hall, remaining my selfe
 vnuiewed of any. VVho could now describe the assaults and surprisals of my heart whilst I there abode: The thoughts which incountred my mind, the considerations which I had, which were so many and such, as they can neither be said, nor is it reason they should. Let it suffice you to know, that the bridegroome entred into the Hall without any ornament, wearing the ordinary array hee was wont, and was accompanied by a cousen Germaine of Luscindas, and in all the Hall there was no stranger present, nor any other then the household seruants, within a while after Luscinda came out of the Parlo^ur accompanied by her mother and two waiting maides of her owne, as richly attired and deckt, as her calling and beautie deserued, and the perfection of courtly pompe and brauery could affoord my distraction and trouble of mind lent me no time to note particularly the apparrell shee wore, and therefore did onely marke the colours which were carnation and white; and the splendour which the precious stones and Iewels of her tires, and all the rest of her garments yeelded: yet did the singular beauty of her faire and golden tresses surpasse them so much, as being in competencie with the precious stones, and flame of foure linkes that lighted in the Hall, yet did the splendour thereof seeme farre more bright and glorious to mine eies. O memory the mortall enemie of mine ease, to what end serues it now to represent vnto me the vncomparable beautie of that my adored enemy. Were it not better cruel memory to remember and represent that which she did then, that being moued by so manifest a wrong, I may at least endeuour to lose my life, since I cannor procure a reuenge? Tire not good sirs to heare the digressions I make, for my griefe is not of that kinde that may be rehearsed succinctly and speedily; seeing that in mine opinion euery passage of it is worthy of a large discourse.
To this the Curate answered, that not onely they were
 not tyred or wearied, hearing of him, but rather the receaued maruellous delight to heare him recount each minuitie and circumstance, because they were such, as deserued not to be past ouer in silence, but rather merited as much attention as the principall parts of the History: you shall then wit (quoth Cardenio) that as they thus stood in the Hall, the Curate of the Parish entred, and taking them both by the hand, to doe that which in such an act is required at the saying of, Will you Ladie Luscinda take the Lord Don Ferdinando who is heere present for your lawfull spouse, according as our holymother the Church commands? I thrust out all my head and neck out of the tapistry, and with most attentiue eares and a troubled mind, setled my selfe to heare what Luscinda answered; expecting by it the sentence of my death, or the confirmation of my life. O if one had dared to sally out at that time, and cried with a loud voice: O Luscinda, Luscinda, see well what thou doest, consider withall what thou owest me. Behold how thou art mine, and that thou canst not be any others, note that thy saying of yea, and the end of my life shall be both in one instant. O traytor Don Ferdinando robber of my glory, death of my life, what is this thou pretendest? what wilt thou doe? Consider that thou canst not Christian like atchieue thine intention, seeing Luscinda is my spouse, and I am her husband. O foolish man now that I am absent, and farre from the danger, I say what I should haue done, and not what I did. Now after that I haue permitted my deere Iewel to be robbed, I exclaime on the theese, on whom I might haue reuenged my selfe, had I had as much heart to doe it as I haue to complaine. In fine since I was then a coward and a foole, it is no matter though I now die ashamed, sory, and franticke. The Curate stood expecting Luscindaes answere a good while erre she gaue it, and in the end, when I hoped that she would take out the Poynard to stab her selfe, or would vnloose her tongue to say some truth, or
 vse some reason or perswasion that might redound to my benefit, I heard heere in stead thereof answere with a dismaied and languishing voice the word: I will: and then Don Fernando said the same, and giuing her the ring, they remained tyed with an indissoluble knot. Then the bridegroome comming to kisse his spouse, she set her hand vpon her heart, and fell in a trance betweene her mothers armes.
Now onely remaines vntold the case wherein I was, seeing in that, yea, which I had heard my hopes deluded, Luscindaes words and promises falsified; and my selfe wholy disabled to recouer in any time the good which I lost in that instant, I rested void of counsell, abandoned (in mine opinion) by heauen, proclaimed an enemy to the earth which vpheld me, the ayre denying breath enough for my sighes, and the water, humour sufficient to mine eyes: only the fire increased in such maner, as I burned throughly with rage and iealousie. All the house was in a tumult for this sodaine amazement of Luscinda, and as her mother vnclasped her bosome to giue her the ayre, there appeared in it a paper foulded vp, which Don Fernando presently seazed on, and went aside to reade it by the light of a torch, and after he had read it, he sate down in a chayre, laying his hands on his cheeke, with manifest signes of melancholy discontent, without bethinking himselfe of the remedies that were applied to his spouse, to bring her againe to her selfe. I seeing all the folke of the house thus in an vprore, did aduenture my selfe to issue, not waighing much whether I were seene or no; bearing withall a resolution (if I were perceiued) to play such a rash part as all the world should vnderstand the iust indignation of my breast, by the reuenge I would take on false Don Fernando, and the mutable and dismaied traytresse: But my destinie which hath reserued me for greater euils, if possibly there may be any greater then mine owne, ordained that instant my wit should
 abound, whereof euer since I haue so great want: and therefore without will to take reuenge of my greatest enemies (of whom I might haue taken it with all facilitie, by reason they suspected so little my being there) I determined to take it on my selfe, and execute in my selfe the paine which they deserued; and that perhaps with more rigour then I would haue vsed towards them, if I had slaine them at that time, seeing that the sodaine death finisheth presently the pain, but that which doth lingringly torment, kils alwaies without ending the life. To be short, I went out of the house, and came to the other where I had left my Mule, which I caused to bee sadled, and without bidding mine hoast adieu, I mounted on her, and rode out of the Citie, without daring like another Lot to turne back and behold it: and then seeing my selfe alone in the fields, and that the darkenesse of the night did couer me, and the silence thereof inuite me to complain, without respect or feare to be heard or known, I did let slip my voyce and vntied my tongue with so many curses of Luscinda and Don Ferdinando, as if thereby I might satisfie the wrong they had done me. I gaue her the title, of cruell, vngratefull, false, and scornefull, but specially of couetous, seeing the riches of mine enemie, had shut vp the eyes of her affection, to depriue me therof, and render it to him, with whom fortune had dealt more frankly and liberally: and in the midst of this tune of maledictions and scornes, I did excuse her saying: that it was no maruaile that a Mayden kept close in her parents house, made and accustomed alwaies to obey them, should at last condiscend to their will specially, seeing they bestowed vpon her for husband so noble, so rich and proper a Gentleman as to refuse him, would be reputed in her to proceed either from want of iudgement, or from hauing bestowed her affections elsewhere, which things must of force greatly preiudice her good opinion and renowne. Presently would I turne againe to
 say, that though she had told them that I was her spouse, they might easily perceiue that in chusing me she had not made so ill an election, that she might not be excused, seeing that before Don Fernando offred himselfe, they themselues could not happen to desire, if their wishes were guided by reason, so fit a match for their daughter as my selfe: and she might easily haue said, before shee put her selfe in that last and forcible passe, of giuing her hand, that I had already giuen her mine, which I would come out to confesse and confirme all that she could any way faine in this case: and concluded in the end, that little loue, lesse iudgement, much ambition and desire of greatnesse caused her to forget the wordes, wherewithall she had deceiued, intertained, and sustained me in my firme hopes and honest desires.
Vsing these wordes, and feeling this vnquietnesse in my brest, I trauelled all the rest of the night, and strucke about dawning into one of the entries of these mountaines, through which I trauelled three dayes at random, without following or finding any path or way, vntill I arriued at last to certaine meddowes and fieldes, that lie I know not in which part of these mountaines: and finding there certaine heards, I demaunded of them which way lay the most craggy and inaccessible places of these rocks, and they directed me hither; and presently I trauelled towards it, with purpose here to end my life: and entring in among those desarts, my Mule through wearinesse and hunger fell dead vnder me, or rather as I may better suppose, to disburden himselfe of so vile and vnprofitable a burden as he carried in me. I remained a foote, ouercome by nature, and pierced thorow and thorow by hunger, without hauing any helpe, or knowing who might succour me; and remained after that manner I know not how long prostrate on the ground; and then I arose a gaine without any hunger, and I found neere vnto mee certaine Goatheards, who were those doubtlesly that
 fedde me in my hunger. For they tolde me in what manner they found me, and how I spake so many foolish and madde wordes, as gaue certaine argument that I was deuoide of iudgement. And I haue felt in my selfe since that time that I enioy not my wits perfectly, but rather perceiue them to be so weakened and impaired, as I commit a hundred follies, tearing mine apparrell, crying loudly thorow these desarts, cursing my fates, and idely repeating the beloued name of mine enemie, without hauing any other intent or discourse at that time, then to endeauour to finish my life ere long: and when I turne to my selfe, I am so broken and tyred, as I am scarce able to stirre me. My most ordinary Mansion place is in the hollownes of a Corke tree, sufficiently able to couer this wretched carkasse. The Cowheards and the Goatheards that feede their cattell here in these mountaines, moued by charity, gaue me sustenance, leauing meate for me by the wayes, and on the rockes which they suppose I frequent, and where they thinke I may finde it: and so although I doe then want the vse of reason, yet doth naturall necessity induce me to know my meate, and stirreth my appetite to couet, and my will to take it. They tell me when they meete me in my wits, that I doe other times come out to the high wayes, and take it from them violently, euen when they themselues doe offer it vnto mee willingly. After this manner doe I passe my miserable life, vntill heauen shall be pleased to conduct it to the last period, or so change my memorie, as I may no more remember on the beauty and treacherie of Luscinda, or the iniurie done by Don Ferdinando; for if it doe me this fauour without depriuing my life, then will I conuert my thoughts to better discourses: if not, there is no other remedie but to pray God to receiue my soule into his mercie; for I neyther finde valour nor strength in my selfe to ridde my bodie out of the straites, wherein for my pleasure I did at first willingly intrude it.

This is Sirs the bitter relation of my disasters: wherefore iudge if it be such as may be celebrated with lesse feeling and compassion then that, which you may by this time haue perceiued in my selfe? And doe not in vaine labour to perswade or counsel me that which reason shal affoord you may bee good for my remedie: for it will worke no other effect in me then a medicine prescribed by a skilfull Physitian, to a Patient that will in no sort receiue it. I will haue no health without Luscinda, and since she pleaseth to be alienate her selfe, being or seeing she ought to be mine: so doe I also take delight to be of the retinue of mishap, although I might be a retainer to good fortune. She hath ordained that her changing shall establish my perdition. And I will labour by procuring mine owne losse, to please and satisfie her wil: and it shal be an example to ensuing ages, that I alone wanted that, wherewithall all other wretches abounded, to whom the impossibility of receiuing comfort, proued sometimes a cure; but in me it is an occasion of greater feeling and harme, because I am perswaded that my harmes cannot end euen with very death it selfe. Here Cardenio finished his large discourse, and vnfortunate and amorous History; and iust about the time that the Curate was bethinking himselfe of some comfortable reasons to answer and perswade him: he was suspended by a voyce which arriued to his hearing, which with pittifull accents said what shall be recounted in the fourth part of this Narration. For in this very point the wise and most absolute Historiographer Cid Hamete Benengeli finished the third Part of this HISTORY.





THE DELIGHTFVLL HISTORY OF THE WITTY KNIGHT DON-QVIXOTE of the MANCHA. THE FOVRTH PART.

CHAP. I.

Wherein is discoursed the new and pleasant aduenture that hapned to the Curate and Barber, in Sierra Morena.

MOst happy and fortunate were those times, wherein the thrise audacious and bolde Knight Don-Quixote of the Mancha, was bestowed on the world; by whose most honorable resolution, to reuiue and renue in it the already worne out, and welnigh diseased exercise of armes, wee ioy in this our so niggard and scant an age of all pastimes, not onely the sweetnesse of his true Historie, but also of the other tales, and digressions contained therein, which are in some respects lesse pleasing, artificiall and true, then the very History it selfe. The which prosecuting the carded, spun, and selfetwined threede of the relation
 sayes, that as the Curate beganne to bethinke himselfe vpon some answere that might both confort and animate Cardenio, hee was hindered by a voyce which came to his hearing, said very dolefully the words ensuing.
O God! is it possible that I haue yet found out the place which may serue for a hidden Sepulchre, to the load of this loathsome body that I vnwillingly beare so long? Yes it may be, if the solitarinesse of these rockes doe not illude me, ah vnfortunate that I am! How much more gratefull companions will these cragges and thickets proue to my designes, by affoording me leisure to communicate my mishaps to heauen with plaints; then that if any mortall man liuing, since there is none vpon earth from whom may be expected counsell in doubts, ease in complaints, or in harmes remedie. The Curate and his companions heard and vnderstood all the words cleerely, and for as much as they coniectured (as indeede it was) that those plaints were deliuered very neere vnto them, they did all arise to search out the plaintiffe; and hauing gone some twenty steppes thence, they behelde a young youth behinde a rocke, sitting vnder an Ashe tree, and attired like a country Swaine, whom by reason his face was inclined, as hee sate washing of his feete in the cleere streame that glided that way, they could not perfectly discerne; and therefore approched towards him with so great silence, as they were not descryed by him who only attended to the washing of his feet, which were so white, as they properly resembled two pieces of cleere crystall, that grew among the other stones of the streame. The whitenesse and beautie of the feete amazed them, being not made as they well coniectured, to treade cloddes, or measure the steppes of lazie Oxen, and holding the Plow, as the youthes apparrell would perswade them; and therefore the Curate, who went before the rest, seeing they were not yet espyed, made signes to the other two
 that they should diuert a little out of the way, or hide themselues behinde some broken cliffes that were neere the place, which they did all of them, noting what the youth did with very great attention. Hee wore a little browne Capouch, gyrt very neere to his body with a white Towell; also a paire of Breeches and Gamasheos of the same coloured cloth, and on his head a clay coloured Cap. His Gamasheos were lifted vp halfe the legge, which verily seemed to be white Alablaster. Finally, hauing washed his feete, taking out a linnen Kerchife from vnder his Cappe, he dried them therewithall, and at the taking out of the Kerchife, he held vp his face, and then those which stood gazing on him had leisure to discerne an vnmatchable beautie, so surpassing great, as Cardenio rounding the Curate in the eare, said, this bodie since it is not Luscinda can be no humane creature, but a diuine. The youth tooke off his Cappe at last, and shaking his head to the one and other part, did disheauell and discouer such beautifull haires, as those of Phaebus might iustly emulate them: and thereby they knew the supposed Swaine to be a delicate woman, yea and the fairest that euer the first two had seene in their liues, or Cardenio himselfe, the louely Luscinda excepted; for as he after affirmed, no feature saue Luscindas could contend with hers. The long and golden haires did not onely couer her shoulders, but did also hide her round about, in such sort, as (her feete excepted) no other part of her body appeared, they were so neere and long. At this time her hands serued her for a Combe, which as her feete seemed pieces of crystall in the water, so did they appeare among her haires like pieces of driuen Snow. All which circumstances did possesse the three which stood gazing at her with great admiration, and desire to know what she was; and therefore resolued to shew themselues; and with the noyse which they made when they arose, the beautifull mayden held vp her head, and remouing her haires from
 before her eyes with both handes, she espyed those that had made it, and presently arising full of feare and trouble, she laid hand on a packet that was by her, which seemed to be of apparrell, and thought to flie away, without staying to pull on her shooes, or to gather vp her haire: But scarce had she gone sixe paces when her delicate and tender feete, vnable to abide the rough encounter of the stones made her to fall to the earth. Which the three perceiuing, they came out to her, and the Curate arriuing first of all, said to her: Ladie, whatsoeuer you be, stay and feare nothing; for we which you beholde here, come only with intention to doe you seruice, and therefore you neede not pretend so impertinent a flight, which neyther your feete can endure nor would we permit. The poore Gyrle remained so amazed and confounded, as shee answered not a word: wherefore the Curate and the rest drawing neerer, he tooke her by the hand, and then hee prosecuted his speech, saying, What your habite concealed from vs Ladie, your haires haue bewrayed, being manifest arguments that the causes were of no smal moment which haue thus bemasked your singular beauty, vnder so vnworthy array; and conducted you to this all-abandoned desart; wherein it was a wonderfull chaunce to haue met you, if not to remedie your harmes, yet at least to giue you some comfort, seeing no euill can afflict and vexe one so much, and plunge him in so deepe extreames, (whilest it depriues not the life) that will wholly abhorre from listening to the aduice that is offered, with a good and sincere intention; so that faire Ladie, or Lord, or what else you shall please to be termed, shake off your affrightment, and rehearse vnto vs your good or ill fortune, for you shall finde in vs ioyntly, or in euery one apart, companions to helpe you to deplore your disasters.
Whilest the Curate made this speech, the disguised woman stood as one halfe asleepe, now beholding the one, now the other, without once mouing her lippe or
 saying a word; much like vnto a rusticke Clowne, when rare and vnseene things to him before, are vnexpectedly presented to his view. But the Curate insisting and vsing other perswasiue reasons addrest to that effect, won her at last to make a breach on her tedious silence, and with a profound sigh blow open her currall gates, saying somwhat to this effect: Since the solitarinesse of these rockes hath not beene potent to conceale me, nor the disheaueling of my disordered haires, licensed my tongue to belie my sexe, it were in vaine for me to faine that anew, which if you beleeued it, would be more for courtesies sake then any other respect. Which presupposed, I say good Sirs, that I doe gratifie you highly for the liberall offers you haue made me, which are such, as haue bound me to satisfie your demaund as neere as I may; although I feare the relation which I must make to you of my mishappes, will breede sorrow at once with compassion in you, by reason you shal not be able to find any salue that may cure, comfort, or beguile them: yet notwithstanding to the end my reputation may not houer longer suspended in your opinions, seeing you know me to be a woman, and view me, young, alone and thus attyred, being things all of them able eyther ioyned or parted, to ouerthrow the best credite, I must be enforced to vnfolde, what I could otherwise most willingly conceale. All this she that appeared so comely spoke without stoppe, or staggering, with so ready deliuerie and so sweete a voice, as her discretion admired them no lesse then her beautie. And renewing againe their complements and intreaties to her, to acco^plish speedily her promise, she setting all coynesse apart, drawing on her shooes very modestly, and winding vp her haire, sate her downe on a stone, and the other three about her, where she vsed no little violence to smother certaine rebellious teares that stroue to breake forth without her permission: and then with a reposed and cleere voyce she began the Historie of her life in this manner.

In this Prouince of Andaluzia there is a certaine Towne, from whence a Duke deriues his denomination, which makes him one of those in Spain are call'd Grandes: He hath two sonnes, the elder is heire of his States, and likewise as may be presumed of his vertues: the younger is heire I know not of what, if it be not of One that murdered Sancho King of Castile, as he was easing himselfe at the siege of Camora. Vellido his treacheries, or Galalous fraudes. My parents are this Noblemans vassals, of humble and low calling; but so rich, as if the goods of nature had equalled those of their fortunes, then should they haue had nothing else to desire, nor I feared to see my selfe in the misfortunes, wherein I now am plunged. For perhaps my mishaps proceed from that of theirs in not being nobly descended. True it is that they are not so base, as they should therefore shame their calling, nor so high as may check my conceit, which perswades me, that my disasters proceede from their lownesse. In conclusion, they are but Farmours, and plaine people, but without any touch or spot of badde bloud, and as we vsually say, Olde rustie Christians, yet so rustie and auncient, as it, their riches, and magnificent porte, gaines them by little and little the title of Gentilitie; yea, and of worship also; although the treasure and Nobility, whereof they made most price and account, was to haue had me for their daughter: and therefore as well by reason that they had none other heire then my selfe, as also because as affectionate parents, they held me most deere: I was one of the most made of and cherished daughters that euer father brought vp: I was the mirrour wherein they beheld themselues, the staffe of their olde age, and the subiect to which they addrest all their desires. From which, because they were most vertuous, mine did not stray an inch: and euen in the same manner that I was Ladie of their mindes, so was I also of their goods. By me were seruants admitted or dismissed: the notice and account of what was sowed or reaped, past through my handes, of the Oyle-mils, the Wine-presses, the number of
 great and little cattell, the Bee-hiues; in fine, of all that which so rich a Farmour as my father was, had or could haue; I kept the account, and was the Steward thereof and Mistresse, with such care of my side and pleasure of theirs, as I cannot possible endure it enough. The times of leisure that I had in the day, after I had giuen what was necessary to the head seruants, and others, labourers I did intertaine in those exercises, which were both commendable and requisite for maydens, to wit, in sowing, making of bone-lace, and many times handling the Distaffe: and if sometimes I left those exercises to recreate my minde a little, I would then take some godly booke in hand, or play at the Harpe; for experience had caught me, that musicke ordereth disordered mindes, and doth lighten the passions that afflict the spirit. This was the life which I ledde in my fathers house: the recounting wherof so particularly, hath not beene done for ostentation, nor to giue you to vnderstand that I am rich, but to the end you may note how much, without mine owne fault haue I falne from that happy state I haue said, vnto the vnhappie plight into which I am now reduced. The Historie therefore is this, that passing my life in so many occupations, and that with such recollection as might bee compared to a religious life, vnseene as I thought by any other person then those of our house: for when I went to Masse it was commonly so earely, and so accompanied by my mother and other maid-seruants; and I my selfe so couerd and watchfull, as mine eyes did scarce see the earth whereon I treade: and yet notwithstanding those of loue, or as I may better terme them, of idlenesse, to which Linces eyes may not be compared, did represent me to Don Ferdinandos affection and care; for this is the name of the Dukes younger sonne, of whom I spake before. Scarce had she named Don Ferdinando when Cardenio changed colour, and began to sweate with such alteration of bodie and countenance, as the Curace and
 Barber which beheld it, feared that the accident of frenzie did assault him which was wont as they had heard to possesse him at times. But Cardenio did nothing else then sweat, and stood still beholding now and then the countrey gyrle imagining straight what she was, who without taking notice of his alteration, followed on her discourse in this manner. And scarce had he seene me when (as he himselfe after confest) he abode greatly surprized by my loue, as his actions did after giue euident demonstration.
But to conclude, soone the relation of those misfortunes which haue no conclusion, I will ouerslip in silence the diligences and practises of Don Ferdinando vsed to declare vnto me his affection: he suborned all the folke of the house. He bestowed gifts and fauours on my parents: euery day was a holy day, and a day of sports in the streets where I dwelled: at night no man could sleepe for musicke; the letters were innumerable that came to my hands without knowing who brought them; farsed too full of amorous conceits and offers; and containing more promises and protestations then they had characters. All which, not onely could not mollifie my mind, but rather hardened it as much as if he were my mortal enemie, and therefore did construe all the indeuours he vsed to gaine my good will to be practised to a contrary end: which I did not, as according Don Fernando vngentle, or that I esteemed him too importunat, for I took a kind of delight to see my selfe so highly esteemed and beloued of so noble a Gentleman: nor was I any thing offended to see his papers written in my praise; for if I be not deceiued in this point, be we women euer so foule, we loue to heare men call vs beautifull. But mine honesty was that which opposed it selfe vnto all these things, and the continuall admonitions of my parents, which had by this plainely perceiued Don Fernandos pretence as one that cared not, all the world should know it. They would often say vnto
 me, that they had deposited their honours and reputation in my vertue alone and discretion, and bad me consider the inequality that was betweene Don Fernando and me, and that I might collect by it how his thoughts (did he euer so much affirme the contrary) were more addrest to compasse his pleasures then my profit. And that if I feared any inconuenience might befall, to the end they might crosse it, and cause him to abandon his so vniust a pursuite they would match me where I most liked, eyther to the best of that towne, or any other towne adioyning, saying they might easily compasse it, both by reason of their great wealth and my good report. I fortified my resolution and integrity with these certaine promises, and the knowne truth which they told me, and therefore would neuer answere to Don Fernando any word, that might euer so farre of argue the least hope of condiscending to his desires. All which cautions of mine which I think he deemed to be disdains, did inflame more his lasciuious appetite (for this is the name wherewithal I intitle his affection towards me) which had it beene such as it ought, you had not knowne it now, for then the cause of reuealing it had not befalne me. Finally Don Fernando vnderstand how my parents meant to marrie mee: to the end they might illude his hope of euer possessing me, or at least set more gards to preserue mine honour, and this newes or surmise was an occasion that hee did, what you shall presently heare.
For one night as I sate in my chamber only attended by a young Mayden that serued me, I hauing shut the doores very safe, for feare least through any negligence my honestie might incur any danger without knowing or imagining how it might happe^: notwithstanding all my dilige^ces vsed and preuentions, and amidst the solitude of this silence and recollection, he stood before me in my chamber. At his presence I was so troubled as I lost both sight and speech, and by reason thereof could not crie, nor I
 thinke he would not though I had attempted it, permit me. For he presently ranne ouer to me, and taking me betweene his armes (for as I haue said I was so amazed, as I had no power to defend my selfe) he said such things to me as I knew not how it is possible that vntruth should haue the ability to faine things resembling in shew so much the truth: and the traytor caused teares, to giue credit to his words, and sighes to giue countenance to his intention. I poore soule being alone amidst my friends, and weakly practised in such affairs began I know not how to account his leesings for verities, but not in such sort, as his teares or sighes might any wise moue me to any compassion that were not commendable. And so the first trouble and amazement of mind being past. I began again to recouer my defectiue spirits, and then said to him with more courage then I thought I should haue had, if as I am my Lord betweene your armes, I were betweene the pawes of a fierce Lyon, and that I were made certaine of my liberty on condition to doe or say any thing preiudiciall to mine honour: it would proue as impossible for me to accept it, as for that which once hath beene, to leaue off his essence and being. Wherefore euen as you haue ingyrt my middle with your armes, so likewise haue I tied fast my minde with vertuous and forcible desires, that are wholy discrepant from yours, as you shall perceiue, if seeking to force me, you presume to passe further with your inordinate designe, I am your vassall, but not your slaue, nor hath the nobility of your bloud power nor ought it to harden, to dishonour, staine or hold in little account the humility of mine; and I doe esteeme my selfe though a countrey wench and farmers daughter, as much as you can your selfe, though a Nobleman and a Lord: With me your violence shall not preuaile, your riches gaine any grace, your words haue power to deceiue, or your sighes and teares be able to moue: yet if I shall finde any of these properties mentioned in him
 when my parents shall please to bestow on me for my spouse, I will presently subiect my will to his, nor shall it euer varie from his minde a iot: So that if I might remaine with honor, although I rested void of delights, yet would I willingly bestow on you, that which you presently labour so much to obtaine: all which I do say to diuert your straying thought from euer thinking that any one may obtaine of me ought who is not my lawfull spouse: If the let onely consistes therein most beautifull Dorotea (for so I am called) answered the disloyall Lord: behold I giue thee here my hand to be thine alone: and let the heauens from which nothing is concealed; and this Image of our Lady which thou hast heere present, be witnesses of this truth. When Cardenio heard her say that she was called Dorotea, he fell again into his former suspicion, and in the end confirmed his first opinion to be true: but would not interrupt her speech, being desirous to know the successe, which he knew wholy almost before, and therefore said onely. Lady is it possible that you are named Dorotea. I haue heard speake of another of that name, which perhaps hath runne the like course of your misfortunes: but I request you to continue your relatio^, for a time may come wherein I may recount vnto you things of the same kinde, which will breed no small admiration. Dorotea noted Cardenios words, and his vncouth, and disastrous attire, and then intreated him very instantly if he knew any thing of her affaires, he would acquaint her therewithall. For if fortune had left her any good, it was onely the courage which she had to beare patiently and disaster that might befall her, being certaine in her opinion that no new one could arriue which might increase a whit those she had alreadie. Ladie I would not let slip the occasion (quoth Cardenio) to tell you what I thinke, if that which I imagine were true: and yet there is no commoditie left to doe it: nor can it auaile you much to know it. Let it be what it list said Dorotea: but that which after
 befell, of my relation was this: That Don Fernando tooke an Image that was in my chamber for witnesse of our contract, and added withall most forcible words and vnusuall oathes, promising vnto me to become my husband. Although I warned him, before he had ended his speech, to see well what he did, and to weigh the wrath of his father, when he should see him married to one so base, and his vassall, and that therefore he should take heede that my beautie such as it was should not blinde him. Seeing he should not finde therein a sufficient excuse for his errour: and that if he meant to doe me any good, I coniured him by the loue that he bore vnto me, to license my fortunes to roule in their owne spheare, according as my quality reached: For such vnequall matches doe neuer please long, nor perseuer with that delight wherewithall they begunne.
All the reasons heere rehearsed, I said vnto him, and many moe; which now are falne out of minde, but yet proued of no efficacy to weane him from his obstinate purpose, euen like vnto one that goeth to buy; which intention neuer to pay for what he takes: and therefore neuer considers the price, worthinesse, or faultlesse of the stuffe he takes to credit. I at this season made a briefe discourse, and said thus to my selfe: I may doe this, for I am not the first which by matrimonie hath ascended from a low degree to a high estate: nor shall Don Fernando be the first whom beautie or blind affection (for that is the most certaine) hath induced to make choyce of a consort vnequall to his greatnesse. Then since herein I create no new world, nor custome, what error can be committed by embracing the honour wherewithall fortune crownes me: Although it so befell that his affection to to me endured no longer then till he accomplish his will, for before God, I ce^tes shall still remaine his wife. And if I should disdainfully giue him the repulse, I see him now in such termes, as perhaps forgetting the dutie of a Noble
 man, hee may vse violence, and then shall I remaine for euer dishonoured, and also without excuse of the imputations of the ignorant which knew not how much without any fault I haue falne into this ineuitable danger. For, what reasons may be sufficiently forcible to perswade my father and other that this Noble man did enter into my chamber without my consent? All these demaunds and answers did I in an instant reuoule in mine imagination, and found my selfe chiefly forced (how I cannot tell) to assent to his petition, by the witnesses hee inuoked, the teares hee shed, and finally by his sweete disposition and comely feature, which accompanied with so many arguments of vnfained affection, were able to conquere and enthrall any other heart, though it were as free and wary as mine owne. Then called I for my waiting Maide that she might on earth accompany the celestiall witnesses. And then Don Fernando turned againe to reiterate and confirme his oathes, and added to his former, other new Saints as witnesses, and wished a thousand succeeding maledictions to light on him, if he did not accomplish his promise to me. His eyes againe waxed moyst, his sighes increased, and himselfe inwreathed mee more straightly betweene his armes, from which he had neuer once loosed mee: and with this, and my Maydens departure, I left to be a Mayden, and hee beganne to be a traytor, and disloyall man. The day that succeded to the night of my mishaps came not I thinke so soone as Don Fernando desired it: for after a man hath satisfied that which the appetite couets, the greatest delight it can take after is to appart it selfe from the place where the desire was accomplished. I say this, because Don Fernando did hasten his departure from me, by my Maids industrie, who was the very same that had brought him into my chamber, hee was got in the streete before dawning. And at his departure from mee he said (although
 not with so great shew of affection and vehemencie, as hee had vsed at his comming) that I might be secure of his faith, and that his oathes were firme most true: and for a more confirmation of his word hee tooke a rich ring off his finger, and put it on mine. In fine he departed and I remained behinde I cannot well say, whether ioyfull or sad; but this much I know that I rested confused and pensiue, and almost beside my selfe for the late mischance; yet eyther I had not the heart, or else I forgot to chide my Maide for her treacherie committed by shutting vp Don Fernando in my chamber: for as yet I could not determine, wherther that which had befalne mee, was a good or an euill. I said to Don Ferdinando at his departure that he might see mee other nights when he pleased by the same meanes hee had come that night seeing I was his owne, and would rest so, vntill it pleased him to let the world know that I was his wife. But hee neuer returned againe, but the next night following; could I see him after for the space of a moneth eyther in the streete or Church, so as I did but spend time in vaine to expect him: although I vnderstoode that hee was still in towne, and rode euerie other day a hunting an exercise to which hee was much addicted.
Those dayes were I know, vnfortunate and accursed to me, and those houses sorrowfull; for in them I began to doubt, nay rather wholly to discredite Don Fernando his faith: and my maide did then heare loudly the checkes I gaue vnto her for her presumption, euer vntill then dissembled. And I was moreouer constrained to watch and keepe guard on my teares and countenance, lest I should giue occasion to my parents to demaund of me the cause of my discontents, and therby ingage me to vse ambages or vntruthes to couer them. But all this ended in an instant, one moment arriuing whereon all these respects stumbled, all honourable discourses ended, patience was
 lost, and my most hidden secrets issued in publicke: which was when there was spread a certaine rumour throughout the towne within a few dayes after, that Don Fernando had married in a Citie neere adioyning, a damzell of surpassing beautie, and of very noble birth, although not so rich, as could deserue by her preferment or dowrie so worthy a husband. It was also said, that she was named Luscinda, with many other things that hapned at their Spousals, worthy of admiration. Cardenio hearing Luscinda named, did nothing else but lift vp his shoulders, bite his lippe, bend his browes, and after a little while shedde from his eyes two floods of teares. But yet for all that Dorotea did not interrupt the file of her Historie, saying, This dolefull newes came to my hearing, and my heart in steede of freezing thereat, was so inflamed with choler and rage, as I had welnigh runne out to the streets, and with outcries published the deceit and treason that was done to me: but my furie was presently asswaged by the resolution which I made, to doe what I put in execution the very same night, and then I put on this habite which you see, being giuen vnto me by one of those that among vs Countrey-folke are called Swaines, who was my fathers seruant; to whom I disclosed all my misfortunes, and requested him to accompany me to the Citie, where I vnderstood mine enemie soiourned. He, after he had reprehended my boldnesse, perceiuing me to haue an inflexible resolution, made offer to attend on me as hee said, vnto the end of the world: and presently afeer I trussed vp in a pillowbeate, a womans attire, some mony and jewels, to preuent necessities that might befall; and in the silence of night, without acquainting my treacherous maide with my purpose, I issued out of my house, accompanied by my seruant, and many imaginations: and in that manner set on towards the Citie, and though I went on foote, was yet borne away flying, by my desires, to come if not time enough to hinder that which was past,
 yet at least to demaund of Don Fernando that he would tell me with what conscience or soule he had done it. I arriued where I wished within two dayes and a halfe; and at the entry of the Citie I demaunded where Luscinda her father dwelled? and he of whom I first demaunded the question answered me more then I desired to heare: he shewed me the house, and recounted to me all that befell at the daughters marriage, being a thing so publique and knowne in the Citie, as men made meetings of purpose to discourse thereof. Hee said to me that the very night wherein Don Fernando was espoused to Luscinda, after that she had giuen her consent to be his wife, shee was instantly assayled by a terrible accident, that strucke her into a traunce, and her spouse approching to vnclaspe her bosome, that she might take the ayre, found a paper foulded in it, written with Luscindas owne hand, wherein she said and declared, that she could not be Don Fernandoes wife, because she was already Cardenioes, who was, as the man tolde me, a very principall Gentleman of the same Citie; and that if she had giuen her consent to Don Fernando, it was onely done because she would not disobey her parents: in conclusion he tolde me, that the Billet made also mention, how shee had a resolution to kill her selfe presently after the marriage, and did also lay downe therein the motiues she had to doe it. All which as they say, was confirmed by a poynard that was found hidden about her in her apparrell. Which Don Fernando perceiuing presuming that Luscinda did flout him, and holde him in little account, hee set vpon her ere she had turned to her selfe, and attempted to kill her with the very same poynard; and had done it if her father and other friends which were present had not opposed themselues, and hindered his determination. Moreouer they reported that presently after Don Fernando absented himselfe from the Citie, and that Luscinda turned not out of her agony vntill the next day, and then recounted to her parents
 how she was verily Spouse to that Cardenio of whom we spake euen now. I learned besides that Cardenio as it is rumourd, was present at the marriage, and that as soone as he saw her married, being a thing he would neuer haue credited, departed out of the Citie in a desperate moode, but first left behinde him a letter, wherein he shewed at large the wrong Luscinda had done to him, and that hee himselfe meant to go to some place where people should neuer after heare of him. All this was notorious, and publiquely bruited throughout the Citie, and euery one spoke thereof, but most of all hauing very soone after vnderstood that Luscinda was missing from her parents house and the Citie; for shee could not be found in neyther of both: for which her parents were almost beside themselues, not knowing what meanes to vse to finde her.
These newes reduced my hopes again to their rancks, and I esteemed it better to find Don Fernando vnmarried then married, presuming that yet the gates of my remedy were not wholly shut, I giuing my selfe to vnderstand that heauen had peraduenture set that impediment on the second marriage, to make him vnderstand what hee ought to the first; and to remember, how he was a Christian, and that he was more obliged to his soule then to humane respects. I reuolued all these things in my mind, and comfortlesse did yet comfort my selfe, by faining large yet languishing hopes to sustaine that life which I now do so much abhor. And whilest I staide thus in the Citie, ignorant what I might doe, seeing I found not Don Fernando, I heard a cryer goe about publikely, promising great rewards to any one that could finde me out, giuing signes of the very age and apparrell I wore. And I likewise heard it was bruited abroad, that the youth which came with me had carried me away from my fathers house. A thing that touched my soule very neerely, to view my credite so greatly wrackt, seeing that it was not sufficient
 to haue lost it by my comming away, without the addition of him with whom I departed, being a subiect so base and vnworthy of my loftier thoughts. Hauing heard this crie, I departed out of the Citie with my seruant: who euen then began to giue tokens that he faultred in the fidelitie he had promised to me: and both of vs together entred the very same night into the most hidden parts of this mountaine, fearing lest we might be found. But as it is commonly said, that one euill cals on another, and that the end of one disaster is the beginning of a greater, so proued it with me; for my good seruant, vntill then faithfull and trustie, rather incited by his owne villany then my beautie, thought to haue taken the benefite of the oportunity which these inhabitable places offered; and sollicited me of loue, with little shame and lesse feare of GOD or respect of my selfe: and now seeing that I answered his impudencies with seuere and reprehensiue wordes, leauing the intreaties aside, wherewithall he thought first to haue compast his will, he began to vse his force. But iust heauen which seldome or neuer neglects the iust mans assistance, did so fauour my proceedings, as with my weake forces, and very little labour, I threw him downe a steepe rocke, and there I left him, I know not whether aliue or dead. And presently I entred in among these mountaines, with more swiftnesse then my feare and wearinesse required; hauing therein no other proiect or designe, then to hide my selfe in them, and shunne my father and others, which by his intreaty and meanes sought for me euery where. Some moneths are past since my first comming here, where I found a Heardman, who carried me to a village seated in the midst of these rockes, wherein he dwelled and intertained me, whom I haue serued as a Sheepheard euer since, procuring as much as lay in me to abide still in the fielde, to couer these haires, which haue now so vnexpectedly betraide me. Yet all my care and industry was not very beneficiall
 seeing my Master came at last to the notice that I was no man but a woman, which was an occasion that the like euill thought sprung in him, as before in my seruant. And as fortune giues not alwayes remedie for the difficulties which occurre, I found neyther rocke nor downefall to coole and cure my Masters infirmitie, as I had done for my man: and therefore I accounted it a lesse inconuenience to depart thence and hide my selfe againe among these desarts, then to aduenture the triall of my strength or reason with him. Therefore, as I say, I turned to imboske my selfe, and search out some place, where without any encumbrance I might intreat heauen with my sighes and teares, to haue compassion on my mishap; and lend me industry and fauour, eyther to issue fortunately out of it, or else to die amidst these solitudes, not leauing any memory of a wretch, who hath ministred matter, although not through her owne default, that men may speake and murmure of her, both in her owne and in other countries.


CHAP. II.

Which treates of the discretion of the beautifull Dorotea, and the artificiall manner vsed to disswade the amorous Knight from continuing his penance: and how he was gotten away; with many other delightfull and pleasant occurrences.

THis is Sirs the true relation of my Tragedie, see therfore now and iudge, whether the sighes you heard, the words to which you listened, and the teares that gushed out at mine eyes haue not had sufficient occasion to appeare in greater abundance: and hauing considered the quality of my disgrace;
 you shall perceiue all comfort to be vaine, seeing the remedie thereof is impossible. Only I will request at your handes one fauor which you ought and may easily grant, and is that you will addresse me vnto some place, where I may liue secure from the feare and suspition I haue to be found by those which I know doe daily trauell in my pursuit: for although I am sure that my parents great affection towards me, doth warrant me to be kindely receiued and intertained by them: yet the shame is so great that possesseth me onely to thinke that I shall not returne to their presence in that state which they expect, as I account it farre better to banish my selfe from their sight for euer, then once to beholde their face, with the least suspition that they againe would beholde mine diuorced from that honestie which whilome my modest behauiour promised. Here she ended, and her face suddenly ouer-run by a louely scarlet, perspicuously deuoted the feeling and bashfulnes of her soule.
The audients of her sad storie, felt great motions both of pitie and admiration for her misfortunes: and although the Curate thought to comfort and counsell her forthwith, yet was he preuented by Cardenio, who taking her first by the hand, said at last; Ladie, thou art the beautifull Dorotea, daughter vnto rich Cleonardo. Dorotea rested admired when she heard her fathers name, and saw of how little value he seemed, who had named him. For we haue already recounted how raggedly Cardenio was clothed; and therefore she said vnto him, and who art thou friend that knowest so well my fathers name; for vntill this houre (if I haue not forgotten my selfe) I did not once name him throughout the whole Discourse of my vnfortunate tale? I am (answered Cardenio) the vnluckie Knight whom Luscinda (as thou saidst) affirmed to be her husband. I am the disastrous Cardenio, whom the wicked proceeding of him that hath also brought thee to those termes wherein thou art, hath conducted me to the
 state in which I am, and thou mayest beholde ragged, naked, abandoned by all humane comfort, and what is worse, voyde of sense; seeing I onely enioy it but at some few short times, and that, when heauen pleaseth to lend it me. I am hee Dorotea that was present at Don Fernandoes vnreasonable wedding, and that heard the consent which Luscinda gaue him to be his wife. I was hee that had not the courage to stay and see the end of her traunce, or what became of the paper found in her bosome. For my soule had not power or sufferance, to beholde so many disuentures at once, and therefore abandoned the place and my patience together, and onely left a Letter with mine Hoste, whom I intreated to deliuer it into Luscinda her owne handes, and then came into these desarts, with resolution to end in them my miserable life, which since that houre I haue hated as my most mortall enemie. But fortune hath not pleased to depriue me of it, thinking it sufficient to haue impaired my wit, perhaps reseruing me for the good successe befalne me now in finding of your selfe: for that being true (as I beleeue it is) which you haue here discoursed, peraduenture it may haue reserued yet better hap for vs both in our disasters then we doe expect. For presupposing that Luscinda cannot marry with Don Fernando because she is mine, nor Don Fernando with her because yours: and that she hath declared so manifestly the same: we may well hope that heauen hath meanes to restore to euery one that which is his owne, seeing it yet consists in being not made away, or anihilated. And seeing this comfort remaines, not sprung from any very remote hope, nor founded on idle surmises, I request thee faire Ladie to take another resolution in thine honourable thought, seeing I meane to do it in mine, and let vs accommodate our selues to expect better successe. For I doe vow vnto thee by the faith of a Gentleman and Christian, not to forsake thee vntill I see thee in Don Fernandoes possession, and when I shall not by reasons be able
 to induce him to acknowledge how farre he rests indebted to thee, then will I vse the liberty graunted to me as a Gentleman, and with iust title challenge him to the fielde, in respect of the wrong he hath done vnto thee; forgetting wholly mine owne iniuries, whose reuenge I will leaue to heauen, that I may be able to right yours on earth.
Dorotea rested wonderfully admired hauing knowne and heard Cardenio, and ignoring what competent thanks she might returne him in satisfaction of his large offers, she cast her selfe downe at his feete to haue kist them, which Cardenio would not permit: and the Licenciat answered for both praysing greatly Cardenios discourse: and chiefly intreated, prayed, and counselled them, that they would go with him to his village, where they might fitte hemselues with such things as they wanted, and also take order how to search out Don Fernando, or carrie Dorotea to her fathers house, or doe else what they deemed most conuenient. Cardenio and Dorotea gratified his courtesies, and accepted the fauour hee proffered. The Barber also who had stood all the while silent and suspended, made them a prettie Discourse, with as friendly an offer of himselfe, and his seruice as Master Curate; and likewise did briefly relate the occasion of their comming thither, with the extrauagant kinde of madnesse which Don-Quixote had, and how they expected now his Squires returne, whom they had sent to search for him. Cardenio hauing heard him named, remembred presently as in a dreame the conflict past betweene them both, and recounted it vnto them, but could not in any wise call to minde the occasion thereof.
By this time they heard one call for them, and knew by the voyce that it was Sancho Pancas, who because hee found them not in the place where he had left them, cryed out for them as loudly as he might. They went to meete him, and demaunding for Don-Quixote, he answered
 that he found him all naked to his shirt, leane, yellow, almost dead for hunger, and sighing for his Lady Dulcinea: and although he had tolde him, how she commaunded him to repaire presently to Toboso, where she expected him: yet notwithstanding he answered that he was determined neuer to appeare before her beautie, vntill he had done feats that should make him worthy of her gratious fauour. And then the Squire affirmed if that humor passed on any further, hee feared his Lord would be in danger neuer to become an Emperour as he was bound in honour, no nor a Cardinall, which was the least that could be expected of him. The Licenciat bid him be of good cheere, for they would bring him from thence whether he would or no; and recounted to Cardenio and Dorotea, what they had bethought for Don-Quixotes remedie, or at least for the carrying of him home to his house. To that Dorotea answered, that she would counterfeit the distressed Ladie better then the Barber; and chiefly seeing shee had apparrell wherewithall to acte it most naturally. And therefore desired them to leaue to her charge the representing of all that which should bee needfull for the atchieuing of their designe; for she had read many books of Knighthood, and knew well the stile that distressed damzels vsed, when they requested any fauour of Knights aduenturous. And then neede we nothing else, quoth the Curate, but onely to put our purpose presently in execution. For questionlesse good successe turnes on our side, seeing it hath so vnexpectedly begun alreadie to open the gates of your remedy, and hath also facilitated for vs that wherof we had most necessity in this exigent. Dorotea tooke forthwith out of her pillowbeare a whole gowne of very rich stuffe, and a short mantle of another greene stuffe, and a collar and many other rich jewels out of a boxe, wherewithall she adorned her selfe in a trice so gorgeously, as shee seemed a very rich and goodly Ladie. Al which and much more she had brought
 with her as she said from her house, to preuent what might happen, but neuer had any vse of them vntill then. Her grace, gesture and beautie liked them all extremely, and made them account Don Fernando to be a man of little vnderstanding, seeing he contemned such feature. But he which was most of all admired was Sancho Panca, because, as he thought (and it was so indeed) that he had not in all the dayes of his life before seene so faire a creature: and he requested the Curate very seriously to tell him who that beautifull Ladie was? and what she sought among those through-fares? This faire Lady friend Sancho, answered the Curate, is (as if a man said nothing she is so great) is heire apparent by direct line of the mighty Kingdome of Micomicon, and comes in the search of your Lord, to demaund a boone of him, which is, that he will destroy and vndoe a great wrong done vnto her by a wicked Giant; and through the great fame which is spread ouer all Guinea of your Lords prowesse, this Princesse is come to finde him out. A happy searcher, and a fortunate finding, quoth Sancho, and chiefly if my Master be so happie as to right that iniurie, and redresse that wrong by killing that, O! the mighty lubber of a Giant whom you say: yes, he will kill him, I am very certaine, if he can once but meete him, and if that he be not a spirit; For my Master hath no kinde of power ouer spirits. But I must request one fauour of you among others most earnestly good Master Licenciat, and tis, that to the end my Lord may not take an humour of becomming a Cardinall (which is the thing I feare most in this world) that you will giue him counsell to marry this Princesse presently, and by that meanes he shall remaine incapable of the dignitie of a Cardinall, and will come very easily by his Empyre, and I to the end of my desires: for I haue thought well of the matter, and haue found that it is in no wise expedient that my Lord should become a Cardinall, for I am wholy vnfit for any Ecclesiasticall dignitie,
 seetng I am a married man, and therefore to trouble my selfe now with seeking of dispensations to inioy Church-liuings, hauing as I haue both wife and children, were neuer to end: so that all my good consists in that my Lord do marry this Princesse instantly whose name yet I know not, and therfore I haue not said it. She is hight quoth the Curate the Princesse Micomicona, for her Kingdome being called Micomicon, it is euident she must be termed so. That is questionlesse quoth Sancho, for I haue knowne many to take their denomination and surname from the place of their birth, calling themselues Peter of Alcala, Iohn of Vbeda, and Iames of Valedolie: and perhaps in Guinea princes and Queenes vse the same custome, and call themselues by the names of their prouinces. So I thinke quoth the Curate, and as touching your Masters marriage with her, I will labour therein as much as lies in my power. Wherewithall Sancho remained as well satisfied; as the Curate admired at his simplicitie, and to see how firmely hee had fixed in his fantasie the very rauings of his master, seeing he did beleeue without doubt that his Lord should become an Emperour. Dorotea in this space had gotten vpon the Curates Mule, and the Barber had somewhat better fitted the beard which he made of the Oxes tayle on his face, and did after intreat Sancho to guide them to the place where Don-Quixote was, and aduertised him withall, that he should in no wise take any notice of the Curate or Barber, or confesse in any sort that he knew them, for therein consisted all the meanes of bringing Don-Quixote to the minde to become an Emperour. Yet Cardinio would not goe with them, fearing lest thereby Don-Quixote might call to minde their contention: and the Curate thinketh also that his presence was not expedient, remained with him, letting the others goe before, and these followed a farre off faire and softly on foote, and ere they departed the Curate instructed Dorotea a new, what she
 should say, who bid him to feare nothing, for she would discharge her part to his satisfaction, and as bookes of chiualrie required and laid downe.
They trampled about three quarters of a league, as they espied the Knight, and at last they discouered him among a number of intricate rocks, all apparelled but not armed: and as soone as Dorotea beheld him, she strucke her palfray, her well bearded Barber following her: and as they approached Don-Quixote, the Barber leaped lightly down from his Mule, and ranne towards Dorotea to take her down betweene his armes, who allighting, went with a very good grace towards Don-Quixote, and keeled before him, and although hee striued to make her arise, yet shee remaining still on her knees spake to him in this manner: I will not arise from hence thrice valourous and approued knight, vntill your bountie and courtesie shall grant vnto me one boone, which shall much redound vnto your honour and prize of your person, and to the profit of the most disconsolate and wronged Damsell that the Sunne hath euer seene. And if it be so that the valour of your inuincible bee correspondent to the bruite of your immortall fame, you are obliged to succour this comfortlesse weight, that comes from lands so remote, to the sound of your famous name, searching you for to remedie his mishaps. I will not answere you a word faire Lady quoth Don-Quixote, nor heare a iet of your affaire, vntill you arise from the ground. I will not get vp from hence my Lord quoth the afflicted Ladie, if first of your wonted bountie you doe not grant to my request. I do giue and grant it said Don-Quixote, so that it be not a thing that may turne to the dammage or hinderance of my king, my countrey, or of her that keepes the key of my heart and liberty. It shall not turne to the dammage or hinderance of those you haue said, good Sir, replied the dolorous Damsell; and as she was saying this, Sancho Panca rounded his Ladie in the eare saying: softly
 to him, Sir you may very well grant the request she asketh, for it is a matter of nothing, it is onely to kill a monstrous Giant, and she that demands it is the mighty Princesse Micomicona in Ethiopia. Let her be what she will quoth Don-Quixote, for I will accomplish what I am bound, and my conscience shal informe me comformable to the state I haue professed: and then turning to the Damsell he said. Let your great beauty arise, for I grant to you any boone which you shall please to aske of me. Why then quoth the Damsell that which I demaund is, that your magnanimous person come presently away with mee, to the place where I shall carry you, and do likewise make me a promise, not to vndertake any other aduenture or demaund vntill you reuenge me vpon a traytour who hath against all lawes both diuine, and humane vsurped my kingdome. I say that I grant you all that quoth Don-Quixote, and therefore Ladie you may cast away from this day forward all the melancholy that troubles you, and labour that your languishing and dismaied hopes may recouer again new strength and courage, for by the helpe of God, and that of mine arme you shall see your selfe shortly restored to your kingdome, and enthronized in the chayre of your ancient and great estate, in despite and maugre the traytours that shall dare gainesay it: and therefore Hands to the worke for they say, that danger alwaies followes delay. The distressed Damsell striued with much ado to kisse his hand, but Don-Quixote who was a most accomplished Knight for courtesie, would neuer condescend thereunto, but making her arise, he imbraced her with great kindenesse and respect; and commaunded Sancho to saddle Rozinante, and helpe him to arme himselfe. Sancho tooke downe the armes forth with, which hung on a tree like trophies, and searching the guirts armed his Lord in a moment, who seeing himselfe armed said, let vs in Gods name depart from hence to assist this great Lady. The barber kneeled all
 this while, and could with much adoe dissemble his laughter or keepe on his beard that threatned still to fall off, with whose fall perhaps they should all haue remained without bringing their good purpose to passe: and seeing that the boone was granted, and noted the diligence wherewirhall Don-Quixote made himselfe readie to depart and accomplish the same: hee arose and tooke his Ladie by the hand, and both of them together holpe her vpon her Mule: and presently after Don-Quixote leaped on Rozinante, and the Barber got vp on his beast, Sancho onely remayning a foote: where hee a fresh renued the memory of the losse of his gray Asse, with the want procured to him thereby. But all this he bore with very great patience, because he supposed that his Lord was now in the way, and next degree to be an Emperour: for he made an infallible account that he would marry that Princesse, and at least be King of Micomicon: but yet it grieued him to thinke how that Kingdome was in the countrey of blacke Moorer, and that therefore the Nation which should be giuen to him for his vassails should be all blacke: for which difficultie his imagination coyned presently a good remedie: and he discoursed with himselfe in this manner. Why should I care, though my subiects be all blacke Moores, is there any more to be done, then to loade them in a ship, and bring them into Spaine, where I may sell them, and receiue the price of them in readie money? And with that money may I buy some title or Office, wherein I may after liue at mine ease all the daies of my life? No! but sleepe, and and haue no wit, nor abilitie to dispose of things, and to sell thirtie or ten thousand vassailes in the space of one would say, giue me those strawes. I will dispatch thom all, they shall flie the little with the great, or as I can best contriue the matter. And be they euer so blacke I will transforme them into white or yellow ones; come neere and see whether I cannot sucke well my figers ends: And thus hee trauailed so
 sollicitous and glad, as he quite forgot his paine of trauailing a foote. Cardenio and the Curate stood in the meane time beholding all that passed from behinde some brambles, where they lay lurking and were in doubt what meanes to vse to issue and ioyne in company with them. But the Curate who was an ingenious and prompt plotter deuised instantly what was to bee done, that they might attaine their desire, thus he tooke out of his case a payre of sheares, and cut off Cardenioes beard therewithall in a trice, and then gaue vnto him to weare a riding Capouch which he himselfe had on, and a blacke cloake; and himselfe walked in a dublet and hose. Cardenio thus attired looked so vnlike that he was before, as he would not haue knowne himselfe in a looking glasse. This being finished, and the others gone on before whilst they disguised themselues, they sallied out with facility to the high way before Don-Quixote or his company, for the rocks and many other bad passages did not permit those that were a horsebacke to make so speedie an end of their iourney as they: and when they had throughly past the mountaine, they expected at the foot thereof for the Knight and his companie: and when the Knight appeared, the Curate looked on him very earnestly for a great space, with inkling that he beganne to know him, and after he had a good while beheld him, he ranne towards him with his arms spread abroad saying. In a good howre be it the mirrour of all knighthood found and my noble country man Don-Quixote of the Mancha, the flower and the creame of gentilitie, the shadow and remedie of the afflicted and the Quintessence of knights erra^t: and saying this he held Don-Quixote his left thigh embraced. Who, admiring at that which he heard that man to say and do, did also reuiew him with attention, and finally knew him, and all amazed to see him, made much ado to alight, but the Curate would not permit him: wherefore Don-Quixote said good Master Licenciat permit me
 to alight, for it is in no sort decent that I be a horsebacke, and so reuerend a person as you goe on foote: I will neuer consent thereunto, quoth the Curate, your highnes must needs stay on horseback, seeing that theron you are accustomed to atchieue the greatest feats of Chiualrie and aduentures, which were euer seene in our age. For it shall suffice me, who am an vnworthy Priest, to get vp behinde some one of these other Gentlemen that ride in your company, if they will not take it in bad part, yea and I will make account that I ride on Pegasus, or the A strange beast of Affricke that trauels very swiftly. Zebra of the famous Moore Muzaraque, who lies yet inchanted in the steepe rocke of Culema, neere vnto Alcala of Henares. Truely I did not thinke vpon it good Master Licenciat, answered Don-Quixote, yet I presume that my Lady the Princesse will be well appaide for my sake to commaund her Squire to lend you the vse of his saddle, and to get vp himselfe on the Croper, if so it be that the beast will beare double. Yes that it will, said the Princesse for ought I know, and likewise I am sure it will not be necessary to commaund my Squire to alight, for he is of himselfe so courteous and courtly, as he will in no wise condescend that an Ecclesiasticall man should go a foote when he may helpe him to a horse. That is most certaine, quoth the Barber; and saying so he alighted, and intreated the Curate to take the saddle; to which courtesie he did easily condescend. But by euill fortune as the Barber thought to leape vp behind him: the Mule which was in effect a hired one (and that is sufficient to say it was vnhappy) did lift a little her hinder quarters, and bestowed two or three flings on the ayre, which had they hit on Master Nicholas his brest or pate, he would haue bequeathed the quest of Don-Quixote vpon the Diuill: but notwithstanding the Barber was so affrighted, as he fell on the ground with so little heed of his beard, as it fell quite off, and lay spread vpon the ground: and perceiuing himselfe without it, he had no other shift, but to couer his
 face with both his handes, and complaine that all his cheeke teeth were strucken out. Don-Quixote beholding such a great sheafe of a beard falne away, without jaw or bloud from the face, he said, I vow this is one of the greatest miracles that euer I saw in my life; it hath taken and pluckt away his beard, as smoothly as if it were done of purpose. The Curate beholding the danger wherein their inuention was like to incurre if it were detected, went forthwith, and taking vp the beard came to Master Nicholas that lay still a playing, and with one push bringing his head towards his owne brest, he set it on againe, murmuring the while ouer him certaine wordes, which he said were a certaine prayer, appropriated to the setting on of falne beardes, as they should soone perceiue: And so hauing set it on handsomly, the Squire remained as wel bearded and whole as euer hee was in his life: whereat Don-Quixote rested maruellously admired, and requested the Curate to teach him that prayer when they were at leasure. For he supposed that the verture therof extended it selfe farther then to the fastning on of beardes; since it was manifest that the place whence the beard was torne, must haue remained without flesh, wounded and il-dight; and seeing it cured all, it must of force serue for more then the beard. It is true, replyed Master Curate; and then promised to instruct him with the secret, with the first oportunity that was presented.
Then they agreed that the Curate should ride first on the Mule, and after him the other two, each one by turnes vntill they arriued to the Inne, which was about some two leagues thence. Three being thus mounted, to wit, Don-Quixote, the Princesse and Curate, and the other three on foote, Cardenio, the Barber, and Sancho Pancas. Don-Quixote said to the damzell, Madame, let me intreat your highnesse to leade me the way that most pleaseth you. And before she could answere, the Licenciat said, Towards what Kingdome would you trauell? Is it by
 fortune towards that of Micomicon? I suppose it should be thitherwards, or else I know but little of Kingdomes. She who knew very well the Curates meaning, and was her selfe no babe, answered, saying; Yes Sir, my way lies towards that Kingdome. If it be so, quoth the Curate, you must passe thorow the village where I dwell, and from thence direct your course towards Cartagena, where you may luckily embarke your selues. And if you haue a prosperous winde, and a quiet and calme Sea, you may come within the space of nine yeares to the sight of the lake Meona, I meane Meolidas, which stands in this side of your Highnesse Kingdome some hundred dayes iourney or more. I take you to be deceiued good Sir, quoth shee; for it is not yet fully two yeares since I departed from thence; and truely I neuer almost had any faire weather, and yet notwithstanding I haue arriued, and come to see that which I so much longed for, to wit, the presence of the worthy Don-Quixote of the Mancha, whose renowne came to my notice as soone as I touched the earth of Spaine with my foote, and moued me to search for him, to commend my selfe to his courtesie, and commit the iustice of my cause to the valour of his inuincible arme. No more, quoth Don-Quixote, I cannot abide to heare my selfe praysed. For I am a sworne enemy of all adulation. And although this be not such, yet notwithstanding the like discourses doe offend my chaste eares. What I can say to you faire Princesse is, that whether I haue valour or not; that which I haue or haue not, shalbe imploied in your seruice, euen to the very losse of my life. And so omitting that til his time, let me intreat good Master Licenciate, to tell me the occasion which hath brought him heere to these quarters so alone, without attendants, and so slightly attired, as it strikes me in no little admiration? To this I will answere with breuity, quoth the Curate: You shall vnderstand that Master Nicholas the Barber, our very good friend, and my selfe, trauelled
 towards Siuill, to recouer certaine summes of money, which a kinseman of mine, who dwels this many yeares in the Indias hath sent vnto me. The summe is not a little one, for it surmounted seuenty thousand Rials of eight, all of good waight: see if it was not a rich gift. And passing yesterday through this way we were set vppon by foure robbers, which dispoyled vs of all, euen to our very beardes, and that in such sort, as the Barber was forced to fet on a counterfeit one: and this young man that goeth here with vs (meaning Cardenio) was transformed by them anew. And the best of it is, that it is publikely bruited about all this Commarke, that those which surprised vs were Galley-flaues, who were set at liberty, as it is reproted, much about this same place, by so valiant a Knight, as in despite of the Commissarie and the guard he freed them all. And questionlesse hee either was wood, or else as great a knaue as themselues, or some one that wanted both soule and conscience, seeing he let slip the Wolues amidst the Sheepe, the Foxe among the Hennes, and Flies hard by Honie; and did frustrate iustice, rebell against his naturall Lord and King, for he did so by oppugning his iust commaundements, and hath depriued the Gallies of their feete, and set all the Holy brotherhood in an vprore, which hath reposed these many yeares past. And finally, would doe an acte, by which he should loose his soule, and yet not gaine his bodie. Sancho had rehearsed to the Curate and Barber the aduenture of the slaues, which his Lord had accomplished with such glorie, and therefore the Curate did vse this vehemencie as he repeated it, to see what Don-Quixote would say or doe, whose colour changed at euery word, and durst not confesse that he was himselfe, and the deliuerer of that good people: and these, quoth the Curate, were they that haue robbed vs, and God of his infinite mercy pardon him who hindered their going to receiue the punishment they had so well deserued.



CHAP. III.

Of many pleasant discourses passed betweene Don-Quixote, and those of his companie, after he had abandoned the rigorous place of his penance.

SCarce had the Curate finished his speech throughly, when Sancho said: By my faith Master Licenciate, he that did that feate was my Lord, and that not for want of warning, for I told him before hand, and aduised him, that he should see well what he did, and that it was a sinne to deliuer them, because they were all sent to the Gallies for very great villanies they had played. You bottlehead, replyed Don-Quixote, hearing him speake, it concerneth not Knights errant to examine whether the afflicted, inchained, and oppressed which they encounter by the way, be carried in that fashion, or are plunged in that distresse, through their owne default or disgrace; but onely are obliged to assist them as needie and oppressed, setting their eyes vpon their paines and not on their crimes. I met with a Rosarie or beades of inserted people, sorrowful and vnfortunate, and I did for them that which my religion exacts, as for the rest, let them verifie it elsewhere: and to whosoeuer else the holy dignity and honourable person of Master Licenciat excepted, it shall seeme euill: I say hee knowes but slightly what belongs to Chiualrie; and hee lies like a whoreson and a villaine borne: and this will I make him know with the broade side of my sword. These wordes he said, setling himselfe in his stirrups, and addressing his Morion for the Barbers bason, which he accounted to be Mambrino his helmet, he carried hanging at the pomell of his saddle, vntill he might haue it repaired of the crasings the Galley slaue had wrought in it. Dorotea who
 was very disceeete and pleasant, and that was by this well acquainted with Don-Quixotes faultie humour, and saw all the rest make a rest of him, Sancho Panca excepted, would also shew her conceit to bee as good as some others, and therefore said vnto him, Sir knight remember your selfe of the boone you haue promised vnto mee, wherunto conforming your selfe you cannot intermeddle in any other aduenture, be it euer so vrgent. Therfore asswage your stomacke, for if Master Licentiat had known that the gallislaues were deliuered by your inuincible arme he would rather haue giuen vnto himselfe three blowes on the mouth, and also bit his tongue thrice then haue spoken any word whence might result your indignation. That I dare sweare quoth the Curate, yea and besides torne away one of my Mustachioes. Madame said Don-Quixote, I will hold my peace, and suppresse the iust choler already inkindled in my breast, and will ride quietly and peaceably, vntil I haue accomplished the thing I haue promised: and I request you in recompence of this my good desire, if it be not displeasing to you, to tell mee your grieua^ce, and how many, which, and what the persons be, of whom I must ^ake, due, sufficient, and entyre reuenge? I will promptly performe your will herein answered Dorotea, if it will not bee irkesome to you to listen to disasters, in no sort good Madame said Don-Quixote to which Dorotea answered thus, be then attentiue to my relation. Scarce had she said so when Cardedenio and the Barber came by her side, desirous to heare how the discreete Dorotea would faine her tale: and the same did Sancho, which was as much deceiued in her person as his Lord Don-Quixote and she after dressing her selfe well in the saddle, bethought and prouided her selfe whilst she coughed and vsed other gestures, and then began to speake in this manner.
First of all good Sirs I would haue you note that I am called, and heere she stood suspended a while by reason
 she had forgotten the name that the Curate had giuen vnto her; but he presently occurd to her succour vnderstanding the cause and said. It is no wonder great Ladie, that you be troubled and stagger whilest you recount your misfortunes, seeing it is their ordinary custome of disasters to depriue those whom they torment and distract their memory in such sort, as they cannot remember themselues, euen of their owne very names; as now it proues done in your highnesse which forgets it selfe, that you are called the Princes Micomicona lawfull inheritix of the great Kingdome of Micomicon: and with this note you may easily reduce into your dolefull memorie, all that which you shall please to rehearse. It is very true (quoth the Damsell) and from henceforth I thinke it will not be needfull to prompt me any more, for I will arriue into a safe port, with the narration of my authenticke Historie: which is, that my father who was called the wise Imacrio, was very expert in that which is called Art Magick, and he knew by his science that my mother, who was called Queene Xaramilla should die before he deceased, and that he should also passe from this life within a while after, and leaue me an Orphane, but he was woont to say how that did not afflict his mind so much, as that he was very certaine that a huge Giant, Lord of a great Iland neere vnto my Kingdome called Pandafilando, of the duskie sight: because although his eyes stand in their right places, yet doe they still looke a squint. which he doth to terrifie the beholders. I say that my father knew that this Giant when he should beare of his death, would passe with a maine power into my land, and depriue me therof, not leauing me the lest village, wherein I might hide my head. Yet might all this be excused, if I would marry with him, but as he found out by his science, he knew I would neuer condiscend thereunto, or incline mine affection to so vnequall a marriage: and herein he said nothing but truth, for it neuer past once my thought to esspouse
 that Giant, nor with any other, were he euer so vnreasonable, great and mightie: my father likewise added then that after his death, and that I should see Landafilando vsurpe my kingdome, I should in no wise stand to my defence, for that would proue my destrurionction; but leauing to him the kingdome freely without troubles, if I meant to excuse mine owne death, and the totall ruine of my good and loyall subiects, for it would be impossible to defend my selfe from the diuellish force of the giant; I should presently direct my course towards Spayne, where I should find a redresse of my harms, by incountring with a knight errant, whose fame should extend it selfe much about that time throughout that kingdome, and his name should be if I forget not my selfe. Don Acote or Don Gigote. Ladie you would say Don-Quixote quoth Sancho Panca, or as he is called by another name, the Knight of the ilfauored face, you haue reason replied Dorotea: he said moreouer, that he should be high of stature, haue a withered face, and that on the right side a little vnder the left shoulder, or thereabouts he should haue a tawny spot with certaine haires like to bristles. Don-Quixote hearing this said to his Squire, hold my horse heere sonne Sancho; and helpe me to take of mine apparrell, for I will see whether I be the Knight off whom the wise king hath prophesied: Why would you now put off your cloathes quoth Dorotea? to see whether I haue that spot which your father mentioned, answered Don-Quixote: you need not vndoe your apparrell for that purpose said Sancho, for I know alreadie that you haue a spot with the tokens she named on the very ridges of your backe, and argues you to bee a very strong man: that is sufficient quoth Dorotea, for wee must not looke too neere, or be ouer curious in our friends affaires, and whether it be on the shoulder, or ridge of the backe it imports but little, for the substance consists onely in hauing such a marke, and that wheresoeuer it shall be;
 seeing all is one, and the selfe same flesh: and doutlesly my good father did ayme well at all, and I like wise in commending my selfe to Don-Quixote, for surely he is the man of whom my father spoke, seeing the signes of his face agree with those of the great renowne that is spread abrode of this knight, not onely in Spayne, but also in Ethiopia: for I had no sooner landed in Osuna, when I heard so many of his prowesses recounted, as my minde gaue me presently that he was the man in whose search I trauailed. But how did you land in Osuna good Madam quoth Don-Quixote, seeing it is no Sea-towne? Marrie sir quoth the Curate anticipating Doroteas answere, the Princesse would say that after she had landed in Magala, the first place wherein she heard tidings of you was at Osuna. So I would haue said quoth Dorotea, and it may be very wel quoth the Curate, and I desire your Maiestie to continue your discourse; there needs no farther continuation quoth Dorotea, but that finally my fortune hath beene so fauourable in finding of Don-Quixote, as I doe alreadie hold and account my selfe for Queene and Ladie of all mine estate, seeing that hee of his wonted bountie and magnificence hath promised mee the boone to accompany me wheresoeuer I shall guide him, which shall be to none other place then to set him before Pandafilando of the duskie sight, to the end you may sley him, and restore me to that which he hath so wrongfully vsurped: for all will succeede in the twinkling of an eye, as the wise Tinacrio my good father hath alreadie foretold: who said moreouer, and also left it written in Chaldaicall or Greeke characters, for I cannot read them, that if the knight of the Prophecie, after hauing beheaded the Giant, would take me to wife, that I should in no sort refuse him, but instantly admitting him for my spouse, make him at once possessor of my selfe and my Kingdome.
VVhat thinkest thou of this friend Sancho quoth
 Don-Quixote then, when he heard her say so, how likest this point? did not I tell thee thus much before? see now whether we haue not a kingdome to commaund, and a Queene whom we may marry? I sweare as much quoth Sancho, a poxe on the knaue that will not marry as soone as Master Pandahlado his windepipes are cut. Mount then and see whether the Queene be ill or no, I would to God all the fleas of my bed turned to be such. And saying so he gaue two or three friskles in the ayre, with very great signes of contentment, and presently went to Dorotea, and taking her Mule by the bridle he withheld it, and laying himselfe downe downe on his knees before he requested her very submissiuely to giue him her hands to kisse them, in signe that hee receiued her for his Queene and Ladie. Which of the beholders could abstaine from laughter, perceiuing the masters madnesse, and the seruants simplicity? To be briefe Dorotea must haue giuen them vnto him, and promised to make him a great Lord in her kingdome, when heauen became so propitious to her, as to let her once recouer and possesse it peaceablie. And Sancho returned her thanks with such words as made them all laugh a new. This is my Historie noble Sirs quoth Dorotea, whereof onely restes vntold, that none of all the traine which I brought out of my Kingdome to attend on mee is now extant, but this well bearded squire; for all of them were drowned in a great storme that ouertooke vs in the very sight of the harborough whence he and I escaped, and came to land by the helpe of two plankes, on which we laid hold, almost by miracle, as also the whole discourse and mysterie of my life seemes none other then a miracle, as you might haue noted: And if in any part of the relation I haue exceeded, or not obserued a due decorum, you must impute it to that which Master Licenciat said to the first of my History, that continuall paines that afflictions of mind depriues them that suffer the like of their memory.
 That shall not hinder mee (O high and valorous Ladie) quoth Don-Quixote, from enduring as many as I shall suffer in your seruice be they euer so great or difficult. And therfore I doe anew ratifie and confirme the promise I haue made, and doe sweare to goe with you to the end of the world vntill I finde out your fierce enemy, whose proud head I meane to slice off by the helpe of God, and my valorous arme, with the edge of this (I will not say a good) sword: thanks be to Gines of Passamonte, which tooke away mine owne: this he said murmuring to himselfe, and then prosecuted saying: and after I haue cut it off, and left you peaceably in the possession of your state, it shal rest in your owne will to dispose of your person as you like best. For as long as I shall haue my memory possessed, and my will captiued, and my vnderstanding yeelded to her, I will say no more, it is not possible that euer I moy induce my selfe to marry any other, although shee were a Phoenix.
That which Don-Quixote had said last of all of not marrying disliked Sancho so much as lifting his voyce with great anger he said, I vow and sweare by my selfe that you are not in your right wits, Sir Don-Quixote: for how is it possible that you can call the matter of contracting so high a Princesse as this is in doubt? do you think that fortune will offer you at euery corners end the like happe of this which is now proffered? Is my Ladie Dulcinea perhaps more beautifull, no certainly nor the halfe, so faire, nay I am rather about to say, that she comes not to her shoo that is heere present. In an ill howre shel I arriue to possesse that vnfortunate Earldome which I expect if you go thus seeking for Mushrubs in the bottome of the Sea: Marry, marry your selfe presently; the diuell take you for me, and take that kingdome comes into your hands, and being a King make me presently a Marquesse, or Admirall, and instantly after let the diuell take all if he pleseth. Don-Quixote, who heard such blasphemies
 spoken against his Lady Dulcinea, could not beare them any longer, and therefore lifting vp his Iaueline without speaking any word to Sancho, gaue him therewithall two such blowes as hee ouerthrew him to the earth: and had not Dorotea cried to him, to hold his hand he had doubtlesly slaine him in the place. Thinkest thou (quoth he after a while) base peasant, that I shall haue alwaies leasure and disposition to thrust my hand into my pouch, and that there be nothing else but thou still erring and I pardoning, and dost not thou thinke of it (excommunicated rascall) for certainly thou art excommunicated, seeing thou hast talked so broadly of the peerelesse Dulcinea, and doest not thou know base slaue, vagabond, that if it were not for the valour she infuseth into mine arme, that I should not haue sufficient forces to kill a flea. Say scoffer with the vipers tongue, who dost thou thinke hath gained this kingdome, and cut the head of this Giant: and made thee a Marquesse, (For I giue all this for done alreadie, and for a matter ended and iudged) but the worthes and valour of Dulcinea: vsing mine arme as the instrument of her act. She fights vnder my person, and ouercomes in me: And I liue and breath in her, and from her I hold my life and being. O whoreson villaine, how vngratefull art thou that seest thy sele exalted out from the dust of the earth to be a Noble man, and yet dost repay so great a benefit, with detracting the person that bestowed it on thee.
Sancho was not so sore hurt, but that he could heare all his Masters reasons very well: wherefore arising somewhat hastily, he ran behinde Dorotea her Palfrey, and from thence said to his Lord: Tell me Sir, if you be not determined to marrie with this Princesse, it is most cleere that the kingdome shall not be yours: and if it be not, what fauours can you be able to doe to me? It is of this that I complaine me, marrie your selfe one for one with this Princesse, now that we haue heere, as it were rained
 to vs downe from heauen, and you may after turne to my Ladie Dulcinea, for I thinke there bee Kings in the world, that keepe Lemmans. As for beautie, I will not intermeddle, for if I must say the truth, each of both is very faire, although I haue neuer seene the Ladie Dulcinea. How, hast not thou seene her blasphemous traytor, quoth Don-Quixote, if thou didst but euen now bring mee a message from her? I say, quoth Sancho, I haue not seene her so leisurely, as I might particularly note her beautie and good parts one by one, but yet in a clap as I saw them, they liked me very well. I doe excuse thee now, said Don-Quixote, and pardon me the displeasure which I haue giuen vnto thee, for the first motions are not in our hands. I see that well, quoth Sancho, and that is the reason why talke is in me of one of those first motions. And I cannot omit to speake once at least, that which comes to my tongue. For all that Sancho, replied Don-Quixote, see well what thou speakest, for the earthen pitcher goes so oft to the water. I will say no more.
Well then answered Sancho, God is in heauen, who seeth all these guiles, and shall be one day iudge of him that sinnes most, of me in not speaking well, or of you by not doing well. Let there be no more, quoth Dorotea, but run Sancho and kisse your Lords hand, and aske him forgiuenesse, and from henceforth take more heede how you praise or dispraise any body, and speake no ill of that Ladie Toboso, whom I doe not know otherwise then to doe her seruice: and haue confidence in God, for thou shalt not want a Lordship wherein thou mayest liue like a King. Sancho went with his head hanging downward, and demaunded his Lords hand, which he gaue vnto him with a graue countenance; and after he had kissed it, he gaue him his blessing, and said vnto him, that he had somewhat to say vnto him, and therefore bade hime to come somewhat forward that he might speake vnto him. Sancho obeyed, and both of them going a little aside, Don-Qaixote
 said vnto him, I haue not had leisure, after thy comming, to demaund of thee in particular concerning the Embassage that thou carriedst, and the answere that thou broughtest backe: and therefore fortune lends vs now some oportunitie and leisure, doe not denie me the happinesse which thou mayest giue me by thy good newes. Demaund what you please, quoth Sancho, and I will answere you, and I request you good my Lord, that you be not from henceforth so vengatiue. Why doest thou say so Sancho? quoth Don-Quixotee. I say it, replied Sancho, because that these blowes which you bestowed now, were rather giuen in reuenge of the dissension which the Diuell stirred betweene vs two the other night, then for any thing I said against my Lady Dulcinea, whom I doe honour and reuerence as a relike, although she be none, only because she is yours. I pray thee good Sancho said Don-Quixote, fal not againe into those discourses, for they offend me. I did pardon thee then, and thou knowest that a new offence must haue a new panence.
As they talked thus, they espied a gallant comming towards them, riding on an Asse, and when he drew neere he seemed to be an Aegyptian: but Sancho Panca, who whensoeuer he met any Asses, followed them with his eyes and his heart, as one that thought still on his owne, had scarce eyed him when he knew that it was Gines of Passamonte, and by the looke of that Aegyptian, found out the fleece of the Asse: as in truth it was, for Gines came riding on his gray Asse: who to the end that hee might not be knowne, and also haue commoditie to sell his beast, attired himselfe like an Aegyptian, whose language and many others he could speake as well as if they were his mother tongue. Sancho saw him and knew him, and scarce had he seene and taken notice of him, when he cried out aloud, Ah thiefe Ginesillo, leaue my goods behinde thee, set my life loose, and doe not intermeddle with my ease. Leaue mine Asse, leaue my comfort,
 flie villaine, absent thy selefe thiefe, and abandon that which is none of thine. Hee needed not to haue vsed so many words and frumpes, for Gines leaped downe at the verie first, and beginning a trot that seemed rather to be a gallop, he absented himselfe and fled farre enough from them in a moment. Sancho went then to his Asse, and imbracing him, said, How hast thou done hitherto my darling and treasure, gray Asse of mine eyes, and my deerest companion: and with that stroked and kissed him as if it were a reasonable creature. The Asse held his peace, and permitted Sancho to kisse and cherish him, without answering a word. All the rest arriued, and congratulated with Sancho for the finding of his Asse, but chiefely Don-Quixote, who said vnto him, that notwithstanding that he found his Asse, yet would not he therefore annull his warrant for the three Colts; for which Sancho returned him very great thanks.
Whilest they two trauelled together discoursing thus, the Curate said to Dorotea, that she had very discreetely discharged her selfe, as well in the History, as in her breuitie and imitation thereof, to the phrase and conceits of bookes of knighthood: she answered that she did oft times read bookes of that subiect, but that she knew not where the Prouinces lay, nor Sea Ports, and therefore did only say at randome, that she had landed in Osuna. I knew it was so, quoth the Curate, and therefore I said what you heard, wherewithall the matter was souldered. But is it not a maruellous thing to see with what facilitie the vnfortunate Gentleman beleeues all these inuentions and lies, onely because they beare the stile and manner of the follies laid downe in his bookes? It is quoth Cardenio, and that so rare and beyond all conceit, as I beleeue if the like were to be inuented, scarce could the sharpest wits deuise such another. There is yet, quoth the Curate, as maruellous a matter as that: for leauing apart the simplicities which the good Gentleman speakes concerning
 his frensie, if you will commune with him of any other subiect whatsoeuer he will discourse on it with an excellent methode, and shew himselfe to haue a cleere and pleasing vnderstanding. So that, if he be not touched by matters of Chiualry, there is no man but will deeme him to be of a sound and excellent iudgement.
Don-Quixote on the other side prosecuted his conuersing with his Squire, whilest the others talked together; and said to Sancho: Let vs two friend Panca forget olde iniuries, and say vnto me now without any rancour or anger, where, how, and when didst thou finde my Ladie Dulcinea? What did she when thou camest? What saidst thou to her? What answered shee? What countenance shewed she as she read my Letter? And who writ it out fairely for thee? And euery other thing that thou shalt thinke worthy of notice in this affaire, to be demanded or answered, without either addition or lying, or soothing adulation: and on the other side do not abbreuiate it, lest thou shouldest defraude me thereby of expected delight. Sir, answered Sancho, if I must say the truth, none copied out the Letter for me, for I caried no Letter at all. Thou sayest true, quoth Don-Quixote, for I found the Tablets wherein it was written with my selfe, two dayes after thy departure, which did grieue me exceedingly, because I knew not what thou wouldest do, when thou didst perceiue the want of the Letter, and I alwaies made full account that thou wouldest returne againe from the place where thou shouldest first misse it. I had done so, quoth Sancho, if I had not borne it away in memory, when you read it to me, in such sort, as I said it to a Clerke of a Vestrie, who did copie it out of my vnderstanding so point by point, as hee said that hee neuer in all the dayes of his life, although he had read many a Letter of excommunication, read or seene so fine a Letter as it was. And dost thou holde it yet in memory Sancho quoth Don-Quixote? No Sir, said Sancho, for after I gaue it, seeing it serued
 for none other purpose, I did willingly forget it. And if I remember any thing it is that of the mouldy, I would say Soueraigne Ladie, and the end, Yours vntill death, The Knight of the ill fauoured face, and I put betweene these two things in the Letter three hundred soules, and liues, and sweet eyes.


CHAP. IIII.

Of the pleasant discourses continued betweene Don-Quixote, and his Squire Sancho Panca, with other aduentures.

ALl this liketh me well, said Don-Quixote, therefore say on, thou arriuedst, and what was that Queene of beauty doing then? I dare say that thou foundest her threeding of Pearls, or imbroidering some curious deuice, with Venice golde for me her captiue Knight? No that I did not, quoth Sancho, but winnowing two bushels of Wheate in the yard of her house. Why then said Don-Quixote, thou mayest make account that each corne of that Wheate was a graine of Pearle, seeing they were touched by her delicate hand. And friend didst thou note well what the Wheate was, whether of the best or ordinarie? It was not but redde, said Sancho. Well then I assure thee, answered Don-Quixote, that being sifted by her hands, it must needes make very faire bread and white. But passe forward, when thou didst deliuer my Letter, did she kisse it? Did she set it on her head? Did she vse any ceremony worthy of such a Letter? Or what did she? When I went to giue it vnto her, said Sancho, she was holding vp of her armes with a good quantity of Wheate that she had in her Siue, and therfore said vnto me, friend, lay downe that Letter there
 on the sacke, for I cannot reade it vntill I haue winnowed all that is here. O discreete Ladie, quoth Don-Quixote, she surely did that because she might reade it at leasure, and recreate her selfe therewithall. Forward Sancho, and as long as she was thus busied, what discourses passed she with thee? What did she demaund of thee concerning me? And thou, what didst thou answere? Say all good Sancho, say all, recount to me euery particularity, and let not the least immunity remaine in the Inke-horne. She demaunded nothing of me, quoth Sancho, but I recounted vnto her the state I had left you in for her sake, doing of penance, all naked from the gyrdle vpward among these rockes like a bruit beast; sleeping on the ground, and eating your bread without Table-clothes, and that you neuer combed your beard, but was weeping and cursing your fortune. There thou saidst ill (quoth Don-Quixote) for I doe not curse my fortune, but rather blisse it, and will blisse it as long as I shall liue, seeing it hath made me worthy to merite the loue of so high a Lady as Dulcinea of Toboso: She is in good faith so high, answered Sancho, as she surpasseth me almost by a whole cubite. Why how now Sancho, said the Knight, hast thou measured thy selfe with her? I did measure my selfe with her in this manner, replyed Sancho, that comming ouer to helpe her to lift vp a sack of Wheat on an Asse, we ioyned so neere, as I well perceiued that she was more then a great span higher then my selfe. That is true, quoth Don-Quixote, but thinkest thou not that the talnesse of her extended stature is adorned with a thousand millions of graces and indowments of the soule? But Sancho, thou canst not denie me one thing, when thou didst thus approch her, didst thou not feele a most odoriferous smell, an aromaticall flagrancie, an, I cannot tell what, so pleasing, as I know not how to terme it? I say such a sent, as if thou werst in some curious perfumers shop? That which I know, quoth Sancho is, that I felt a little vnsauorie sent, somewhat
 ramish and manlike, and I thinke the reason was, because she had sweat a litle doing of that exercise. It was not so (quoth Don-Quixote) but eyther thou hadst the murre, or else didst smell thy selfe; for I know very well how that Rose among thornes doth sent, that Lillie of the field, and that chosen Amber. It may well be said Sancho as you haue said; for I haue had many times such a smell, as me thought the Ladie Dulcinea had then: and though she smeld to it were no maruell: for one Diuell is like another. And well (quoth Don-Quixote) see heere, she hath sifted her corne, and sent it to the Mill. What did she after she had read the Letter? The Letter said Sancho, she read it not, for she said she could neither reade nor write, and therefore shee tore it into small pieces, and would haue no man to reade it, lest those of the village should know her secrets, and say that what I had tolde her by word of mouth of your loue and extraordinarie penance, which you remayned doing for her sake was sufficient. And finally she concluded, commaunding me to say vnto you, that she had her commended vnto you, and that she remained with greater desire to see you then to write vnto you; and therefore she requested and willed you, as you tendred her affection, that presently vpon sight hereof you should abandon these shrubbie groues; leaue off your frensie, and take presently the way of Toboso. If some matter of greater importance did not occur, for she had very great desire to see and talke with you. She laughed heartily when I tolde her that you named your selfe the Knight of the ill-fauoured face. I demaunded of her whether the beaten Biscaine came there? and she answered that he did, and affirmed withall that hee was a very honest man. I asked also for the Galley-slaues, but she tolde me, that she had seene none of them as yet.
All goes well till this, said Don-Quixote, but tell me I pray thee what Iewell did she bestow on thee at thy departure
 for reward of the newes thou carriedst vnto her of me? For it is an vsuall and ancient custome among Knights and Ladies errant to bestow on Squires, Damsels, or dwarfes which bring the^ any good tidings of their Ladies, or seruants, some rich Iewel as a reward and thanks of their welcome newes. It may well be quoth Sancho, and I hold it for a very laudable custome, but I thinke it was onely vsed in times past; for I thinke the manner of this our age is onely to giue a peece of bread, and cheese, for this was all that my Ladie Dulcinea bestowed on me, and that ouer the yard wals, when I tooke my leaue with her. And in signe thereof (well fare all good tokens) the cheese was made of sheepes milke. She is maruellous liberall quoth Don-Quixote, and if she gaue thee not a Iewell of gold, it was without doubt, because she had none then about her. But sleeues are good, although they come after the feast. I will see her and then all things shall be amended, knowest thou Sancho whereat I wonder, It is at this sodaine returne, for it seemes to me thou wast gone, and hast come backe againe in the ayre, for thou hast beene away but a little more then three daies, Toboso being well nigh thirtie leagues from hence: And therefore do beleeue that the wise inchanter, who takes care of mine affaires, and is my friend (for there is such a one of force, and then must bee, vnder paine that I else should not be a good knight errant) I say I verely thinke that wise man holpe thee to trample vnawares of thy selfe: for there are wise men of that condition which will take a Knight errant sleeping in his bed; and without knowing how or in what manner hee will wake the next day a thousand leagues from that place where he fell a sleepe. And were it not for this, knights errant could not succour one another in their most dangerous exigents, as they do now at euerie step. For it oft-times befalles that a knight is fighting in the mountaines of Armenia with some diuellish Fauno, some dreadfull shadow, or fierce
 knight, where he is like to haue the worst, and in this point of death when I least expect it, there appeares there on the top of a cloude, or riding in a chariot of fire an other Knight his friend, who was but euen then in England, and helpes him, and deliuers him from death, and returnes againe that night to his owne lodging, where hee suppes with a very good appetite, and yet for all that is there woont to bee, two or three thousand leagues from the one to the other countrey. All which is compassed by the industrie and wisedome of those skilfull inchaunters, that take care of the said valorous knights. So that friend Sancho, I am not hard of beleefe in giuing thee credite that thou hast gone and returned in so short a time from this place to Toboso, seeing as I haue said, some wise man my friend hath belike transported thee thither by stealth, and vnaware, of thy selfe. I easily thinke it replied Sancho, for Rozinante trauailed in good faith as lustily as if he were an Aegyptians Asse with quicksiluer in his eares, and thinkest thou not quoth Don-Quixote, that he had not quicksiluer in his eares? yes and a legion of diuels also to helpe it, who are folke that doe trauaile and make others goe as much as they list without any wearinesse.
But leauing all this apart, what is thine opinion that I should doe now, concerning my Ladies commaundement, to goe and see her: for although I know that I am bound to obey her behests: yet doe I finde my selfe disabled at this time to accomplish them, by reason of the grant I haue made to the Princesse that comes with vs, and the law of armes doth compell me to accomplish my word, rather then my will? on the one side I am assaulted and vrged by a desire to go and see my Ladie: on the other, my promised faith, and the glory that I shall winne in this enterprize doe incite and call me away. But that which I resolue to doe, is to trauaile with all speede that I may quickly arriue to the place where that Giant is,
 and will cut off his head at my comming, and when I haue peaceably installed the Princesse in her Kingdome, will presently returne to see the light that doth lighten my senses; to whom I will yeeld such forcible reasons of my so long absence, as she shall easily condescend to excuse my stay, seeing all doth redound to her glory and same. For all that I haue gained, doe winne, or shall hereafter atchieue by force of armes in this life, proceedes wholy from the gracious fauor she pleaseth to bestow vpon me, and my being hers. O God! quoth Sancho I perceiue that you are greatly diseased in the pate. I pray you Sir tell me whether you mean to go this long voyage for nought? And let slip and lose so rich and so noble a preferment as this? where the dowrie is a Kingdome, which is in good faith as I haue heard say, twentie thousand leagues in compasse. And most plentifully stored with all things necessary for the sustaining of humane life: and that it is greater then Portugall and Castile ioyned together? peace for Gods loue, and blush at your owne words, and take my counsaile, and marry presently in the first village that hath a parish Priest: and if you will not doe it there, can you wish a better commodity then to haue our owne Master Licentiat, who will doe it most excellently. And note that I am old enough to giue counsaile, and that this which I now deliuer is as fit for you, as if it were expresly cast for you in a mould. For a Sparrow in the fist, is worth more then a flying Bittor,

For he that can haue good, and euill doth chuse,
For ill that betides him, must not patience loose.

Why Sancho quoth Don-Quixote, if thou giuest me counsaile to marry to the end I may become a King after I haue slaine the Giant, and haue commoditie thereby to promote thee, and giue thee what I haue promised: I let thee to vnderstand that I may doe all that most easily without marrying my self. For before I enter into the battaile, I will make this condition, that when I come away
 victor, although I marry not the Princesse, yet shall a part of the Kingdome bee at my disposition, to bestow vpon whom I please; and when I receiue it, vpon whom wouldest thou haue me bestow it but on thy selfe? that is manifest said Sancho: but I pray you Sir haue care to chuse that part you would reserue towards the Seaside, to the end that if the liuing doe not please me, I may embarke my blacke vassailes, and make the benefit of them which I haue said. And likewise I pray you not to trouble your minde, thinking to goe and see my Ladie Dulcinea at this time; but trauaile towards the place where the Giant is, and kill him, and conclude that businesse first, for I sweare vnto you that I am of opinio^ it will proue an aduenture of very great honour and profit. I assure thee Sancho quoth Don-Quixote, thou art in the right, and I will follow thy counsaile in rather going first with the Princesse, then to visite Dulcinea. And I warne thee not to speake a word to any bodie, no not to those that ride with vs of that which we haue heere spoken and discoursed together, for since Dulcinea is so warie and secret, as she would not haue her thoughts discouered, it is no reason, that I either by my selfe or any other should detect them.
If that be so quoth Sancho, why then doe you send all those which you vanquish by vertue of your arme to present themselues to my Ladie Dulcinea, seeing this is as good as subsignatio^ of your hands writing, that you wish her well, and are enamored on her? and seeing that those which goe to her, must forcibly lay them downe on their knees before her presence, and say that they come from you to doe her homage, how then can the thoughts of you both be hidden and concealed? O! how great a foole art thou, and how simple quoth Don-Quixote. Dost not thou perceiue Sancho, how all this results to her greater glory. For thou oughtest to wit, that in our knightly proceedings, it is great honour that one Ladie alone, haue
 many knights errant for her seruitors, without extending their thoughts any further then to serue her, only for her high worthes, without tending any other reward of their many and good desires, then that she will deigne to accept them as her seruants and knights. I haue heard preach said Sancho that men should loue our Sauiour with that kinde of loue, onely for his owne sake, without being moued thereunto, eyther by the hope of glorie, or the feare of paine, although for my part I would loue and serue him, for what he is able to doe. The Diuell take thee for a clowne, quoth Don-Quixote how sharpe and pertinently dost thou speake now and then? able to make a man imagine that thou hast studied. Now by mine honestie, quoth Sancho, I can neither read nor write.
Master Nicholas perceiuing them drowned thus in their discourse, cried out to them to stay and drinke of a little fountaine that was by the way. Don-Quixote rested to Sanchoes verie great contentment, who was already tyred with telling him so many lies, and was affraid his Master would intrappe him in his owne words. For although he knew Dulcinea to be of Toboso, yet had hee neuer seene her in his life. And Cardenio had by this time done on the apparrel Dorotea wore when they found her in the mountaines, which though they were not verie good, yet exceeded with great aduantage those which he had himselfe before. And allighting hard by the fountaine they satisfied with the prouision the Curate had brought with him from the Inne, although it were but little, the great hunger that pressed them. And whilest they tooke their ease there, a certaine young stripling that trauelled passed by, who looking very earnestly on all those which sate about the fountaine, he ranne presently after to Don-Quixote, and imbracing his legs, he said weeping downe right: O my Lord doe not you know me? Looke well vpon me, for I am the youth Andrew, whom you vnloosed from the Oake whereunto I was tied. Don Quixote
 presently knew him, and taking him by the handes, hee turned to those that were present, and saide, because you may see of how great importance it is, that there bee Knights errant in the world, to vndoe wrongs and iniuries, that are committed in it by the insolent and badde men which liue therein, you shall witte that a few daies past as I rode through a wood, I heard certaine lamentable scritches and cries, as of some needfull and afflicted person: I forthwith occurd, borne away by my profession towards the place from whence the lamentable voyce sounded, and I found tied to an Oake tree, this boy whom you see heere in our presence; for which I am maruellous glad, because If I shall not say the truth, he may checke me. I say that he was tied to the Oake starke naked from the^ middle vpward, and a certain clowne was opening his flesh with cruell blowes that he gaue him with the reines of a bridle; which clowne as I after vnderstood, was his Master. And so soone as I saw him, I demaunded the cause of those cruell stripes. The rude fellow answered that he beate him because he was his seruant, and that certaine negligences of his proceeded rather from being a thiefe, then of simplicitie. To which this child answered: Sir, he whips me for no other cause, but by reason that I demaund my wages of him. His Master replied, I know not now what speeches and excuses, the which although I heard, yet were they not by me admitted. In resolution I caused him to be loosed, and tooke the clownes oath, that he would take him home, and pay him there his wages, one Riall vpon another; I and those also perfumed. Is it not true, sonne Andrew? Didst not thou note with what a domineering countenance I commaundid it, and with what humilitie he promised to accomplish all that I imposed, commaunded, and desired? answere me, be not ashamed, nor stagger at all, but tell what passed to the Gentlemen, to the end it may be manifestly seene how necessarie it is as I haue said to haue Knights errant vp and downe the high waies.

All that which you haue said quoth the boy is verie true, but the end of the matter succeeded altogether contrarie to that which you imagine. How contrarie quoth Don-Quixote? Why hath not the peasant paid thee? He not onely hath not payed me, answered the boy, but rather as soone as you were passed the wood, and that we remained both alone, he turned againe and tied me to the same tree, and gaue me a fresh so many blowes, as I remained another S. Bartholomew, all fleaed: and at euery blow he said some iest or other in derision of you: so that if I had not felt the paine of the stripes so much as I did, I could haue found in my heart to haue laughed very heartily. In fine, he left me in such pitifull case, as I haue beene euer since curing my self in an Hospitall of the euill, which the wicked peasant did then vnto me. And you are in the fault of all this, for if you had ridden on your way, and not come to the place where you were not sought for, nor intermedled your selfe in other mens affaies, perhaps my Master had contented himselfe with giuing me a dozen or two of strokes, and would presently after haue loosed me, and payed me my wages. But by reason you dishonoured him so much without cause, and said to him so many villanies, his choler was inflamed, and seeing hee could not reuenge it on you, finding himselfe alone, he disburdened the shower on me so heauily, as I greatly feare that I shall neuer againe be mine owne man. The hurt consisted in my departure (quoth Don-Quixote) for I should not haue gone from thence, vntill I had seene thee payed. For I might haue very well knowne by many experiences that there is no clowne that will keepe his word, if he see the keeping of it can turne any way to his damage. But yet Andrew thou dost remember how I swore that if he paid thee not, I would returne and seeke him out, and likewise finde him, although he conueyed himselfe into a Whales belly. Thats true, quoth Andrew, but all auailes not: thou shalt see whether it auailes or no presently,
 quoth Don-Quixote, and saying so, got vp very hastily, and commaunded Sancho to bridle Rozinante, who was feeding whilest they did eare: Dorotea demaunded of him what he meant to doe? He answered that he would goe to finde out the villaine, and punish him for vsing bad proceedings, and cause Andrew to be paid the last denier, in despite of as many pesants as in liued the world. To which she answered, intreating him to remember that he could not deale with any other aduenture according to his promise, vntill hers were atchieued, and seeing that he himselfe knew it to be true better then any other, that he should pacifie himselfe, vntill his returne from her Kingdome. You haue reason, said Don-Quixote, and therefore Andrew must haue patience perforce vntill my returne (as you haue said Madame) and when I shall turne againe I doe sweare vnto him, and likewise renew my promise, neuer to rest vntill he be satisfied and payed. I beleeue not in such oathes, quoth Andrew, but would haue as much money as might carry me to Siuill, rather then all the reuenges in the world. Giue me some meate to eate, and carrie away with me, and God be with you and all other Knights errant, and I pray God that they may proue as erring to themselues as they haue beene to me.
Sancho tooke out of his bagge a piece of bread and cheese, and giuing it to the youth said, hold brother Andrew, for euery one hath his part of your misfortune. I pray you what part thereof haue you, said Andrew? This piece of bread and cheese that I bestow on thee, quoth Sancho, for God onely knowes whether I shall haue need of it againe or no: for thou must wit friend, that we the Squires of Knights errant, are very subiect to great hunger and euill lucke, yea and to other things which are better selt then told: Andrew laid hold on his bread and cheese; and seeing that no bodie gaue him any other thing, he bowed his head, and went on his way. True it
 is that he said to Don-Quixote at his departure: for Gods loue good Sir Knight errant, if you shall euer meet me againe in the plight you haue done, although you should see mee torne in pieces, yet do not succour or helpe me, but leaue me in my disgrace; for it cannot be so great, but that a greater will result from your helpe, vpon whom and all the other Knights errant that are borne in the world, I pray God his curse may alight. Don-Quixote thought to arise to chastise him, but he ran away so swiftly, as no man durst follow him; and our Knight remained maruellously ashamed at Andrews tale: wherefore the rest with much ado supprest their desire to laugh, lest they should throughly confound him.


CHAP. V.

Treating of that which befell all Don-Quixote his train in the Inne.

THe dinner being ended, they sad led and went to horse presently, and trauelled all that day, and the next without incountring any aduenture of price, vntill they arriued at the only bugge and scar-crow of Sancho Panca: and though he would full faine haue excused his entry into it, yet could he in no wise auoide it: the Inkeeper, the Hostesse her daughter, and Maritornes seeing Don-Quixote and Sancho returne, went out to receiue them with tokens of great loue and ioy, and he intertained them with graue countenance and applause, and bad them to make him ready a better bedde then the other which they had giuen vnto him the time before. Sir, quoth the Hostesse, if you would pay vs better then the last time we would giue you one for a Prince. Don-Quixote answered that hee would; they prepared a reasonable good bedde for him in the same wide roome where he lay before: and he went presently to
 bedde, by reason that he arriued much tyred, and voide of wit. And scarce was he gotten into his chamber, when the Hostesse leaping suddenly on the Barber, and taking him by the beard, said, now by my selfe blissed, thou shalt vse my taile no more for a beard, and thou shalt turne me my taile; for my husbands combe goes throwen vp and down the flowre, that it is ashamed to see it: I meane the combe that I was wont to hang vp in my good taile. The Barber would not giue it vnto her for all her drawing, vntill the Licenciate bad him to restore it, that they had now no more vse thereof, but that he might now very well discouer himselfe, and appeare in his owne shape, and say to Don-Quixote, that after the Galley-slaues had robd him, he fledde to that Inne: and if Don-Quixote demaunded by chaunce for the Princesse her Squire, that they should tel him, how she had sent him before to her kingdome, to giue intelligence to her subiects, that she returned, bringing with her him that should free and giue them all liberty. With this the Barber surrendred the taile willingly to the Hostesse, and likewise all the other borrowed wares which she had lent for Don-Quixotes deliuery. All those of the Inne rested wonderfull amazed at Doroteas beautie, and also at the comelinesse of the Shepheard Cardenio. Then the Curate gaue order to make readie for them such meat as the Inne could affoord: and the Inkeeper in hope of better payment, did dresse very speedily for them a reasonable good dinner. Don-Quixote slept all this while, and they were of opinion to let him take his rest, seeing sleepe was more requisite for his disease then meate. At the Table they discoursed (the Inkeeper, his wife, daughter and Maritornes, and all the other trauellers being present) of Don-Quixotes strange frensie, and of the manner wherein they found him. The Hostesse eftsoones recounted what had hapned there betweene him and the Carrier; and looking to see whether Sancho were present, perceiuing that hee was away, she tolde likewise all the story of his canuasing, whereat they conceiued no little content and pastime. And as the Curate
 said, that the originall cause of Don-Quixotes madnesse proceeded from the reading of bookes of Knighthood; the In-keeper answered.
I cannot conceiue how that may be, for (as I beleeue) there is no reading so delightfull in this world: and I my selfe haue two or three bookes of that kinde with other papers, which doe verily keepe me aliue, and not onely mee, but many other. For in the reaping times, many of the reapers repaire to this place in the heates of mid-day, and there is euermore some one or other among them that can reade, who takes one of these bookes in hand, and then some thirtie or more of vs doe compasse him about, and do listen to him with such pleasure as it hinders a thousand hoary haires: for I dare say at least of my selfe, that when I heare tell of those furious and terrible blowes that kinghts errant giue, it inflames me with a desire to become such a one my selfe, and could finde in my heart to be hearing of them day and night. I am iust of the same minde no more, nor no lesse, said the hostesse, for I neuer haue any quiet houre in my house, but when thou art hearing those bookes whereon thou art so besotted, as then thou doest onely forget to chide, which is thy ordinarie exercise at other times. That is very true said Maritornes. And I in good sooth doe take great delight to heare those things, for they are very fine and especially when they tell how such a Ladie lies embraced by her Knight vnder an Orange tree, and that a certaine Damsell keepeth watch all the while, readie to burst; for enuie that she hath not likewise her sweet heart: And very much afraid. I say that all those things are as sweete as honey to me. And you quoth the Curate to the Inkeepers daughter what doe you thinke? I know not in good sooth Sir quoth she, but I doe likewise giue eare, and in truth although I vnderstand it not, yet doe I take some pleasure to heare them, but I mislike greatly those blowes, which please my father so much: and onely delight in the lamentations that knightes make being absent from their Ladies: which
 in sooth doe now and then make mee weepe through the compassion I take of them. Well then quoth Dorotea, belike faire Maiden you would remedie them, if such plaints were breathed for your owne sake? I know not what I would doe answered the Gyrle, onely this I know, that there are some of those Ladies so cruell, as their Knights call them Tigres and Lions, and a thousand other wild beasts. And good Iesus, I knew not what vnsouled folk they bee, and so without co^science, that because they wil not once behold an honoruble man, they suffer him either to die or run mad. And I know not to what end serues all that coynesse. For if they do it for honesties sake, let the^ marry with them, for the knights desire nothing more: Peace child quoth the hostesse, for it seemes that thou knewest too much of those matters, and it is not decent that maidens should know or speake so much; I speake quoth she, by reason that this good Sir made me the demaund. And I could not in courtesie omit to answere him: Well said the Curate, let me entreate you good mine host to bring vs here those books, for I would faine see them.
I am pleased said the Inkeeper, and then entring into his chamber he brought forth a little old Mallet shut vp with a chaine, and opening thereof, he tooke out three great bookes and certaine papers written with a very faire letter. The first booke he opened was that of Don Cirongilio of Thracia. The other Felixmarte of Hircania: And the third, The Historie of the great Captaine, Goncalo Hernandez of Cordoua with the life of Diego Garcia of Paredes, adioyned, as soone as the Curate had read the titles of the two bookes, hee said to the Barber, we haue now great want of our friends the old woman and Neece: not so much as you thinke quoth the Barber, for I knew also the way to the yard, or the chimney, and in good sooth, there is a fire in it good enough for that purpose. Would you then quoth the host burne my bookes? no more of them quoth the Curate, but these first two of Don Cirongilio and Felixmarte, are my bookes, perhaps quoth the Inkeeper hereticall or flegmaticall that you
 would thus roughly handle them? Schismaticall thou wouldest haue said quoth the Barber, and not flegmaticall. It is so said the Inkeeper, but if you will needs burne any, I pray you rather let it be that of the great Captaine, and of that Diego Garcia, for I would rather suffer one of my sonnes to be burned, then any one of those other two. Good friend these two bookes are lying and full of follies and vanities, but that of the great Captaine is true, and containeth the artes of Goncalo Hernandez of Cordoua: who for his sundrie and noble actes, merited to be termed by all the world, The great Captaine, a name famous, illustrious, and onely descrued by himselfe, and this other Diego Garcia of Paredes was a noble Gentleman, borne in the Citie of Truxillo in Estremadura, and was a most valorous souldier, and of so surpassing force as he would detaine a mill wheele with one hand from turning in the midst of the speediest motion: and standing once at the end of a bridge with a two handed sword, defended the passage against a mightie armie that attempted to passe ouer it: and did so many other things, that if another, who were a stranger and vnpassionate had written them, as he did himselfe who was the relater and historiographer of his owne actes, and therefore recounted them with the modestie of a Gentleman, and proper Chronicler; they would haue drowned all the Hectors, Achillises and Rollands in obliuion.
There is a iest quoth the Inkeeper, deale with my father I pray you, see at what you wonder. A wise tale, at the withholding of the wheele of a mill. I sweare you ought to read that which is read in Felixmarte of Hircania, who with one twhart blow cut fiue mightie Giants in ^^lfes, as if they were of beanes, like to the little Friers that children make of beancods. And set an other time vpon a great and most powerfull armie of more then a million and sixe hundred thousand souldiers, and ouerthrew and scattered them all like a flocke of sheepe. What then can you say to me of the good Don Cirongilio of Thracia, who was so animous and valiant as may
 be seene in his booke: wherein is laid downe, that as he sayled along a Riuet there issued out of the middest of the water a serpenr, of fire, and hee as soone as hee perceiued it, leaped vpon her, and hanging by her squamie shoulders he wroong her throat so straitly betweene both his armes, that the serpent perceiuing her selfe to bee well nigh strangled, had no other way to saue her selfe, but by diuing down into the deeps, carrying the knight away with her, who would neuer let goe his gripe, and when they came to the bottome, he found himselfe by a Pallace in such faire and pleasant gardens, as it was a wonder: and presently the Serpent turned into an old man, which said to him such things as there is no more to be desired. Two figs for the great Captaine. and that Diego Garcia, of whom you speake.
Dorotea hearing him speake thus, said to Cardenio, mee thinkes our host wants but little to make vp a second part of Don-Quixote? So it seemes to me likewise replied Cardenio, for as we may coniecture by his words, he certainly beleeues that euery thing written in those bookes passed iust as it is laid downe, and barefooted friers would be scarce able toperswade him the contrary. Know friend (quoth the Curate to the Inkeeper) that there was neuer any such ma^ as Felixmarte of Hircania, or Don Cirongilio of Thracia, nor other such knights, as books of Chiualry recount. For all is but a deuice and fiction of idle wits that composed them, to the end that thou sayest, to passe ouer the time as your readers do in reading of the^. For I sincerely sweare vnto thee, that there were neuer such knights in the world, nor such aduentures and rauings hapned in it. Cast that bone to another dog quoth the Inkeeper, as though I knew not how many numbers are fiue, and where the shoe wrests me now. I pray you Sir goe not about to giue me pappe, for by the Lord I am not so white. Is it not a good sport that you labour to perswade mee that al that which these good books say, are but rauings and fables, they being printed by grace and priuiledge of the Lords of the priuie Counsell; as if they were folke that would permit-so
 many lies to be printed at once: and so many battels and inchantments, as are able to make a man runne out of his wits. I haue told thee already friend (said the Curate) that this is done for the recreation of our idle thoughts: and so euen as in welgouernd co^monwealths the plaies of Chesse, Tennis and Trucks are tollerated for the pastime of some men, which haue none other occupation, and either ought not, or cannot work: euen so such books are permitted to be printed: presuming, (as intruth they ought) that no man would be found so simple and ignorant, as to hold any of these bookes for a true history. And if my leasure permitted and that it were a thing requisite for this auditory, I could say many things co^cerning the subiect of books of knighthood, to the end that they should be well contriued, and also be pleasant and profitable to the readers: but I hope somtime to haue the commoditie to communicate my conceit with those that may redresse it. And in the meane while you may beleeue good mine host what I haue said, and take to you your bookes, and agree with their truthes or leasings as you please, and much good may it doe you. And I pray God that you hault not in time on the foot that your guest Don-Quixote halteth. Nor so quoth the In-keeper, for I will neuer be so wood as to become a Knight errant, for I see well, that what was vsed in the times of these famous knights, is now in no vse nor request.
Sancho came in about the midst of this discourse, and rested much confounded and pensatiue of that which he heard them say, that knights errant were now in no request, and that the bookes of Chiualry, onely contained follies and lies: and purposed with himselfe to see the end of that one voyage of his Lords, and that if it sorted not the wished successe which he expected, he resolued to leaue him, and returne home to his wife and children, and accustomed labour. The Inkeeper thought to take away his bookes and budget, but the Curate withheld him saying, stay a while, for I would see what papers are those which are written in so faire a character. The host tooke the^ out and gaue them to him to read, being in
 number some eight sheets with a title written in text letters, which said, The Historie of the curious impertinent: The Curate read two or three lines softly to himselfe, and said after, truly the title of this History doth not mislike mee, and therefore I am about to read it through. The Inkeeper hearing him said, your reuerence may very well do it, for I assure you that some guests which haue read it here as they trauelled, did commend it exceedingly, and haue begd it of me as earnestly, but I would neuer bestow it, hoping some day to restore it to the owner of this Mallet, who forgot it heere behinde him with these bookes and papers, for it may be that hee will sometime returne, and although I know that I shall haue great want of the bookes, yet will I make to him restitution, for although I am an Inkeeper, yet God be thanked I am a Christian therewithall. You haue great reason my friend quoth the Curate, but yet notwithstanding if the tast like me, thou must giue me leaue to take a copie thereof; withall my heart replied the host. And as they two talked, Cardenio taking the booke began to reade a little of it, and it pleasing him as much as it had done the Curate, he requested him to read it in such sort as they might al heare him: that I would willingly doe said the Curate, if the time were not now more fit for sleeping then reading. It were sufficient repose for me said Dorotea, to passe away the time listening to some tale or other, for my spirit is not yet so well quieted, as to affoord me licence to sleepe, euen then when nature exacteth it. If that be so quoth the Curate, I will read it if it were but for curiositie, perhaps it containeth some delightfull matter. Master Nicholas and Sancho intreated the same; the Curate seeing and knowing that he should therein doe them all a pleasure, and he himselfe likewise receiue as great, said, seeing you will needs heare it, be all of you attentiue, for the Historie beginneth in this manner.



CHAP. VI.

Wherein is rehearsed the Historie of the curious impertinent.

IN Florence a rich and famous Citie of Italie, in the Prouince called Tuscane, there dwelled two rich and principall Gentlemen called Anselmo and Lothario, which two were so great friends, as they were named for excellency and by Antonomasia, by al those that knew them, the two friends. They were both batchelers, and much of one age and manners; all which was of force to make them answere one another with reciprocall amity. True it is, that Anselmo was somewhat more inclined to amorous daliance then Lothario, who was altogether addicted to hunting. But when occasion exacted it, Anselmo would omit his owne pleasures to satisfie his friends, and Lothario likewise his, to please Anselmo. And by this meanes both, their wils were so correspondent, as no clocke could be better ordred then were their desires. Anselmo became at last deepely enamoured of a principall and beautifull young Ladie of the same Citie, called Camila, being so worthily descended, and she her selfe of such merite therewithall, as he resolued (by the consent of his friend Lothario, without whom he did nothing) to demaund her of her parents for wife, and did put his purpose in execution: and Lothario himselfe was the messenger, and concluded the matter so to his friends satisfaction, as he was shortly after put in possession of his desires: and Camila so contented to haue gotten Anselmo, as she ceased not to render Heauen and Lothario thankes, by whose meanes she had obtained so good a match. The first dayes, as all marriage daies are wont to be merry; Lothario frequented according to the custome, his friend Anselmos house, endeuouring to honor, feast and recreat him all the wayes he might possible, but after
 the Nuptials were finished, and the concourse of strangers visitations and congratulations somewhat ceased, Lothario also began to be somewhat more slacke then he wonted in going to Anselmo his house, deeming it (as it is reason that all discreet men should) not so conuenient to visite or haunt so often the house of his friend after marriage, as he would, had he still remained a Batcheler. For although true amitie neyther should, or ought to admit the least suspition: yet notwithstanding a married mans honour is so delicate and tender a thing, as it seemes it may be sometimes impayred euen by very brethren, and how much more by friends. Anselmo noted the remisnes of Lothario, and did grieuously complaine thereof, saying, that if he had wist by marriage he should thus be depriued of his deerest conuersation, he would neuer haue married; and that since through the vniforme correspondencie of them both being free, they had deserued the sweet title of the two friends, that he should not now permit (because he would be noted circumspect without any other occasion) that so famous and pleasing a name should be lost: and therefore he requested him (if it were lawfull to vse such a terme betweene them two) to returne and be Master of his house, and come and goe out of it, as he had done before his marriage, assuring him that his Spouse Camila had no other pleasure and will, then that which himselfe pleased she should haue: and that she, after hauing knowne how great was both their friendships, was not a little amazed to see him become so strange.
To all these and many other reasons alleaged by Anselmo, to perswade Lothario to frequent his house: he answered with so great prudence, discretion and warinesse, as Anselmo remained satisfied of his friends good intention herein: and they made an agreement betweene them two, that Lothario should dine at his house twice a weeke, and the Holydaies besides. And although this agreement had passed betweene them, yet Lothario purposed to do that onely which he should finde most expedient for his friends honour, whose
 reputation he tendered much more deerely then he did his owne; and was wont to say very discreetely, that the married man vnto whom heauen had giuen a beautifull wife, ought to haue as much heede of the friends which hee brought to his house, as he should of the women friends that visited his wife, for that which is not done nor agreed vpon in the Church or Market, nor in publike feasts or stations (being places that a man cannot lawfully hinder his wife from frequenting sometimes at least) are oft-times facilitated, and contriued in a friends or kinsewomans house, whom perhaps we neuer suspected. Anselmo on the other side affirmed, that therefore married men ought euery one of them to haue some friend who might aduertise them of the faults escaped in their manner of proceeding; for it befals many times, that through the great loue which the husband beares towards his wife, eyther he doth not take notice, or else he doth not aduertise her, because he would not offend her to doe, or omit to doe certaine things, the doing or omitting whereof, might turne to his honour or obloquie: to which things being aduertised by his friend hee might easily apply some remedie: but where might a man find a friend so discreet, loyal and trustie as Anselmo demaunds? I know not truely, if not Lothario; for he it was that with all solicitude and care regarded the honour of his friend: and therefore endeuoured to clip and diminish the number of the dayes promised, lest he should giue occasion to the idle vulgar, or to the eyes of vagabonds and malitious men to iudge any finister thing, viewing so rich, comely, noble, and qualified a young man as he was, to haue so free acccsse into the house of a woman so beautifull as Camila. For though his vertues and modest carriage were sufficiently able to set a bridle to any malignant tongue, yet notwithstanding he would not haue his credit, nor that of his friends called into any question, and therefore would spend most of the dayes that he had agreed, to visite his friend, in other places and exercises; yet fayning excuses so plausible, as his friend admitted them for very reasonable.
 And thus the time passed on in challenges of vnkindnesse of the one side, and lawfull excuses of the other.
It so fell out, that as both the friends walked on a day together in a field without the Citie, Anselmo said to Lothario these words ensuing. I know very well friend Lothario, that among all the fauours which God of his bounty hath bestowed vpon me, by making me the sonne of such parents, and guing to me with so liberall a hand, both the goods of Nature and Fortune. Yet as I cannot answere him with sufficient gratitude for the benefits alreadie receiued, so doe I finde my selfe most highly bound vnto him aboue all others for hauing giuen me such a friend as thou art, and so beautifull a wife as Camila; being both of you such pawnes as if I esteeme you not in the degree which I ought, yet doe I hold you as deere as I may. And yet possessing all those things which are wont to bee the all and some that are wont, and may make a man happy, I liue notwithstanding the most sullen and discontented life of the world. Being troubled I know not since when and inwardly wrested with so strange a desire, and extrauagant from the common vse of others, as I maruaile at my selfe, and do condemne and rebuke my selfe when I am alone, and doe labour to conceale and couer mine owne desires, all which hath serued me to as little effect, as if I had proclaimed mine owne errors purposely to the world. And seeing that it must finally breake out, my will is that it bee onely communicated to the treasury of thy secret. Hoping that by it and mine owne industrie which (as my true friend) thou wilt vse to helpe me, I shall be quickly freed from the anguish it causeth, and by thy meanes my ioy and contentment shall arriue to the passe that my discontents haue brought mee through mine owne folly.
Lothario stood suspended at Anselmos speech, as one that could not imagine, to what so prolixe a preuention and preamble tended: And although he reuolued and imagined sundry things in his mind which hee deemed might afflict his
 friend, yet did he euer shoore wide from the marke which in truth it was: and that he might quickly escape that agonie, wherin the suspension held him, he said that his friend did notable iniurie to their amitie in searching out wreathings and ambages in the discouery of his most hidden thoughts to him, feeing he might assure himselfe certainly, either to receiue counsels of him how to entertaine, or else remedy and meanes how to accomplish them. It is very true, answered Anselmo, and with that confidence I let thee to vnderstand friend Lothario, that the desire which vexeth me, is a longing to know whether my wife Camila be as good and perfect, as I doe account her: and I cannot wholy rest satisfied of this truth, but by making triall of her, in such sort, as it may giue manifest argument of the degree of her goodnesse, as the fire doth shew the value of gold. For I am of opinio^ (O friend that a woman) is of no more worth or vertue then that which is in her, after she hath Casta est quam nemo rogauit. bene solicited, and that she alone is strong, who cannot bebowed by the promises, gifts, teares, and co^tinual importunities of importunate louers. For what thanks is it (quoth he) for a woman to be good, if no bodie say or teach her ill? What wonder that she be retired and timerous, if no occasion be ministred to her of dissolution, and chiefly she that knowes she hath a husband readie to kill her, for the least argument of lightnesse? So that she which is onely good for feare, or want of occasion, will I neuer hold in that estimation, that I would the other sollicited and pursued, who notwithstanding comes away crowned with the victory. And therefore being moued as well by these reasons, as by many other, which I could tell you, which accredite and fortifie mine opinion, I desire that my wife Camila doe also passe through the pikes of those proofes and difficulties, and purifie and refine her selfe in the fire of being requested, solicited and pursued; and that by one whose worthes and valour may deserue acceptance in her opinion: and if she beare away the Palme of the victory, as I beleeue she will, I shall acount my fortune matchlesse, and may brag that my desires are in
 their height: and will say that a strong woman hath falne to my lot, of whom the wise man saith, Who shall finde her? and when it shall succeede contrary to mine expectation, I shall with the pleasure that I will conceiue to see how rightly it iumps with mine opinio^, beare very indiffere^t the grief which in all reason, this so costly a triall must stir in me. And presupposing that nothing which thou shalt say to me, shall be auaileable to hinder my designe, or disswade me from putting my purpose in execution; I would haue thy selfe deere friend Lothario to prouide thee to be the instrument, that shall labour this worke of my liking, and I will giue thee oportunitie enough to performe the same without omitting any thing that may further thee in the solicitation of an honest, noble, warie, retired, and passionlesse woman.
And I am chiefly moued to co^mit this so hard an enterprize to thy trust, because I know that if Camila be vanquished by thee yet shall not the victory arriue to the last push and vpshot, but onely to that of accounting a thing to bee done, which shall not be done for many good respects. So shall I remaine nothing offended, and mine iniury concealed in the vertue of thy silence; for I know thy care to be such in matters concerning mee, as it shall be eternall like that of death. And therfore if thou desirest that I may leade a life, deseruing that name, thou must forthwith prouide thy selfe to enter into this amorous conflict, and that not languishing or slouthfully, but with that courage and diligence which my desire expecteth, and the confidence I haue in our amitie assureth me.
These were the reasons vsed by Anselmo to Lothario, to all which he was so attentiue as vntill he ended, hee did not once vnfold his lippes to speake a word saue those which we haue aboue related: and seeing that he spoke no more; after he had beheld him a good while, as a thing that he had neuer before, and did therefore strike him into admiration and amazement, he said. Friend Anselmo I cannot perswade my
 selfe, that the words you haue spoken be other then iests, for had I thought that thou wert in earnest, I would not haue suffered thee to passe on so farre, and by lending thee no eare, would haue excused this tedious Oration. I doe verily imagine, that either thou doest not know me, or I thee: but not so: for I know thee to bee Anselmo, and thou, that I am Lothario: the dammage is, that I thinke thou art not the Anselme thou wast wont to bee, and perhaps thou deemest me not to be the accustomed Lothario that I ought to be: for the things which thou hast spoken are not of that Anselmo my friend; nor those which thou seekest, ought to be demaunded of that Lothario, of whom thou hast notice. For true friends ought to proue and vse their friends as the Poet said, Vsque ad Aras. That is, that they should in no sort imploy them or implore their assistance in things offensiue vnto God: and if a Gentile was of this opinion in matters of friendship, how much greater reason is it that a Christian should haue that feeling, specially knowing that the celestiall amitie is not to be lost for any humane friendship whatsoeuer. And when the friend should throw the barres so wide, as to set heauenly respectes apart, for to compliment with his friend, it must not be done on light grounds, or for things of small moment, but rather for those whereon his friends life, and honour wholy depends. Then tell me now Anselmo in which of these two things art thou in danger, that I may aduenture my person to doe thee a pleasure; and attempt so detestable a thing as thou doest demaund? none of them truly, but rather doest demaund, as I may coniecture, that I doe industriously labour to depriue thee of thine honour and life together, and in doing so, I likewise depriue my selfe of them both. For if I must labour to take away thy credit, it is most euident, that I dispoile thee of life, for a man without reputation is worse then a dead man: and I being the instrument (as thou desirest that I should be) of so great harme vnto thee, doe not I become likewise thereby dishonoured, and by the same consequence also without life? Heare mee friend Anselmo, and
 haue patience not to answere me vntil I haue said all that I thinke concerning that which thy minde exacteth of thee. For wee shall haue after leasure enough, wherein thou mayest reply, and I haue patience to listen vnto thy reasons.
I am pleased quoth Anselmo, say what thou likest: And Lothario prosecuted his speech in this manner, me thinks Anselmo that thou art now of the Moores humours, which can by no meanes be made to vnderstand the errour of their sect. Neither by Citations of the holy Scripture, nor by reasons which consist in speculations of the vnderstanding, or that are founded in the Articles of the faith: but must be wonne by palpable examples, and those, easie, intelligible, demonstratiue and doubtlesse, by Mathematicall demonstrations which cannot be denied. Euen as when wee say: If from two equall parts, we take away two parts equall, the parts that remaine are also equall. And when they cannot vnderstand this, as in truth they do not, we must demonstrate it to them with our hands, and lay it before their eyes, and yet for all this, nought can auaile to winne them in the end to giue credit to the verities of our religion, which very termes and manner of proceeding, I must vse with thee, by reason that the desire which is sprung in thee, doth so wander and stray from all that which beares the shadow onely of reason, as I doubt much that I shall spend my time in vaine, which I shall bestow to make thee vnderstand thine owne simplicity, for I will giue it no other name at this present: and in good earnest I was almost perswaded to leaue thee in thine humour, in punishment of thine inordinate and vnreasonable desire, but that the loue which I beare towards thee doth not consent, I vse to thee such rigour, or leaue thee in so manifest a danger of thine owne perdition. And that thou maist cleerely see it, tell me Anselmo, hast not thou said vnto me that I must solicite one that stands vpon her reputation: perswade an honest woman, make proffers to one that is not passionate or engaged? and serue a discreete woman? yes, thou hast said
 all this. Well then, if thou knowest already that thou hast a retyred, honest, vnpassionate, and prudent wife, what seekest thou more? And if thou thinkest that she will rest victorious after all mine assaults, as doubtlesly she will, what better titles wouldest thou after bestow vpon her, then those she possesseth already? eyther it proceeds because thou dost not thinke of her as thou sayest, or els because thou knowest not what thou demaundest. If thou dost not acount her such as thou praysest her, to what end wouldest thou proue her, but rather as an euill person, vse her as thou likest best: but if she be as good as thou beleeuest, it were an impertinent thing to make tryall of truth it selfe. For after it is made, yet it will still rest onely with the same reputation it had before. Wherfore it is a concluding reason that to attempt things whence rather harme may after result vnto vs then good, is the part of rash and discourselesse braines, and principally when they deale with those things whereunto they are not compelled or driuen, and that they see euen a farre off, how the attempting the like is manifest folly. Difficult things are vndertaken for God, or the world, or both. Those that are done for God are the workes of the Saints, indeauouring to leade Angels liues in fraile and mortall bodies. Those of the world are the trauels and toiles of such as crosse such immense seas, trauell through so aduerse regions, and conuerse with so many nations, to acquire that which wee call the goods of fortune. And the things acted for God and the world together, are the worthy exploits of resolute and valorous martiall men, which scarce perceiue so great a breach in the aduersarie wall, as the common billet is wont to make, when leauing all feare apart, without making any discourse, or taking notice of the manifest danger that threatens them, borne away by the wings of desire and honour to serue God, their Nation and Prince, doe throw themselues boldly into the throate of a thousand menacing deathes which expect them.
These are things wont to be practised, and it is honour,
 glory and profite to attempt them, be they neuer so full of inconueniences and danger: but that which thou sayest, thou wilt trie and put in practise, shall neuer gaine thee Gods glorie, the goods of Fortune, or renoune among men: for suppose that thou bringest it to passe according to thine owne fantasie, thou shalt remaine nothing more contented, rich or honorable then thou art already: and if thou doest not, then shalt thou see thy selfe in the greatest miserie of any wretch liuing: for it will little auaile thee then, to thinke that no man knowes the disgrace befallen thee, it being sufficient both to afflict and dissolue thee, that thou knowest it thy selfe, and for greater confirmation of this truth I will repeate vnto thee a stanza of the famous Poet Ludouico Tansilo in the end of his first part of Saint Peters teares, which is:

THe griefe increaseth, and withall the shaine,
In Peter when the day it selfe did show.
And though he no man sees, yet doth he blame,
Himselfe because he had offended so:
For brests magnanimous not onely tame
When that of others, they are seene they know.
But of themselues asham'de they often bee,
Though none but Heauen and Earth their errour see.

So that thou canst not excuse thy griefe, with secrecie be it neuer so great, but rather shalt haue continuall occasion to weepe, if not watry teares from thine eyes, at least teares of bloud from thy heart, such as that simple Doctor wept, of whom our Poet makes mention, who made triall of the vessell, which the prudent Reynaldos vpon maturer discourse refused to deale withall: and although it be but a Poeticall fiction yet doth it containe many hidden morals, worthy to be noted, vnderstood and imitated: how much more seeing that by what I meane to say now, I hope thou shalt begin to conceaue the great errour which thou wouldest wittingly commit. Tell me Anselmo, if heauen or thy fortunes had
 made thee Lord and lawfull possessor of a most precious Diamante, of whose goodnesse and qualitie all the Lapidarists that had viewed the same would rest satisfied, and that all of them would ioyntly and vniformely affirme that it arriued in quality, goodnes, and finesse to all that, to which the nature of such a stone might extend it selfe, and that thou thy selfe didst beleeue the same, without witting any thing to the contrary: would it be iust that thou shouldest take an humour to set that Diamant betweene an Anuile and a hammer; and to trie there by very force of blowes whether it be so hard and so fine as they say? And farther when thou didst put thy designe in execution, put the case that the stone made resistance to thy foolish triall, yet wouldest thou adde thereby no new valour or esteeme to it: and if it did breake as it might befall, were not then all lost? Yes certainly, and that leauing the owner in all mens opinion for a very poore ignorant person. Then friend Anselmo, make account that Camila is a most pretious Diamant, as well in thine, as in other mens estimation, and it is no reason to put her in contingent danger of breaking, seeing that although she remain in her integrity, she cannot mount to more worth then she hath at the present; and if she faltred, or did not resist, consider euen at this present, what state you would be in then, and how iustly thou mightest then complaine of thy selfe, for being cause of her perdition and thine owne? See how there is no jewell in the world comparable to the modest and chaste woman. And that all womens honour consists in the good opinion thats had of them: and seeing that of thy spouse is so great as it arriues to that summe of perfection which thou knowest, why wouldest thou call this verity in question? Know friend that a woman is an imperfect creature, and should therefore haue nothing cast in her way to make her stumble and fall, but rather to cleere, and doe all incumbrances away out of it, to the end she may without impeachment run with a swift course to obtaine the perfection she wants, which onely consists in being vertuous.

The Naturalists recount, that the Ermine is a little beast that hath a most white skinne, and that when the hunters would chase him they vse this art to take him: as soone as they finde out his haunt, and places where he hath recourse, they thwart them with mire and dirt, and after when they discrie the little beast, they pursue him towards those places which are defiled, and the Erimine espying the mire standes still, and permits himselfe to be taken and captiued in exchange of not passing through the mire, or stayning of his whitenesse, which it esteemes more then eyther liberty or life. The honest and chaste woman is an Ermine, and the vertue of chastitie is whiter and purer then Snow: and hee that would not lose it, but rather desires to keepe and preserue it, must proceede with a different stile from that of the Ermine. For they must not propose and lay before her the mire of the passions, flatteries and seruices of importunate louers; for perhaps she shall not haue the naturall impulse and force which commonly through proper debility is wont to stumble, to passe ouer those incumbrances safely: and therefore it is requisite to free the passage and take them away, and lay before her the cleerenesse of vertue, and the beauty comprized in good fame. The good woman is also like vnto a bright and cleere mirrour of Crystall, and therfore is subiect to bee stained and dimmed by euery breath that toucheth it. The honest woman is to be vsed as reliques of Saints, to wit, she must be honoured but not touched. The good woman is to be kept and prized like a faire Garden full of sweet flowers and Roses, that is held in estimation; whose owner permits no man to enter and trample, or touch his flowers but holdes it to be sufficient that they standing a farre off without the railes may ioy the delightfull sight, and flagrancie thereof. Finally I will repeat certaine verses vnto thee that haue now come to my memorie, the which were repeated of late in a new play, and seeme to me very fit for the purpose of which we treat. A prudent olde man did giue a neighbour of his that had a daughter, counsaile to
 keepe and shut her vp: and among many other reasons hee vsed these.

TRuely woman is of glasse,
Therefore no man ought to trie
If she broke or not might bee,
Seeing all might come to passe.
Yet to breake her tis more easie,
And it is no wit to venter
A thing of so brittle temper,
That to saulder is so queasie.
And I would haue all men dwell
In this truth, and reasons ground,
That if Danaes, may be found
Golden showers are found as well.

All that which I haue said to thee Anselmo vntill this instant hath beene for that, which may touch thy selfe: and it is now high time that somewhat be heard concerning me. And if by chance I shall be somewhat prolixe, I pray thee to pardon me; for the Labyrinth wherein thou hast entred, and out of which thou wouldest haue me to free thee requires no lesse. Thou holdest me to be thy friend, and yet goest about to dispoyle me of mine honour, being a thing contrary to all amitie; and dost not onely pretend this, but dost likewise indeauour that I should robbe thee of the same, that thou wouldest depriue me of mine is euident; for when Camila shall perceiue that I sollicite her as thou demaundest, it is certaine that she will esteeme of me, as of one quite deuoide of wit and indiscreete, seeing I intend and doe a thing so repugnant to that, which the being that him I am, and thine amitie doe binde me vnto; that thou wouldest haue me rob thee thereof is as manifest, for Camila seeing mee thus to court her, must imagine that I haue noted some lightnesse in her, which lent me boldnes thus to discouer vnto her my depraued desires, and she holding her selfe to be thereby iniured
 and dishonoured, her disgrace must also concerne thee as a principall part of her. And hence springs that which is commonly said, that the husband of the adulterous wife, although he know nothing of her lewdnesse, nor hath giuen any occasion to her to doe what she ought not, nor was able any way to hinder by diligence, care, or other means his disgrace, yet is intituled with a vituperious and vile name, and is in a manner beheld by those that know his wiues malice with the eyes of contempt; whereas they should indeed regard him rather with those of compassion, seeing that hee fals into that misfortune, not so much through his owne default, as through the light santasie of his wicked confort. But I will shew thee the reason why a badde womans husband is iustly dishonoured and contemned, although he be ignorant and guiltlesse thereof, and cannot preuent nor hath giuen to it any occasion. And be not grieued to heare me, seeing the benefite of the discourse shall redound vnto thy selfe.
When God created our first parent in the terrestriall Paradice, the holy Scripture saith, that God infused sleepe into Adam, and that being asleepe he tooke out a ribbe out of his left side, of which hee formed our mother Eue, and as soone as Adam awaked and beheld her he said, this is flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bones. And God said, for this shall a man leaue his father and his mother, and they fhall be two in one flesh, and then was the diuine Sacrament of Matrimonie first instituted, with such indissoluble knots, as onely may be by death dissolued. And this maruellous Sacrament is of such efficacie and force, as it makes two different persons to be one very flesh, and yet operates farther in good married folke: For although they haue two soules, yet it makes them to haue but one will. And hence it proceeds, that by reason the wiues flesh is one and the very same with her husbands, the blemishes or defects that taint it, doe also redound into the husbands, although he (as we haue said) haue ministred no occasion to receiue that dammage. For
 as all the whole body feeles any paine of the foote, head or any other member, because it is all one flesh: and the head smarts at the griefe of the Ancle, although it hath not caused it, so is the husband participant of his wiues dishonour, because he is one and the selfesame with her. And by reason that all the honours and dishonours of the world are, and spring from flesh and bloud; and those of the badde woman be of this kinde, it is forcible, that part of them fall to the husbands share, and that he be accounted dishonourable, although he wholly be ignorant of it. See then Anselmo to what perill thou doest thrust thy selfe, by seeking to disturbe the quietnesse and repose wherein thy wife liues: and for how vain and impertinent curiositie thou wouldest stir vp the humors which are now quiet in thy chaste spouses brest; note how the things thou dost aduenture to gaine, is of smal moment, but that which thou shalt lose so great, that I must leaue it in his point, hauing no wordes sufficiently able to indeere it. But if all that I haue said be not able to moue thee from thy badde purpose: thou mayest well seeke out for some other instrument of thy dishonour and mishaps: for I meane not to be one, although I should therefore lose thine amitie, which is the greatest losse that might any way befall mee.
Here the prudent Lothario held his peace, and Anselmo remained so confounded and melancholie, as hee could not answere a word to him, for a very great while. But in the end he said. I haue listned friend Lothario, to all that which thou hast said vnto mee, with the attention which thou hast noted. And haue perceiued in thy reasons, examples, and similitudes, the great discretion wherewithall thou art indowed, and the perfection of amitie that thou hast attained: and do also confesse and see, that if I follow not thine aduice, but should leaue vnto mine owne, I doe but shunne the good and pursue the euill. Yet oughtest thou likewise to consider how herein I suffer the disease which some women are wont to haue that long to eate earth, lime, coales, and other far
 worse and loathsome things; euen to the very sight, and much more to the taste. So that it is behouefull to vse some arte by which I may be cured, and this might be easily done, by beginning only to solicite Camila although you did it but weake and fainedly: for I know shee will not be so soft and pliable, as to dash her honestie about the ground at the first encounters, and I will rest satisfied with this commencement alone: and thou shalt herein accomplish the obligation thou owest to our friendship, by not only restoring mee to life, but also by perswading me not to dispoile my selfe of mine honour. And thou art bound to doe this for one reason that I shall alledge, to wit, that I being resolued as indeed I am to make this experience, thou oughtst not to permit being my friend that I should bewray my defect herein to a stranger, whereby I might very much indanger my reputation, which thou labourest so much to preserue, and though thy credit may lose some degrees in Camilas opinion, whilst thou dost solicite her, it matters not very much or rather nothing; for very shortly, when we shall espie in her the integritie that we expect, thou maist open vnto her sincerely the drift of our practice, by which thou shalt againe recouer thine impaired reputation. Therefore seeing the aduenture is little, and the pleasure thou shalt doe mee by the enterprising thereof so, too great, I pray thee do it, though euer so many incumbrances represent themselues to thee, for (as I haue promised) with only thy beginning, I will rest satisfied and account the cause concluded.
Lothario perceauing the firme resolution of Anselmo, and nothing else occurring forcibly disswasiue, nor knowing what other reasons to vse, that might hinder this his precipitate resolution: and noting withall how hee threatned to breake the matter of this his indiscreet desires to a stranger: he determined to auoid greater inconuencies to giue him satisfaction, and performe his demaund, with purpose and resolution to guide the matter so discreetly, as without troubling Camila's thoughts, Anselmo should rest contented,
 and therefore intreated him not to open his minde to any other, for he himselfe would vndertake that enterprise, and beginne it when soeuer hee pleased. Anselmo imbraced him very tender and louingly, and gratified him as much for that promise, as if he had done him some very great fauour: and there they accorded betweene them, that he should beginne the worke the very next day insuing, for he would giue him place and leasure to speake alone with Camila, and would likewise prouide him of money, jewels, and other things to present vnto her. He did also admonish him to bring musicke vnder her windowes by night, and write verses in her praise, and if he would not take the paine to make them, he himselfe would compose them for him. Lothario promised to performe all himselfe, yet with an intention far wide from Anselmos; and with this agreement they returned to Anselmos house, where they found Camila somewhat sad and carefull, expecting her husbands returne, who had stayed longer abroade that day then his custome. Lothario leauing him at his house, returned to his owne, as pensiue as he had left Anselmo contented, and knew not what plot to lay, to issue out of that impertinent affaire with prosperous successe. But that night hee bethought himselfe of a manner how to deceaue Anselmo without offending Camila: and so the next day insuing hee came to his friends house to dinner, where Camila knowing the great good will her husband bore towards him, did receaue and entertaine him very kindly with the like, dinner being ended, and the table taken vp, Anselmo requested Lothario to keepe Camila company vntil his returne, for hee must haue gone about an affaire that concerned him greatly, but would returne againe within an houre and a halfe. Camila intreated her husband to stay, and Lothario proferd to goe and keepe him companie, but nothing could preuaile with Anselmo, but rather he importuned his friend Lothario, to remaine and abide there his returne, because hee must goe to treate of a matter of much consequence. He also commanded Camila not to leaue Lothario
 alone vntill he came backe. And so hee departed leauing Camila and Lothario together at the table, by reason that all the attendants and seruants were gone to dinner.
Here Lothario saw that he was entred into the lists, which his friend so much desired, which his aduersarie before him who was with her beautie able to ouercome a whole squadron of armed Knights; see then if Lothario had not reason to feare himselfe? but that which he did at the first onset was to lay his elbow on the arme of his chaire, and his hand on his cheeke, and desiring Camila to beare with his respectlesnesse therein, he said he would repose a little, whilest hee attended Anselmo's comming. Camila answered that shee thought hee might take his ease better on the cushions of state, and therefore prayed him hee would enter into the parler and lye on them. But he excused himselfe, and so remained asleepe in the same place, vntill Anselmos returne, who comming in, and finding his wife in her chamber and Lothario a sleepe, made full account, that by reason of his long stay, they had time enough both to talke, and repose, and therefore expected very greedily the houre wherein his friend should awake, to goe out with him, and learne what successe he had: all succeeded as he wished, for Lothario arose, and both of them went abroade, and then he demaunded of him what hee desired: and Lothario answered that it seemed not to him so good to discouer al his meaning at the first, and therefore had done no other thing at that time, then speake a little of her beautie and discretion, for it seemed to him that this was the best preamble he could vse to gaine by little and litle some interest and possession in her acceptance, to dispose her thereby the better to giue eare againe to his wordes more willingly, imitating therein the Diuels craft when hee meanes to deceaue any one that is vigilant and carefull, for then hee translates himselfe into an Angell of light, being one of darkenesse, and laying before him apparent goods, discouers what hee is in the end, and brings his intention to passe, if his guiles bee not at the beginning detected.
 All this did greatly like Anselmo, who said that hee would affoorde him euery day as much leasure, although he did not goe abroade, for hee would spend the time so at home, as Camila should neuer be able to suspect his drift.
It therefore befell, that many daies passed, which Lothario did willingly ouerslip, and said nothing to Camila, yet did he euer soothe Anselmo, and told him, that hee had spoken to her, but could neuer winne her to giue the least argument of flexibilitie, or make way for the feeblest hope that might be: but rather affirmed that shee threatned him, that if hee did not repell his impertinent desires, shee would detect his indirect proceedings to her husband. It is well quoth Anselmo. Hitherto Camila hath resisted wordes, it is therefore requisite to trie what resistance she wil make against works. I will giue thee to morrow foure thousand crownes in gold, to the end thou maist offer, and also bestow them on her: and thou shalt haue as many more to buy jewels, wherewithall to baile her: for women are naturally inclined, and specially if they be faire (be they euer so chast) to goe braue and gorgeously attired, and if shee can ouercome this temptation, I will remaine pleased, and put thee to no more trouble. Lothario answered that seeing he had begun, he would beare his enterprise on to an end, although he made full account, that he should depart from the conflict, both tyred and vanquished. He receaued the foure thousand crownes the next day, and at once with them foure thousand perplexities, for he knew not what to inuent, to lie a new; but concluded finally to tell to his friend how Camila was as inflexible at gifts and promises as at words, and therefore it would be in vaine to trauaile any more in her pursuite, seeing he should doe nothing else but spend the time in vaine.
But fortune which guided these affaires in an other manner, so disposed, that Anselmo hauing left Lothario and Camila alone as he was wont, entred secretly into a chamber, and through the cranies and chinks did listen and see what they would doe: where he perceaued that Lothario in
 the space of halfe an houre spoke not a word to Camila, nor yet would he haue spoken though hee had remained there a whole age, and thereupon surmised straight, that all that which his friend had told him of Camilas answeres and his owne speech were but fictions and vntruthes, and that hee might the more confirme himselfe, and see whether it were so, he came forth and calling Lothario apart, he demaunded of him what Camila had said, and in what humour shee was at the present? Lothario answered that he meant not euer any more to sound her in that matter, for shee replied to him so vntowardly and sharply, as he durst not attempt any more to speake vnto her of such things. O, quoth Anselmo, Lothario, Lothario, how euill dost thou answere to the affection thou owest me, or to the confidence I did repose in thee? I haue stood beholding thee all this while through the hole of that locke, and saw how thou neuer spokest one word to her. Whereby I doe also collect, that thou hast not yet once accosted her, and if it be so, as doubtlesly it is, say, why dost thou deceaue me? or why goest thou about fraudulently to depriue me of those meanes, whereby I may obtaine my desires? Anselmo said no more, yet what he said was sufficient to make Lothario confused and ashamed, who taking it to be a blemish to his reputation to bee found in a lie, swore to Anselmo, that he would from thence forward so indeuour to please his minde and tell him no more leasings, as hee himselfe might perceaue the successe thereof, if he did againe curiously lye in watch for him, a thing which hee might well excuse, because his most serious labour to satisfie his desire, should remooue all shadowe of suspicion. Anselmo beleeued him, and that he might giue him the greater commodity, and lesse occasion of feare, he resolued to absent himselfe from his house some eight daies, and goe to visit a friend of his, that dwelled in a Village not farre from the Cittie, and therefore dealt with his friend that he should send a messenger to call for him very earnestly, that vnder that pretext, he might finde an excuse to Camila for his departure,

O infortunate and inconsiderate Anselmo, what is that which thou doest? what doest thou contriue? or what is that thou goest about? behold thou workest thine owne ruine, laying plots of thine owne dishonour, and giuing order to thy proper perdition. Thy wife Camila is good, thou dost possesse her in quiet and peaceable manner, no man surpriseth thy delights, her thoughts transgresse not the limits of her house. Thou art her heauen on earth, and the goale to which her desires aspire. Thou art the accomplishment and summe of her delectation, thou art the squire by which shee measureth and directeth her will, adiusting wholy with thine and with that of heauen. Since then the mines of her honour, beautie, modestie, and recollection, bountifully afford thee without any toile, all the treasures contained in them, or thou canst desire, why wouldest thou digge the earth, and seeke out new vaines, and new seene treasures exposing thy selfe to the danger, that thy labours may turne to wracke, seeing in fine, that they are only sustained by the weake supporters of her fraile nature? remember how hee that seekes the impossible, may iustly bee refused of that which is possible, according vnto that which the Poet saith:

IN death for life I seeke.
Health in infirmitie.
For issue in a dungeon deepe:
In iayles for libertie,
And in a treachour loyaltie.


But enuious fate, which still
Conspires to worke mine ill,
With Heauen hath thus decreed;
That easie things should be to me denide
Cause I craue th'impossible.

Anselmo departed the next day following to the Village, telling Camila at his departure, that whilest hee were absent his friend Lothario would come and see to the affaires of his
 house, and to eate with her, and desired her therefore, to make as much of him, as shee would doe of his owne person. Camila like a discreet and modest woman, was grieued at the order her husband did giue to her, and requested him to render how indecent it was that any one should possesse the chaire of his table, he being absent, and if hee did it, as doubting her insufficiencie, to manage his houshold affaires, that at least he should make triall of her that one time, and should clearely perceaue how shee was able to discharge matters of farre greater consequence. Anselmo replyed, that what hee commanded was his pleasure, and therefore shee had nothing else to doe, but hold downe the head, and obay it. Camila answered, that shee would doe so, although it was very much against her will. In fine her husband departed, and Lothario came the next day following to the house, where hee was entertained by Camila very friendly, but would neuer treate with Lothario alone, but euermore was compassed by her seruant and waiting Maidens, but chiefly by one called Leonela, whome shee loued dearely; as one that had beene brought vp with her in her Fathers house, euen from their infancie, and when shee did marry Anselmo, shee brought her from thence in her company.
The first three dayes Lothario spoke not a word, although he might, when the tables were taken vp, and that the folke of the house went hastely to dinner, for so Camila had commanded, and did giue Leonela order besides to dine before her selfe, and that shee should still keepe by her side: but the gyrle which had her fancie otherwise imployed in thinges more pleasing her humour, and needed those houres and times for the accomplishing of them, did not alwaies accomplish so punctually her Ladies command, but now and then would leaue her alone, as if that were her Ladies beheast. But the honest presence of Camila, the grauitie of her face, and the modestie of her carriage was such, as it serued as a bridle to restraine Lotharios tongue. But the benefit of Camilas many vertues, setting silence to Lotharios speech, resulted
 afterward to both their harmes. For though the tongue spoke not, yet did his thoughts discourse, and had leasure afforded them to contemplate, part by part, all the extremes of worth and beautie that were cumulated in Camila potent to inflame a statue of frozen Marble: how much more an heart of flesh. Lothario did only behold her in the time and space he should speake vnto her, and did then consider how worthy shee was to be loued. And this consideration did by little and little giue assaults to the respects which he ought to haue borne towards his friend Anselmo: a thousand times did hee determine to absent himselfe from the Cittie, and goe where Anselmo should neuer see him, nor hee Camila: but the delight hee tooke in beholding her did againe with-hold and hinder his resolutions. When hee was alone he would condemne himselfe of his mad designe, and tearme himselfe a badde friend and worse Christian, hee made discourses and comparisons betweene himselfe and Anselmo, all which did finish in this point that Anselmos foolhardinesse, and madnesse was greater, then his owne infidelitie, and that if hee might bee as easily excused before God, for that he meant to doe, as he would be before men, he needed not to feare any punishment should bee inflicted on him for the crime: finally, Camilas beautie and worths, assisted by the occasion which the ignorant husband had thrust into his fists, did wholly ruine and ouerthrow Lothario his loyaltie, and therefore without regarding any other thing then that to which his pleasure conducted him, about a three dayes after Anselmos departure (which time he had spent in a continuall batraile and resistance of his contending thoughts) he beganne to solicite Camila, with such trouble of the spirits and so amorous wordes, as shee was strucken almost beside her selfe with wonder, and made him no other answere, but arising from the table, flung away in a furie into her chamber. But yet for all this drines, Lothario his hope (which is wont euermore to bee borne at once with loue) was nothing dismayed, but rather accounted the more
 of Camila, who perceiuing that in Lothario, which she neuer durst before to imagine, knew not what she might doe; but it seeming vnto her to be a thing neither secure nor honest, to giue him occasion or leisure to speake vnto him againe, determined to send one vnto her husband Anselmo the same very night, as indeed she did, with a letter to recal him home to her house. The subiect of her Letter was this.


CHAP. VII.

Wherein is prosecuted the history of the curious impertinent.


EVen as it is commonly said, that an armie seemes not well without a Generall, or a Castle without a Constable, so doe I affirme that it is much more indecent to see a young married woman without her husband, when hee is not iustly detained away by necessary affaires. I finde my selfe so ill disposed in your absence and so impatient and impotent to indure it longer, as if you doe not speedily returne, I shall be constrained to returne backe vnto my father, although I should leaue your house without any keeping. For the guard you appointed for me, if it be so that hee may deserue that title, lookes more I beleeue to his own pleasure, then to that which concernes you, therefore seeing you haue wit enough, I will say no more, nor ought I to say more in reason.

Anselmo receiued the Letter, and by it vnderstood that Lothario had begun the enterprize, and that Camila had answered to him according as he had hoped: and maruellous glad at the newes, he answered his wife by word of mouth, that she should not remoue in any wise from her house, for he would returne with all speed. Camila was greatly admired at his answer, which strucke her into a greater perplexitie then she was at the first, being affraid to stay at home, and
 also to goe to her fathers. For by staying she indangers her honesty, by going she should transgresse her husbands commaund: at last she resolued to doe that which was worst, which was to remaine at home, and not to shunne Lotharios presence, lest she should giue her seruants occasion of suspition: and now she was grieued to haue written what shee did to her husband, feareful lest he should thinke that Lothario had noted in her some token of lightnesse, which might haue moued him to lose the respect which otherwise was due vnto her: but confident in her innocency, she cast her hopes in God and her good thoughts, wherewithall shee thought to resist all Lotharios words, and by holding her silent without making him any answere, without giuing any further account of the matter to her husband, lest thereby she might plunge him in new difficulties and contention with his friend, and did therefore bethinke her how shee might excuse Lothario to Anselmo, when he should demaund the occasion that moued her to write vnto him that Letter. With these more honest then profitable or discreete resolutions she gaue eare the second day to Lothario, who charged her with such resolution, as her constancy beganne to stagger, and her honesty had enough to doe, recurring to her eyes to containe them, lest they should giue any demonstration of the amorous compassion which Lotharios wordes and teares had stirred in her breast. Lothario noted all this, and it inflamed him the more. Finally, he thought that it was requisite the time and leisure which Anselmoes absence affoorded him, to lay closer siege to that Fortresse: and so he assaulted her presumptiously with the praises of her beauty; for there is nothing which with such facility doth render and raze to the ground the proudly crested Turrets of womens vanity, then the same vanity being dilated on by the tongue of adulation and flattery. To be briefe, he did with all diligence vndermine the rocke of her integrity with so warlike engines, as although Camila were made of brasse, yet would she be ouerthrowne. For Lothario wept, intreated,
 promised, flattered, persisted and fained so feelingly, and with such tokens of truth, as trauersing Camilas care of her honour, he came in the end to triumph ouer that which was least suspected, and he most desired: for she rendred her selfe, euen Camila rendred her selfe. But what wonder if Lotharioes amitie could not stand on foote? A cleere example, plainly demonstrating that the amorous passion is onely vanquished by shunning it; and that no body ought to aduenture to wrestle with so strong an aduersarie: for heauenly forces are necessarie for him that would confront the violence of that passion, although humane. None but Leonela knew the weakenesse of her Ladie, for from her the two bad friends and new louers could not conceale the matter: nor yet would Lothario discouer to Camila her husbands pretence, or that he had giuen him wittingly the oportunity whereby he arriued to that passe, because she should not imagine that he had gotten her lightly, and by chance, and did not purposely sollicite her.
A few dayes after Anselmo arriued to his house, and did not perceiue what wanted therein, to wit, that which it had lost, and he most esteemed. From thence he went to see his friend Lothario, whom he found at home, and embracing one another, he demanded of him the newes of his life or of his death. The newes which I can giue thee friend Anselmo quoth Lothario, are, that thou hast a wife who may deseruedly be the example and garland of all good women. The words that I spoke vnto herwere spent on the ayre, my proffers contemned, and my gifts repulsed, and besides she hath mockt me notably for certaine fained teares that I did shed. In resolution, euen as Camila is the patterne of all beauty, so is she a treasury wherein modesty resides, courtesie and warinesse dwell, and all the other vertues that may beautifie an honourable woman, or make her fortunate. Therefore friend take backe thy money, for here it is ready, and I neuer had occasion to imploy it: for Camilas integrity cannot be subdued with so base things as are gifts and promises. And Anselmo
 content thy selfe now with the proofes made already, without attempting to make any farther triall. And seeing thou hast past ouer the Sea of difficulties and suspitions with a drie foote, which may and are wont to be had of women: doe not eftsoones enter into the profound depthes of new inconueniences, nor take thou any other Pilot to make experience of the goodnesse and strength of the vessell that heauen hath allotted to thee, to passe therein through the Seas of this world: but make account that thou art harboured in a safe hauen, and there hold thy selfe fast with the Anchors of good consideration, and so rest thee vntill death come to demaund his debt, from the payment whereof no Nobility or priuiledge whatsoeuer can exempt vs. Anselmo rested singularly satisfied at Lotharios discourse, and did beleeue it as firmely as if it were deliuered by an Oracle; but did intreat him notwithstanding to prosecute his attempt, although it were onely done for curiositie, and to passe away the time; yet not to vse so efficacious meanes, as he thitherto practised: and that he only desired him to write some verses in her praise, vnder the name of Clori, for hee would make Camila beleeue, how that he was inamoured of a certaine Lady, to whom he did appropriate that name, that hee might celebrate her prayses with the respect due to her honour: and that if he would not take the paynes to inuent them, that he himselfe would willingly compose them. That is not needfull, quoth Lothario, for the Muses are not so alienated from me, but that they visite mee sometimes in the yeare. Tell you vnto Camila what you haue deuised of my loues: and as for the verses, I will make them my selfe, if not so well as the subiect deserues, yet at the least as artificially as I may deuise them. The impertinent curious man and his treacherous friend hauing thus agreed, and Anselmo returned to his house, he demaunded of Camila that which she maruelled he had not asked before, that she should tell vnto him the occasion why she sent vnto him the Letter? Camila made answere, because it seemed vnto her, that Lothario beheld
 her somewhat more immodestly then when he was at home; but that now she did againe disswade her selfe, and beleeued that it was but a light surmise, without any ground, because that she perceiued Lothario to loath her presence, or be by any meanes alone with her. Anselmo tolde her that she might very well liue secure for him, for that he knew Lotharios affections were bestowed else-where, and that vpon one of the noblest damzels of the Citie, whose prayses he solemnized vnder the name of Clori, and that although he were not, yet was there no cause to doubt of Lotharios vertue or the amitie that was betweene them both. Here if Camila had not beene premonished by Lothario that the loue of Clori was but fained, and that he himselfe had told it to Anselmo to blinde him, that he might with lesse difficultie celebrate her owne prayses vnder the name of Clori, shee had without doubt falne into the desperate toyles of iealousie; but being already aduertised, she posted ouer that assault lightly. The day following they three sitting together at dinner, Anselmo requested Lothario to repeate some one of the verses that he had made to his beloued Clori; for seeing that Camila knew her not, he might boldly say what he pleased. Although she knew her, quoth Lothario, yet would I not therefore suppresse any part of her praises. For when any louer praiseth his Ladie for her beauty, and doth withall taxe her of cruelty, her credit incurres no danger. But befall what it list, I composed yesterday a Sonnet of the ingratitude of Clori, and is this ensuing.




A SONNET.

A Midst the silence of the darkest night,
When sweetest sleepe inuadeth mortall eyes:
I poore account, to heau'n and Clori bright,
Giue of the richest harmes, which euer rise.


And at the time, we Phebus may deuise,
Shine through the Roseall gates of th'Orient bright,

VVith deepe accents, and fighes in wonted guise
I doe my plaints renew, with maine and might.


And when the Sunne, downe from his starry seat
Directest rayes, towards the earth doth send,
My sighes I double, and my sad regrete.
And night returnes, but ef my woes no end:
For I finde alwayes in my mortall strife,
Heau'n without eares, and Clori likewise deafe.





Camila liked the Sonnet very well, but Anselmo best of all; for he praysed it, and said, that the Lady must be very cruell, that would not answere such perspicuous truths, with reciprocall affection. But then Camila answered, why then belike all that which inamoured Poets say is true? In as much as Poets, quoth Lothario, they say not truth, but as they are inamoured, they remains as short as they are true. That is questionlesse, quoth Anselmo, all to vnderprop and giue Lothario more credite with Camila, who was as carelesse of the cause her husband said so, as she was enamoured of Lothario, and therefore with the delight she tooke in his compositions, but chiefly knowing that his desires and labors were addrest to her selfe, who was the true Clori, shee intreated him to repeate some other Sonnet or dittie, if he remembred any. Yes that I do, quoth Lothario, but I beleeue that it is not so good as the first, as you may well iudge, for it is this.




A SONNET.

I Die, and if I cannot be beleeu'd,
My deaths more certaine, as it is most sure,
To see me at thy feet, of life depriu'd:
Rather then grieue, this thraldome to endure.


VVell may I in oblinious shades obscure
Of glory, life, and fauour be denide:
And yet euen there shall in my bosome pure,
The shape of thy faire face ingraude be eyed.



For that's a relique, which I do reserue
For the last traunces, my contentions threaten,
VVhich midst thy rigour doth it selfe preserue.
O woe's the wight! that is by tempests beaten
By night, in vnknowne Seas, in danger rife,
For want of North, or hauen to lose his life.





Anselmo commended also this second Sonnet as hee had done the first, and added by that means one linke to another in the chaine, wherewith he intangled himselfe, and forged his owne dishonour: seeing when Lothario dishonoured him most of all, he said vnto him then that he honoured him most. And herewith all Camila made all the linkes that verily serued onely to abase her downe to the Center of contempt, seeme to mount her in her husbands opinion, vp to the height of vertue and good fame.
It befell soone after, that Camila finding her selfe alone with her mayden said to her, I am ashamed friend Leonela to see how little I knew to value my selfe, seeing that I made not Lothario spend some time at least in the purchasing the whole possession of mee, which I with a prompt will bestowed vpon him so speedily. I feare me that he will impute my hastinesse to lightnesse, without co^sidering the force he vsed towards mee, which wholy hindred and disabled my resistance. Let not that afflict you Madam quoth Leonela, for it is no sufficient cause to diminish estimation, that, that bee giuen quickly which is to be giuen, if that in effect be good that is giuen, and be in it selfe worthy of estimation; for it is an old prouerbe, That hee that giues quickly, giues twice. It is also said as well quoth Camila, that that which costeth little, is lesse esteemed. That reason hath no place in you quoth Leonela, for as much as loue according as some say, which somesay, doth sometimes flie, other times it goes, it runs with this man, and goes leasurely with the other; it makes some keycold, and inflames others, some it wounds, and some it kils, it begins the Carrire of his desires in an instant, and in the very
 same, concludes it likewise: It is wont to lay siege to the fortresse in the morning, and at night it makes it to yeelde; for ther's no force able to resist it: which being so, what doe you wonder, or what is it that you feare? If the same hath befalne Lothario, seeing that loue made of my Lords absence an instrument to vanquish vs? and it was forcible, that in it we should conclude on it which loue had before determined, without giuing time it selfe any time, to leade Anselmo that he might returne, and with his presence leaue the worke imperfect. For loue hath none so officious or better a minister to execute his desires then is occasion: It serues it selfe of occasion in all his act, but most of all at the beginning. And all this that I haue said, I know rather by experience then heare say: as I will some day let you to vnderstand, for Madam I am likewise made of flesh, and lustie young bloud. And as for you Ladie Camila, you did not giue vp and yeelde your selfe presently, but stayed vntill you had first seene in Lotharios eyes, his sighes in his discourses, in his promises and gifts all his soule, in which and in his perfections you might reade how worthy he is to be loued. And seeing this is so, let not these scruples and nice thoughts assault or further disturbe your mind, but perswade your selfe that Lothario esteemes you as much as you doe him, and liues with content and satisfaction, seeing that it was your fortune to fal into the amorous snare, that it was his good lucke to catch you with his valour and deserts: who not only hath the foure. S S. which they say euery good louer oughtto haue, but also the whole A. B. C. which if you will not credite, doe but listen to me a while, and I will repeate it to you by roate. He is as it seemes, and as farre as can iudge amiable, bountifull, courteous, dutifull, enamored, firme, gallant, honourable, illustrious, loyall, milde, noble, honest, prudent, quiet, rich, and the S. S. which they say, and besides true, valorous. The X. doth not quader well with him, because it sounds harshly: Y. he is young. And the Z. he is zealous of thine honour. Camila laughed at her maydens A. B. C. and accounted her to bee more practicke
 in loue matters then she her selfe had confessed, as indeed she was, for then she reuealed to her Mistresse, how she and a certaine young man well borne of the Citie did treate of loue one with another: Hereat her Mistresse was not a little troubled in minde, fearing that her honour might be greatly indangered by that meanes; she demaunded whether her affections had passed farther then words, and the maid answered very shamelesly and freely that they did: for it is most certaine that this kinde of wretchlesse Mistresses doe also make their maydens carelesse and impudent: who when they perceiue their Ladies to faulter, are commonly wont to hault likewise themselues, and care not that the world doe know it. Camila seeing this errour past remedie, could do no more but intreate Leonela not to reueale any thing of her affaires, to him she said was her sweet heart; and that she should handle her matters discreetly and secretly, lest they might come to Anselmo or Lotharios notice. Leonela promised to performe her wil, but did acco^plish her promise in such sort, as she did confirme Camilas feares, that she should lose her credit by her means. For the dishonest and bold Gyrle after that she had perceiued that her Mistres, her proceedings were not such as they were wont, grew so hardy as she gaue entrance, and brought her louer into her Maisters house, presuming that although her Ladie knew it, yet would she not dare to discouer it. For this among other harmes follow the sinnes of Mistresses, that it makes them slaues to their owne seruants, and doth oblige them to conceale their dishonest and base proceedings as it fell out in Camila, who although she espied Leonela not once onely, but sundry times together with her louer in a certaine chamber of the house, she not onely dared not to rebuke her for it, but rather gaue her oportunity to hide him, and would remoue all occasions out of her husbands way, whereby he might suspect any such thing.
But all could not hinder Lothario from espying him once, as he departed out of the house at the breake of the day: who not knowing him, thought at the first that it was a spirit, but
 when he saw him post away, and cast his cloake ouer his race, least he should be known, he abandoning his simple surmise, fell into a new suspicio^ which had ouerthrown them all, were it not that Camila did remedie it. For Lothario thought that he whom he had seene issue out of Anselmos house at so vnreasonable an hower, had not entred into it for Leonelas sake, nor did he remember then that there was such a one as Leonela in the world, but onely thought that as Camila was lightly gotten by him, so belike she was won by some other. For the wickednesse of a bad woman bringeth vsually all these additions, that she looseth her reputatio^ euen with him to whom prayed and perswaded she yeeldeth her selfe: and he beleeueth that she will as easily, or with more facility consent to others, and doth infallibly credit the least suspicion which thereof may be offered.
And it seemes that Lothario in this instant was wholy depriued of all reasonable discourse, and quite dispoyled of his vnderstanding, for without pondering of the matter, impatient and kindled by the iealouse rage that inwardly gnawed his bowels, fretting with desire to be reuenged on Camila, who had neuer offended him, he came to Anselmo before he was vp, and said to him: know Anselmo that I haue had these many daies a ciuill conflict within my selfe whether I should speake or no, and I haue vsed as much violence as I might, to my selfe, not to discouer a thing vnto you, which now it is neither iust nor reasonable I should conceale. Know that Camilas fortresse is rendred and subiect to all that I please to commaund, and if I haue beene somewhat slow to informe thee this of truth, it was because I would first see, whether it proceeded of some light appetite in her: or whether shee did it to trie me, and see whether that loue was still constantly continued, which I first began to make vnto her by thy order and licence. I did also beleeue, that if shee had beene such as she ought to bee, and her that we both esteemed her, she would haue by this time acquainted you with my importunacy: but seeing that she lingers therein, I presume that
 her promises made vnto mee are true, that when you did againe absent your selfe out of the towne, she would speake with mee in the wardrobe (and it was true, for there Camila was accustomed to talke with him) yet would not I haue thee runne rashly to take reuenge, seeing the sinne is not yet otherwise committed then in thought, and perhaps betweene this and the oportunity she might hope to put it in execution, her mind would be changed, and she repent her selfe of her folly. And therefore seeing that thou hast euer followed mine aduises partly or wholy, follow and keepe one counsaile that I will giue vnto thee now, to the ende that thou mayest after with carefull assurance, and without fraud satisfie thine owne will as thou likest best, faine thy selfe to be absent two or three daies as thou art wont, and then conuey thy self cunningly into the wardrobe, where thou maist very well hide thy selfe behind the tapestry, and then thou shalt see with thine owne eyes, and I with mine what Camila will doe; and if it be that wickednesse which rather ought to be feared then hoped for, thou maiest with wisedome, silence, and discretion bee the proper executioner of so iniurious a wrong.
Anselmo remained amazed, and almost besides himselfe, heating his friend Lothario so vnexpectedly to acquaint him with those things, in a time wherein he least expected them, for now hee esteemed Camila to haue escaped victresse from the forged assaults of Lothario, and did himselfe triumph for glorie of her victorie, suspended thus and troubled, he stood silent a great while looking on the earth without once remouing his eye from it; and finally turning towards his friend, he said. Lothario, thou hast done all that which I could expect from so intire amitie, and I do therefore meane to follow thine aduice in all things precisely, doe therefore what thou pleasest, and keepe that secret which is requisite in so waighty and vnexpected an euent, or that I doe promise quoth Lothario, and so departed wholly repented for that hee had told to Anselmo seeing how foolishly hee had
 proceeded, since hee might haue reuenged himselfe on Camila very well, without taking away so cruell and dishonorable. There did he curse his little wit; and abased his light resolution: and knewe not what meanes to vse to destroy what he had done, or giue it some reasonable and contrary issue. In the end hee resolued to acquaint Camila with the whole matter, and by reason that hee neuer missed of oportunitie to speake vnto her, he found her alone the very same day; and shee seeing likewise that shee had commoditie to speake vnto him, said. Know friend Lothario that a certaine thing doth pinch my heart in such manner, as it seemes ready to burst in my brest, as doubtlesly I feare me that in time it will, if we cannot set a remedie to it. For such is the immodestie of Leonela, as shee shuts vp a louer of hers euery night in this house, and remaines with him vntill day light, which so much concernes my credit, as it leaues open a spacious field to him, that sees the other goe out of my house at so vnseasonable times, to iudge of me what he pleaseth; and that which most grieues mee is that I dare not punish or rebuke her for it. For shee being priuie to our proceedings sets a bridle on me, and constraines me to conceale hers, and hence I feare me will bad successe befall vs. Lothario at the first suspected that Camila did speake thus to make him beleeue that the man whom he had espied, was Leonelas friend, and none of hers: but seeing her to weepe indeede and bee greatly afflicted in minde, he began at last to giue credit vnto the truth, and beleeuing it, was greatly confounded and grieued for that he had done. And yet notwithstanding he answered Camila that shee should not trouble or vexe her selfe any more, for he would take such order as Leonelas impudencies should bee easily crost and suppressed. And then did recount vnto her all that hee had said to Anselmo, spurd on by the furious rage of iealous indignation, and how her husband had agreed to hide himselfe behinde the tapestrie of the wardrobe, that he might from thence clearly perceiue, the little loyaltie shee kept towards him, and demanded pardon
 of her for that follie and counsaile to redresse it, and come safely out of the intricate Labyrinth, whereinto his weake eyed discourse had conducted him.
Camila hauing heard Lotharios discourse, was afraid and amazed, and with great anger, and many and discreet reasons did rebuke him, reuiling the basenesse of his thoughts, and the simple and little consideration that hee had. But as women haue naturally a suddaine wit, for good or bad much more prompt then men: although when indeed they would make discourses, it proues defectiue. So Camila found in an instant a remedy for an affaire in apparance so irremediable and helplesse, and therfore bad Lothario to induce his friend Anselmo to hide himselfe the next day ensuing, for shee hoped to take commodity out of his being there, for them both to ioy one another with more securitie then euer they had before: and without wholly manifesting her prouerbe to him, shee only aduertised him to haue care, that after Anselmo were hidden hee should presently come when Leonela called for him, and that he should answere her as directly to euery question shee proposed, as if Anselmo were not in place. Lothario did vrge her importunately to declare her designe vnto him, to the end he might with more securitie and aduice obserue all that was necessarie. I say, quoth Camila, there is no other obseruance to bee had, then onely to answere me directly to what I shall demaund. For she would not giue him account before hand of her determination, fearefull that he would not conforme himselfe to her opinion which shee tooke to bee so good; or else least he would follow or seeke any other, that would not proue after so well. Thus departed Lothario, and Anselmo vnder pretext that hee would visit his friend out of Towne departed, and returned couertly backe againe to hide himselfe, which hee could do the more commodiously, because Camila and Leonela did purposely afford him oportunitie, Anselmo hauing hidden himselfe, with the griefe that may bee imagined one would conceiue, who did expect to see with his owne eyes
 an anotomie made of the bowels of his honour, and was in danger to loose the highest felicitie that hee accounted himselfe to possesse in his beloued Camila: Camila and Leonela being certaine that he was hidden within the wardrobe entred into it, wherein scarce had Camila set her foote, when breathing forth of a deepe sigh shee spoke in this manner.
Ah friend Leonela were it not better, that before I put in execution, that which I would not haue thee to know, least thou shouldest indeauour to hinder it, that thou takest Anselmos poyniard that I haue sought of thee, and passe this infamous brest of mine through and through? but doe it not, for it is no reason that I should suffer for other mens faults. I will know first of all what the bold and dishonest eyes of Lothario noted in me that should stirre in him the presumption to discouer vnto me so vnlawfull a desire, as that which he hath reuealed, so much in contempt of his friend, and to my dishonour. Stand at that window Leonela, and call him to mee, for I doe infallibly beleeue, that hee stands in the streete awaiting to effect his wicked purpose. But first my cruell, yet honourable minde shall be first performed. Alas deare Madame (quoth the wise and craftie Leonela) what is is it you meane to doe with that poyniard? meane you perhaps to depriue either your owne or Lotharios life therewithall? for which soeuer of these things you doe, shall redound to the losse of your credit and fame. It is much better that you dissmble your wrong, and giue no occasion to the bad man now to enter into this house, and finde vs here in it alone: Consider good Madame how we are but weake women, and hee is a man, and one resolute, and by reason that he comes blinded by his bad and passionate intent, hee may peraduenture before thou beest able to put thine in execution, doe somewhat that would be worse for you, then to depriue you of your life. Euill befall my Mr. Anselmo, that ministers so great occasion to impudencie, thus to discouer her visage in our house, and if you should kill him by chance Madame, as I suspect you meane to doe, what shall we doe
 after with the dead carkasse? what? said Camila, we would leaue him here that Anselmo might burie him. For he must in all equitie esteeme that labour for ease, which hee shall passe, in the interring of his owne infamie. Make an end then, and call him, for mee thinkes that all the time which I spend vntaking due reuenge of my iust disdaine, turnes into the preiudice of the loyaltie which I owe to my spouse.
Anselmo listned very attentiuely all the while, and at euery word that Camila said, his thoughts changed. But when he vnderstood that shee was resolued to kill Lothario, he was about to come out and discouer himselfe, to the end that such a thing should not be done, but the desire that hee had to see wherein so braue and honest a resolution would end with-held him, determining then to sallie out, when his presence should be needfull to hinder it. Camila about this time beganne to bee very weake and dismayed, and casting her selfe, as if shee had fallen into a trance vpon a bed that was in the roome, Leonela beganne to lament very bitterly and to say. Alas wretch that I am, how vnfortunate should I be, if the flower of the worlds honestie, the crowne of good women, and the patterne of chastitie, should die here betweene my hands. Those and such other things shee said so dolefully, as no one could heare her, that would not deeme her to bee one of the most esteemed and loyall Damzels of the world: and take her Ladie for an other new and persecuted Penelope. Soone after Camila returned to her selfe, and said presently. Why goest thou not Leonela to call the most disloyall friend of a friend, that euer the Sunne beheld, or the night concealed. Make an end, runne, make hast, and let not the fire of my choller bee through thy stay consumed and spent, nor the iust reuenge which I hope to take passe ouer in threats or maledictions. I goe to call him Madame, quoth Leonela, but first of all you must giue mee that poyniard, least you should doe with it in mine absence somewhat that would minister occasions to vs your friends to deplore you all the dayes of our liues. Goe away boldly friend
 Leonela said Camila, for I shall do nothing in thine absence; for although I be in thine opinion both simple and bolde enough to turne for mine honour, yet meane I not to be so much as the celebrated Lucretia, of whom it is recorded that she slew her selfe, without hauing committed any error or slaine him first who was the principall cause of her disgrace: I will die if I must needes die, but I will be satisfied and reuenged on him that hath giuen me occasion to come into this place to lament his boldnesse, sprung without my default. Leonela could scarcely be intreated to goe and call Lothario; but at last she went out, and in the meane time Camila remained, speaking to her selfe these words: Good God, had not it beene more discretion to haue dismissed Lothario, as I did many times before, then thus to possesse him as I haue done, with an opinion that I am an euill and dishonest woman, at least all the while that passeth, vntill mine actes shall vndeceiue him, and teach him the contrary? It had beene doubtlesly better: but then should not I be reuenged, nor mine husbands honour satisfied. If he were permitted to beare away so cleerely his malignitie, or escape out of the snare wherein his wicked thoughts inuolued him. Let the Traytor pay with his lifes defrayment, that which he attempted with so lasciuious a desire. Let the world know (if it by chance shall come to know it) that Camila did not only conserue the loyaltie due to her Lord, but also took reuenge of the intended spoile thereof. But yet I beleeue that it were best to giue Anselmo first notice thereof; but I did already touch it to him in the Letter which I wrote to him to the Village: and I beleeue that his not concurring to take order in this so manifest an abuse, proceeds of his too sincere and good meaning, which would not, nor cannot beleeue, that the like kinde of thought, could euer finde intertainment in the breast of so firme a friend, tending so much to his dishonour: and what maruell, if I my selfe could not credite it for a great many daies together, nor would I euer haue thought it, if his insolency had not arriued to that passe, which the
 manifest gifts, large promises, and continuall teares hee shed doe giue testimony. But why doe I make now these discourses? Hath a gallant resolution perhaps any neede of aduice? No verily; therefore auaunt treacherous thoughts, here we must vse reuenge. Let the false man come in, arriue, die and end, and let after befall what can befall. I entred pure and vntouched to his possession, whom heauen bestowed on me for mine, and I will depart from him purely: and if the worst befall, I shall onely be defiled by mine owne chaste bloud, and the impute goare of the falsest friend that euer amitie saw in this world. And saying of this she praunced vp and down the roome with the poyniard naked in her hand, with such long and vnmeasurable strides, and making withal such gestures, as she rather seemed defectiue of wit, and a desperate ruffian, then a delicate woman.
All this Anselmo perceiued very well from behinde the Arras that couerd him; which did not a little admire him, and he thought that what he had seene and heard, was a sufficient satisfaction of farre greater suspitions then he had: and could haue wished with all his heart that the trial of Lotharios comming might be excused, fearing greatly some sudden badde successe: and as he was ready to manifest himselfe, and to come out and embrace and disswade his wife; he withdrew himselfe because he saw Leonela returne, bringing Lothario in by the hand, and as soone as Camila beheld him, she drew a great strike with the point of the poyniard athwart the wardrop, saying Lothario, note wel what I mean to say vnto thee: for if by chance thou beest so hardy as to passe ouer this iine which thou seest, ere I come as far as it, I will in the very same instant stabbe my selfe into the heart with this poyniard, which I hold in my hand: and before thou doest speake or answer me any word I would first haue thee to listen to a few of mine, for after thou maiest say what thou pleasest. First of all I would haue thee, O Lothario, to say whether thou knowest my husband Anselmo, and what opinion thou hast of him? And next I would haue thee to tel
 me if thou knowest my selfe? Answer to this without delay, nor do not stand long thinking on what thou art to answer, seeing they are no deepe questions which I propose vnto thee. Lothario was not so ignorant, but that from the very beginning when Camila requested him to perswade her husband to hide himselfe behinde the tapistry, he had not falne on the drift of her inuention, and therefore did answere her intention so aptly and discreetly, as they made that vntruth passe betweene them for a more then manifest verity: and so he answered to Camila in this forme, I did neuer coniecture beautifull Camila, that thou wouldest haue called me here to demaund of me things so wide from the purpose for which I come: if thou doest it to deserre yet the promised fauour, thou mightest haue intertained it yet farther off; for the good desired afflicteth so much the more, by how much the hope to possesse it is neere. But because thou mayest not accuse me for not answering to thy demaunds, I say that I know thy husband Anselmo, and both of vs know one another euen from our tender infancie, and I will not omit to say that, which thou also knowest of our amity, to make me thereby a witnesse against my selfe of the wrong which loue compels me to doe vnto him, yet loue is a sufficient excuse and excuser of greater errors then are mine. Thee doe I likewise know and hold in the same possession that he doth: for were it not so, I should neuer haue beene won by lesse perfections then thine, to transgresse so much that which I owe to my selfe, and to the holy lawes of true amitie, now broken and violated by the tyrannie of so powerfull an aduersary as loue hath proued. If thou dost acknowledge that replied Camila, O mortall enemy of all that which iustly deserueth loue, with what face darest thou then appeare before that which thou knowest to be the mirror wherin he lookes, in whom thou also oughtest to behold thy selfe, to the end thou mightest perceiue vpon how little occasion thou dost wrong him? but vnfortunate that I am, I fall now in the reason which hath moued thee to make so little account of
 thine owne duety, which was perhaps some negligent or light behauiour of mine, which I will not call dishonesty, seeing that as I presume, it hath not proceeded from me deliberately, but rather through the carelesnes that women which thinke they are not noted do sometimes vnwittingly commit. If not, say traytor, when did I euer answere thy prayers with any word or token, that might awake in thee the least shadow of hope to accomplish thine infamous desires? When were not thine amorous intreaties reprehended and dispersed by the roughnesse and rigour of mine answers? When were thy many promises and larger gifts euer beleeued or admitted? But for as much as I am perswaded that no man can perseuere long time in the amorous co^tention, who hath not beene sustayned by some hope, I will attribute the fault of thine impertinence to my selfe: for doubtlesly some carelesnesse of mine hath hitherto sustained thy care, and therefore I will chastise and giue to my selfe the punishment which thy fault deserueth. And because thou mightest see that I being so inhumane towards my selfe, could not possibly be other then cruell to thee, I thought fit to call thee to be a witnesse of the sacrifice which I meane to make to the offended honor of my most honourable husband, tainted by thee, with the blackest note that thy malice could deuise, and by me through the negligence that I vsed, to shun the occasion, if I gaue thee any, thus to nourish and canonize thy wicked intentions. I say againe that the suspition I haue that my little regard hath ingendred in thee these distracted thoughts, is that which afflicteth me most, and that which I meane to chastice most with mine owne hands: for if another executioner punished me, then should my crime become more notorious; but before I doe this, I dying will kill, and carie him away with me that shall end and satisfie the greedy desire of reuenge which I hope for, and I haue; seeing before mine eyes wheresoeuer I shall go, the punishment which disingaged iustice shall inflict, it still remayning vnbowed or suborned by him, which hath brought me to so desperate termes.

And hauing said these wordes, she flew vpon Lothario with incredible force and lightnesse, and her poyniard naked, giuing such arguments and tokens that shee meant to stabbe him, as he himselfe was in doubt whether her demonstrations were false or true; wherefore he was driuen to helpe himselfe by his wit and strength for to hinder Camila from striking of him, who did so liuely acte her strange guile and fiction, as to giue it colour, she would giue it a blush of her owne blood: for perceiuing, or else fayning that shee could not hurt Lothario, she said seeing that aduerse fortune will not satisfie throughly my iust desires, yet at least it shall not be potent wholly to crosse my designes, and then striuing to free the dagger hand, which Lothario held fast, she snatched it away, and directing the point to some place of her bodie, which might hurt her but not very grieuously, she stabd her selfe, and hid it in her apparrell neere vnto the left shoulder, and fell forthwith to the ground, as if she were in a traunce. Lothario and Leonela stood amazed at the vnexpected euent, and still rested doubtfull of the truth of the matter, seeing Camila to lie on the ground bathed in her bloud: Lothario ranne all wan and pale very hastily to her to take out the poyniard, and seeing how little bloud followed, he lost the feare that he had conceiued of her greater hurt, and began a new to admire the cunning wit, and discretion of the beautifull Camila: but yet that he might play the part of a friend, he began a long and dolefull lamentation ouer Camilas bodie, euen as she were dead, and began to breath forth many curses and execrations not onely against himselfe, but also against him that had imployed him in that vnfortunate affaire. And knowing that his friend Anselmo did listen vnto him, he said such things as would moue a man to take more compassion of him then of Camila her selfe, although they accounted her dead. Leonela tooke her vp betweene her armes, and laid her on the bedde, and intreated Lothario to goe out, and finde some one that would vndertake to cure her secretly. She also demaunded of him his aduice, touching
 the excuse they might make to Anselmo concerning her Mistresse her wound, if hee came to towne before it were fully cured. He answered that they might say what they pleased, for hee was not in an humour of giuing any counsell worth the following: And onely sayd this, that shee should labour to staunch her Ladies bloud, for hee meant to goe there, whence they should heare no newes of him euer after: And so departed out of the house with verie greate tokens of griefe and feeling, and when hee was alone in place where no bodie perceiued him, hee blist himselfe a thousand times, to thinke of Camilas Art, and the gestures so proper and accommodated to the purpose, vsed by her mayde Leonela. Hee considered how assured Anselmo would remayne, that hee had a second Portia to wife, and desired to meete him, that they might celebratte together the fiction, and the best dissembled truth that could bee euer imagined. Leonela as is said, staunched her Ladies bloud, which was iust as much as might serue to colour her inuention and no more, and washing the wound with some wine, shee tyed it vp the best that shee could, saying such words whilest she cured her, as were able, though nothing had beene done before to make Anselmo beleeue that hee had an Image of honesty in Camila to the plants of Leonela, Camila added others terming her selfe a coward of base spirit, since she wanted time, (being a thing so necessary) to depriue her life which she hated so mortally, she demaunded counsell of her maiden whether shee would tell, or conceale all that successe to her beloued spouse: and she answered that it was best to conceale it, lest she should ingage her husband to be reuenged on Lothario, which could not be done without his very great peril, and that euery good wise was bound not to giue occasion to her husband of quarrelling, but rather to remoue from him as many as was possible. Camila answered, that she allowed of her opinion, and would follow it. And that in any sort they
 must studie some deuice to cloake the occasion of her hurt from Anselmo, who could not chuse but espie it. To this Leonela answered that she her selfe knew not how to lie, no not in very iest it selfe. Well friend quoth Camila, and I, what do I know? for I dare not to forge, or report an vntruth, if my life lay on it. And if wee knew not how to giue it a better issue, it will be better to report the naked truth, then to be ouertaken in a leesing: doe not trouble your selfe Madame quoth Leonela, for I will bethinke my selfe of somewhat betweene this and to morrow morning, and perhaps the wound may be concealed from him, by reason that it is in the place where it is, and heauen perhaps may be pleased to fauour our so iustand honourable thoughts: Be quiet good Madam, and labour to appease your alteration of mind, that my Lord at his returne may not find you perplexed, and leaue all the rest to Gods and my charge, who doth alwaies assist the iust.
With highest attention stood Anselmo listening and beholding the tragedie of his dying honours, which the personages thereof had acted with so strange and forceable effects as it verily seemed, that they were transformed into the opposite truth of their well contriued fiction, he longed greatly for the night, and leasure to get out of his house, that hee might goe and congratulate with his good friend Lothario, for the precious Iewell that he had found in this last triall of his wife. The Master and Mayden had as great care to giue him the oportunitie to depart, and he fearing to loose it, issued out in a trice, and went presently to finde Lothario, who being found, it is not possible to recount the embracements he gaue vnto him, the secrets of his contentment that he reuealed, or attributes and praises he gaue to Camila. All which Lothario heard, without giuing the least argument of loue: hauing represented to his minde at that very time, how greatly deceiued his friend liued, and how iniustly hee himselfe had iniuried him. And although that Anselmo noted that Lothario tooke no delight at his relation, yet did he beleeue
 that the cause of his sorrow proceeded from hauing left Camila wounded, and he himselfe giuen the occasion thereof. And therefore among many other words said vnto him, that there was no occasion to grieue at Camilas hurt, it doubtlesly being but light; seeing she and her mayde had agreed to hide it from him; and that according vnto this there was no great cause of feare, but that from thence forward he should liue merily and contentedly with him, seeing that by his industrie and meanes, hee found himselfe raised to the highest felicitie that might be desired: and therefore would from thenceforth spend his idle times in writing of verses in Camilas praise, that he might eternize her name, and make it famous in insuing ages. Lothario commended his resolution therein, and said that he for his part would also helpe to raise vp so noble an edifice, and herewithall Anselmo rested the most soothingly and contentedly deceiued, that could bee found in the world: and then himselfe tooke by the hand to his house (beleeuing that he bore the instrument of his glory) the vtter perdition of his fame. Camila entertained him with a frowning countenance, but a cheerefull minde, the fraude rested vnknowne a while, vntill at the end of certaine monethes fortune turned the wheele, and the wickednesse that was so artificially cloaked, issued to the publike notice of the world, and Anselmo his impertinent curiositie cost him his life:



CHAP. VIII.

Wherein is ended the Historie of the curious impertinent: and likewise recounted the rough incounter and conflict passed betweene Don-Quixote and certaine bagges of red wine.

A Little more of the nouell did rest vnread, when Sancho Panca all perplexed ran out of the chamber where his Lord reposed, crying as loud as hee could. Come good Sirs speedily, and assist my Lord who is ingaged in one of the most terrible battailes, that euer mine eyes haue seene. I sweare that he hath giuen such a blow to the Giant, my Ladie the Princesse Micomicona her enemie, as hee hath cut his head quite off as round as a Turnep. What sayest thou friend, quoth the Curate, (leauing off at that word to prosecute the reading of his nouell) art thou in thy wits Sancho? what a Diuell man how can that be, seeing the Giant dwels at least two thousand leagues from hence. By this they heard a maruailous great noyse within the chamber, and that Don-Quixote cried out aloud. Stay false Thiefe, Robber stay, for since thou art here, thy Cimitar shall but little auaile thee, and therewithall it seemed that he struck a number of mighty blowes on the wals. And Sancho said, there is no neede to stand this listening abroade, but rather that you goe in, and part the fraye, or else assist my Lord. Although I thinke it be not very necessary, for the Giant is questionlesse dead by this, and giuing account for the ill life hee ledde. For I sawe his bloud runne all about the house, and his heade cut off, which is as great as a great Wine bagge. I am content to bee hewen in peeces, quoth the Innekeeper, hearing of this, if Don-Quixote or Don-Diuell haue not giuen some blow to one of the wine bagges that stood filled
 at his beds head, and the shedde wine must needes bee that which seemes bloud to this good man, and saying so, he entred into the roome, and all the rest followed him, where they found Don-Quixote in the strangest guise that may bee imagined: hee was in his shirt, the which was not long enough before to couer his thighes, and it was sixe fingers shorter behinde: his legges were very long and leane, full of haire and horrible dirtie. Hee wore on his head a little red very greafie night cap, which belonged to the Inkeeper, he had wreathed on his left arme the couerlet of his bedde, on which Sancho looked very often and angerly, as one that knew well the cause of his owne malice to it, and in his right hand he griped his naked sword, wherewithall he laid round about him many a thwacke and withall spake, as if he were in battaile with some Giant: and the best sport of all was that he held not his eyes open, for he was indeede a sleepe, and dreaming that he was in fight with the Giant. For the imagination of the aduenture which hee had vndertaken to finish, was so bent vpon it, as it made him to dreame that he was already arriued at the Kingdome of Micomicon, and that he was then in combate with his enemie: and hee had giuen so many blowes on the wine bagges, supposing them to be the Giant, as all the whole chamber flowed with wine. Which being perceiued by the Host all inflamed with rage, he set vpon Don-Quixote with drie fists, and gaue vnto him so many blowes, that if Cardenio and the Curate had not taken him away, he would doubtlesly haue finished the warre of the Giant, and yet with al this did not the poore knight awake vntill the Barber brought in a great Kettle full of cold water from the Well, and threw it all at a clap vpon him, and therewithall Don-Quixote awaked but not in such sort, as he perceiued the manner wherein he was. Dorotea seeing how short and how thin her Champion was arrayed, would not go in to see the conflict of her combattant and his aduersarie.
Sancho went vp and downe the floure searching for the Giants head, and seeing that he could not finde it, hee said,
 now doe I see very well that all the things of this house are inchantments, for the last time that I was here in this very same roome, I got many blowes and buffets, and knew not who did strike me, nor could I see any body: and now the head appeares not which I saw cut off with mine owne eyes, and yet the bloud ranne as swiftly from the body as water would from a fountaine. What bloud or what fountaine dost thou tattle of here, thou enemie of God and his Saints, quoth the Inkeeper? thou theefe, dost not thou see that the bloud and the fountaine is no other thing, then these wine bagges which are slashed here, and the wine redde that swimmes vp and downe this chamber, and I wish that I may see his soule swimming in hell which did bore them? I know nothing replied Sancho, but this that if I cannot finde the Giants head, I shall become so vnfortunate, as mine Earledome will dissolue like salt cast into water. And certes, Sancho awake, was in worse case then his Master sleeping, so much had his Lords promises distracted him. The Inkeeper on the other side was at his wits end to see the humour of the Squire, and vnhappinesse of his Lord, and swore that it should not succeed with them now as it had done the other time, when they went away without payment: and that now the priuiledges of Chiualrie should not auaile him, but hee should pay both the one and other, yea euen for the very patches that were to be set on the boared wine bagges.
The Curate held fast Don-Quixote by the hands, who beleeuing that he had atchieued the aduenture, and was after it come into the Princesse Micomicona her presence, he laid himselfe on his knees before the Curate, saying: Well may your greatnesse, high, and famous Ladie, liue from hence forth secure from any danger, that this vnfortunate wretch may doe vnto you; and I am also freed from this day forward from the promise that I made vnto you, seeing I haue by the assistance of the heauens, and through her fauour by whom I liue and breathe, so happely accomplished it. Did not I say so, quoth Sancho, hearing of his
 Master? yea, I was not drunke, see, if my Master hath not powdred the Giant by this? the matter is questionlesse, and the Earledome is mine owne, who would not laugh at these rauing fits of the Master and Man? all of them laughed saue the Inkeeper who gaue himselfe for anger to the Diuel more then a hundred times. And the Barber Cardenio and the Curate got Don-Quixote to bed againe not without much adoe, who presently fell asleepe with tokens of maruailous wearinesse. They left him sleeping and went out to comfort Sancho Panca for the griefe hee had, because hee could not finde the Giants head: but yet had more adoe to pacifie the Inkeeper, who was almost out of his wits for the vnexpected and suddaine death of his wine bagges.
The Hostesse on the other side went vp and downe whining and saying, in an ill season and an vnlucky houre did this Knight errant enter into my house; Alas, and I would that mine eyes had neuer seene him, seeing hee costs mee so deere. The last time that hee was heere, hee went away scot-free for his supper, bedde, straw, and barley, both for himselfe and his man, his horse, and his Asse, saying, that he was a knight aduenturous (and God giue to him ill venture, and to all the other aduenturers of the world) and was not therefore bound to pay any thing, for so it was written in the statutes of Chiualry. And now for his cause came the other Gentleman, and tooke away my good taile, and hath returnd it me backe, with two quarters of damage. For all the haire is falne off, and it cannot stand my husband any more in steed for the purpose he had it; and for an end and conclusion of all to breake my wine bagges and shedde my wine: I wish I may see as much of his bloud shedde. And do not think otherwise, for by my fathers old bones, and the life of my mother, they shall pay me euery do it, one quart on an other, or else I will neuer be called as I am, nor be mine own fathers daughter. These and such like wordes spake the In-keepers wife with very great fury, and was seconded by her good seruant Maritornes. The daughter held her peace, and
 would now and then smile a little: but Master Parson did quiet and pacifie all, by promising to satisfie them for the damages as well as he might, as well for the wine as for the bagges, but chiefly for her taile, the which was so much accounted of, and valued so highly. Dorotea did comfort Sancho saying to him, that whensoeuer it should be verified that his Lord had slaine the Giant, and established her quietly in her kingdome, she would bestow vpon him the best Earledome thereof. With this he tooke courage, and assured the Princesse that he himselfe had seene the Giants head cut off, and for a more certaine token thereof, he said that hee had a beard that reached him downe to his gyrdle; and that if the head could not now be found, it was by reason that all the affaires of that house were guided by inchantment, as he had made experience to his cost the last time that he was lodged therein. Dorotea replyed that she was of the same opinion, and bad him to be of good cheere, for all would be well ended to his hearts desire. All parties being quieted, the Curate resolued to finish the end of his nouell, because he perceiued that there rested but a little vnread thereof. Cardenio, Dorotea, and all the rest intreated him earnestly to finish it. And he desiring to delight them all herein, and recreate himselfe, did prosecute the tale in this manner.
It after befell that Anselmo grew so satisfied of his wiues honestie, as he led a most contented and secure life: and Camila did for the nonce looke sourely vpon Lothario to the end Anselmo might conster her mind amisse: and for a greater confirmation thereof, Lothario requested Anselmo to excuse his comming any more to his house, seeing that hee cleerely perceiued how Camila could neither brooke his company nor presence. But the hoodwink'd Anselmo answered him, that he would in no wise consent thereunto, and in this manner did weaue his owne dishonour a thousand waies, thinking to worke his contentment. In this season such was the delight that Leonela tooke also in her affections, as she suffered her selfe to be borne away by them headlongly without
 any care or regard confident, because her Ladie did couer it, yea, and sometimes instructed her how she might put her desires in practise, without any feare or danger. But finally Anselmo heard on a night some body walke in Leonelas chamber, and being desirous to know who it was, as he thought to enter, he felt the doore to be held fast against him, which gaue him a greater desire to open it, and therefore he strugled so long, and vsed such violence, as he threw open the dore, and entred iust at the time that another leaped out at the window, and therefore he ran ouer to ouertake him, or see wherein he might know him, but could neyther compasse the one or the other, by reason that Leonela embracing him hardly, with-held him and said, pacifie your selfe good Sir, and be not troubled, nor follow him that was here, for he is one that belongs to mee, and that so much as he is my spouse. Anselmo would not beleeue her, but rather blinde with rage, he drew out his poyniard, and would haue wounded her, saying, that she should presently tell him the truth, or else he would kill her. She distracted with feare, said, without noting her owne words: Kill me not Sir, and I will acquaint you with things which concerne you more then you can imagine. Say quickly then, quoth Anselmo, or else thou shalt die. It will be impossible, replied Leonela, for me to speake any thing now I am so affrighted, but giue me respite till morning, and I will recount vnto you things that will maruellously astonish you, and in the meane time rest secure; that he which leaped out of the window is a young man of this citie, betwixt whom and me hath passed a promise of marriage. Anselmo was somewhat satisfied by these words, and therefore resolued to expect the terme which she had demaunded to open her minde; for hee did not suspect that he should heare any thing of Camila, by reason that he was already so assured of her vertue: and so departing out of the chamber, and shutting vp Leonela therin, threatning her withall that she should neuer depart thence vntill she had said all that she promised to reueale vnto him
 He went presently to Camila to tell vnto her all that which his mayden had said, and the promise she had passed, to disclose greater and more important things; whether Camila hearing this, were perplexed or no, I leaue to the discreete readers iudgement: for such was the feare which she conceiued, beleeuing certainely (as it was to be doubted) that Leonela would tell to Anselmo all that she knew of her disloyalty, as she had not the courage to expect and see whether her surmise would become false or no: but the very same night as soone as she perceiued Anselmo to be asleepe, gathering together her best iewels and some money, she departed out of her house vnperceiued of any, and went to Lotharios lodging, to whom she recounted al that had past, and requested him eyther to leaue her in some safe place, or both of them to depart to some place, where they might liue secure out of Anselmos reach. The confusion that Camila strucke into Lothario, was such, as he knew not what to say, and much lesse how to resolue himself what he might do. But at last he determined to carie Camila to a Monastery wherin his sister was Prioresse; to which shee easily condiscended, and therefore Lothario departed, and left her there with all the speed that the case required, and did also absent himselfe presently from the citie, without acquainting any body with his departure.
Anselmo as soone as it was day, without heeding the absence of his wife, arose and went to the place where he had shut vp Leonela, with desire to know of her what she had promised to acquaint him withall: he opened the chamber dore and entred, but could finde no body therein, but some certaine sheets knit together, and tied to the window as a certaine signe how Leonela had made an escape by that way. Wherfore he returned very sadde, to tell to Camila the aduenture; but when he could neither finde her at bedde, nor in the whole house, he remained astomed, and demaunded for her of his seruants, but none of them could tell him any thing. And as he searched for her, hee hapned to see her
 cofers lye open, and most of her jewels wanting, and heerewithall fell into the true account of his disgrace, and that Leonela was not the cause of his misfortune, and so departed out of his house sadde and pensiue, euen as hee was, halfe ready and vnapparelled to his friend Lothario, to recount vnto him his disaster: but when hee found him to bee likewise absented, and that the seruants told him how their master was departed the very same night and had borne away with him all his money, hee was ready to runne out of his wits. And to conclude, hee returned to his owne house againe, wherein he found no creature, man or woman, for all his folke were departed, and had left the house alone and desert: he knew not what he might thinke, say, or doe, and then his iudgement beganne to faile him. There he did contemplate and behold himselfe in an instant, without a wife, a friend, and seruants: abandoned (to his seeming) of heauen that couered him, and chiefly without honour, for hee clearly noted his owne perdition in Camilas crime. In the end he resolued, after he had bethought himselfe a great while to goe to his friends Village wherein hee had beene all the while that hee afforded the leisure to contriue that disaster, and so shutting vp his house, he mounted a horse-backe, and rode away in languishing and dolefull wise. And scarce had he ridden the halfe way when he was so fiercely assaulted by his thoughts, as hee was constrained to alight, and tying his horse to a tree, he leaned himselfe to the trunke thereof, and breathed out a thousand pittifull and dolourous sighes: and there hee abode vntill it was almost night; about which houre hee espied a man to come from the Cittie a horse-backe by the same way, and hauing saluted him, he demaunded of him what newes he brought from Florencia? the Cittizen replyed that the strangest that had hapned there many a day, for it is there reported publikly that Lothario the great friend of the rich man, hath carried away the said Anselmos wife Camila this night, for shee is also missing, all which a waiting maide of Camilas hath
 confest, whom the gouernour apprehended yesternight, as shee slipt downe at a window by a paire of sheets, out of the said Anselmos house. I know not particulary the truth of the affaire, but well I wote, that all the Cittie is amazed at the accident, for such a fact would not bee as much as surmised, from the great and familiar amitie of them two, which was so much, as they were called the two friends. Is it perhaps yet knowen, quoth Anselmo, which way Lothario and Camila haue taken? in no wise replyed the Cittizen, although the Gouernour hath vsed all possible diligence to finde them out. Farewell then good Sir, said Anselmo; and with you Sir, said the traualer, and so departed.
With these so vnfortunate newes poore Anselmo arriued not only to termes of loosing his wits, but also welnigh of loosing his life: and therefore arising as well as he might, he came to his friends house, who had heard nothing yet of his disgrace; but perceiuing him to arriue, so wanne, pyned and dried vp, he presently coniectured that some grieuous euill afflicted him. Anselmo requested him presently that hee might be carried to his chamber, and prouided of paper and inke to write withall; all was done, and he left at bed, and alone, for so he desired them; and also that the dore should bee fast locked: and being alone the imagination of his misfortune gaue him such a terrible charge, as he clearely perceiued that his life would shortly faile him, and therefore resolued to leaue notice of the cause of his suddaine and vnexpected death: and therefore he beganne to write it, but before hee could set an end to his discourse, his breath failed, and yeelded vp his life into the hands of sorrowe which his impertinent curiositie had stirred vp in him. The Gentleman of the house seeing that it grew late, and that Anselmo had not called, determined to enter and know whether his indisposition passed forward: and hee found him lying on his face, with halfe of his body in the bed, and the other halfe leaning on the table whereon hee lay, with a written paper vnfolded: and held the pen also yet in his hand. His Host
 drew neare vnto him, and first of all hauing called him, hee tooke him by the hand: and seeing that hee answered not, and that it was cold, he knew that he was dead: and greatly perplexed and grieued thereat, hee called in his people that they might also be witnesses of the disastrous successe of Anselmo: and after all he tooke the paper and read it, which he knew to bee written with his owne hand, the substance whereof was this:
A foolish and impertinent desire hath dispoiled mee of life. If the newes of my death shall arriue to Camila, let her also know that I doe pardon her, for shee was not bound to worke miracles; nor had I any neede to desire that shee should worke them. And seeing I was the builder and contriuer of mine owne dishonour, there is no reason.
Hitherunto did Anselmo write, by which it appeared, that his life ended in that point ere he could set an end to the reason he was to giue. The next day insuing, the Gentleman his friend, acquainted Anselmos kinsfolke with his death: the which had already knowledge of his misfortune, and also of the Monasterie wherein Camila had retyred her selfe, being almost in termes to accompany her husband in that forcible voyage; not for the newes of his death, but for griefe of others which she had receiued of her absent friend. It is said that although shee was a widdow, yet would shee neither depart out of the Monasterie, nor become a religious woman, vntill shee had receiued within a few dayes after newes how Lothario was slaine in a battaile giuen by Monfieur de Lautrec to the great Captaine Goncalo Fernandez of Cordoua. In the Kingdome of Naples: and that was the end of the late repentant friend, the which being knowen to Camila she made a profession, and shortly after deceased betweene the rigorous hands of sorrow and melancholie, and this was the end of them all, sprung from a rash and inconsiderate beginning.
This nouell, quoth the Curate, hauing read it is a prettie one, but yet I cannot perswade my selfe that it is true, and
 if it be a fiction, the authour erred therein, for it cannot bee imagined, that any husband would be so foolish, as to make so costly an experience as did Anselmo. But if this accident had beene deuised betwixt a Gentleman and his loue, then were it possible, but being betweene man and wife, it containes somewhat that is impossible and vnlikely: but yet I can take no exception against the manner of recounting thereof.


CHAP. IX.

Which treates of many rare successes, befallen in the Inne.

WHilst they discoursed thus, the Inkeeper who stood all the while at the dore, said, heere comes a faire troupe of guests: and if they will here alight, wee may sing Gaudeamus. What folke is it, quoth Cardenio, foure men a horse-backe, quoth the Host, and ride gennet wise, with launces and targets, and maskes on their faces, and with them comes likewise a woman apparelled in white, in a side saddle, and her face also masked: and two lackeys that run with them a foote: are they neare, quoth the Curate? so neare, replyed the Inkeeper, as they do now arriue. Dorotea hearing him say so, couered her face, and Cardenio entred into Don-Quixotes Chamber, and scarce had they leisure to doe it, when the others of whom the Host spake, entred into the Inne: and the foure horsemen allighting, which were all of very comely and gallant disposition, they went to helpe downe the Lady that rode in the side saddle, and one of them taking her downe in his armes, did seat her in a chaire that stood at the chamber dore, into which Cardenio had entred, and all this while neither shee, nor they, tooke off their maskes, or spake a word, onely the Gentlewoman at her
 sitting downe in the chaire breathed forth a very deep sigh, and let fall her armes like a sicke and dismayed person. The Lackeyes carried away their horses to the stable Master Curate seeing and noting all this, and curious to know what they were that came to the Inne in so vnwonted an attyre, and kept such profound silence therein, went to the Lackeies and demaunded of one of them that which hee desired to know. Who answered him, In good faith Sir I cannot tell you what folke this is, only this I know, that they seeme to be very Noble, but chiefly hee that went and tooke downe the Ladie in his armes that you see there: and this I say because all the others doe respect him very much, and nothing is done, but what hee ordaines and commaunds. And the Ladie, what is shee, quoth the Curate? I can as hardly informe you, quoth the Lackey, for I haue not once seene her face in all this iourney, yet I haue heard her often grone and breathe out so profound sighes, as it seemes shee would giue vp the Ghost at euery one of them; and it is no maruaile that wee should know no more, then wee haue said, for my companion and my selfe haue beene in their companie but two dayes: for they incountred vs on the way and prayed and perswaded vs to goe with them vnto Andaluzia, promising that they would recompence our paines largely. And hast thou heard them name one another, said the Curate? no truly answered the Lackey, for they all trauaile with such silence, as it is a wonder, for you shall heare not a word among them, but the sighes and throbs of the poore Ladie, which doe moue in vs very great compassion, and wee doe questionlesse perswade our selues that shee is forced, wheresoeuer shee goes, and as it may bee collected by her attyre shee is a Nunne, or as is most probable goes to be one, and perhaps shee goeth so sorrowfull as it seemes, because shee hath no desire to become religious. It may very well be so, quoth the Curate; and so leauing them hee returned to the place where he had left Dorotea, who hearing the disguised Ladie to sigh so often mooued by the natiue compassion of
 that sexe, drew neare her and said, what ailes you good Madame? I pray you thinke if it be any of those inconueniences to which women bee subiect, and whereof they may haue vse and experience to cure them, I doe offer vnto you my seruice, assistance, and good will, to helpe you as much as lies in my power. To all those complements the dolefull Ladie answered nothing, and although Dorotea made her againe larger offers of her seruice, yet stood shee euer silent vntill the bemasked Gentleman (whom the Lackey said the rest did obay) came ouer and said to Dorotea: Ladie doe not trouble your selfe, to offer any thing to that woman, for shee is of a most ingratefull nature, and is neuer wont to gratifie any curtesie, nor doe you seeke her to answere vnto your demaunds, if you would not heare some lie from her mouth. I neuer said any (quoth the silent Lady) but rather because I am so true and sincere without guiles, I am now drowned here in those misfortunes, and of this I would haue thy selfe beare witnes, seeing my pure truth makes thee to be so false and disloyal.
Cardenio ouerheard these words very cleere and distinctly, as one that stood so neere vnto her that said them, as onely Don-Quixotes chamber doore stood betweene them, and instantly when he heard them, he said with a very loud voice, good God, what is this that I heare? what voyce is this that hath touched mine eare? The Ladie moued with a sodaine passion turned her head at those outcries, and seeing shee could not perceiue him that gaue them, she got vp, and would haue entred into the roome, which the Gentleman espying, withheld her, and would not let her stirre out of the place: and with the alteration and sodaine motion the maske fell off her face, and she discouered an incomparable beautie, and an angelicall countenance, although it was somewhat wanne and pale, and turned heere and there with her eies to euery place so earnestly as she seemed to be distracted: which motions without knowing the reason why they were made, strucke Dorotea and the rest that beheld her into very great compassion. The Gentleman held her very strongly fast by
 the shoulders, that hee more on his owne face that was falling, and was so busied therein, as hee could not hold vp the maske, as it did in the end wholy: Dorotea who had likewise embraced the Ladie, lifting vp her eyes by chance, saw that he which did also embrace the Ladie was her spouse Don Fernando: and scarce had she knowne him when breathing out along and most pitifull Alas from the bottome of her heart she fell backward in a trance. And if the Barber had not bin by good hap at hand, she would haue falne on the ground with all the waight of her bodie: the Curate presently repaired to take off the vaile of her face, and cast water thereon, and as soone as he did discouer it, Don Fernando, who was he indeed that held fast the other, knew her, and looked like a dead man as soone as he viewed her, but did not all this let go Luscinda, who was the other whom he held so fast, and that laboured so much to escape out of his hands. Cardenio likewise heard the Alas that Dorotea said, when she fell into a trance, and beleeuing that it was his Luscinda, issued out of the chamber greatly altered, and the first he espied was Don Fernando, which held Luscinda fast; who forthwith knew him: and all the three, Luscinda, Cardenio, and Dorotea stood dumbe and amazed, as folke that knew not what had befalne vnto them. All of them held their peace, and beheld one another. Dorotea looked on Don Fernando. Don Fernando on Cardenio, Cardenio on Luscinda, and Luscinda againe on Cardenio: but Luscinda was the first that broke silence, speaking to Don Fernando in this manner. Leaue me off Lord Fernando, I coniure thee, by that thou shouldest bee, for that which thou art; if thou wilt not doe it for any other respect: let me cleaue to the wall, whose Iuie I am, to the supporter from whom neither thy importunities nor threats, promises or gifts could once deflect mee. Note how heauen by vnusuall, vnfrequented, and from vs conccaled waies, hath set my true spouse before mine eyes: and thou doest know well by a thousand costly experiences, that onely death is potent to blot forth his remembrance out of my memorie: let then so manifest truthes be of power (if
 thou must doe none other) to conuert thine affliction into rage, and thy good will into despight, and therewithall end my life, for if I may render vp the ghost in the presence of my deere spouse, I shall account it fortunately lost. Perhaps by my death he will remaine satisfied of the faith, which I euer kept sincere towards him, vntill the last period of my life. By this time Dorotea was come to her selfe, and listned to most of Luscindas reasons, and by them came to the knowledge of her selfe: but seeing that Don Fernando did not yet let her depart from betweene his armes, nor answere any thing to her words: encouraging her selfe the best that she might, she arose, and kneeling at his feete, and shedding a number of Cristall and penetrating teares she spoke to him thus.
If it be not so my Lord, that the beames of that Sunne which thou holdest ecclipsed betweene thine armes, doe darken and depriue those of thine eyes, thou mightest haue by this perceiued how she that is prostrated at thy feet is the vnfortunate (vntill thou shalt please) and the distastrous Dorotea. I am that poore humble countriwoman, whom thou eyther through thy bountie, or for thy pleasure didst deigne to raise to that height that she might call thee her owne. I am she which sometime immured within the limits of honestie did lead a most contented life, vntil it opened the gates of her recollection and wearinesse, to thine importunitie, and seeming iust, and amorous requests, and rendred vp to thee the keyes of her liberty, a greefe by thee so ill recompensed, as the finding my selfe in so remote a place as this: wherein you haue met with mee, and I seene you, may cleerely testifie, but yet for all this, I would not haue you to imagine that I come heere guided by dishonourable steps being onely hither conducted by the tracts of dolour, and feeling to see my selfe thus forgotten by thee. It was thy will, that I should be thine owne, and thou didst desire it in such a manner, as although now thou wouldst not haue it so, yet canst not thou possibly leaue off to be mine. Know my deare Lord that the matchlesse affection that I doe beare towards thee, may recompense
 and be equiualent to her beautie and nobilitie, for whom thou doest abandon mee. Thou canst not be the beautifull Luscindas, because thou art mine: nor she thine, for as much as she belongs to Cardenio, and it will be more easier, if you will note it well, to reduce thy will to loue her that adores thee, then to addresse hers that hates thee, to beare thee affection: Thou diddest sollicite my wretchlesnesse; thou prayedst to mine integrtie, and wast not ignorant of my qualitie: thou knowest also very well vpon what termes I subiected my selfe to thy will, so as there remaines no place, nor colour to terme it a fraud or deceit. And all this being so, as in veritie it is, and that thou beest as Christian as thou art noble, why doest thou with these so many vntoward wreathings dilate the making of mine ende happy, whose commencement thou diddest illustrate so much? and if thou wilt not haue me for what I am, who am thy true and lawfull spouse; yet at least take and admit mee for thy slaue, for so that I may be in thy possession, I will account my selfe happy and fortunate. Doe not permit that by leauing and abandoning mee, meetings may be made to discourse of my dishonour. Doe not vexe thus the declining yeares of my parents, seeing that the loyall seruices which they euer haue done as vassailes to thine, deserue not so honest a recompence. And if thou esteemest that thy bloud by medling with mine shall be stayned or embased: consider how fewe Noble howses or rather none at all are there in the world, which haue not runne the same way: and that the womans side is not essentially requisite for the illustrating of noble descents, how much more, seeing that true nobilitie consists in vertue, which if it shall want in thee by refusing that which thou owest mee so iustly, I shall remaine with many more degrees of nobilitie then thou shalt. And in conclusion that which I will lastly say is, that whether thou wilt or no I am thy wife, the witnesses are thine owne words, which neither should nor ought to lie, if thou doest prize thy selfe of that for whose want thou despisest mee. Witnesse shall
 also be thine own hand writing. Witnesse heauen which thou didst inuoke to beare witnesse of that which thou didst promise vnto mee: and when all this shall faile, thy very conscience shall neuer fayle from vsing clamours being silent in thy mirth and turning for this truth, which I haue said to thee now, shall trouble thy greatest pleasure and delight.
These and many other like reasons did the sweetely grieued Dorothea vse with such feeling and abundance of teares, as all those that were present, as well such as accompanied Don Fernando, as also the others that did accompany her. Don Fernando listened to her without replying a word, vntill she had ended her speech, and giuen beginning to so many sighes and sobs, as the heart that could indure to beholde them without mouing, were harder then brasse. Luscinda did also regard her, no lesse compassionate of her sorrow then admired at her discretion and beautie: and although she would haue approched to her, and vsed some consolatorie wordes, yet was she hindred by Don Fernandoes armes, which held her still embraced; who full of confusion and maruell, after she had stood very attentiuely beholding Dorotea a good while, opening his armes, and leauing Luscinda free, said, Thou hast vanquished; O beautifull Dorotea, thou hast vanquished me. For it is not possible to resist or denie so many vnited truthes. Luscinda through her former traunce and weakenesse, as Don Fernando left her was like to fall, if Cardenio who stood behinde Don Fernando all the while, lest he should be knowne, shaking off all feare and indangering his person, had not started forward to stay her from falling, and clasping her sweetly betweene his armes, he said, if pittifull heauen be pleased, and would haue thee now at last take some ease my loyall, constant and beautifull ladie, I presume that thou canst not possesse it more securely, then betweene these armes which doe now receiue thee, as whilome they did when fortune was pleased, that I might call thee mine own: and then Luscinda first seuering her eye-lids, beheld Cardenio, and hauing first taken notice of him by
 his voyce, and confirmed it againe by her sight, like one quite distracted, without farther regarding modest respects, she cast both her arms about his neck, and ioyning her face to his, said; yea, thou indeed art my Lord: thou, the true owner of this poore captiue, howsoeuer aduerse fortune shall thwart it, or this life, which is only sustained and liues by thine, be euer so much thretned. This was a maruellous spectacle to Don Fernando, and all the rest of the beholders, which did vniuersally admire at this so vnexpected an euent: and Dorotea perceiuing Don Fernando to change color, as one resoluing to take reuenge on Cardenio, for he had set hand to his sword; which she coniecturing, did with maruellous expedition kneele, and catching holde on his legges, kissing them, she strained them with so louing embracements as he could not stirre out of the place, and then with her eyes ouerflowen with teares, said vnto him: what meanest thou to doe my onely refuge in this vnexpected traunce? Thou hast heere thine owne spouse at thy feete, and her whom thou wouldest faine possesse, is betweene her owne husbands armes: iudge then whether it become thee, or is a thing possible to dissolue that which heauen hath knit, or whether it be any wise laudable to indeauour to raise and equall to thy selfe her, who contemning all dangers and inconueniences, and confirmed in faith and constancy, doth in thy presence bathe her eyes with amorous liquor of her true loues face and bosom. I desire thee for Gods sake, and by thine owne worths, I request thee that this so notorious a verity may not onely asswage thy choler, but also diminish it in such sort, as thou mayest quietly and peaceably permit those two louers to enioy their desires without any encumbrance, all the time that heauen shall graunt it to them: and herein thou shalt shew the generositie of thy magnanimous and noble breast, and giue the world to vnderstand how reason preuaileth in thee, and dominereth ouer passion. All the time that Dorotea spoke thus to Don Fernando, although Cardenio held Luscinda betweene his armes yet did he neuer take his eye of Don
 Fernando, with resolution, that if he did see him once stir in his preiudice, he would labour both to defend himselfe, and offend his aduersary, and all those that should ioine with him to do him any harme as much as he could, although it were with the rest of his life: but Don Fernandos friends, the Curate and Barber who were present and saw all that was past repayred in the meane season, without omitting the good Sancho Panca, and all of them together compassed Don Fernando, intreating him to haue regard of the beautifull Doroteas teares, and it being true (as they beleeued it was) which she had said he should not permit her to remain defrauded of her so iust and lawful hopes. And that he should ponder how it was not by chance, but rather by the particular prouidence and disposition of the heauens, that they had al met together so vnexpectedly. And that he should remember as Master Curate said very wel, that only death could seuer Luscinda from her Cardenio. And that although the edge of a sword might deuide and part them a sunder, yet in that case they would account their death most happie, and that in irremedilesse euents, it was highest prudence, by straining and ouercomming himselfe to shew a generous minde, permitting that he might conquer his owne will they two should ioy that good, which heauen had alreadie granted to them, and that he should conuert his eyes to behold the beautie of Dorotea, and he should see that few or none could for feature paragon with her; and much lesse excell her, and that he should confer her humilitie and extreme loue which she bore to him, with her other indowments; and principally that if he gloried in the titles of Nobilitie or Christianitie, hee could not doe any other then accomplish the promise that he had past to her: and that by fulfilling it, hee should please God, and satisfie discreet persons, which know very well, how it is a speciall prerogatiue of beautie, though it be in an humble and meane subiect, if it bee consorted with modestie and vertue, to exalt and equall it selfeto any dignitie, without disparagement of him which doth helpe to raise, or vnite it to himselfe. And when
 the strong lawes of delight are accomplished (so that there intercurre no sinne in the acting thereof) hee is not to bee condemned which doth follow them. Finally, they added to these reasons, others so many and forcible, that the valerous breast of Don Fernando (as commonly all those that are warmed and nourished by Noble bloud are wont) was mollified, and permitted it selfe to bee vanquished by that truth which he could not denie though hee would: and the token that hee gaue of his being ouercome, was to stoupe downe and imbrace Dorotea, saying vnto her, arise Ladie, for it is not iust that shee bee prostrated at my feete; whose Image I haue erected in my minde, and if I haue not hitherto giuen demonstrations of what I nowe auerre, it hath perhaps befallen through the disposition of heauen, to the end that I might by nothing the constancie and faith wherewithall thou dost affect me, know after how to valewe and esteeme thee according vnto thy merits: and that which in recompence thereof I doe intreate of thee is, that thou wilt excuse in me mine ill maner of proceeding, and exceeding carelesnesse in repaying thy good will. For the very occasion and violent passions that made me to accept thee as mine, the very same did also impell me againe not to be thine: and for the more verifying of mine assertion, doe but once behold the eyes of the now contented Luscinda, and thou mayest reade in them a thousand excuses for mine errour: and seeing she hath found and obtained her hearts desire: and I haue in thee also gotten what is most conuenient; for I wish she may liue securely and ioyfully, many and happy yeares with her Cardenio, for I will pray the same, that it will license me to enioy my beloued Dorotea: and saying so, he embraced her againe, and ioyned his face to hers with so louely motion, as it constrayned him to holde watch ouer his teares, least violently bursting forth, they should giue doubtlesse arguments of his feruent loue, and remorse.
Cardenio, Luscinda, and almost all the rest could not doe
 so, for the greater number of them shed so many teares, some for their priuate contentment, and others for their friends, as it seemed, that some grieuous and heauy misfortune had betided them all: euen very Sancho Panca wept, although he excused it afterward, saying, that he wept onely because that he saw that Dorotea was not the Queene Micomicona as he had imagined, of whom he hoped to haue receiued so great gifts and fauours. The admiration and teares ioyned, indured in them all for a pretty space, and presently after Cardenio and Luscinda went and kneeled to Don Fernando, yeelding him thankes for the fauour that hee had done to them, with so courteous complements, as he knew not what to answere; and therfore lifted them vp, and embraced them with very great affection and kindenesse; and presently after he demaunded of Dorotea how she came to that place, so farre from her owne dwelling? And she recounted vnto him all that she had tolde to Cardenio: whereat Don Fernando and those which came with him tooke so great delight as they could haue wished that her story had continued a longer time in the telling then it did, so great was Doroteas grace in setting out of her misfortunes. And as soone as she had ended, Don Fernando tolde all that had befalne him in the Citie, after that he had found the scroule in Luscindas bosome, wherein she declared Cardenio to be her husband; and that he therefore could not marry her, and also how he attempted to kill her, and would haue done it, were it not that her parents hindred him, and that he therefore departed out of the house full of shame and despite, with resolution to reuenge himselfe more commodiously; and how he vnderstood the next day following, how Luscinda was secretly departed from her fathers house, and gone no body knew where; but that he finally learned within a few moneths after that she had entred into a certain Monastery, with intention to remain there all the daies of her life, if she could not passe them with Cardenio: and that as soone as he had learned that, choosing those three Gentlemen for his associates, hee
 came to the place where she was, but would not speake to her, fearing lest that as soone as they knew of his being there they would increase the guardes of the Monastery, and therfore expected vntill he found on a day the gates of the Monastery open; and leauing two of his fellowes to keepe the doore, he with the other entred into the Abbey in Luscindas search, whom they found talking with a Nunne in the Cloyster, and snatching her away er'e she could retire her selfe, they brought her to a certaine village, where they disguised themselues in that sort they were; for so it was requisite for to bring her away. All which they did with the more facility, that the Monastery was seated abroad in the fields, a good way from any village. He likewise told, that as soone as Luscinda saw her selfe in his power, she fell into a sound, and that after she had returned to her selfe, she neuer did any other thing but weepe and sigh, without speaking a word; and that in that manner, accompanied with silence and teares, they had arriued to that Inne, which was to him as gratefull as an arriuall to heauen, wherein all earthly mishaps are concluded and finished.


CHAP. X.

Wherein is prosecuted the Historie of the famous Princesse Micomicona, with other delightfull aduentures.

SAncho gaue eare to all this with no small griefe of minde, seeing that all the hopes of his Lordship vanished away like smoake, and that the faire Princesse Micomicona was turned into Dorotea, and the Giant into Don Fernando, and that his Master slept so soundly and carelesse of all that had hapned. Dorotea could not yet assure her selfe whether the happinesse that she possest was a dreame, or no. Cardenio was in the very same taking,
 and also Luscindas thought, runne the same race. Don Fernando yeel^ed many thankes vnto heauen for hauing dealt with him so propitiously, and vnwinded him out of the intricate Labyrinth, wherein straying, he was at the point to haue lost at once his soule and credite, and finally, as many as were in the Inne were very glad and ioyfull of the successe of so thwart, intricate, and desperate affaires. The Curate compounded and ordered all things through his discretion, and congratulated euery one of the good he obtained: but she that kept greatest Iubilee and ioy, was the Hostesse for the promise that Cardenio and the Curate had made to pay her the damages and harmes committed by Don-Quixote; onely Sancho as we haue said, was afflicted, vnfortunate and sorrowfull. And thus he entred with melancholy semblance to his Lord, who did but then awake, and said to him.
Well and securely may you sleepe Sir Knight of the heauie countenance, as long as it shall please your selfe, without troubling your selfe with any care of killing any Giant, or of restoring the Queene to her Kingdome, for all is concluded and done already. I beleeue thee very easily, replyed Don-Quixote, for I haue had the monstrousest and most terrible battell with that Giant, that euer I thinke to haue all the dayes of my life with any; and yet with one thwart blow thawacke I ouerthrew his head to the ground: and there issued so much bloud, as the streames thereof ran along the earth, as if they were of water. As if they were of red wine, you might better haue said, replied Sancho Panca: for I would let you to vnderstand, if you know it not already, that the dead Giant is a bored wine bagge: and the bloud, sixe and thirty gallons of redde wine which it contained in his belly: the head that was slasht off so neatly is the whoore my mother, and let the Diuell take all away for me. And what is this thou sayest madde man (quoth Don-Quixote?) Art thou in thy right wits? Get vp Sir (quoth Sancho) and you your selfe shall see the faire stuffe you haue made, and what we haue to pay, and you shall beholde the Queene
 transformed into a particular Ladie called Dorotea, with other successes, which if you may once conceiue them aright, will strike you into admiration, I would maruell at nothing, quoth Don-Quixote, for if thou beest well remembred, I tolde thee the other time that we were here, how all that succeeded in this place, was done by inchantment, and what wonder then if now the like should eftsoones befall? I could easily be induced to beleeue all, replied Sancho, if my canuassing in the Couerlet were of that nature. But indeed it was not, but most reall and certaine. And I saw well how the Inkeeper that is here yet this very day aliue, held one end of the Couerlet, and did tosse me vp towards heauen with very good grace and strength, no lesse merrily then lightly: and where the notice of parties intercurs, I doe beleeue, although I am a simple man, and a sinner, that there is no kinde of inchantment, but rather much trouble, bruising and misfortune. Well God will remedie all, said Don-Quixote, and giue me mine apparrell, for I will get vp and goe forth, and see those successes and transformations which thou speakest of. Sancho gaue him his clothes, and whilst he was a making of him readie, the Curate recounted to Don Fernando and to the rest, Don Quixotes mad prankes, and the guile hee had vsed to bring him away out of the poore Rocke, wherein he imagined that hee liued exiled through the disdaine of his Lady. Hee told them moreouer all the other aduentures, which Sancho had discouered, whereat they did not laugh a little and wonder withall, because it seemed to them all to bee one of the extrauagantest kinds of madnesse, that euer befell a distracted braine. The Curate also added, that seeing the good successe of the Lady Dorotea did impeach the farther prosecuting of their desigue, that it was requisite to inuent and finde some other way, how to carry him home to his own village. Cardenio offred himself to prosecute the aduenture, and Luscinda shold represent Doroteas person. No, quoth Don Ferna^do, it shal not be so, for I wil haue Dorotea to prosecute her own inuention. For so that the village of this good Gentleman be not very far off from hence I will be very glad
 to procure his remedy. It is no more then two daies iourney from hence said the Curate, wel though it were more replied Don Fernando, I wold be pleased to trauel them, in exchange of doing so good a worke. Don-Quixote sallied out at this time completely armed with Mambrinos helmet, although with a great hole in it on his head, his target on his arme, and leaned on his Trunke or Iaueline: his strange countenance and gate amazed Don Fernando and his companions very much, seeing his ilfauoured visage so withered and yealow, the inequalitie and insutability of his armes, and his graue manner of proceeding: and stood all silent to see what he would: who casting his eyes on the beautifull Dorotea with very great grauity and stayednesse said.
I am informed (beautifull Ladie) by this my Squire, that your greatnesse is annihilated, and your being destroyed: for of a Queene and mightie Princesse which you were wont to bee, you are now become a particular Damzell: which if it hath bene done, by particular order of the magicall king your father, dreading that I would not be able to giue you the necessarie and requisite helpe for your restitution; I say that he neither knew nor doth know the one halfe of the enterprise, and that he was very little acquainted with Histories of chiualry, for if he had read them, or passed them ouer with so great attention and leasure, as I haue done and read them, he should haue found at euery other step how other knights of a great deale lesse fame then my selfe haue ended more desperate aduentures, seeing it is not so great a matter to kill a Giant be he euer so arrogant: for it is not many howres since I my selfe fought with one, and what insued I will not say, least they should tell me that I doe lie, but time the detector of all things will disclose it, when we do least thinke thereof, thou foughtest with two wine bagges, and not with a Giant quoth the host at this season, but Don Fernando commaunded him to be silent and not interrupt Don-Quixote in any wise, who prosecuted his speech saying. In fine I say high and disenherited Ladie, that if your
 father hath made this met amorphoses in your person for the causes related, giue him no credit: for there is no perill so great on earth, but my sword shall open a way through it, wherewithall I ouerthrowing your enemies head to the ground, will set your crowne on your owne head within a few dayes. Heere Don-Quixote held his peace, and awaited the Princesses her answere, who knowing Don Fernandos determination and will, that she should continue the commenced guile vntil Don-Quixote were carried home againe, answered with a very good grace and countenance in this manner. Whosoeuer informed you valorous Knight of the ill fauored face, that I haue altered and changed my being, hath not told you the truth: for I am the very same to day, that I was yesterday: true it is, that some vnexpected, yet fortunate successes haue wrought some alteration in me, by bestowing on me better hap, then I hoped for, or could wish my selfe: but yet for all that I haue not left off to be that which before, or to haue the very same thoughts, which I euer had, to helpe my selfe by the valour of your most valorous and inuincible arme. And therefore I request you good my Lord of your accustomed bounty to returne my father his honour againe, and account of him as of a very discreete and prudent man: seeing that he found by this skill, so easie and so infallible a way to redresse my disgraces. For I doe certainly beleeue, that if it had not beene by your meanes, I should neuer haue hapned to attaine to the good fortune, which now I possesse, as all these Noblemen present may witnesse: what therefore rests, is, that to morrow morning we doe set forward, for to day is now alreadie so ouergone, as we should not be able to trauaile very farre from hence: as for the conclusion of the good successe that I do howerly expect, I referre that to God, and the valour of your inuincible arme.
This much the discreet Dorotea said, and Don-Quixote hauing heard her, he turned him to Sancho with very manifest tokens of indignation and said. Now I say vnto thee little
 Sancho, that thou art the veryest rascall that is in all Spaine: tell me theefe and vagabond, didst not thou but euen very now say vnto me that this Princesse was turned into a Damsell, and that called Dorotea? and that the heade which I thought I had slashed from a giants shoulders, was the whore which bore thee? with a thousand other follies, which did plunge men into the greatest confusion that euer I was in, in my life? I vow (and then he looked vp on heauen, and did crash his teeth together) that I am about to make such a wracke on thee, as shall beate wit into the pates of all the lying Squires that shall euer hereafter serue Knights errant in this world. I pray you haue patience good my Lord answered Sancho, for it may very well befall mee, to be deceiued in that which toucheth the transmutation of the Ladie and Princesse Micomicona: but in that which concerneth the Giants head, or at least the boaring of the wine bagges, and that the bloud was but red wine, I am not deceiued I sweare. For the bagges lie yet wounded there within at your owne beds head: and the red wine hath made a lake in the chamber: and if it bee not so, it shall be perceiued at the frying of the egges, I meane that you shall see it, when Master Inkeepers worship, who is heere present shall demaund the losse and dammage: I say the Sancho quoth Don-Quixote that thou art a madcap, pardon me, and so it is enough. It is enough indeed quoth Don Fernando, and therefore let me intreate you to say no more of this, and seeing my Ladie the Princesse saies she will go away to morrow, seeing it is now to late to depart to day, let it be so agreed on, and we will spend this night in pleasant discourses vntill the approach of the insuing day, wherein we will all accompany and attend on the worthy Knight Sir Don-Quixote, because we would be eye-witnesses of the valorous and vnmatchable feates of armes, which he shall doe in the pursuit of this waightie enterprize, which he hath taken vpon him: I am he that will serue and accompany you good my Lord replyed Don-Quixote, and I doe highly gratifie the honour
 that is done mee, and the good opinion that is held of me, the which I will indeuour to verifie and approoue, or it shall cost mee my life, or more, if more it might cost mee.
Many other words of complement and gratification past betweene Don-Quixote and Don Fernando: but a certaine passenger imposed silence to them all, by his arriuall to the Inne, in that very season, who by his attire shewed that hee was a Christian newly returned from among the Moores, for he was apparrelled with a short skirted cassocke of blew cloth, sleeues reaching downe halfe the arme, and without a coller; his breeches were likewise of blew linnen, and hee wore a bonnet of the same colour, a payre of date colour buskins, and a Turkish Cimitar hanging at his necke in a scarfe: which went athwart his breast, there entred after him riding on an Asse a woman clad like a Moore, and her face couered with a pecce of the vaile of her head, she wore on her head a little cap of cloath of gold, and was couered with a little Turkish mantle, from the shoulders downe to the feete. The man was of strong and comely making, of the age of fortie yeares or there abouts, his face was somewhat tanned, he had long Mostacheos, and a very hansome beard. To conclude, his making was such as if he were well attired, men would take him to be a person of quality, and good birth: he demaunded a chamber as soone as hee had entred, and being answered that there was no one vacant in the Inne, he seemed to be grieued, and comming to her which in her attire deuoted her selfe to be a Moore, he tooke her downe from her Asse. Luscinda, Dorotea, the hostesse, her daughter, and Maritornes, allured to behold the new and strange attire of the Moore compassed her about and Dorotea, who was alwaies most gracious, courteous, and discreete, deeming that both she and her that had brought her were discontented for the want of a lodging she said. Ladie be not grieued for the trouble you are heere like to endure for want of meanes to refresh your selfe, seeing it is
 an vniuersall and vsuall vice of all Innes to be defectiue herein: yet notwithstanding if it shall please you to passe away the time among vs (pointing to Luscinda) perhaps you haue met in the discourse of your trauels, other worse places of intertainment then this shall proue. The disguised Lady made none answere, nor other thing then arising from the place wherein she sate, and setting both her hands a crosse on her bosome, she inclined her head, and bowed her bodie in signe that she rendred them thanks: by her silence they doubtlesly coniectured her to bee a Moore, and that shee could not speake the Castilian tongue. In this, the captiue arriued who was otherwise imployed vntill then, and seeing that they all had inuironed her that came with him, and that she made no answere to their speech, he said. Ladies this maiden scarce vnderstands my tongue yet, nor doth she know any other the^ that of her owne countrey, and therefore she hath not, nor can make any answere to your demaunds: We dmaund nothing of her quoth Luscinda, but onely doe make her an offer of our companies for this night, and part of her roume where we our selues shall be accommodated, where she shall be cherished vp as much as the commodity of this place, and the Obligatio^ wherin we be tied to shew courtesies to strangers that may want it, doe binde vs, especially she being a woman, to whom we may do this seruice. Sweet Lady I kisse your hands both for her and my selfe replied the captiue, and I do highly prize, as it deserueth the fauour you haue profered, which in such an occasion, and offred by such persons as you seeme to be, doth very plainly shew how great it is: tell me good Sir quoth Dorotea, whether is this Lady a Christian or a Moore? for by her attire and silence she makes vs suspect that she is, that we would not wish she were. A Moore she is in attire and body, answered the captiue: but in mind she is a very feruent Christian, for she hath very expresly desired to become one. Then she is not yet baptized, said Luscinda? there hath beene no oportunitie offered to vs quoth the captiue to christen her since she departed from Argell,
 which is her Towne and Country: and since that time shee was not in any so eminent a danger of death, as might oblige her to be baptized, before shee were first instructed in al the ceremonies which our holy Mother the Church commandeth: but I hope shortly (if it shall please God) to see her baptized with that decency, which her quality and calling deserues, which is greater then her attire or mine makes shew of.
Thefe wordes inflamed all the hearers with a great desire to know, who the Moore and her captiue were; yet none of them would at that time intreate him to satisfie their longing, because the season rather inuited them to take som order how they might rest after their trauailes, then to demaund of them the discourse of their liues. Dorotea then taking her by the hand, caused her to sit downe by her selfe, and prayed her to take off the veile from her face: shee instantly beheld the Captiue, as if shee demaunded of him, what they said; and hee in the Arabicall language told her, how they desired her to discouer her face and bad her to do it, which presently shee did, and discouered so beautifull a visage, as Dorotea esteemed her to bee fairer then Luscinda, and Luscinda prized her to excell Dorotea, and all the beholders perceiued, that if any one could surpasse them both in beautie, it was the Moore; and there were some that thought shee excelled them both in some respects. And as beautie hath euermore the prerogatiue and grace to reconcile mens minds, and attract their wils to it; so all of them forth with dedicated their desires to serue and make much of the louely Moore. Don Fernando demaunded of the Captiue, how shee was called, and hee answered that her name was Lela Zoraida, and as soone as shee heard him, and vnderstood what they had demaunded, shee suddainely answered with anguish, but yet with a very good grace, no, not Zoraida, but Maria, Maria, giuing them to vnderstand that shee was called Maria, and not Zoraida. These wordes and the great affect and vehemencie wherewithall the Moore deliuered
 them, extorted more then one teare from the hearers, especially from the women, who are naturally tender hearted and compassiue. Luscinda embraced her then with great loue, and said. I, I, Maria, Maria, to which shee answered, I, I, Maria; Zoraida mancange: that is, and not Zoraida. By this it was growen some foure of the clocke in the afternoone, and by order of those which were Don Ferdinandos companions, the Inkeeper had prouided for them as good a beauer as the Inne could in any wise affoord vnto them. Therefore it being the houre, they sate downe altogether at a long table, for there was neuer a square or round one in all the house, and they gaue the first and principall end (although hee refused it as much as hee could) to Don-Quixote, who commaunded that the Ladie Micomicona should sit at his elbow, seeing hee was her champion, presently were placed Luscinda, and Zoraida, and Don Fernando, and Cardenio right ouer against them, and after the Captiue and other Gentlemen, and on the other side the Curate and Barber: and thus they made their drinking with very great recreation, which was the more augmented to see Don-Quixote, leauing of his meate, and moued by the like spirit of that which had made him once before talke so much to the Goate-heards, beginne to offer them an occasion of speech in this manner.
Truely, good Sirs, if it be well considered, those which professe the order of Knighthood doe see many great, and vnexpected things. If it be not so, say, what mortall man aliue is there that entring in at this Castle gate, and seeing of vs all in the manner we be now present here, can iudge and beleeue that we are those which wee be? who is it that can say, that this Ladie which sits here at my sleeue, is the great Queene that wee all know her to bee, and that I am that Knight of the heauie countenance, that am so much blab'd of abroade by the mouth of fame? therefore it cannot be now doubted but that this arte and exercise excelleth all the others which euer humane wit, the vnderminer of nature inuented,
 and it is the more to be prized, by how much it exposeth it selfe more then other trades to dangers and inconueniences. Away with those that shall affirme learning to surpasse armes, for I will say vnto them, be they what they list, that they know not what they say. For the reason which such men doe most vrge, and to which they most relye, is, that the trauailes of the spirit doe farre exceede those of the body: and that the vse of armes are only exercised by the body, as if it were an office fit for porters, for which nothing were requisite but bodily forces, or as if in that which wee that professe it doe call armes, were not included the acts of Fortitude, which require deepe vnderstanding to execute them, or as if the Warriours minde did not labour as well as his body, who had a great armie to leade and command, or the defence of a besieged Cittie. If not, see if hee can arriue by his corporall strength, to know or sound the intent of his enemy, the designes, stratagems, and difficulties, how to preuent iminent dangers, all these being operations of the vnderstanding, wherein the body hath no medling at all: it being therefore so, that the exercise of armes require spirit as well as those of learning; let vs now examine which of the two spirits, that of the Scholler, or Souldier, doe take most paine? and this may bee best vnderstood by the end, to which both of them are addressed, for that intention is most to be esteemed, which hath for obiect the most Noble end. The end and conclusion of learning is, I speake not now of Diuinitie whose scope is to leade and addresse soules to heauen, for to an end so much without end as this, no other may be compared, I meane of humane sciences and arts, to maintaine distributiue iustice in his perfection, and giue to euery one that which is his owne: to indeauour and cause good lawes to bee religiously obserued; an end most certainely, generous, high, and worthy of great praise: but not of so much as that, to which the exercise of armes is annext, which hath for his obiect and end, peace: which is the greatest good men can desire in this life: and therefore the
 first good newes that euer the world had, or men receiued, were those which the Angels brought on that night which was our day when they sung in the skies: Glorie bee in the heights, and peace on earth, to men of good mindes. And the salutation which the best Master that euer was on earth or in heauen, taught to his Disciples and fauourites, was that, when they entred into any house, they should say: Peace be to this house. and many other times he said: I giue vnto you my peace; I leaue my peace vnto you: peace bee amongst you: It is a good, as precious as a jewell, and a gift giuen, and left by such a hand: a jewell without which neither on earth or in heauen can there bee any perfect good. This peace is the true end of warre, for armes, and warre are one and the selfe same things. This truth being therefore presupposed, that the end of learning: let vs descend to the corporall labours of the Scholler, and to those of him which professeth armes, and consider which of them are more toilesome.
Don-Quixote did prosecute his discourse in such sort, and with so pleasing termes, as he had almost induced his audients to esteeme him, to be at that time at least, exempt from his frensie: and therefore by reason that the greater number of them were Gentlemen, to whom the vse of armes is in a manner essentiall and proper, they did willingly listen to him, and therefore hee continued on with his discourse in this manner. I say then that the paines of the Student are commonly these: principally pouerty (not that I would maintaine that all Students are poore, but that I may put the case in the greatest extremity it can haue) and by saying that he may be poore, me thinks there may be no greater aggrauation of his misery. For he that is poore, hath no perfection: and this pouerty is suffered by him sundry waies, sometimes by hunger, other times by cold or nakednesse, and many times by all of them together. Yet it is neuer so extreme, but that he doth eate, although it be somewhat later
 then the custome; or of the scraps and reuersion of the richman: and the greatest misery of the Student is that which they terme, to liue by saps and pottage: and though they want fire of their owne, yet may they haue recourse to their neighbours chimney, which if it doe not warme, yet will it weaken the cold; and finally, they sleepe at night vnder a roofe. I will not descend to other trifles, to wit, the want of shirts and shoes, the barenesse of their clothes: or the ouerloading of stomacks with meate, when good fortune lends them as good a meale: for by this way which I haue decyphered so rough and difficult: stumbling here, falling there, getting vp againe on the other side, and refalling on this, they attaine the degree which they haue desired so much, which many hauing compassed as wee haue seene, which hauing passed through these difficulties, and sailed by Scylla and Charibdis (borne away flying in a manner by fauourable fortune) they command and gouerne all the world from a chaire, turning their hunger into sacietie, their nakednesse into pompe, and their sleeping on a matte, into a sweet repose among Hollands and Damaske: a reward iustly merited by their vertue; but their labours confronted and compared to those of the militant Souldier, remaine very far behinde, as I will presently declare.


CHAP. XI.

Treating of the curious discourse made by Don-Quixote vpon the exercises of Armes and Letters.

DON-QVIXOTE continuing his discourse said. Seeing wee beginne in the Student with pouerty and her parts, let vs examine whether the Souldier be richer? certainely wee shall finde that no man can exceede the Souldier in pouerty it selfe. For hee is tyed
 to his wretched pay which comes either late or neuer: or else to his owne shifts with notable danger of his life and conscience, and his nakednesse is oftimes so much as many times a leather jerken gashed, serues him at once for a shirt and an ornament: and in the midst of winter he hath sundry times no other defence or helpe to resist the inclemencies of the aire in the midst of the open fields, then the breath of his mouth; which I verily beleeue doth against nature come out cold, by reason it sallies from an emptie place: expect there till the night fall, that hee may repaire all these discommodities, by the easinesse of his bed, the which if it be not through his owne default, shall neuer offend in narrownesse, for hee may measure out for it on the earth as many foot as he pleaseth, and tumble himselfe vp and downe in it without indangering the wrinckling of his sheetes. Let after all this the day and houre arriue, wherein he is to receiue the degree of his profession. Let, I say, a day of battaile arriue, for there they will set on his head, the Cappe of his dignitie, made of lints to cure the wound of some bullet that hath past throw and throw his temples, or hath maimed an arme or a legge, and when this doth not befall, but that heauen doth piously keepe and preserue him whole and sound; he shall perhaps abide still in the same pouerty wherein hee was at the first; and that it bee requisite that one and another battaile doe succeede, and he come of euer a victour to the end that he may prosper, and be at the last aduanced. But such miracles are but few times wrought, and say good Sirs if you haue noted it, how few are those which the warres rewards, in respect of the others that it hath destroyed? you must answere without question that there can be no comparison made betweene them, nor can the dead be reduced to any number, but all the liuing and such as are aduanced, may be counted easily with three arithmeticall figures; all which fals out contrary in learned men, for all of them haue wherewithall to entertaine and maintaine themselues by skirts, I will say nothing of sleeues: So that although the Souldiers labour is
 greater, yet is his reward much lesse. But to this may be answered, that it is easier to reward two hundred thousand learned men, then thirty thousand Souldiers; for they may be aduanced by giuing vnto them offices which must of necessity be bestowed on men of their profession: but Souldiers cannot be recompensed otherwise then by the Lords substance and wealth whom they serue; and yet this obiection and impossibility doth fortifie much more my assertion.
But leauing this apart which is a labyrinth of very difficult issue, let vs returne to the preeminency of armes ouer learning; which is a matter hitherto depending, so many are the reasons that euery one alleageth for himselfe: and among those which I my selfe haue repeated, then learning doth argue thus for it selfe, that armes without it cannot be long maintained, for as much as the warre hath also lawes, and is subiect to them, and that the lawes are contayned vnder the title of learning, and belong to learned men. To this obiection, Armes doe make answere, that the lawes cannot be sustained without them, for commonwelths are defended by armes, and Kingdomes preserued, Citties fenced, high waies made safe, the Seas freed from Pirates: and to be briefe, if it were not for them, Commonwelths, Kingdomes, Monarchies, Citties, and wayes by Sea and Land, would be subiect to the rigour and confusion which attendeth on the warre all the time that it indureth, and is licensed to practise his prerogatiues and violence: And it is a knowen truth, that it which cost most is or ought to be most accounted of, that one may become eminent in learning, it costs him time, watchings, hunger, nakednesse, head-aches, rawnesse of stomacke, and other such inconueniences, as I haue partly mentioned already. But that one may arriue by true termes to be a good Souldier, it costs him al that it costs the Student, in so exceeding a degree, as admits no comparison, for he is at euery step in jeoperdie to loose his life. And what feare of necessity, or pouerty, may befall or molest a Student so fiercely as it doth a Souldier, who seeing himself
 at the siege of some impregnable place, and standing Centinell in some Raueline or halfe Moone, feeles the enemies vndermining neere to the place where he is, and yet dares not to depart or abandon his stand, vpon no occasion whatsoeuer, or shunne the danger which so nearely threatens him; but that which he only may doe, is to aduise his Captaine of that which passeth, to the end he may remedy it by some countermine, whilest he must stand stil fearing and expecting when he shal suddainly flie vp to the clowds without wings, and after descend to the depths against his will. And if this appeare to be but a small danger, let vs way whether the grapling of two gallies, the one with the other in the midst of the spacious Maine, may be compared, or doe surpasse it, the which nailed and grapled fast the one to the other, the Souldier hath no more roome in them, then two foot broad of a planke on the battailings, and notwithstanding, although he clearly see laid before him so many ministers of death, for all the peeces of artillery that are planted on the aduerse side, doe threaten him, and are not distant from his body the length of a launce: and seeing that if he slipt euer so little aside, he should fall into the deepes: doth yet neuerthelesse with vndaunted heart, borne away on the wings of honour, which spurreth him onward, oppose himselfe as a worke to all their shot, and striues to passe by that so narrow a way into the enemies vessell: And what is most to bee admired, is to behold how scarce is one fallen into that place; from whence hee shall neuer after arise vntill the worldes end, when another takes possession of the same place: and if he doe likewise tumble into the Sea, which gapes like an enemy for him also, another and another will succeede vnto him, without giuing any respite to the times of their death, valour, and boldnesse, which is the greatest that may be found among all the traunces of warfare. Those blessed ages were fortunate which wanted the dreadfull furie of the diuelish and murdering peeces of Ordenance, to whose inuentor I am verily perswaded that they render in
 hell an eternall guerdon for his Diabolicall inuention; by which he hath giuen power to an infamous, base, vile and dastardly arme, to bereaue the most valorous Knight of life; and that without knowing how or from whence, in the midst of the stomacke and courage that inflames and animates valorous mindes, there arriues a wandring bullet (shot off perhaps by him that was affraid, and fledde at the very blaze of the powder, as he discharged the accursed engine) and cuts off and finisheth in a moment the thoughts and life of him who merited to enioy it many ages.
And whilest I consider this I am about to say that it grieues me to haue euer vndertaken the exercise of a Knight errant in this our detestable age; for although no danger can affright me, yet notwithstanding I liue in iealousie to thinke how powder and Lead might depriue me of the power to make my selfe famous and renouned by the strength of mine arme and edge of my sword throughout the face of the earth. But let heauen dispose as it pleaseth, for so much the more shal I be esteemed, if I can compasse my pretentions, by how much the dangers were greater, to which I opposed my selfe, then those atchieued in foregoing times by Knights aduenturous.
Don-Quixote made all this prolixe speech, whilest the rest of his company did eate, wholly forgetting to taste one bit, although Sancho Panca did now and then put him in remembrance of his victuals, saying that hee should haue leisure enough after, to speake as much as he could desire. In those that had heard was againe renued a kinde of compassion, to see a man of so good a witte as he seemed to be, and of so good discourse in all the other matters which he tooke in hand, to remaine so clzerely deuoyd of it, when any occasion of speech were offered, treating of his accursed Chiualrie. The Curate applauded his discourse, affirming that hee produced very good reasons for al that he had spoken in the fauour of armes, and that he himselfe (although he was learned and Graduated) was likewise of his opinion. The Beauer
 being ended, and the table clothes taken away, whilest Maritornes did helpe her Mistresse and her daughter to make ready the roome where Don-Quixote had slept for the Gentlewomen, wherein they alone might retire themselues that night. Don Fernando intreated the captiue to recount vnto them the history of his life, for as much as he suspected that it must haue beene rare and delightfull, as he gathered by the tokens he gaue, by comming in the louely Zoraydas companie. To which the captiue replied, that he would accomplish his desire with a very good will, and that onely he feared that the discourse would not proue so sauory as they expected. But yet for all that he would tell it, because hee would not disobey him: the Curate and all the rest thanked him for his promise, and turned to request him againe to begin his discourse; and he perceiuing so many to sollicite him, said, that prayers were not requisite, when commaundements were of such force, and therefore I desire you, quoth he, to be attentiue, and you shall heare a true discourse, to which perhaps no fained inuention may be compared for variety, or delight. The rest animated by these his wordes, did accommodate themselues with very great silence, and he beholding their silence and expectation of his history, with a modest and pleasing voyce, began in this manner.


CHAP. XII.

Wherein the captiue recounteth his life, and other accidents.

IN a certaine village of the Mountaines of Lion, my lineage had beginning, wherewithall nature dealt much more liberally then fortune, although my father had the opinion amidst the penury and pouerty of that people, to be a rich man, as indeed he might haue beene, had he but
 vsed as much care to hoard vp his wealth, as prodigality to spend it. And this his liberall disposition proceeded from his being a souldier in his youthfull yeares: for warre is the schoole wherein the miser is made francke, and the francke man prodigall: and if among souldiers wee finde some wretches and niggards, they are accounted Monsters which are seldome seene. My father passed the bounds of liberality, and touched very neerely the confines of prodigality; a thing nothing profitable for a married man, who had children that should succeed him in his name and being. My father had three sonnes, all men, and of yeares sufficient to make an election of the state of life they meaned to leade. Wherefore he perceiuing as he himselfe was wont to say, that he could not bridle his nature in that condition of spending, he resolued to depriue himselfe of the instrument and cause, which made him such a spender and so liberall, to wit, of his goods; without which Alexander the great himselfe would be accounted a miser: and therefore calling vs all three together on a day into his chamber, he vsed these or such like reasons to vs.
Sonnes, to affirme that I loue you well, may be presumed, seeing I terme you my sonnes: and yet it may be suspected that I hate you, seeing I doe not gouerne myselfe so well as I might, in the husbanding and increasing of your stocke. But, to the end that you may from henceforth perceiue that I doe affect you with a fatherly loue, and that I meane not to ouerthrow you like a step-father, I will doe one thing to you which I haue pondered, and with mature deliberation purposed these many dayes: You are all of age to accept an estate, or at least to make choice of some such exercise, as may turne to your honour and profite at riper yeares: and therefore that which I haue thought vpon, is to deuide my goods into foure parts; the three I will bestow vpon you, to euery one that which appertaines to him, without exceeding a iot, and I my selfe will reserue the fourth, to liue and maintaine me with as long as it shall please heauen to lend mee
 breath. Yet I doe greatly desire that after euery one of you is possest of his portion, hee would take one of the courses which I meane to propose. There is an old prouerbe in this our Spaine, in mine opinion very true, (as ordinarily all prouerbs are, being certaine briefe sentences collected out of long and discreete experiences) and it is this; The Church, the Sea, or the Court: The meaning whereof is, That whosoeuer would become wealthy, or worthy must either follow the Church, haunte the Seas by exercising the trade of Merchandizes, or get him a place of seruice, and entertainement in the Kings house, for men say that A Kings crumme is more worth then a Lords loafe. This I say because I desire, and it is my will, that one of you doe follow his booke, an other merchandize, and the third the warre; seeing that the seruice of his owne house is a difficult thing to compasse. And although the warre is not wont to inrich a man, yet it addes vnto him great worth and renoune. Within these eight dayes I doe meane to giue you all your portions in money, without defrauding you of a mite, as you shall see in effect. Therefore tell me now whether you meane to follow mine opinion and aduice in this which I haue proposed. And then he commaunded me by reason that I was the eldest, to make him an answere.
I, after I had intreated him not to make away his goods, but to spend and dispose of them as he listed, seeing that we were both young and able enough to gaine more; at last I concluded that I would accomplish his will, and that mine was to follow the wars, therein seruing God and my King together. The second brother made the same offer, and imploying his portion in commodities, would venter it to the Indias. The youngest, and as I deeme the discreetest, said, that eyther he would follow the Church, or goe at the least to Salamanca to finish his already commenced studies. And as soone as we had ended the agreement and election of our vocations, my father embraced vs all, and afterwards performed vnto vs, in as short a time as he had mentioned, all that
 he promised; giuing vnto each of vs a portion, amounting, if doe well remember, to three thousand duckats, a piece in money: for an vncle of ours bought all the goods and paide ready money, because he would not haue them made away from our owne familie and lineage. We all tooke our leaue of our good father in one day, and in that instant it seeming to me a great inhumanity to leaue my father so old, and with so little meanes; I dealt so with him, as I constrayned him to take backe againe two thousand duckats of the three he had giuen me, for as much as the rest was sufficient to furnish me in very good sort with all things requisite for a souldier. My brothers, moued by mine example, did each of them giue him a thousand crownes: so that my father remained with foure thousand crownes in money, and three in goods, as they were valued; which goods he would not sell, but keepe them still in stocke. Finally, we bad him (and our said vncle) farewell, not without much feeling and many teares on both sides: and they charged vs that we would from time to time acquaint them with our successes, whether prosperous or aduerse. We promised to performe it, and then embracing vs, and giuing vs his blissing, one departed towards Salamanca, another to Siuill, and my selfe to Alicante. I arriued prosperously at Genoua, and from thence went to Milaine, where I did accommodate my selfe with armes, and other braueries vsed by souldiers, and departed from thence to settle my selfe in Piemonte, and being in my way towards the Citie of Alexandria de la Paglia, I heard newes that the great Duke of Alua did passe towards Flanders. Wherefore changing my purpose, I went with him, and serued him in all the expeditions he made: I was present at the beheading of the Earles of Egmont and Hornes, and obtained at last to be ensigne to a famous Captaine of Guada-lasara, called Diego de Vrbina. Within a while after mine arriuall to Flanders the newes were diuulged of the league that P^us quintus the Pope of famous memory, had made with the Venetians, and King of Spaine, against our common enemy the Turke, who had
 gained by force the famous Island of Cypres, much about the same time, which Island belonged to the state of Venice, and was an vnfortunate and lamentable losse. It was also certainly known, that the most noble Don Iohn of Austria, our good King Don Philips naturall brother did come downe for general of this league, and the geat prouision that was made for the warre was published euery where.
All this did incite and stirre on my minde and desire to be present at that expedition so much expected: and therefore although I had coniectures, and halfe promises to be made a Captaine in the first occasion that should be offered, yet I resolued to leaue all those hopes, and goe into Italie, as in effect I did. And my good fortune so disposed, as the Lord Don Iohn of Austria arriued iust at the same time at Genoua, and went towards Naples, to ioyne himselfe with the Venetian Nauie, as he did after at Messina. In this most fortunate iourney I was present, being by this made a Captaine of foote: to which honourable charge, I was mounted rather by my good fortune, then by my deserts. And that very day which was so fortunate to all Christendome: for therein the whole world was vndeceiued, and all the nations thereof freed of all the errour they held, and beliefe they had, that the Turke was inuincible at Sea: in that very day I say, wherin the swelling stomacke, and Ottomanicall pride was broken among so many happy men as were there (for the Christians that were slaine were much more happy then those which they left victorious aliue) I alone was vnfortunate, seeing that in exchange of some Naual crowne, which I might expect, had I liued in the times of the auncient Romanes, I found my selfe the night ensuing, that so famous a day with my legges chained, and my hands manacled, which befell in this manner: that Vchali King of Argiers, a bolde and venturous Pirate, hauing inuested and distressed the Admirall of Malta (for onely three Knights remained aliue, and those very sore wounded) Iohn Andreas chiefe Gallie came to her succour, wherein I went with my company: and doing what
 was requisit in such an occasion, I leapt into the enemies vessel, the which falling off from that which had assaulted her, hindred my souldiers from following me; by which means I saw my selfe alone amidst mine enemies, against who^ I could make no long resistance, they were so many. In fine, I was taken full of wounds. Now as you may haue heard, Vchali saued himselfe and all his squadron, whereby I became captiue in his power, and onely remained sorrowfull among so many ioysull, and captiue among so many freed: for that day fifteene thousand Christians, which came slaues and inchained in the Turkish Gallies recouered their desired liberty. I was carried to Constantinople, where the great Turke Selim, made my Lord Generall of the Sea, by reason that he had so well performed his duety in the battell, hauing brought away for a witnesse of his valour the Standard, of the order of Malta. I was the yeare insuing of 1572. in Nauarino, rowing in the Admirall of the three Lanthornes, and saw and noted there the oportunity that was lost, of taking all the Turkish Nauie within the hauen: for all the Genisaries and other souldiers that were in it, made full account, that they should be set vpon, euen within the very port, and therfore trussed vp all their baggage, and made ready their shoes to flie away presently to the land, being in no wise minded to expect the assault, our Nauie did strike such terrour into them. But God disposed otherwise of the matter, not through the fault or negligence of the Generall that gouerned our men, but for the sinnes of Christendome, and because God permits and wils, that we haue alwaies some executioners to chastice vs. In summe, Vchali got into Modon, which is an Island neere to Nauarino, and landing his men there, he fortified the mouth of the hauen, and there remained vntil Don Iohn departed. In this voyage was taken the Gally called Presa, whereof the famous Pirate Barbarossas his sonne was Captaine: it was surprised by the head Galley of Naples called the shee Wolfe, that was commaunded by the thunderbolt of warre, the father of souldiers, that fortunate and neuer
 ouerthrowne Don Aluaro de Bacan, the Marquesse of Sancta Cruez. And here I will not forget to recount what befell at the taking of the Presa: this sonne of Barbarossas was so cruell, and vsed his slaues so ill, that as soone as they that were rowing perceiued the shee Wolfe to approach them, and that she had ouertaken them, they cast away their Oares all at one time, and laying hands on their Captain that stood on the Estanderil. p. 442. Poope, crying to them to row with more speede, and passing him from one bancke to another, from the Poope to the Prow, they tooke so many bits out of him, as he had scarce passed beyond the Mast, when his soule was already wasted to hell: such was the cruelty wherewithall he intreated them, and so great the hate they also bore towards him. We returned the next yeare after to Constantinople, being that of seuenty and three, and there we learned how Don Iohn had gained Tunez, and taking that Kingdom away from the Turkes had by installing Muley Hamet therin, cut away all Muley Hamedas hopes to raigne againe there, who was the most cruell and valiant Moore that euer liued.
The great Turke was very much grieued for this losse, and therefore vsing the sagacity wherewithall all his race were indued, he made peace with the Venetians, which wished for much more then he did himselfe: and the yeare after of seuenty and foure he assaulted the fortresse of Goleta, and the other fortresse that Don Iohn had raised neere vnto Tunez: and in all these occasions I was present, tyed to the Oare, without any hope of liberty; at least wise by ransome, being resolued neuer to signifie by letter my misfortunes to my father. The Goleta was lost in fine, and also the Fortresse before which two places lay in siege seuenty fiue thousand Turkes, and more then foure hundred thousand Moores, and other Sarasins of all the other parts of Affrica, being furnished with such abundance of munition and warlike engines, and so many Pioners as were able to couer Goleta and the Fortresse, if euery one did cast but his handfull of earth
 vpon them. Thus was Goleta accounted, vntill then impregnable, first lost, the which did not happen through default of valour in the defendants, who in defence thereof did all they could, or ought to haue done; but because experience shewed the facilitie wherewithall trenches might be raised in that desert sand; for though water had beene found in it within two spannes depth, the Turkes could not finde it in the depth of two yeards; and therefore filling many sacks full of sand, they raised their trenches so high, as they did surmount the walles of the Sconce, and did so gall the defendants from them with their shot, as no one could stand to make any defence: it was a co^mon report, that our men would not immure themselues within Goleta, but expect the enemy in the champaine, at their disembarquing: but those that gaue this out spake widely, as men very little acquainted with the like affaires: for if in Goleta and the Fortresse, there were scarce seuen thousand Souldiers, how could so few a number were they euer so resolute, make a sallie, and remaine in the Forts, against so great a number of enemies? or how is it possible, that the forces which are not seconded and supplyed, should not be ouercome, specially being besieged by many, and obstinate enemies, and those in their owne Countrey. But many others esteemed, and so did I likewise among the rest, that almighty God did a particular grace and fauour vnto Spaine, in that manner permitting to bee destroyed the stop and cloake of all wickednesse; and the sponge and Moath of innumerable summes of money spent there vnprofitably, without seruing to any other end, then to preserue the memory of being gayned by the Emperour Charles the fift, as if it had been requisite for the keeping of it eternall (as it is, and shall bee euer) that those stones should sustaine it. The Fortresse was also wonne, but the Turkes were constrained to gaine it, span by spanne, for the Souldiers which defended it fought, so manfully and resolutely, as the number of the enemies slaine in two and twenty generall assaults which they gaue vnto
 it, did passe fiue and twenty thousand. Neuer a one was taken prisoner, but three hundred which suruiued their fellowes, a certayne and manifest token of their valour and strength, and how well they had defended themselues and kept their fortresses: a little Fort or turret that stood in the midst of the place.
Vnder the command of Don Iohn Zanoguera a Valentian Gentleman, and famous Souldier, was yeelded vp on composition, and Don Pedro de Puertocarrero Generall of Goleta was taken prisoner, who omitted no diligence possible to defend the place: but yet was so grieued to haue lost it as he dyed for very griefe on the way towards Constantinople whither they carried him Captiue. The Generall likewise of the Fort, called Gabriel Cerbellon, being a Gentleman of Milan, and a great enginer, and most resolute Souldier was taken: and there dyed in both the places many persons of worth, among which Pagan de Oria was one, a Knight of the order of St. Iohn, of a most noble disposition, as the exceeding liberality which he vsed towards his brother the famous Iohn Andrea de Oria clearly demonstrates, and that which rendred his death more deplorable, was, that he was slaine by certaine Sarracines (which he trusted, perceiuing how the Fort was lost) who had offered to conuey him thence in the habit of a Moore to Tabarca, which is a little hauen or cricke possest by the Genoueses, that fish for Corral in that coast. These Sarracens cut off his head, and brought it to the Generall of the Turkish armie, who did accomplish in them the Spanish prouerbe; That although the treason pleaseth, yet is the Traitor hated: and so it is reported, that he commanded those to bee hanged that had brought him the present, because they had not brought it aliue.
Among the Christians that were lost in the Fort, there was one called Don Pedro de Aguilar, borne in Andulizia, in some Towne whose name I haue forgotten, he had beene Auncient in the Fortresse, and was a Souldier of great account, and of a rare vnderstanding, and specially had a particular
 grace in Poetrie, this I say, because his fortune brought him to be slaue to my Patron, euen into the very same Galley and bench whereon I sate. This Gentleman made two Sonnets in forme of Epitaphes, the one for the Goleta the other for the Fort: and I will repeate them, because I remember them very well, and doe beleeue that they will be rather gratefull, then any thing disgustfull to the audients, as soone as euer the Captiue named Don Pedro de Aguilar, Don Fernando beheld his Camaradas, and they all three did smile, and when he beganne to talke of the Sonnets, one of them said, before you passe further, I beseech you good Sir let me intreate you to tell me, what became of that Don Pedro de Aguilar, whom you haue named? that which I know of that affaire, answered the Captiue, is, that after he had beene two yeares in Constantinople, he fledde away in the attyre of an Armenian, with a Greeke spie, and I cannot tell whether he recouered his liberty, or no; although I suppose he did, for within a yeare after I saw the Greeke in Constantinople, but I had not the oportunity to demaund of him, the successe of that voyage. He came then into Spaine, quoth the Gentleman: for that same Don Pedro is my brother, and dwels now at home in our owne Towne, very well, rich, marryed, and a Father of three Sonnes. God bee thanked, quoth the Captiue, for the infinite fauour he hath shewed vnto him: for in mine opinion there is not on earth any contentment able to be compared to that of recouering a mans lost liberty. I doe moreouer, said the Gentleman, know the Sonnets which my brother composed, I pray you then good Sir, quoth the Captiue, repeate them, for perhaps you can say them better then I; with a very good will, answered the Gentleman; and that of the Goleta is thus.



CHAP. XIII.

Wherein is prosecuted the Historie of the Captiue.





A SONNET.

O Happy soules, which from this mortall vaile
Freed and exempted, through the good you wrought,
Safe from the harmes, that here did you assaile;
By your deserts, to hiest Heauen were brought.


Which here inflam'd by wrath, and noble thought
Shewed how much your forces did auaile:
When both your owne, and forraine bloods you taught
From sandy shoares, into the deep's to traile.


Your liues before your valours end, deceased
In your tyr'd armes; which though they were a dying
And vanquisht; yet on victorie haue ceazed.
And this your life from seruile thraldome flying:
Ending, acquires, betweene the sword and wall,
Heauens glorie there, fame here on earth, for all.





I haue it euen in the very same manner, quoth the Captiue: well then, said the Gentleman, that of the Fort is thus, if I doe not forget it:




A SONNET.

FRom midst the barren earth, here ouerthrowne
In these sad clods, which on the ground doe lie,
Three thousand souldiers holy soules are flow'n,
And to a happier mansion, gone on hie.


Here when they did in vaine the vigour trie
Of their strong armes, to coste of many a one,
After the most through extreame toile did die:
The cruell sword, a few did light vpon.
And this same plot, eternally hath beene,



With thousand dolefull memories repleate,
As well this age, as in foregoing time.
But from his cruell bosome Heau'n ne're yet
Receau'd sincerer soules, then were the last,
Nor earth so valiant bodies, aye possest.





The Sonnets were not misliked: and the Captiue was greatly recreated with the newes which he receiued of his companion, and prosecuting his Historie, he said: The Goleta, and the Fort being rendred, the Turkes gaue order to dismantell Goleta, for the Fort was left in such sort, as there remained nothing vp that might be ouerthrowen: and to do it with more breuity and lesse labour, they vndermined it in three places, but that which seemed least strong could not be blowen vp by any of them, which was the old walles; but all that which had remained a foote of the new fortifications and workes of Fratin fell downe to the ground with great facility: and this being ended the Nauie returned triumphant and victorious to Constantinople: where within a few moneths afterward my Lord Vchali died, whom they called Vchali Fartax, which signifies in the Turkish language the scald or scurfie renegate, for he was such; and it is a custome among the Turkes to giue one another nicke names either of the defects, or perfections and vertues which they haue, and the reason hereof is, that among them all they haue but foure linages that haue surnames, and these doe contend with that of Ottomanes, for Nobility of bloud: and all the rest, as I haue said doe take denomination, sometime from the blemishes of the body, and sometime from the vertues of the minde: and this scuruie fellow did row fourteene yeares, being the great Turkes slaue, and did renounce his faith, being foure and thirty yeares old, for despight, and because he might be reuenged on a Turke, that gaue him a cuffe on the face as he rowed; and his valour was so great, as without ascending by the dishonourable meanes and waies vsually taken, the greatest minions about the great
 Turke, he came first to be King of Argiers, and after to be Generall of the Sea, which is the third most Noble charge and dignitie of all the Turkish Empire. He was borne in Calabria, and was a good morall man, and vsed with great humanity his slaues, whereof hee had aboue three thousand, which were after his death deuided, as he had left in his Testament, betweene the great Turke (who is euer an inheritour to euery dead man, and hath a portion among the deceased his children) and his runnegates. I fell to the lot of a Venetian runnegate, who being a shippe-boy in a certaine vessell, was taken by Vchali, who loued him so tenderly, as he was one of the dearest youthes he had, and he became after the most cruell runnegate that euer liued. He was called Azanaga, and came to be very rich, and King of Argiers: with him I came from Constantinople, somewhat contented in minde, because I should be nearer vnto Spaine; not for that I meaned to write vnto any one of my vnfortunate successe, but only to see whether fortune would proue more fauourable to me in Argiers, then at Constantinople; where I had attempted a thousand waies to escape, but none of them sorted vnto any good effect: and I thought to search out in Argiers some other meanes to compasse that which I so greedily desired; for the hope of attayning liberty sometime had neuer abandoned me, and when in the contriuing, I thought, or put my designes in practise, and that the successe did not answere mine expectation, presently without forsaking me, it forged and sought out for another hope, that might sustaine me, although it were debile, and weake.
With this did I passe away my life, shut vp in a prison or house, which the Turks call Bathes, wherein they do inclose the Captiue Christians as well those that belong to the king as other particular mens, and those which they call of the Almazen, which is as much to say, as slaues of the Counsell who are deputed to serue the Citie in the publike works and other affaires thereof, and these of all other Captiues doe with most difficulty attaine to liberty; free by reason they
 belong to the communalty, and haue no particular master, there is none with whom a man may treate of their redemption, although they should haue the price of their ramsay. To these Bathes as I haue said, some particular me carry their Captiues to be kept, chiefly if they be to be ransomed; for there they haue them at their ease and secure, vntill they be redemed. The Kings Captiues of ransome also, do not go forth to labour with the other poore crew, if it be not when the paying of their ransom is deferred; for then, to the end they may make them write for money more earnestly, they make them labour, and goe to fetch wood with the rest which is no small toyle and trouble. I then was one of those of ransome; for as soone as it was knowne how I was a Captaine, notwithstanding that I told them of my little possibilitie, and want of meanes, all could not preuaile to disswade the^ from consorting me with the multitude of Gentlemen, and those of ransome, they put on me then a chaine, rather to be a token that I was there for my ransome, then to keepe me the better with it, and so I passed away my time there with many other Gentlemen, and men of marke held and kept in their for thy ransome. And although both hunger and nakednesse did vexe vs now and then, or rather euermore, yet nothing did afflict vs so much as to heare and see euery moment the cruelties that my master vsed towardes Christians. Euery day he hanged vp one, he set this man on a slake, and would cut off the others eares, and that, for so little occasion, or wholy without it, as the very Turks themselues perceiued, that be did it not for any other cause, but because he had a will to doe it, and that it was his naturall inclination to be a homicide of all humane kind. Onely one Spanish soldier called such a one of Sanuedra was in his good grace, who although hee did sundrie things that will remaine in the memory of that Nation for many yeares, and all to the end to get his liberty; yet he neuer strucke him, nor commaunded him to be strucken, nor said as much as an euell word vnto him: and yet we all feared that hee should
 be broached on a-stake for the least of many things which he did, and himselfe did also dread it more then once; and if it were not that time denieth me leasure to doe it, I would recount vnto you things done by this souldier, which might both entertaine and astonish you much more then the relation of my life.
There were ouer the square court of our prison certaine windowes that looked into it, and belonged to a certaine rich and principall Moore; the which windowes (as ordinarily are all the Moores windowes) rather seemed to be holes then windowes: and euen these were also very closely couered and shut fast with linnen couerings. It therefore befell that standing one day vpon the battlements of our prison with other three companions, trying which of vs could leape best in his shakles to passe away the time, and being alone (for all the other Christians were gone abroad to labour) I lifted vp by chance mine eyes, and I saw thrust out at one of those so close-shut windowes a cane, and a linnen tied at the end thereof, and the cane was moued and wagged vp and downe, as if it had made signes, that we should come and take it: we looked vpon it, and one of my companions went vnder the cane, to see whether they would let it fall, or what they would doe else; but as soone as he approached it, the Cane was lifted vp, and did stirre it to eyther side, as if they had said (with wagging of the head) no the Christian returned to vs; and the Cane being eftsoones let fall, and beginning to moue as it had done before, an other of my fellowes went, and the same succeeded vnto him, that did to the first. Finally, the third approached it, with no better successe then the former two, which I perceiuing, would not omit to trie my fortitude, and as soone as I came neere to stand vnder the Cane, it was let slip and fel within the Bathes iust at my feete: I forthwith went to vntie the linnen which was knotted, wherein I found tenne Zianiys, which are certaine peeces of base gold, vsed among the Moores, and worth each of them tenne rials of our money.
 I leaue to your discretion to thinke if I was not glad of my bootie, certes my ioy and admiration was much, to thinke whence that good might come vnto vs, but specially to my selfe, since the signes of refusall, to let it fall to the other did confirme cleerly that the fauour was only addrest to my selfe. I tooke my welcome money, broke the Cane, and returned to the battlements, and viewed the window earnestly, and perceiued a very beautifull hand issue out thereat, which did open and shut it againe very speedily. By which imagining and thinking that some woman that dwelled in that house, had done vs the charitie and benefit, in token of our thankfull minds, we made our courtesies after the Moorish sashion by inclining of our heads, bending of the bodie, and pressing our hands to our breasts, within a while after, there appeared out of the same window a little crosse made of Canes, which presently was taken in againe, this signe did confirme vs in the opinion that there was some Christian woman captiue in that place, and that it was shee which did to vs the courtesie: but the whitenesse of her hand, and her rich bracelets destroyed this presumption: although we did notwithstanding coniecture that it was some renegate Christian, whom their masters there do very ordinarily take to wiues yea and account verie good hap to light on one of them, for they are much more accounted of, then the women of the nation it selfe.
Yet-in all these discourses we strayed very farre from the truth, of the accident; and so from thence forward all our passing of the time was imployed in beholding that window as our North, wherein had appeared the starre of the Cane: but fifteene daies past ouer, or we could descrie either it, or the hand againe, or any other signe. And although in the meane time we endeuour all that we might to know who dwell in that house, or whether there were any renegate Christian therein, yet neuer a one could tell vs any other things but that it belonged to a very rich and noble Moore called Aguimorato who had beene Constable of the Pata,
 dignitie among them of very great qualitie. But when we thought least that it would raine any more Zianiys by that way we saw the Cane suddenly to appeare, and an other linnen hanging on it, whose bulke was much greater: and this befell when the bath was freed of concourse, and void, as the other time before. We made the accustomed triall, euery one approaching it before mee, but without effect, vntill I came, for presently as I approached it, it was permitted to fall. I vntied the knot and found inwreathed in it fortie duckets of Spanish gold, with a letter written in the Arabian tongue, and at the end therof was drawne a very great crosse. I kissed the crosse, tooke vp the money, and returned againe to the battlements, and we altogether made our receiuers, the hand also appeared, I made signes that I would reade the paper, and the window was shut incontinently. All of vs were maruellously astonished, yet ioyfull at that which had befalne vs, and by reason that none of vs vnderstood the Arabian tongue, the desire that we had to vnderstand the contents of the letter was surpassing great, but greater the difficultie to finde out some trustie person that might reade it. In the end, I resolued to trust in this affaire a renegate of Murcia, who did professe himself to be my very great friend, and hauing by my liberality and other good turnes done secretly obliged him to be secret in the affaire wherein I would vse him: for some renegates are accustomed when they haue an intention to turne into the Christian countries to bring with them the testimonies of the most principall captiues, wherein they informe, and in the amplest manner they may, how the bearer is an honest man, and that he hath euer done many good turnes to the Christians, and that he hath himselfe a desire to escape by the first commoditie. Some renegates there are, which procure those testimonies sincerely, and with a good intention, others take the benefit of them eyther by chance or industrie; who intending to goe and rob into the countries of Christians, if by chance they be astray or taken, bring forth their testimonies and say, that by those
 papers may be collected the purpose wherwith all they came that is, to remaine in Christian countries, and that therefore, they came abroad a pyrating with the other Turks: and by this meanes they escape that first brunt, and are reconciled againe to the Church, without receiuing any harme at all: and when they espie their time doe returne againe into Barbarie, to be such as they were before. Others there are, which procure those writings with a pure intention, and doe after stay in Christian countries. Well this my friend was a renegate of his last kinde: who had the testimonies of all my companions, wherein we did commend him, as amply as we could deuise: and certainly if the Moores had found those papers about him, they would haue burnt him for it. I vnderstand how he could speake the Arabian tongue very perfectly, and not onely that alone, but also write it withall: yet before I would wholy breake my minde to him, I requested him to reade mee that scroule, which I had found by chance in a hole of my cabin, he opened it, and stood a good while beholding and construing thereof, murmuring somewhat betweene his teeth. I demaunded therefore of him whether he vnderstood it? and he answered that he did, very well: and that if I desired to haue it translated verbatim, I should bring vnto him Pen and Ink, to the end he might do it more completely: we presently gaue vnto him that which he asked, and he did translate it by little and little; and hauing finisht it, he said all that is heere in Spanish, is punctually without omitting a letter, the contentes of the Moorish paper, and heere you must note, that where it sayes Lela Marien, it meanes our Ladie the blessed Virgine Marie. We read the paper, whereof the contents were these which ensue.

WHen I was a child, my father had a certaine Christian woman captiue, that taught mee in mine owne tongue all the Christian Religion, and tolde mee many things of Lela Marien. The Christian died, and I know shee
 went not to the fire, but to Ala, for shee appeared to mee twice after her death, and bade mee goe to the Christian countrey, to see Lela Marien, who loued mee much: I knowe not how I may goe: I haue seene many Christians through this window, and none of them hath seemed to mee a Gentleman but thy selfe: I am very beautifull and young, and I haue a great deale of riches to carry away with mee. See thou whether thou canst contriue the way how wee may depart, and thou shalt there be my husband, if thou pleasest; and if thou wilt not, I doe not greatly care, for Lela Marien will prouide mee of a husband. I wrote my selfe this billet, be therefore wary, whom thou trustest to reade it: doe not trust any Moore, for they are all of them deceiptfull traytours. It is this that grieues mee most of all, for I would not haue thee, if it were possible, to disclose the matter to any liuing bodie; for if my father did know it, hee would throw mee downe into awell, and oppresse mee in it with stones. I will hang a threede to the end of the Cane, and therein thou mayest tie thine answere. And if thou canst not write the Arabian, tell mee thy minde by signes, for Lela Marien will make mee to vnderstand it. Who with Ala preserue thee, and this crosse which I doe many times kisse, for so the Captiue commaunded mee to doe.

See, good Sir, if it was not great reason, that the reasons comprehended in this Letter should recreate and astonish vs. And certainly the one and the other was so great, as the runnagate perceiued well that the paper was not found by chance, but was really addressed vnto some one of vs: and therefore desired vs earnestly, that if that were true which he suspected, that we would trust and tell it vnto him, and hee would aduenture his life to procure our liberties: and saying this, he tooke out of his bosome a Crucifixe of mettle, and protested with very many teares by the God which that Image represented, in whom he, although a sinner and wicked man, did most firmely beleeue, that he would be most
 loyall and secret to vs in all that which we would discouer vnto him; for it seemed to him, and he almost deuined that both himselfe and we all should recouer our liberties by her meanes that did write the Letter: and he should then also see himselfe in the state which he most desired, to wit, in the bosome of his mother the holy Catholicke Church; from which through his ignorance and sinne, he was departed and deuided as an vnprofitable and corrupt member. The Renegate said this with so many teares, and such euident tokens of repentance, as all of vs consented to open our mindes vnto him, and declare the truth of the matter; and so wee recounted vnto him the whole discourse, without concealing any circumstance; and shewed vnto him the window by which the Cane was wont to appeare, and he marked the house from thence, and rested with special charge to informe himselfe well of those that dwelled therein. We thought also that it was requisite to answere the Moorish Ladies Letter: and therefore hauing him present that could so well performe that taske, we caused the renegate to draw out an answer presently as I did dilate it to him, which was punctually such as I will recount: for of all the most substantial points that befell me in that affaire, no one is falne out of my memorie, nor shall euer as long as I haue breath. In effect that which I answered to the Moore, was this.

THE true Ala preserue you deere Ladie, and that blessed Marian, who is the true mother of God, and is she that hath put in your minde the desire to goe into the Christian Countries, because she doth loue you wel: pray vnto her that she will vouchsafe to instruct you, how you may bring the matter to passe, which she commaundeth you to doe; for she is so good as she will easily condescend to doe it. As for my part I doe promise, as well for my selfe, as for these other Christians that are with me, to do for you all that we are able to doe vntill death. Doe not omit to write vnto me, and acquaint me with your purposes, and I will answer you euery time: for great Ala hath giuen vs a captiue
 Christian, that can write and reade your language well, as you may perceiue by this paper. So that you may securely, and without any dread, aduise vs of all that you shall thinke good. And as concerning that which you say, that you will become my wife, after we arriue to the Christian countries, I doe promise you the same, as I am a good Christian: and you shall vnderstand that the Christians do accomplish their wordes far better then do the Moores. Ala and Marien his mother preserue you my deerest Ladie.

This Letter being written and inclosed, I expected two dayes, that the Bathes might be free of concourse, as it was wont, which assoone as it befel, I went vp to my accustomed place of the battlements, to see whether the Cane appeared; which was presently afterthrust out at the window. And soone as I perceiued it, although I could not note who it was that set it, I shewed my paper, to giue them warning to set on the threed: but it was already hanging thereon. To the which I tied the Letter, and within a while after began to appeare our Starre, with the white flagge of peace, and the knotted linnen; which they let fall, and I tooke vp, and I found therein in diuers sorts of money and golde more then fiftie duckats, which redoubled our ioyes more then fifty times, and confirmed the hope wee conceiued of attayning libertie. The very same night our Renegate returned to vs, and tolde, how he had learned that the very same Moore which wee were informed of before called Aguimorata dwelt there, and was excessiue rich, and had one only daughter, the heire of all his goods; of whom the common opinion throughout the citie was, that she was the fairest woman of all Barbarie: and that many of the Viceroyes that came there had demaunded her to wife, but she would neuer condiscend to any motion of mariage: and that he likewise had vnderstood, that she had somtimes a Christian captiue, which now was deceased, all which agreed with the contents of the Letter. We presently entred in counsell with the Renegate, about the meanes we were to vse, to fetch away the
 Moore, and come all of vs to Christian landes, and in the end we concluded to attend for that time, the second aduice of Zoraida (for so was she then called, who now meanes to name her selfe Maria) for as much as we cleerely perceiued that it was shee, and none other that could minister to vs the meanes to remoue all these difficulties. After we had rested on this resolution, the Renegate bid vs be of good courage, for he would ingage his life, or set vs at liberty. Foure dayes after the Bathes were troubled with people: which was an occasion that the Cane appeared not all that while. But that impediment being remoued, and the accustomed solitude returned, the Cane did againe appeare with a linnen hanging thereat so grossely impregned, as it promised to be deliuered of a most happie burden. Both Cane and linnen bent themselues to me, and in them I found another paper and a hundred duckats in golde, besides other small money. The Renegate was present, and we gaue him the Letter to reade, the effect whereof was this.

I Know not, good Sir, what order to giue for our going into Spaine, nor hath Lela Marien tolde me any thing concerning it although I haue demaunded her counsaile. That which may be done is, that I will through this window giue vnto you great store of money, wherewith you may redeeme your selfe, and your friends: and let one of you goe into the Christians countrey, and buy a Barke, and after returne for his fellowes, and he shall finde me in my fathers garden, which is at the gate of Babazon, neere to the Sea coast, where I meane to stay all this Sommer, with my father and my seruants: from whence you may take mee out boldly by night, and carry me to the Barke. And see well that thou wilt be my husband; for if thou wilt not, I will demaund of Marien to chastise thee: and if thou darest trust no body to goe for the vessell, redeeme thy selfe and goe, for I know thou wilt rather returne then another, seeing thou art a Gentleman and a Christian; learne out the garden: and when I see thee walke there where thou now arte, I will make account that the Bath is
 emptie, and will giue thee great store of money. Ala preserue thee my deere friend.

These were the contents of the second Letter, which being heard by vs all, euery one offered to bee himselfe the ransomed person, and promised to goe and returne with all punctuality, and I also made a proffer of my selfe: to all which resolutions the Renegate opposed himselfe, saying that he would consent in no wise that any one of vs should be freed, vntill we were all together deliuered: for experience had taught him how euill ransomed men were wont to keepe those promises which they passed in the times of their thraldome: for many times certaine principall captiues had made that kinde of triall, redeeming of some one or other that should goe to Valentia or Mallorca, with money to freight a Barke or Fregat, and returne for him that had ransomed them, and did neuer returne againe: for the recouered liberty, and the feare of aduenturing to lose it againe, concurring, did blot out of their memory all the other obligations of the world. And to confirme the truth which he auerred, he briefly recounted vnto vs an accident which befel much about the same time to certaine Christian Gentlemen, the strangest, as I suppose, that euer hapned in those quarters, wherein do succeede euery other day euents full of wonder and admiration, and therefore concluded, that what ought and might be done, was, that they should giue vnto him to buy a Barke, such money as they meant to imploy in the ransome of a captiue, and he would buy it there in Argiers, vnder pretext of becomming a merchant and sayler in Tetuan and that cost: and being once owner of a Barke, he would easily deuise how to haue them out of the Baths and imbarke them al: how much more if the Moorish Ladie did, as she promised, giue them money enough to ransom them all, was it a most easie thing they being free, to embark the^selues at midday: but the greatest difficultie in this affaire was, that the Moores vse not to permit any Renegate to buy any Barke or other small vessell, but onely great vessels of warre: for they suspect that
 he that buyes a Barke, especially if he be a Spaniard, does it for no other end but to runne away to Christian countries. And yet he knew how to facilitate that inconuenience, by inducing a Tangerine Moore to become his partner of the Barke, and the gaines that should be gotten by the commodities thereof, and with this shaddow hee would become Lord of it himselfe, and therewithall accounted the matter ended. And although that both my selfe and my Camaradas held it the better course to send vnto Mallorca for one, as the Moorish Lady said, yet durst we not contradict him, fearefull that if we did not what he would haue vs to doe, he would discouer vs, and indanger our liues, if he did once detect Zoraidas practises; for the safeguard of whose life wee would all of vs most willingly aduenture our owne: and therfore we determined to put our selues into Gods and the Renegates hands. And so we answered at the same instant to Zorayda, telling her that we would accomplish all that she had admonished vs, because she had aduertised vs as wel as if Lela Marien had told her what she should say, and that the dilating or shortning of the affair did consist only in her selfe. I did offer my selfe anew to become her husband: and with this the day ensuing, wherein the Bath was also free, she sent me downe at diuers times by the Cane two thousand Duckats, and a Letter, wherein she said that she would goe to her fathers garden the next Iumia, that is the Friday following, and that before she went away she would giue vs more money. And that, if it were not enough we should aduise her, and she would giue vnto vs as much as we would demaund; for her father had so much treasure, as he would neuer perceiue it, how much more seeing she had, and kept the Keyes of all. We gaue fiue hundred crownes presently to the Renegate to buy a Barke, and with eight hundred I redeemed my selfe, giuing the money to a Valentian Merchant, which was at that season in Argiers, who did ransome me of the King, taking me forth on his word, which he passed to pay my ransome, at the arriuall of the first Ship that
 should come from Valentia. For if hee had deliuered the money instantly, it would haue giuen occasion to the King to suspect that my ransome was many dayes before in Argiers, and that the Merchant had kept it silently, to make his benefite thereof. Finally, my Master was so cauilous as I durst not in any wise pay him presently.
The Thursday before the Friday of the beautiful Zoraidas departure towards the garden, she gaue vnto vs other two thousand duckats, and did likewise aduise vs of her going away, intreating me that as soone as I had ransomed my selfe I should learne the way to the garden, and take occasion howsoeuer to goe to it, and see her. I answered her briefly, that I would doe so, and prayed her that she would carefully commend our proceedings to Lela Marien, with those prayers which the captiue had taught her. This being done, order was also giuen for the ransoming of my three companions, to facilitate our issue out of the Bathes, and also that they seeing me free, and themselues vndeliuered, might not be troubled or perswaded by the Diuell, to doe any thing in preiudice of Zorayda. For although that they, being the men of that quality they were, might assure me from this feare, I would not for all that, aduenture the matter, and therefore I caused them to bee ransomed by the same meanes that I was redeemed my selfe, giuing all the money to the Merchant, that he might with the more security passe his word for vs: to whom yet we neuer did discouer our practise and secret, by reason of the eminent danger of the discouery thereof.



CHAP. XIIII.

Wherein the captiue prosecuteth the pleasant narration of his life.

FIfteene dayes were not fully expired, when the Renegate had bought him a very good Barke, able to holde thirty persons or more; and for the better colour and assurance of his businesse, he made a voyage to a place called Sargel, which is thirty leagues distant from Argiers towards the side of Oran, and is a great place of traffique for drie Figges. He made this voyage twise or thrise in company with the Tagarine, of whom we made mention: and the name of Tagarino is in Barbary giuen to the Moors of Arragon, Granada, and Mudesares. And in the Kingdome of Fez those Mudesares are called Elehes, and are the Nation which that King doth most imploy in warlike affaires. You shall therefore vnderstand that euery time he passed by with his Barke he did cast Ancre in a little cricke, twise the shot of a Crosbow from the garden wherein Zorayda attended; and there the Renegate would in very good earned exercise himselfe with the Moores that rowed, eyther to flie or else to assault one another in iest, as he meant to doe after in good earnest: and would now and then goe to Zoraydas garden, and demaund fruits, which her father would bestow vpon him, without knowing what hee was: and although hee desired to haue spoken with Zorayda, as hee tolde mee afterward himselfe, and haue informed her, how it was hee that was to carry her away by my direction into the land of Christians, and that shee should therefore liue chearfull and secure, yet was it neuer possible, forasmuch as the women of that nation do not suffer themselues to be viewed by any Moore or Turke if he be not their husband, or that their parents command them, yet do they
 haunt and communicate themselues to Christian captiues freely, and that sometimes more then is conuenient, and truly it would haue grieued me, that he should haue spoken vnto her, for perhaps it would haue perplexed her extraordinarily, to see her affaire committed to the trust of a runnegate: but God who did otherwise dispose it, did not concurre with this good desire of our renegate: who seeing how safely he went and returned from Sargel, and that he sounded when and where he pleased; and that the Tagarmo his partner did only what he liked, and that I was ransomed, and nothing else wanting, but to finde out some Christians that would row, hee bad mee bethinke my selfe what men I would bring away with mee besides those that I had ransomed, and that I should warne them to bee ready against the next Friday, wherein hee was resolued that wee should depart.
Seeing this, I spake to twelue Spaniards very lusty rowers, and those that could with most liberty get out of the Citty: and it was not a little matter to finde so many there at that time, for there were twenty gallies abroad a robbing, which had carried all the other rowers with them, and these were left behinde because their Master did keepe at home that Sommer to finish a galley that was on the Stockes a making. To these I said nothing else, but only warned them that the Friday ensuing in the euening, they should closely steale out by one and one, and goe towards Aguimorates Garden, and there expect me vntill I came vnto them. I gaue this aduice to euery one of them a part, with order also, that although they saw any other Christians there, they should tell them nothing else, but that I had commaunded them to expect me in that place. This diligence being vsed, yet wanted there another, which was the most expedient of all, to wit, to aduise Zoraida of the termes wherein our affaires did stand, to the end shee might be likewise ready and prepared, and not affrighted though wee did assault her before the time that shee could imagine the barke of the Christians to
 be come to fetch her away; and therefore I resolued to goe my selfe vnto the Garden and see whether I might speake with her: and taking the occasion to goe and gather some hearbs, I went vnto it the day before our departure, and the first person with whom I encountred was her father, who demanded of me in a language which in all Barbarie and Constantinople is vsually spoken by the Moores to their captiues, and is neither, Arabian, Spanish, nor of any other nation, but rather a mixture of all languages wherewith all of vs vnderstand one another: he, I say, in that kinde of speech demanded of me, what I sought for in that his garden, and to whom I did belong? I answered that I was one Arnaute Mami his slaue (and this, because I was very certainely informed that he was his intire friend) and that I came thither to gather of all sorts of hearbs to make a sallade: he consequently asked of me whether I was a man of ransome or no, and how much my Master demaunded for me? and being in those questions and demaunds, the beautifull Zoraida descended from the house into the garden, who had espyed me a good while before: and as the Moorish women doe not greatly estrange themselues from the sight of Christians, we are in their behauiour or conuersation with them any thing squeamish, as we haue said already, shee did not greatly feare to approch the place where her father talked with mee: but rather, her father perceiuing that shee came on somewhat slowly, did call, and commanded her to draw neare.
It were a thing impossible for mee to recount the great beauty and gallant disposition, or the brauery and riches of attyre, wherein my beloued Zoraida then shewed her selfe to mine eyes. I will only say this, that there hanged more Pearles at her eares, superlatiue faire necke, and haire, then shee hath haires on her head, about the wrests of her legges, which were naked after the manner of her Countrey, shee wore two Carcaxes (for so the manicles or bracelets of the feete are called in the Morisco tongue) of the finest gold, wherein were inchaced so many Diamonds, that as shee told
 me after her father valued them at twenty thousand crowns; and those about the wrests of her hands, were of equall esteeme. Her pearles were many, and those most Orient; for all the chiefe brauery and ornament of the Moorish Ladies consists in the adorning of themselues with Pearles and Pearle seede; by reason whereof there is more Pearles and Pearle-seede to be found among the Moores then among all the other nations of the world: and Zoraidas father had the fame to haue many, and those the very best that were in Argiers; and also aboue two hundred thousand Duckats of Spanish gold: of all which was shee the Lady, who now is mine. And if with all this ornament shee could then seeme faire, by the relikes that haue remained vnto her among so many labors, may bee easily ghessed, what shee would haue beene in the time of prosperity? for all of vs doe know that the beauty of some women hath limited dayes and seasons, and requireth certayne accidents either to diminish or increase it, and it is a thing naturall to the passions of the minde, either to raise, or abase it, but most commonly they wholly destroy it. To be briefe, I say, that shee arriued to the place where we discoursed at that time most richly atryred, and beautifull beyond measure, or I at last deemed her the fairest that I had euer beheld vntill then: and herewithall remembring the obligation wherein shee had tyed me, thought that some Deitie had presented it selfe to my view, being come from heauen to the earth, for my recreation and reliefe.
As soone as shee was arriued her father told her in her owne language, how I was his friend Arnaute Mami his captiue, and that I came there to gather a sallade: then shee taking the speech, demaunded in that medly of tongues of which I haue spoken, whether I was a Gentleman, and what the reason was why I redeemed not my selfe? I made answere, that I was already ransomed, and by the ransome might be coniectured, in how much my Master valued me, seeing hee had for my liberty a thousand and fine hundred Coltamis, to this shee answered; In good sooth, if thou
 werst my fathers, I would cause him not to giue thee for twice as much more: for you Christians are great lyars, and doe make euery one of your selues poore men, to defraude the Moores of their due ransome. It may well bee so Madame, quoth I, but I haue for my part vsed all truth in this affaire with my Master, and doe, and will, vse truth with as many persons as I shall euer haue occasion to treate with in this world, and when dost thou goe away, quoth Zoraida? to morrow as I beleeue, quoth I. For there is a French vessell here, which sets forth to morrow, and I meane to depart in her: were it not better, replyed Zoraida, to expect vntill vessels come out of Spaine, and goe away with them, then with those of France, which are not your friends? no, quoth I, although if it were true as the newes runne, that there comes a vessell from Spaine, I would attend it; but yet it is more certaine that I shall depart to morrow: for the desire I haue to see my selfe at home in my Countrey, and with those persons whom I loue is so great, as it will not permit me to expect any other commodity, that foreslowes it selfe bee it neuer so good. Thou art doubtlefly marryed in thy Countrey, said Zoraida, and therefore desirest to goe see thy wife? I am not married, quoth I, but I haue passed my word to marry, as soone as I am there safely arriued. And is shee beautifull to whome thou hast past it, quoth Zoraida? so beautifull, said I, as to indeere it and tell you the truth, shee is very like vnto your selfe. Hereat her father laughed very hartily, and said. In good earnest Christian shee must be very fair that may compare with my daughter, who is the most beautifull of all this Kingdome: and if thou wilt not beleeue me looke on her well, and thou shalt see that I tell thee but the truth. He himselfe, as most perfect in the tongue, did serue for the interpreter of most of our speeches; for although shee could speake that illegitimate language which is there in vse, yet did shee manifest her mind more by signes then by wordes.
Whilst thus wee reasoned of many matters, there came
 running towards vs a certaine Moore, and told his Master how foure Turkes had leaped ouer the Garden walles, and were gathering the fruits although they were not yet ripe. The old man and his daughter Zoraida started here at; for it is an vniuersall and naturall defect in the Moores to feare the Turkes, but specially the Souldiers of that nation, who are commonly so insolent, and haue such command ouer the Moores that are their subiects, as they doe vse them worse then if they were their slaues. Therefore Zoraidas father said vnto her; daughter retyre thy selfe into the house, and keep thy selfe in whilest I goe speake to those dogges; and thou Christian goe and seeke out thine hearbs, and depart in good houre, and I pray Ala to conduct thee safely to thy Country. I inclined my selfe to him, and he departed to search out the Turkes, leauing me alone with Zoraida, who began to make adoe as if she went whither her father had commanded her; but scarce was hee couered among the trees of the Garden when shee returned to me, with her eyes full of teares, said. Amexi Christiano Amexi, that is, goest thou away Christian, goest thou away? I answered, yes Ladie, that I doe, but I will neuer depart away without thee: expect mee the next Friday, and be not affrighted when thou shalt see vs, for we will goe to the Christian Countrey then, without all doubt. This I said to her in such sort as she vnderstood all my words very well, and casting her arme ouer my necke, shee began to trauaile with languishing steps towards the house, and fortune would (which might haue beene very ill, if heauen had not rectified it) that as we walked together in that manner and forme, her father, who did by this returne after hee had caused the Turkes to depart, espyed vs, and we saw also very well how he had perceiued vs: wherefore Zoraida, who is very discreet, would not take away her arme from my necke, but rather drew nearer vnto me, and laid her head on my brest, and bowed her knees a little, with euident token that shee swouned, and I likewise made as though I did sustaine her vp by force. Her father came running ouer towards
 vs, and seeing his daughter in that state, demanded the cause of her, but seeing shee made no answere, hee himselfe said, she doubtlesly is dismaide by the suddaine affright she tooke at the entrance of those Dogges: and taking her away from me, he bowed her to his owne brest: and shee breathing out a sigh, with her eyes yet full of teares, said againe, Amexi Christiano Amexi, goe away Christian, goe away: to which her father replyed, there is no cause daughter why the Christian should goe away, for he hath done thee no harme, and the Turkes are already departed. Sir they haue affrighted her (quoth I) as you haue said, but yet since shee hath commanded mee to goe away, I will not offend her; therefore rest in peace, for I will returne, if it please you to giue mee leaue, for hearbs to this garden, when it is needfull; for my Master saies there are none better to be found for sallades in any other garden, then you haue here in this: come as oft as thou wilt, said Aguimorato, for my daughter saies not this, in respect that thou or any other Christian hath offended her, but that, meaning to say, that the Turkes should goe away, shee bad thee to depart, or else shee spake it, because it is time for thee to gather thine hearbs.
With this I tooke leaue of both, and she seemed at the instant of my departure to haue had her heart torne away from her, as she departed with her father; and I vnder colour of seeking herbs, went about all the garden at my leasure, and viewed all the sallies, and the entrances thereof, the strength of the house, and the commodities that might bee offered to facilitate our enterprise. This being done, I came home and made a relation to the renegate, and my other fellowes of all that had passed: and did long infinitely to see the hower wherein I might, without any affright or danger, possesse that happinesse which fortune in the faire and louely Zoraida, offered vnto mee. In fine the time passed ouer, and the so much desired day and terme arriued: and euery one of vs following the order, which with mature consideration and long discourse wee had agreed on, we found the good
 successe we desired. For the very Friday following the day wheerin I had spoken with Zoraida in the garden, Morrenago (for so was the renegate called) neere night cast anchor almost right before the place wherein the beautifull Zoraida remained. The Christians also that were to row, were readie, and hidden in sundrie places there abouts. All were suspended, and resolutely expected my comming, desirous to set vpon the Barke that was before their face: for they knew not of the agreement that was betweene mee and the renegate; but rather made full account that they were to gaine their liberty by force of armes, and killing the Moores that came in that vessell.
It therefore befell, that as soone as I and my fellowes appeared, all the rest that were hidden, and espied vs, made forthwith ouer towards vs. This was at an hower when the Citie gates were shut, and neuer a bodie abroad among all those fields: and when wee were altogether, wee were in doubt whether it would be best, first to goe and fetch Zoraida, or to imprison and stone the Tagarine Moores, that rowed in the frigat. And being in this doubt, the renegate came to vs, asking vpon what we slayed, for it was now high time to be going away and all his Moores were wretchlesse, and the greater number of them a sleepe: We told him then the cause of our slay, and he answered that it was of most importance, first to subiect the vessell which might be done with very great facilitie, and without any perill, and that we might goe after for Zoraida. His opinion liked vs all verie well, and therefore without lingring any longer, he leading the way we came to the vessell, and he himselfe leaping in first of all set hand to his faulchion and said, in Morisco let none of you that is, heere stirre himselfe, if he loue his life. And saying so all the rest of the Christians entred: the Moores which were of little spirit, hearing their master say so, were maruellously amazed, and without daring, any one of them to set hand to their armes, which were but a few at all, they suffered themselues very quietly to be taken and bound
 by the Christians, which did it very dexteriously, threatning them that if they did let slip the least outcry, they should presently be all put to the sword: this being finished, and the halfe of our people remaining in their guard, wee that were left, conducted also by the renegate, went towards Aquimoratus garden, the doore thereof did, by very good hap, open with as little noise as if it it had had no locke at all: Whereupon we went with great quietnesse and silence towards the house vnfelt or espied of any.
The beautifull Zoraida was the while expecting vs at a window, and as soone as she felt people approach, demanded with a low voice whether we were Nizarans, as if she would say or aske, whether we were Christians? I answered that we were, and willed her to come downe. As soone as she knew mee, she stayed not a minute, but without answering any word, came downe in an instant; and opening the doore, shewed her selfe to vs all more beautifull, and richly attired, then I am able in any sort to expresse. As soone as I saw her, I tooke her by the hand, and kissed it, the same did the renegate, and my two Camaradas; and all the rest which knew not the matter, did as they had seene vs doe before them; for it seemed that wee did no more but giue her thankes, and acknowledge her the auctresse of all our liberties. The renegat demaunded of her in her owne language, whether her father were in the garden or no? she answered that he was, and that he slept; then wil it be requisite quoth the renegat, to rouse him, and beare him, and al the other things of worth in this garden away with vs: that shal not be so, (quooth she, for I will haue no man to touch my father, and in this house there is nothing of value, but that which I meane to carry away with my selfe, which is so much as will be sufficient to cheere and inrich you all: as if you will stay but a while, you shall perceiue. And saying so, she entred againe into the house, promising to returne to vs speedily, and bade vs stand still without making any noise. I demanded of the renegate what speech had passed betweene them,
 and he told me all she had said, and I answered him againe that I would not haue Zoraidas will transgrest in any sort: by this time she returned loden with a little Casket full of gold, so that she was scarce able to beare it. And her father in the meane season, by bad fortune awaked, and heard the noyse that was beneath in his garden, and looking out at a window he perceiued that they were all Christians that were in it, and therfore cried out in a loud and vnmeasurable maner in the Arabian tongue, Christians, Christians, Theeues, Theeues; by which cries we were all of vs strucken into very great feare and confusion: but the renegate seeing the perill wherein we were, and how neerely it concerned him to come off from that enterprize, before he were discouered, ranne vp very speedily to the place where Aquimorato stood, and some of our fellowes accompanied him (for I durst not abandon Zoraida, who had falne betweene mine armes all amazed) and in conclusion those which had mounted behaued themselues so well, as they brought Aquimorato downe in a trice, hauing tied his hand, and set a gagge in his mouth, which hindred his speech, threatning him that if hee did speake but a word, it should cost him his life.
When his daughter saw him, she couered her eyes because she would not behold him, and he maruelled, wholy ignoring with how good a will she came away with vs: but then considering that nothing was so requisite as our legges, we did with al velocity and diligence get into the frigat, for our companions did perplexedly expect our returne, halfe afraid that some disgrace had befalne vs. Scarse were two houres of the night ouerrunne when we were all imbarked: and then we vnmanacled Zoraidas fathers hands, and tooke the cloath out of his mouth. But the renegate did againe admonish him, that as he tendred his life he should not speake one word, he beholding his daughter likewise there, beganne to sigh very feelingly, but chiefly perceiuing me to hold her so straightly embraced, and that she made no resistance, nor
 did complaine or seeme coy, but stood quiet. But yet for all that he kept silence, fearing lest they should put the renegates menaces in execution. Zoraida seeing her selfe now safe within the Barke, and that we were readie to row away, looking on her father, and the other Moores that were tied therein, she intreated the renegate to tell me how she desired me to doe her the fauour to set those Moores and her father at liberty, for she would rather cast her selfe into the Sea then see a father, who had loued her so dearely, caried away captiue before her eyes, and that also by her occasion. The renegate told me her minde, and I answered how I was very well pleased it should be so: but he replied, that it was in no sort expedient, by reason that if they were landed there, they would presently raise the countrey, and put the whole Citie into a tumult, and cause certaine light Frigats to bee manned, and sent out in our pursuite; and lay both Sea and land for vs in such sort as it would be impossible for vs to escape: but that as might bee done was to giue them liberty at the first Christian countrey whereat we arriued: All of vs agreed to this opinion, and Zoraida also (to whom reason was giuen of the motiues we had not to free them forthwith and accomplish her will therein) remained satisfied: and therefore presently with ioyfull silence, and cheerefull diligence euery one of our lustie rowers, ceasing vpon his oare, we beganne, after we had commended our selues vnto Almighty God, to lanch forth, and addresse our course towards the Iles of Mallorca, which is the neerest Christian country: but by reason that the wind blew somwhat from the mountaines, and that the Sea began to be rough, it was not possible to continue that course; and so wee were forced to approach the shore, and go by little and little towards Oran, not without great griefe and anguish, for feare to be espied by the towne of Sargell, vvhich is on that cost, and falles some seuentie leagues beyond Argiers: and vve did likewise feare to meete in that passage some galleat of those vvhich come ordinarily vvith merchandize from Tetuan, although euerie
 one of vs for himself, and for altogether, did presume, that if we encountred a galliot of merchandize, so it were not a Pirate, that not only we wold not be lost, but rather would take the vessell that therein we might with more security finish our voyage. Zoraida whilst thus we sailed, went with her head between my hands, because she would not looke on her father, and I felt her, how she was still inuoking of Lela Marien to assist vs, and hauing sailed about some thirty leagues, the morning ouertook vs about some three Musket shot fro^ land, in a place that seemed to be desart, and free from all accesse of those that might discouer vs; and yet for all that, we got by might and maine, somewhat further into the Seas, that now were become a little calmer, and hauing entred some two leagues into the maine, order was giuen, that they should row by turnes, whilst they did refresh themselues and take a little sustenance, for the Barke was very well furnished with victuals, although those which did rowe, refused the offer saying, that then it was no time to repose, and that they should set those that did not row to dinner, for they would not yet in in any sort let go their Oates. It being done as they had said, the wind did rise so much as it made vs abandoning our Oares, to set saile and direct our Boat towards Oran, being vnable to take any other course: all was done with very great speed, and so we made by the saile more then eight miles an hower, free from all other feare, then that of encountring some vessell of war. We gaue the Moores our prisoners their dinner, and the renegate conforted them, saying, that they went not as prisoners, for they should receiue their liberty, vpon the first commodity that were proferd. The same was likewise said to Zoraidas father, who returned them this answere. I would easily expect and beleeue any other thing O Christians of your liberality and honorable manner of proceeding, but do not thinke that I am so simple as once to imagine that you will giue me my liberty, for you did neuer, expose your selfe to the danger of dispoiling me thereof, with intention to returne it me so prodigally againe,
 especially knowing as you do, who I am, and the profit which you may reape by giuing me it againe, to which profit if you wil put a name, and tel me how much would you demand, I do euen from hence offer vnto you all that which you will seeke for me, and for that vnfortunate daughter of mine, or if you wil not deliuer me, I will giue you it for her alone, who is the greatest, and the best part of my soule. And saying so, he began to weep so bitrerly, as he moued vs all to co^passion, and forced Zoraida to looke vpon him; who seeing him weepe, was so strangely moued as arising fro^ my feet, she went and embraced her father, and laying her face vpon his, they began together so tender a lamentation, as many of vs that were in the Bark were forced to keep thee co^pany: but when her father noted her to be so richly adorned, and with so many Iewels on, he asked her in his own language, how haps this daughter that yesternight late before this terrible disaster befel vs, wherin we are plunged, I saw thee attired in thine ordinary houshold aray, and that now without hauing had any leasure to apparrel thy self, or hauing giue^ thee any glad tidings, for whose sole^nizing, thou oughtest to adorne and publish thy selfe, I do view thee thus clad in the richest attire which I could bestow vpon thee, when our fortune was most fauourable. Answer me to this, for thou hast suspended and astonished mee more then the very disgrace it selfe wherein I am.
All that the Moore said to his daughter the renegate declared vnto vs, and she did not answere a word to him: but when he saw the little coffers lie at one side of the Barke, wherein she was wont to keepe her Iewels, and that hee knew very well she had left at Argiers, and not brought to the garden, he was much more amazed, and demaunded of her how that coffer was come into our possession, and what things she had therewith in it? to which the renegate without attending that Zoraida should answere him, said, Sir do not trouble your selfe by demaunding so many things of your daughter Zoraida, for with one that I will say, I shal satisfie them all: and therefore you shall vnderstand that shee
 is a Christian, and hath been the file that cut off our chaines, and is the liberty it selfe of our captiuitie, and she goeth along with vs of her owne free will, as content (if mine imagination doth not wrong me) to see her selfe in this state, as he is that commeth out of darkenesse to the light, from death vnto life, and out of paine into glory. Is it true daughter, which this man sayes, quoth the Moore? It is, answered Zorayda: that thou in effect art a Christian, replyed the old man, and she that hath put her father into his enemies hands? To which Zorayda answered, I am she that is a Christia^, but not she that hath brought thee to this passe: for my desire did neuer so estrange it selfe from thee, as to abandon or harme thee, but only endeuored to do my self good. And what good hast thou done thy self daughter? demand that, said she of Lela Marien, for she can therin informe thee better then I can.
Scarce had the Moore heard her say so, when with incredible haste he threw himselfe headlong into the Sea, wherein hee had beene questionlesly drowned, if the long apparell he wore on, had not kept him vp a while aboue the water. Zoraida cried out to vs to saue him, and so we all presently ranne, and laying hold on a part of his Turkish robe, drew him vp halfe drowned, and wholly deuoyde of feeling. Whereat Zorayda was so grieued, that she lamented him as dolefully as if he had beene dead. There we laid him with his mouth downward, and he auoyded a great quantity of water, and after the space of two houres returned to himselfe againe: and in the meane time the winde also turning, it did driue vs towards the coast; so that we were constrayned to keepe ourselues by very force of armes from striking vpon it, and our good fortune directing vs, we arriued to a little creeke at the side of a certaine Cape or Promontory, called by the Moores the Cape of the Caua Rumia, which in our language signifies the ill Christian woman: and the Moores hold it for a tradition, that in the very same place was the Caua buried, for whom Spaine was lost, and conquered by the Moores: for Caua in their language signifies an illwoman,
 and Rumia a Christian: yea, and they holde it for a signe of misfortune to arriue or cast Ancre there, when meere necessity driues them thither: without which they neuer approach it, yet did it not proue to vs the shelter of an ill woman, but the secure hauen of our safery. We sent our Centinels a shore, and neuer let Oares slip out of our hands: We did likewise eate of the Renegates prouision, and heartily besought Almightie God and our Ladie to assist and fauour vs with a happy end, to so luckie a beginning. And we agreed vpon Zoraydas intreatie, to set her father and the other Moores that we had tied, a land in that place: for she was of so tender and compassionate a minde, as she could in no wise brooke to see her father tied in her presence, or her countreymen borne away captiues: wherfore we made her a promise that we wold at our departure let them al go away, seeing we incurd no danger by leauing them in that inhabitable desart: our prayers were not so vain, but that they found gentle acceptance in heauen, which presently changed the winde and appeased the Sea, inuiting vs cheerfully to returne to it againe, and prosecute our commenced voyage.
Seeing that the weather was fauourable, we loosed the Moors, and set them al a land one by one; and comming to dismbark Zoraydas father, who was by that time wholly come to himselfe, he said, For what doe you coniecture Christians, that this bad woman is glad that you giue me libertie? Do you thinke that she doth it for pitie that she takes of me? No truely, but she doth it onely to remoue the hinderance my presence gaue her when she would execute her vnlawful desires. Nor ought you to beleeue that shee is moued to change religion, by reason that she vnderstands yours to be better then her owne, but onely because she knowes licentiousnesse to be more publickely and freely practised in your countrey then among vs: and then turning to Zorayda, whom I and another Christian held fast by both the armes lest shee should do some desperate acte, he said, O infamous girle, and il-aduised mayden, where dost thou runne thus blinded and
 distracted, in the power of those dogges our naturall enemies? Cursed be the houre wherein I engendred thee, and cursed the delights and pleasures wherin thou wast nousled. I perceiuing that he was not like to make an end of his execrations so soone as I could wish, had him set on shore, and thence he prosecuted his maledictions, and plaints praying vnto Mahomet that he would intercede with Ala, that we might be all destroyed, confounded, and cast away. And when we could heare his words no longer, by reason that we set saile, we perceiued his works, that were, to plucke his beard, teare his haire, and cast himselfe on the ground: but once he did lift vp his voyce so high, as that we heard him say, return beloued daughter, returne to the land, for I doe pardon thee all that thou hast done, and deliuer that money to those men, for it is now their owne, and returne thou to comfort thy sadde and desolate father, who will forsake his life on these desolate sands, if thou dost abandon him.
Zorayda heard him say all this, and lamented thereat, but knew not how to speake, or answere him any other thing but this, Father mine, I pray Ala that Lela Marien, who hath beene the cause of my becomming a Christian, may likewise comfort thee in thy sorrow. Ala knowes well that I could do none other then I did, and that these Christians do owe me nothing for my good wil, seeing that though I had not come away with them, but remained at my house, yet had it beene impossible (such was the hast wherewithall my soule pressed me) not to haue executed this my purpose, which seemes to me to be as good, as thou O beloued father, dost account it wicked. She said this in a time that neither her father could heare her, nor we beholde him: and therefore after I had comforted Zorayda, we did thenceforth onely attend our voyage, which was so much holpen by the fauorable winde, as we made full account to bee the next day on the cost of Spaine: but as good very seldome or rather neuer, betides a man thoroughly and wholly, without being accompanied or followed by some euill which troubles and assaults it, our
 fortune would, or rather the maledictions of the Moore powred on his daughter: (for the curses of any father whatsoeuer are to bee feared) that being ingulfed three houres within night, and going before the winde with a full sayle, and our Oares set vp, because the prosperous winde had rid vs of the labour of rowing: we saw neere vnto vs, by the light of the Moone that shined very cleerely, a round vessel, which with all her sailes spread, did crosse before vs in the Sea, and that so neerely as we were faine to strike down her saile, that we might auoide the shog she was like to giue vs; and those that were in her had on the other side laboured also what they might, to turne her out of our way, standing all of them on the hatches to demaund of vs what we were, from whence we came, and whither vve did saile? But by reason that they spake French, the Renegate bad vs not to speake a word, saying, Let none answer, for these are French Pirates which make their bootie of euery body. For this cause none of vs answered: and being passed a litle forward, and that the Ship remained in the Lee of vs, they suddenly shotte off two pieces of Artillery, and as I thinke both of them had chaine bullets, for with the one they cut our Mast asunder, and ouerthrew it and the saile into the sea, and instantly after they discharged another, and the bullet alighting in our barke did pierce it thorow and thorow, without doing any other hurt, but we, seeing that our vessell beganne to sinke, beganne all to crie out, and request them to succour vs, and prayed them that they would take vs into their vessell, for we were a drowning. Then they amaine, and casting out their Cocke-boate, there entred into it as good as a douzen Frenchmen, wel appointed with their Harcabuzes and Matches lighted, and so approched vnto vs; and perceiuing how few we were, and that the Barke did sinke, they receiued vs into their boate, saying that because we had vsed the discourtesie of not making them answere, that misfortune had befalne vs. Our Renegate about this time tooke the coffin wherein Zoraydas treasures were kept, and threw it into the sea vnperceiued of any.

In conclusion, we went all of vs into the great vessel with the Frenchmen, who after they had informed themselues of all that which they desired to know, as if they were our capitall enemies, they afterward dispoyled vs of all that euer we had about vs, and of Zorayda they tooke all, euen vnto her very bracelets, that she wore on the wrests of her feete. But the wrong they did to Zorayda did not afflict mee so much as the feare I conceiued, that after they had taken away from her, her most rich and pretious jewels, they would also depriue her of the jewell of most price, and which shee valued most. But the desires of that nation extend themselues no farther, then to the gaine of money: and their auarice in this is neuer throughly satisfied; and at that time was so great, as they would haue taken from vs the very habites of slaues, that we brought from Barbarie, if they had found them to haue beene worth anything: and some there were of opinion among them, that we should be al inwreathed in a saile, and throwen into the Sea, because they had intention to traffique into some hauens of Spaine, vnder the name of Britaines, and that if they caried vs aliue, they should be punished, their robery being detected: but the Captaine, who was he that had pilled my beloued Zorayda, said, that hee was so contented with his booty, as he meaned not to touch any part of Spaine, but would passe the streights of Gibraltar by night, or as he might, and so returne againe to Rochel, from whence he was come: and there vp on they all agreed to giue vs their Cock-boate, and all that was necessary for our short voyage, as indeed they performed the day ensuing when we were in the view of Spaine, with the sight whereof all our griefes and pouerties were as quite forgotten as if we neuer had felt any; so great is the delight a man takes to recouer his liberty. It was about midday when they put vs into the Cocke, giuing vnto vs two Barrels of water and some Bisket; and the Captaine moued with some compassion, as the beautifull Zorayda embarqued her selfe, bestowed on her about fortie crownes in gold; nor would he permit
 his Souldiers to dispoyle her of these very garments, which then and now she weares.
We entred into the cockboate, and giuing them thankes for the good they did, and shewing at our departure more tokens of thankfulnes, then of discontent; they sailed presently away from vs towards the straights, and we without looking on any other north or starre, then the land it self which appeared before vs, did row towards it so lustily, that at the Sunneset we were so neare, as we made full account to arriue before the night were farre spent. But by reason that the Moone did not shine, and the night was very darke, and that wee knew not where wee were, wee did not hold it the best course to approch the shore too neare; yet others there were that thought it conuenient and good, desiring that wee should make to it, although we ran the boate on the rocks, and farre from any dwelling; for by doing so, we should free our selues from the feare which we ought of reason to haue, lest there should bee vp and downe on that coast any Frigats of the Pyrates of Tetuan, which are wont to leaue Barbarie ouer night, and be on the coast of Spaine ere morning, and ordinarily make their booty and turne to their supper againe to Barbarie the night following: but of the contrary opinions that which was followed was, that wee should draw neare the land by little and little, and that if the quietnesse of the Sea would permit it, wee should take land where wee might best and most commodiously doe it. This was done, and a little before midnight we arriued to the foot of a high and monstrous mountaine, which was not altogether so neare to the Sea, but that it did grant a litle patch of ground, whereon we might commodiously disembarke. Wherefore we ranne our selues on the sands, and came all a land and kissed the earth, and with teares of most ioyfull content and delight, gaue thankes vnto our Lord God, for the incompatable fauours which hee had done vs in our voyage: then tooke we out our vittailes from the boate, and drew it selfe vp on the shore, and ascended a great part of the mountaine,
 for although we were in that place, yet durst wee not asture our selues, nor did throughly beleeue that it was a Christian Country whereon we did treade.
The day breaking somewhat slower then I could haue wished it; we ascended the mountaine wholly, to see whether we might discouer any dwelling, or sheepfoulds from thence; but although wee extended our sight vnto euery quarter, yet could we neither descry dwelling, person, path, nor high way: yet did we resolue notwithstanding to enter into the land, seeing that wee could not choose but discouer ere long some body who might giue vs notice of the place where we were: and that which afflicted me most of all was, to see Zoraida goe a foote through those rugged places; for although I did sometimes carry her on my shoulders, yet did the toile I tooke more weary her, then the repose shee got could ease her; and therefore would neuer after the first time suffer me to take that paines againe, and so shee went euer after a foot with great patience, and tokens of ioy, I holding her still by the hand; and hauing trauailed little lesse then a quarter of a league, we heard the noise of a little bell, an infallible argument that neare at hand there was some cattle; whereupon all of vs looking very wistly to see whether any body appeared, wee might perceiue vnder a Corke-tree a young sheep-heard, who very quietly and carelesly was caruing of a sticke with a knife: we called to him, and he leaped vp lightly on foote, and (as we afterwards learned) the first that he got sight of, were the renegate and Zoraida whom he seeing apparelled in the Morisco habit, thought that all the people of Barbarie had been at his heeles, and therefore running very swiftly into the wood, he cryed all along with maruailous lowdnesse, Moores, Moores, are in the land; Moores, Moores, arme, arme. These outcryes strucke vs a new into a great perplexity, and scarce did wee know what vve should doe: but considering how the sheep-heards alarme would cause all the Country to rise vp, and that the horsemen that kept the coast would presently come to see
 vvhat it was; we all agreed that the renegate should put off his Turkish attyre, and put on a captiues caffocke, which one of the company gaue vnto him forthwith, although the giuer remained after in his shirt, and thus committing the affaire vnto almighty God, we followed on by the same way, which we saw the sheep-heard had taken, alwaies expecting when the horsemen of the coast would fall vpon vs, and we were not deceiued in our expectation, for within two houres after, hauing issued out of those woods into a plaine, we discouered about some fifty horsemen which came running towards vs as swiftly as their horses could driue, and hauing perceiued them we stood still, and stayed vntill they came to vs, and saw, in steed of the Moores, they sought for, so many poore Christians, and remayned somewhat ashamed thereat: and one of them demaunded whether we were the occasion that a sheep-heard had giuen the alarme: yes, quoth I, and as I was about to informe what I was, and of all our aduenture, and from whence we came; one of the Christians that came with vs, did take notice of the horseman who had spoken vnto vs, and so interrupting my speech, he said. Sirs let God be praised which hath brought vs to so good a place as this is, for if I be not deceiued the earth which we treade is of Veley Malaga; and if the yeares of my captiuity haue not confounded my memory, you likewise Sir that demaunds vvhat we be, are Peter of Bustamonte, mine Vncle. As soone as euer the Christian captiue had spoken those wordes, the horseman leaping of his horse ranne and embraced him, saying, O nephew as deare to me as my soule and life, now I doe know thee very well, and many a day since haue I wept for thee, thinking thou vvast dead, and so hath my sister thy mother, and all the rest of thy friends which doe liue yet, and God hath been pleased to preserue their liues, that they may inioy the pleasure to behold thee. We knew very vvell that thou vvast in Argiers, and by the signes and tokens of thy clothes, and that of all the rest here of thy companions, I surmise that your escape hath beene miraculous: it was so, replyed
 the Captiue, and vve shall haue time, I hope, to recount vnto you the manner.
As soone as the horsemen had vnderstood, that vve vvere Christian captiues, they allighted of their horses, and euery one of them inuited vs to mount vpon his owne, to carry vs to the Citty of Veley Malaga, vvhich vvas yet a league and a halfe from that place, and some of them vvent to the place vvhere vve had left the boate, to bring it to the Citty; whom vve informed first of the place where it lay; others did mount vs vp a horsebacke behind themselues, and Zoraida rode behind the captiues Vncle: all the people issued to receiue vs being premonished of our arriuall by some one that had ridden before. They did not wonder to see Captiues freed, nor Moores captiued there, being an ordinary thing in those parts, but that whereat they wondred, was the surpassing beauty of Zoraida, which at that season and instant vvas in her prime, as vvell through the warmth shee had gotten by her trauaile, as also through the ioy she conceiued to see her selfe in Christian lands, secure from all feare of being surprised or lost: and these things called out to her face such colours, as if it be not that affection might then haue deceiued mee, I durst auer, that a more beautifull then shee was, the world could not affoord, at least among those which I had euer beheld.
We went directly to the Church to giue thanks vnto almighty God, for the benefit receiued, and as soone as Zoraida entred into it, shee said there were faces in it, that resembled very much that of Lela Marien: we told her that they were her images, and the renegate as well as the breuitie of the time permitted, instructed her what they signified, to the end shee should doe them reuerence, as if euery one of them were truly that same Lela Marien, which had spoken vnto her. She who hath a very good vnderstanding, and an easie and cleare conceit, comprehended presently all that was told vnto her concerning Images: from thence they carryed vs, and deuided vs among different houses of the Citty, but the
 Christian that came with vs carryed the Renegate, Zoraida, and me to the house of his parents, which were indifferently accommodated, and stored with the goods of Fortune, and did entertaine me with as great loue and kindnesse, as if I were their owne sonne. We remayned sixe dayes in Veley, in which time the renegate hauing made an information of all that which might concerne him, hee went to the Citty of Granada to be reconciled, by the holy Inquisitions meanes, to the bosome of our holy Mother the Church. The rest of the freed captiues tooke euery one the way that he pleased, and Zoraida and I remained behinde, with those Duckats only which the Frenchmans curtesie was pleased to bestow on Zoraida, and with part of that summe I bought her this beast whereon shee rides: I my selfe seruing her hitherto as her Father and her Squire, and not as her Spouse, we trauaile with intention to see whether my father be yet liuing, or any of my brothers haue had more prosperous hap then my selfe, although seeing that heauen hath made mee Zoraidas consort, mee thinkes no other good Fortune could arriue were it neuer so great, that I would hold in so high estimation. The patience wherewithall shee beares the incommodities vsually annext vnto pouerty, and the desires shee shewes to become a Christian, is such and so great, as it strikes mee into an admiration, and doth moue mee to serue her all the dayes of my life: although that the delight which I take to see my selfe hers, and shee mine, is oftimes interrupted and almost dissolued by the feare which I haue, that I shall not finde in mine owne Countrey some little corner wherein I may entertayne her; and that time and death haue wrought such alteration in the goods and liues of my fathers and brothers, as I shall scarce finde any one at home that knowes mee. I haue no more good Sirs, to tell you of my liues Historie, then which whether it be pleasing, and rare, or no, your cleare conceipts are to iudge: as for my selfe I dare say, that if it had beene possible, I would haue told it with more breuitie; fearing it might bee tedious
 vnto you, I purposely omitted many delightfull circumstances thereof.


CHAP. XV.

Which speakes of that which after befell in the Inne; and of sundry other things worthy to be knowne,

THe Captiue hauing said this, held his peace, and Don Fernando replyed to him thus. Truly Captaine, the manner wherewithall you haue recounted this maruailous successe hath beene such, as it may be parrangond to the nouelty and strangenesse of the euent it self, and so great is the delight we haue taken in the hearing therof, as I doe beleeue, that although wee had spent the time from hence till to morrow in listning to it, yet should we be glad to heare it told ouer once againe, and saying so, Cardenio, and all the rest did offer themselues and their meanes to his seruice as much as lay in them with so cordiall and friendly words, as the Captaine remained throughly satisfied with their good wits: but specially Don Fernando offered, that if hee would returne with him hee would cause the Marquesse his brother to be Zoraida her Godfather in Baptisme, and that hee for his part, would so accommodate him with all things necessary, as he might enter into the towne, with the decency and authority due to his person. The Captiue did gratifie his large offers very curteously, but would not accept any of them at that time: by this the night drew on, and about the fall thereof, there arriued at the Inne a coatch with some men a horsebacke, and asked for lodging: to whom the Hostesse answered, that in all the Inne there was not a spanne free. The number of her guests was already so many: well, although that be so, quoth one of the horsemen that had entred, yet must there be a place found for Master
 Iustice, who comes in this Coach. At this name, the Hostesse was affraid, and said, Sir the misfortune is, that I haue no beds, but if Master Iustice brings one with him, as it is probable he doth, let him enter in boldly, and I and my husband will leaue our owne chamber to accommodate his worship. So be it, quoth the Squire, and by this time allighted out of the Coach, a man whose attyre did presently denote his dignity and office; for his long gowne and his great and large sleeues did shew that he was a Iudge, as the Seruingman affirmed. He led a young maiden by the hand, of about some sixteene yeares old, apparelled in riding attyre, but she was therewithall of so disposed, beautifull, and chearfull a countenance, as her presence did strike them all into admiration: so as if they had not seene Dorotea, Luscinda, and Zoraida, which were then in the Inne, they would hardly haue beleeued that this Damzels beauty might any where haue beene matched.
Don-Quixote was present at the Iudges, and the Gentlewomans entry, and so, as soone as he had seene him, he said, Sir you may boldly enter, and take your ease in this Castle, which although it be but little, and ill accommodated, yet there is no narrownesse nor discommodity in the world, but makes place for armes, and learning, and specially if the armes and letters bring beauty for their guide and leader, as your learning doth, conducted by this louely Damzell, to whom ought not only Castles to open and manifest themselues, but also rocks to part and deuide their cliffes, and mountaines to bow their ambitious crests, to giue and make her a lodging. Enter therefore, I say, Worshipfull Sir, into this Paradise, wherein you shall finde Starres and Sunnes, to accompany this skie which you bring in your company. Here shall you find armes in their height, and beauty in her prime. The Iudge maruailed greatly at Don-Quixots speech, whom he began to behold very earnestly, and wondered no lesse at his shape then at his words, and knowing not what answere he might returne him, he was diuerted on the other side, by
 the suddaine approch of the three Ladies Luscinda, Dorotea, and Zoraida, which stood before him, for hauing heard of the arriuall of new guests, and also being informed by the Hostesse of the young Ladies beauty, they were come forth to see, and entertaine her. But Don Fernando, Cardenio, and the Curate, did giue him more compleate and courtly entertainment then the rusty Knight. In effect the Iudge was maruailously amazed at that which hee sawe and heard in that Inne; and the faire guests thereof, bad the beautifull maiden welcome. The Iudge perceiued very well, that the guests of the Inne were all men of account, but Don-Quixotes feature visage, and behauiour, did set him out of all byas, being not able to coniecture what he might be: and after some courtlike intercourses passed, and the commodities of the Inne examined, they all agreed againe, as they had done before, that all the women should enter into Don-Quixotes roome, and the men remaine without in their guarde. And so the Iudge was content that the Damzel, who was his daughter, should also goe with those Ladies, which shee did with a very good will: and with a part of the Inkeepers narrow bed, and halfe of that which the Iudge had brought with him, they made shift to passe ouer that night the best they could.
The Captiue, who from the instant that he had first seene the Iudge, did greatly suspect that he was his brother, demaunded of one of his seruants, how he was called, and where he was borne. The other answered, how he was called the Licenciat Iohn Perez of Viedma, and as hee had heard, hee was borne in a Village of the mountaines of Leon. With this relation and the rest that he had noted, he finally confirmed his opinion that it was the brother, who following his fathers aduice, had dedicated himselfe to his studies, and full of ioy and contentment, calling a side Don Fernando, Cardenio, and the Curate, he certified them of all that passed, and that the Iudge was his brother. The seruingman told him likewise how he went towards the Indies, where he had his place and office in the Courts of Mexico: and also that the
 young Gentlewoman was his daughter, of whose birth her mother had died, and he euer after remained a widdower, and very rich, by her dowry and portion that shee had left to her daughter: he demanded of them aduice how he might discouer himselfe to his brother, or first know, whether after he had detected himselfe, he would receiue him with a good countenance and affection, and not be ashamed to acknowledge him for his brother, seeing him in so poore an estate: leaue the triall of that experience to mee, quoth the Curate, and the rather because there is no occasion why you Sir Captaine should not be kindly entertained by him: for the prudence, worths, and good countenance of your brother, giue manifest tokens that he is nothing arrogant. For all that said the Captaine, I would not make my selfe knowen on the suddaine, but would vse some pretty ambages to bring him acquainted with me: I say vnto you, quoth the Curate, that I will trace the matter in such sort, as we all wil rest satisfied.
Supper was by this made ready, and all of them sate down to the table, the Captiue excepted and Ladies, which supped together within the roome: and about the midst of supper the Curate said, Master Iustice, I haue had in times past a Comrades of your very surname in Constantinople, where I was sometime Captiue, who was one of the most valiant Souldiers and Captaines that might be found among all the Spanish foote: but he was as vnfortunate as he was valorous and resolute. And how was that Captaine called good Sir, quoth the Iudge? his name was, replyed Master Curate, Ruy Perez of Viedma, and he was borne in a Village of the mountaines of Leon; and he recounted vnto me an occurrence hapned betweene his father, him, and his other brethren, which if I had not beene told by a man of such credit and reputation as he was, I would haue esteemed for one of these fables which old Wiues are wont to rehearse by the fire side in winter: for hee said to me that his father had deuided his goods among his three sons, and gaue them withall certaine precepts, better then those of Cato; and I know
 well, that the choise which he made to follow the warre, had such happy successe, as within a few yeares, through his forwardnesse and valour, without the helpe of any other arme, he was aduanced to a company of foot, and made a Captain, and was in the way and course of becomming one day a Collonell, but fortune was contrary to him, for euen there, where he was most to expect her fauour, he lost it, with the losse of his liberty, in that most happy iourney wherein so many recouered it, to wit, in the battell of Lepanto. I lost mine in Goleta, and after by different successe wee became companions in Constantinople, from whence we went to Argiers, where did befall him one of the most notable aduentures that euer hapned in the world; and there the Curate with succinct breuity recounted all that had happened betweene the Captaine and Zorayda: to all which the Iudge was so attentiue, as in all his life he neuer listned to any cause so attentiuely, as then. And the Curate onely arriued to the point wherein the Frenchmen spoiled the Christians that came in the Barke, and the necessity wherein his companion and the beautifull Zorayda remained: of whom he had not learned any thing after, nor knew not what became of them or whether they came into Spaine, or were caried away by the Frenchmen to Fraunce.
The Captaine stood listening somewhat a loose off to all the Curates wordes, and noted the while the motions and gestures of his brother; who seeing that the Curate had now made an end of his speech, breathing forth a great sigh, and his eyes being filled with teares, he said: O Sir, if you had known the newes which you haue told me, and how neerely they touch me in some points, whereby I am constrained to manifest these teares which violently breake forth in despight of my discretion, and calling, you would hold me excused for this excesse. That Captaine of whom you spoke, is my eldest brother, who, as one stronger, and of more noble thoughts then I or my younger brother, made election of the honourable military calling; one of the three estates
 which our father proposed to vs, euen as your Comrade informed you, when as you thought he related a fable. I followed my booke, by which God and my diligence raised me to the state you see: my younger brother is in Peru, and with that which he hath sent to my father and my selfe, hath bountifully recompenced the portion he caried, and giuen to him sufficient to satisfie his liberall disposition, and to me, wherewithall to continue my studies, with the decensie and authority needfull to aduance me to the ranke which now I possesse. My father liues yet, but dying through desire to learne somewhat of his eldest sonne, and doth daily importune God with incessant prayers, that death may not shut his eyes vntill he may once againe see him aliue. I only maruell not a little, considering his discretion, that among all his labours, afflictions, or prosperous successes, he hath beene so carelesse in giuing his father notice of his proceedings: for if eyther he, or any one of vs had knowne of his captiuity, he should not haue needed to expect the miracle of the Cane for his ransome. But that which troubles me most of all, is, to thinke whether these Frenchmen haue restored him againe to libertie, or else slaine him, that they might conceale their robberie the better: all which will be an occasion to me to prosecute my voyage, not with the ioy wherewithall I beganne it, but rather with melancholy and sorrow. O deere brother, I would I might know now where thou art, that I my selfe might goe and search thee out, and free thee from thy paines, although it were with the hazard of mine owne. O who is he that could carrie newes to our olde father, that thou wert but aliue, although thou wert hidden in the most abstruse dungeons of Barbarie; for his riches, my brothers and mine would fetch thee from thence. O beautifull and bountifull Zorayda, who might be able to recompence thee for the good thou hast done to my brother? How happy were he that might be present at thy spirituall birth and baptisme, and at thy nuptials, which would be so gratefull to vs all? These and many other such wordes did the
 Iudge deliuer, so full of compassion for the newes that he had receiued of his brother, as all that heard him kept him company, in shewing signes of compassion for his sorrow.
The Curate therfore perceiuing the happy successe wherto his designe and the Captaines desire had sorted, would hold the company sad no longer, and therefore arising from the table, and entring into the roome wherin Zorayda was, he tooke her by the hand, and after her followed Luscinda, Dorotea, and the Iudge his daughter. The Captaine stood still to see what the Curate would doe; who taking him fast by the other hand matched ouer with them both towards the Iudge and the other Gentlemen, and said: Suppresse your teares Master Iustice, and glut your desire with all that good which it may desire, seeing you haue here before you your good brother, and your louing sister in law: this man whom you view here is the Captaine Viedma, and this the beautifull Moore, which hath done so much for him. The Frenchmen which I told you of, haue reduced them to the pouerty you see, to the end that you may shew the liberality of your noble brest. Then did the Captaine draw neere to embrace his brother, but he held him off a while with his arms, to note whether it was he or no; but when he once knew him, he embraced him so louingly, and with such aboundance of teares, as did attract the like from all the beholders. The wordes that the brothers spoke one to another, or the feeling affection which they shewed, can hardly be conceiued, and therfore much lesse written by any one whatsoeuer. There they did briefly recount the one to the other their successes: there did they shevv the true loue and affection of brothers in his prime: there did the Iudge embrace Zorayda: there he made her an offer of all that was his: there did hee also cause his daughter to embrace her: there the beautifull Christian, and the most beautiful Moore renued the teares of them al: there Don-Quixote was attentiue, without speaking a word, pondering of these rare occurrences, and attributing them to the Chimeras, which he imagined to be incident to Chiualrie:
 and there they agreed that the Captaine and Zorayda should returne with their brother to Siuill, and thence aduise their father of his finding and liberty, that he as well as he might should come to Siuill to the baptisme and marriage of Zorayda, because the Iudge could not possibly return, or discontinue his iourney, in respect that the Indian Fleete was to depart within a moneth from Siuill towards New Spaine.
Euery one in conclusion, was ioyful and glad at the captiues good successe; and two parts of the night being vvelnigh spent, they all agreed to repose themselues a while. Don-Quixote offered himselfe to watch and guard the Castle whilst they slept, lest they should be assaulted by some Giant or other miscreant, desirous to robbe the great treasure of beautie that was therein immured and kept. Those that knew him rendred vnto him infinite thankes: and withall informed the Iudge of his extrauagant humour, whereat hee was not a little recreated: onely Sancho Panca did fret, because they went so slowly to sleepe, and he alone was best accommodated of them all, by lying downe on his beasts furniture, vvhich cost him deerely, as shall be after recounted. The Ladies being vvithdrawne into their chamber, and euery one laying himselfe downe vvhere best he might, Don-Quixote sallied out of the Inne, to be Centinell of the Castle as he had promised. And a little before day it hapned, that so sweete and tunable a voyce touched the Ladies eares, as it obliged them all to listen vnto it very attentiuely, but chiefly Dorotea, who first awaked, and by whose side the yong Gentlevvoman Donna Clara of Viedma (for so the Iudges daughter was called) slept. None of them could imagine who it vvas that sung so vvell without the helpe of any instrument: sometimes it seemed that he sung in the yard, others that it was in the stable: and being thus in suspence Cardenio came to the chamber dore, and said, Whosoeuer is not asleepe, let them giue eare, and they shall heare the voice of a Lackey that so chants, as it likewise inchants. Sir, quoth Dorotea, vve heare him very vvell: vvith this Cardenio departed,
 and Dorotea vsing all the attention possible, heard that his song vvas this following.


CHAP. XVI.

Wherin is recounted the History of the Lackey, with other strange aduentures befalne in the Inne.


I Am a Mariner to loue,
Which in his depths profound
Still sailes, and yet no hope can proue
Of comming aye to the ground.


I following go, a glistring starre,
Which I aloose descry,
Much more resplendent, then those are
That Palinure did spye:


I know not where my course to bend,
And so confusedly,
To see it onely I pretend
Carefull and carelesly.


Her too impertinent regard,
And too much modestie,
The clouds are which mine eyes haue bard
From their deserued fee.


O cleere and soule reuiuing star,
Whose sight doth trie my trust,
If thou thy light from me debar,
Instantly die I must.

The Singer arriuing to this point of his song, Dorotea imagined that it would not be amisse to let Donna Clara heare so excellent a voyce, and therfore she iogged her a little on the one and other side, vntill she had awaked her, and then said, Pardon me childe for thus interrupting your sweete repose, seeing I doe it to the end you may ioy, by hearing one
 of the best voyces that perhaps you euer heard in your life. Clara awaked at the first drowsily, and did not well vnderstand what Dorotea said, and therefore demaunding of her what she said, she told it her againe; wherupon Donna Clara was also attentiue: but scarce had she heard two verses repeated by the early Musitian, when a maruellous trembling inuaded her, euen as if she had then suffered the grieuous fit of a quartane Ague. Wherefore imbracing Dorotea very straightly, she said, Alas deere Ladie, why did you awake me, seeing the greatest hap that fortune could in this instant haue giuen me, was, to haue mine eyes and eares so shut, as I might neither see, nor heare that vnfortunate Musitian: what is that you say childe, quoth Dorotea, did you not heare one say that the Musitian is but a horseboy? Hee is no horseboy, quoth Clara, but a Lord of many townes; and he that hath such firme possession of my soule, as if hee himselfe will not reiect it, he shall neuer be depriued of the dominion thereof. Dorotea greatly wondred at the passionate wordes of the young gyrle, whereby it seemed to her that she far surpassed the discretion which so tender yeares did promise: and therefore she replied to her, saying, You speake so obscurely Lady Clara, as I cannot vnderstand you, expound your selfe more cleerly, and tel me what is that you say of soules, and townes, and of this Musitian, whose voyce hath altred you so much: but doe not say anything to me now; for I would not lose, by listening to your disgusts, the pleasure I take to heare him sing, for me thinkes he resumes his musicke with new verses, and in another tune: in a good houre, quoth Donna Clara; and then because shee her selfe would not heare him, she stopt her eares with her fingers; whereat Dorotea did also maruell: but being attentiue to the Musicke, she heard the Lackey prosecute his song in this manner.

O Sweet and constant hope,
That break'st impossibilities and bryars,

And firmely run'st the scope
Which thou thy selfe dost forge to thy desires.
Be not dismaide to see
At eur'y step thy selfe, nigh death to bee.


Sluggards doe not deserue
The glorie of triumphs or victorie,
Good hap doth neuer serue
Those, which resist not Fortune manfully,
But weakely fall to ground:
And in soft slouth, then senses all confound.


That loue his glories hold
At a high rate, it reason is and iust:
No precious stones nor gold
May be at all compared with loues gust.
And tis a thing most cleare:
Nothing is worth esteeme that cost not deare.


An amarous persistance
Obtaineth oftimes things impossible
And so though I resistance
Finde of my soules desires, in her sternewill;
I hope, time shall be giuen
When I from earth may rech her glorious heauen.

Heere the voyce ended, and Donna Claras sighes began; all which inflamed Doroteas desire to know the cause of so sweete a song, and so sad a plaint. And therefore she eftsoones required her, to tell her now what she was about to haue said before. Then Clara timerous, lest Luscinda should ouerheare her, imbracing Dorotea very neerely, laid her mouth so close to Doroteas eare, as she might speake securely without being vnderstood by any other, and said; he that sings is, deere Ladie, a Gentlemans sonne of the Kingdome of Aragon, whose father is Lord of two townes, and dwelled right before my fathers house at the Court, and although the windowes of our house were in Winter couered with seare cloth, and in Sommer with lattice, I know not
 how it happened, but this Gentleman, who went then to the schole espied me, and whether it was at the Church, or else where, I am not certaine. Finally, he fell in loue with mee, and did acquite me with his affection from his owne windowes that were opposite to mine, with so many tokens and such abundance of teares, as I most forceably beleeued, and also affected him, without knowing how much he loued me among the signes that he would make me one was to ioyne the one hand to the other, giuing me thereby to vnderstand that he would marry me: and although I would be very glad that it might be so; yet as one alone, and without a mother, I knew not to who^ I might co^municate the affaire, and did therfore let it rest without affording him any other fauour, vnlesse it were when my father and his were gone abroad, by lifting vp the lattice or Searecloth only a little, and permitting him to be hold me; for vvhich fauor he vvould shew such signes of ioy, as a man vvould deeme him to be rest of his vvits. The time of my fathers departure arriuing, and he hering of it, but not from me (for I could neuer tell it to him) he fell sicke, as farre as I could vnderstand for griefe, and therefore I could neuer see him all the day of our departure, to bid him farevvell at least vvith mine eyes: but after me had trauelled tvvo daies iust as vve entred into an Inne in a village a daies iourney from hence, I saw him at the lodging doore, apparrelled so properly like a Lacky, as if I had not borne about me his purtrature in my foule, it had bene impossible to know him. I knew him, and wondred, and was glad withall; and he beheld me vnwitting my father, from whose presence he stil hides himselfe when he crosses the waies before me as we trauell, or after we arriue at any Inne. And because that I know what he is, and do consider the paine hee takes by comming thus a foote for my sake, and that with so great toyle, I die for sorrow, and where he puts his feete I also put mine eyes. I know not vvith vvhat intention he comes, nor how he could possibly thus escape from his father, vvho loues him beyond measure, both because he hath none other hayre, and because
 the young Gentleman also deserues it, as you vvill perceiue vvhen you see him: and I dare affirme besides, that all that vvhich he saies he composes extempore, and vvithout any studie; for I haue heard that he is a fine student, and a great Poet. And euery time that I see him, or do heare him sing, I start and tremble like an Aspen leafe, for feare that my father should know him, and thereby come to haue notice of our mutuall affections. I haue neuer spoken one word to him in my life, and yet I do neuerthelesse loue him so much as without him I shall not be able to liue. And this is all, deere Ladie, that I am able to say vnto you of the Musician whose voyce hath pleased you so well, as by it alone you might coniecture, that he is not a horse-boy as you said, but rather a Lord of soules, and townes, as I affirmed.
Speake no more Ladie Clara (quoth Dorotea, at that season kissing her a thousand times:) speake no more I say, but haue patience vntill it be day-light; for I hope in God so to direct your affaires, as that they shall haue the fortunate successe, that so honest beginning deserue. Alas Madam, quoth Donna Clara, what end may be expected, seeing his father is so noble and rich, as he would scarce deeme me worthy to be his sonnes seruant, how much lesse his spouse? and for mee to marry my selfe vnknowne to my father, I would not doe it for all the world. I desire no other thing, but that the young Gentleman would returne home againe, and leaue me alone; perhaps, by not seeing him, and the great distance of the way which we are to trauell, my paine which now so much presseth me, will be somewhat attained, although I dare say, that this remedie which now I haue imagined would auaile me but little: for I know not whence with the vengeance, or by what way this affection which I beare him got into me, seeing both I and he are so young as we be, for I beleeue we are much of an age, and I am not yet full sixteene; nor shall be as my father saies, vntil Michaelmas next. Dorotea could not contain her laughter, hearing how childishly Donna Clara spoke, to whom she said, Lady let vs repose
 againe, and sleepe that little part of the night which remaines, and when God sends day light we will prosper, or my hands shall faile me: with this they held their peace, and all the Inne was drowned in profound silence; only the Inkeepers daughter, and Maritornes were not a sleepe, but knowing very wel Don-Quixotes peccant humor, and that he was armed and on horsebacke without the Inne keeping guard, both of them consorted together, and agreed to be someway merry with him, or at least to passe ouer some time, in hearing him speake rauingly.
It is therefore to be vnderstood that there was not in all the Inne any window, which looked out into the field, but one hole in a barne, out of which they were wont to cast their straw: to this hole came the two demy-damzels, and saw Don-Quixote mounted and leaning on his Iauelin, and breathing forth, euer and anone, so dolefull and deepe sighes as it seemed his soule was plucked away by euery one of them: and they noted besides how he said with a soft and a morous voice: O my Ladie Dulcinea of Toboso, the sonne of all beauty, the end and quintessence of discretion, the treasury of sweet countenance and carriage, the storehouse of honesty: and finally the Idea of all that which is profitable, modest, or delightfull in the world, and what might thy Ladiship be doing at this present? Hast thou perhaps thy mind now vpon thy captiue knight, that most wittingly exposeth himselfe to so many dangers for thy sake, giue vnto me tidings of her, O thou Luminary of the three faces, peraduenture thou dost now with enuy enough behold her, either walking through some gallery of her sumptuous Pallaces, or leaning on some bay window and thinking how (sauing her honour and greatnesse) she shall mitigate, and asswage the torture which this mine oppressed hart indures for her loue, what glory she shall giue for my paines, what quiet to my cares, what life to my death, and what guerdon to my seruices. And thou sonne, which art as I beleeue, by this time sadling of thy horses to get away earely, and go out to see my
 Mistresse, I request thee as soone as thou shall see her to salute her in my behalfe, but beware that when thou lookest on her, and dost greet her, that thou doe not kisse her on the face, for if thou dost I wil become more iealous of thee, then euer thou wast of the swift ingrate which made thee to run and sweat so much through the plaines of Thessalia, or the brinks of Peneo for I haue forgotten through which of them thou rannest so iealous and inamored. To this point arriued Don-Quixote, whe^ the Inkeepers daughter began to cal him softly vnto her and say; Sir Knight approach a little hitherward if you please. At which voice Don-Quixote turned his head and saw by the light of the Moone which shined then very clearely, that hee was called too from the hole, which he accounted to be a faire window ful of yron barres, and those costly gylded with gold, well befitting so rich a Castle as he imagined that Inne to be, and presently in a moment he forged to his owne fancie, that once againe as shee had done before, the beautifull Damzell daughter to the Ladie of that Castle, ouercome by his loue, did returne to solicite him: and with this thought, because he would not shew himselfe discourteous and vngratefull, he turned Rozanante about, and came ouer to the hole, and then hauing beheld the two wench hee said: I take pitie on you beautiful Lady, that you haue placed your amorous thoughts in a place whence it is not possible* to haue any correspondence answerable to the desert of your high worth and beauty, whereof you are in no sort to co^demne this miserable knight errant, whom loue hath wholy dishabled to surrender his will to be any other then to her, whom at the first sight he made absolute mistresse of his soule. Pardon me therefore good Ladie and retire your selfe to your chamber, and make me not, by any further insinuation of your desires, more vnthankfull and discourteous then I would be: and if through the loue that you beare me, you find in me any other thing wherewethall I may serue and pleasure you, so that it be not loue it selfe, demaund it boldly, for I do sweare
 vnto you by mine absence yet sweetest enemy, to bestow it vpon you incontinently, yea though it be a loke of Medusas haires, which are all of Snakes, or the very Sunne beames inclosed in a violl of glasse.
My Ladie needes none of those things Sir Knight answered Maritornes: what doth shee then want discreet Matron, quoth Don-Quixote? only one of your faire hands, said Maritornes, that therewithall shee may disburden her selfe of some part of those violent desires, which compelled her to come to this window, with so great danger of her honour; for if her Lord and Father knew of her comming, the least slice he would take of her should bee at the least an eare. I would faine once see that, quoth Don-Quixote, but I am sure he will beware how he doe it, if he haue no list to make the most disastrous end that euer father made in this world, for hauing laied violent hands on the delicate limmes of his amorous daughter. Maritornes verily perswaded her selfe, that Don-Quixote would giue vp his hand as he was requested; and hauing already contriued in her minde what shee would doe, descended with all hast from the hole, and going into the stable, fetched out Sancho Pancas his Asses halter, and returned againe with very great speede, iust as Don-Quixote (standing vp on Rozinantes saddle, that hee might the better reach the barred windowes, whereat he imagined the wounded Damzel remained) did, stretching vp his hand, say vnto her. Hold Lady the hand, or as I may better say, the executioner of earthly miscreants: hold I say that hand, which no other woman euer touched before, not euen shee her selfe that hath intyre possession of my whole body, nor doe I giue it to you, to the end you should kisse it; but that you may behold the contexture of the sinnewes, the knitting of the muscles, and the spaciosity and breadth of the veines, whereby you may collect how great ought the force of that arme to be whereunto such a hand is knit. We shall see that presently, quoth Maritornes, and then making a running knot on the halter, shee cast it on the wrest of his hand, and
 then descending from the hole, shee tyed the other end of the halter very fast to the locke of the barne dore. Don-Quixote feeling the roughnesse of the halter about his wrest, said: It rather seemes that you grate my hand, then that you cherish it: but yet I pray you, not to handle it so roughly, seeing it is in no fault of the euill which my will doth vnto you: nor is it comly that you should reuenge or disburden the whole bulke of your indignation on so small a part: remember that those which loue well, doe not take so cruell reuenge. But no body gaue eare to these wordes of Don-Quixote: for as soone as Maritornes had tyed him, shee and the other almost burst for laughter, ranne away, and left him tyed in such manner, as it was impossible for him to loose himselfe.
He stood as we haue recounted, on Rozinante his saddle, hauing all his arme thrust in at the hole, and fastned by the wrest to the locke: and was in very great doubt and feare, that if Rozinante budged neuer so little on any side hee should fall and hang by the arme; and therefore he durst not once vse the least motion of the world, although he might well haue expected from Rozinantes patience, and mild spirit, that if he were suffered, he would stand still a whole age without stirring himselfe. In fine, Don-Quixote seeing him selfe tyed, and that the Ladies were departed, began straight to imagine that all that had beene done by way of inchauntment, as the last time, when in the very fame Castle the inchanted Moore (the Carrier) had so fairely belaboured him: and then to himselfe did he execrate his own want of discretion and discourse, seeing that hauing escaped out of that castle so euill dight the first time, he would after aduenture to enter into it the second: for it was generally obserued by Knights errant, that when they had once tried an aduenture, and could not finish it, it was a token that it was not reserued for them, but for some other; and therefore would neuer proue it againe. Yet for all this he drew forward his arme, to see if he might deliuer himselfe; but he was so well bound, as all his
 indeauours proued vaine. It is true that he drew it very warily, least Rozinante should stirre: and although hee would faine haue set, and setled himselfe in the saddle, yet could he doe no other but stand, or leaue the arme behinde. There was many a wish for Amadis his sword, against which no inchauntment whatsoeuer could preuaile: there succeeded the malediction of his fates; there the exaggerating of the want that the world should haue of his presence, all the while hee aboade inchaunted (as he infallibly beleeued he was) in that place. There he a new remembred his beloued Lady Dulcinea of Toboso: There did hee call oft enough on his good Squire Sancho Panca, who intombed in the bowels of sleep, and stretched along on the pannell of his Asse, did dreame, at that instant, but little of the mother that bore him. There he inuoked the wisemen Lirgandeo and Aquife, to helpe him: and finally, the morning did also there ouertake him, so full of despaire and confusion, as hee roared like a Bull; for hee had no hope that by day light any cure could bee found for his care, which he deemed would be euerlasting, because he fully accompted himselfe inchaunted; and was the more induced to thinke so, because he saw that Rozinante did not moue little nor much, and therefore he supposed, that both he and his horse should abide in that state without eating, drinking, or sleeping, vntill that either the malignant influence of the Starres were passed, or some greater inchaunter had disenchaunted him.
But he deceiued himselfe much in his beleefe; for scarce did the day begin to peepe, when there arriued foure horsemen to the Inne dore very well appointed, and hauing their snaphaunces banging at the pomell of their saddles. They called at the Inne dore (which yet stood shut) and knocked very hard; which being perceiued by Don-Quixote from the place where he stood Centinel, he said with a very lowd, and arrogant voice. Knights or Squires, or whatsoeuer else yee be, you are not to knocke any more at the gates of that Castle, seeing it is euident, that at such houres as this, either
 they which are within, doe repose them, or else are not wont to open Fortresses vntill Phoebus hath spread his beames ouer the earth: therefore stand backe, and expect till it bee cleare day, and then we will see whether it be iust or no that they open their gates vnto you. What a Diuell, what Castle or Fortresse is this, quoth one of them, that it should bind vs to vse all those circumstances? if thou beest the Inkeeper, command that the dore bee opened; for we are trauailers, that will carry no longer then to bait our horses, and away, for we ride in post hast. Doth it seeme to you, Gentlemen, quoth Don-Quixote, that I looke like an Inkeeper? I know not what thou lookest like, answered the other, but well I know that thou speakest madly, in calling this Inne a Castle. It is a Castle, replyed Don-Quixote, yea and that one of the best in this Prouince; and it hath people within it which haue had a Scepter in hand, and a Crowne on their head: It were better said quite contrary, replyed the trauailer, the Scepter on the head, and the Crowne in the hand. But perhaps (and so it may well be) there is some company of players within, who doe very vsually hold the Scepters, and weare those crownes whereof thou talkest: for in such a paultry Inne as this is, and where I heare so little noise, I cannot beleeue any one to be lodged worthy to weare a crowne, or beare a scepter. Thou knowest but little of the world, replyed Don-Quixote, seeing thou dost so much ignore the chances that are wont to befall in Chiualry. The fellowes of him that entertained this prolixe dialogue with Don-Quixote, waxed weary to heare them speake idlely so long together, and therefore turned againe to knocke with great fury at the dore, and that in such sort, as they not only waked the In-keeper, but also all the guests: and so he arose to demaund their pleasure.
In the meane while it hapned, that one of the horses whereon they rode drew neare to smell Rozinante, that melancholy and sadly with his eares cast downe, did sustayne without mouing his outstretched Lord: and he being indeed
 of flesh and bloud, although hee resembled a blocke of wood, could not choose but feele it, and turne to smell him againe, who had thus come to cherish and entertaine him: and scarce had he stirred but a thought from thence, when Don-Quixotes feete, that were ioyned, slipt asunder, and tumbling from the saddle, had doubtlesly fallen to the ground, had he not remayned hanging by the arme: a thing that caused him to indure so much paine, as he verily beleeued that either his wrest was a cutting, or his arme a tearing off from his body: and he hung so neare to the ground, as he touched it with the tops of his toes; all which turned to his preiudice; for hauing felt the little which he wanted to the setting of his feete wholly on the earth, hee laboured and drew all that he might to reach it; much like vnto those that get the strapado, with the condition to touch or not to touch; who are themselues a cause to increase their owne torture, by the earnestnesse wherewith they stretch themselues; deceiued by the hope they haue to touch the ground if they can stretch themselues but a little further.


CHAP. XVII.

Wherein are prosecuted the wonderfull aduentures of the Inne.

SO many were the outcryes which Don-Quixote made, as the Inkeeper opened the dore very hastily and affrighted, to see who it was that so roared: and those that stoode without did also the same. Maritornes, whom the cryes had also awaked, imagining streight what it might be, went into the barne, and vnperceiued of any, loosed the halter that sustained Don-Quixote, and forthwith hee fell to the ground in the presence of the Inkeeper and the trauailers; who comming towardes him,
 demaunded the occasion why he did so vnmeasurably roare? he without making any answere tooke off the halter from his wrest, and getting vp, he leaped vpon Rozinante, imbraced his target, set his launce into the wrest, and wheeling about a good part of the field, returned with a halfe gallop, saying: whosoeuer shall dare to affirme that I haue not been with iust title inchaunted: if my Lady the Princesse Micomicona will giue me leaue to doe it, I say that he lyes, and I doe presently challenge him to single combat. The new trauailers were amazed at Don-Quixotes wordes, but the Host remoued that wonder by informing them what hee was, and that they should make no account of his words, for the man was bereft of his wits: then they demanded of the Inkeeper, if there had arriued to his Inne, a young stripling of some fifteene years old or thereabouts, apparelled like a horseboy, and hauing such and such markes and tokens: and then gaue the very signes of Donna Claras louer. The Host made answere that there were so many people in his Inne as hee had taken no notice of him for whom they demaunded. But one of them hauing seene the Coach wherein the Iudge came, said: questionlesly he must be here, for this is the Coach that they say, he hath followed: let therefore one of vs remayne at the dore, and the rest enter to seeke him out. Yea and it will not be from the purpose, if one of vs ride about without the Inne, lest he should make an escape from vs by the wals of the yard. We will doe so, said another of them, and thus two of them entred into the house, one staied at the dore, and the other did compasse the Inne about. The Inkeeper beheld all, but could neuer iudge aright the reason why they vsed all this diligence, although he easily beleeued that they sought for the youth whose marks they had told vnto him.
By this the day was growen cleere, and as well by reason thereof, as through the outcries of Don-Quixote, all the strangers were awake, and did get vp, especially both the Ladies Clara and Dorotea: for the one through feare to haue her louer so neere, and the other with desire to see him, could
 sleepe but very little all that night. Don-Quixote perceiuing that none of the foure trauellers made any account of him, or answered his challenge, was ready to burst with wrath and despite: and if he could any wise haue found that it was tollerated by the statues of Chiuelry, that a Knight errant might haue lawfully vndertaken any enterprise, hauing plight his word and faith, not to attempt any, vntil he had finished that which he had first promised, he would haue assailed them all, and made them maugre their teeth to haue answered him. But because it seemed to him not so expedient nor honourable, to begin any new aduenture vntill he had installed Micomicona in her Kingdome, he was forced to be quiet, expecting to see wherunto the indeauours and diligence of those four trauellers tended: the one whereof found out the youth that hee searched, asleepe by another Lackey, little dreaming that any bodie did looke for him; and much lesse would finde him out thus. The man drew him by the arme, and said, truely Don Lewis, the habite that you weare answers very well your calling, and the bedde whereon you lie, the care and tendernesse wherewith your mother did nurse you: the youth hereat rub'd his drowsie eyes, and beheld very leisurely him that did hold him fast, and knew him forthwith to be one of his fathers seruants; wherat he was so amazed as hee could not speake a word for a great while: and the Scruingman continuing his speech, said, Here is nothing else to be done, Lord Lewes, but that you be patient and depart againe with vs towards home, if you be not pleased to haue your father and my Lord depart out of this world to the other, for no lesse may be expected from the woe wherein he rests for your absence. Why how did my father know, said Don Lewis, that I came this way, and in this habite? A Student, answered the other, to whom you bewrayed your intention, did discouer it, moued thorough the compassion he tooke to heare your fathers lamentations when he found you missing: and so he dispatcht foure of his men in your search, and we are al at your seruice, more
 ioyfull then may be imagined, for the good dispatch wherewithall we shall returne, and carie you to his sight, which do loue you so much. That shall be as I please, or heauen will dispose, said Don Lewis. What would you please, or what should heauen dispose of other then that you agree to returne; for certainly you shall not doe the contrary, nor is it possible you should? All these reasons that passed betweene them both, did the Lackey that lay by Don Lewis here, and arising from thence, he went and tolde all that passed to Don Fernando, Cardenio, and all the rest that were gotten vp. To whom he tolde how the man gaue the title of Don to the boy, and recounted the speech he vsed, and how hee would haue him returne to his fathers house: which the youth refused to doe. Whereupon, and knowing already what a good voyce the heauens had giuen him, they greatly desired to be more particularly informed what he was: and intended also to helpe him, if any violence were offered vnto him, and therefore went vnto the place where he was, and stood contending with his seruant.
Dorotea issued by this out of her chamber, and in her companie Donna Clara, all perplexed. Dorotea calling Cardenio aside, tolde vnto him succinctly all the historie of the Musitian, and Donna Clara: and he rehearsed to her againe all that passed of the Seruingmens arriuall that came in his pursuit, which he did not speake so low, but that Donna Clara ouerheard him, whereat she indured such alteration, as she had falne to the ground, if Dorotea running towards her, had not held her vp. Cardenio intreated Dorotea to returne with the other to her chamber, and he would endeauour to bring the matter to some good passe, which they presently performed. The foure that were come in Don Lewis his search were by this all of them entred into the Inne, and had compassed him about, perswading him that he would, cutting off all delayes, returne to comfort his father. He answered that he could not doe it in any sort, vntill he had finished an aduenture, which imported him no lesse then his life, his honour,
 and his soule. The seruants vrged him then saying, that they would in no sort goe backe without him, and therefore would carrie him home, whether he would or no. That shall not you doe, quoth Don Lewis, if it be not that you carrie me home dead; and in this season all the other Gentlemen were come in to the contention, but chiefly Cardenio, Don Fernando and his Comaradas, the Iudge, the Curate, and the Barber, and Don-Quixote; for now it seemed to him needlesse to guard the Castle any more. Cardenio who knew already the History of the youth, demaunded of those that would carie him away, what reason did moue them to seeke to take that ladde away against his will? We are moued vnto it, answered one of them by this reason that we shall therby saue his fathers life, who for the absence of this Gentleman is in danger to loose it. To this said Don Lewis, it is to no end to make relation of mine affaires here. I am free, and will returne if I please, and if not, no one shall constraine me to doe it perforce. Reason shall constraine you good Sir to doe it, quoth the man, and when that cannot preuaile with you, it shall with vs, to put that in execution for which we become, and which we are bound to do. Let vs know this affaire from the beginning; said the Iudge then to those men: Sir, quoth one of them, who knew him very well, as his Masters next neighbour: Master Iustice doth not your worship know this Gentleman, who is your neighbours sonne, and hath absented himselfe from his fathers house in an habite so vndecent and discrepant from his calling, as you may perceiue? The Iudge beheld him then somewhat more attentiuely, knew him, and imbracing of him, said, What to yes are these Don Lewis, or what cause hath beene of efficacie sufficient to moue you to come away in this manner and attire, which answers your calling so ill? The teares stucke then in the young Gentlemans eyes, and hee could not answere a word to the Iudge, who bad the foure Seruing men appease themselues, for all things should be done to their satisfaction, and then taking Don Lewis apart, he intreated him to tell
 him the occasion of that his departure.
And whilest hee made this and other demaunds to the Gentleman, they heard a great noise at the Inne doore; the cause whereof was, that two guests which had line there that night, seeing all the people busied to learne the cause of the foure horsmens comming, had thought to haue made an escape scot-free, without defraying their expenses: but the Inkeeper who attended his owne affaires with more diligence then other mens did stay them at their going forth, and demaunded his money, vpbraiding their dishonest resolution with such wordes, as moued them to returne him an answere with their fists, which they did so roundly as the poore Host was compelled to raise the crie, and demaund succour. The Hostesse and her daughter could see no man so free from occupation as Don-Quixote, to whom the daughter said, I request you, Sir Knight, by the vertue that God hath giuen you to succour my poore father, whom two badde men are grinding like corne. To this Don-Quixote answered very leisurely, and with great grauity; Beautifull damzell, your petition cannot preuaile at this time, for as much as I am hindred from vndertaking any other aduenture, vntill I haue finished one wherein my promise hath ingaged me; and all that I can now doe in your seruice, is, that which I shall say now vnto you: run vnto your father, and bid him continue and maintaine his conflict manfully, as the best that he may, vntill I demaund license of the Princesse Micomicona to helpe him out of his distresse; for if she will giue it vnto me, you may make ful account that hee is deliuered. Sinner that I am (quoth Maritornes, who was by and heard what he said) before you shall be able to obtaine that license, of which you speake, my Master will be departed to the other world. Worke you so Lady, quoth Don-Quixote, that I may haue the license; for so that I may haue it, it will make no great matter, whether hee be in the other world or no: for euen from thence would I bring him backe againe, in despite of the other world it selfe, if it durst contradict
 me: or at least wise I will take such a reuenge of those that doe send him to the other world, as you shall remaine more then meanely contented: and so without replying any more, he went, and fell on his knees before Dorotea, demanding of her in Knightly and errant phrases, that she would deigne to license him to goe and succour the Constable of that Castle, who was then plunged in a deepe distresse: The Princesse did graunt him leaue very willingly, and he presently buckling on his Target, and laying hand on his sword, ranne to the Inne dore, where yet the two guests stood hansomly tugging the Inkeeper. But as soone as he arriued, he stopt and stood still, although Maritornes and the Hostesse demaunded of him twise or thrise the cause of his restinesse in not aresting her Lord and husband. I stay, quoth Don-Quixote, because according to the lawes of armes, it is not permitted to me to lay hand to my sword against Squire-like men that are not dubbed Knights. But call to me heere my Squire Sancho, for this defence and reuenge concernes him, as his duety. This passed at the Inne dore, where fists and blowes were interchangeably giuen and taken in the best sort, although to the Inkeepers cost, and to the rage and griefe of Maritornes, the Hostesse and her daughter, who were like to runne wood, beholding Don-Quixotes cowardise, and the mischiefe their Master, husband, and father endured. But here let vs leaue them; for there shall not want one to succour him, or if not let him suffer: and all those that wittingly vndertake things beyond their power and force: and let vs turne backeward to heare that which Don-Lewis answered the Iudge, whom we left somewhat apart with him, demaunding the cause of his comming a foot, and and in so base array: to which the youth wringing him hard by the hands, as an argument that some extraordinary griefe pinched his heart, and shedding many teares, answered in this manner.
I know not what else I may tell you deere Sir, but that from the instant that heauen made vs neighbours, and that I
 saw Donna Clara your daughter and my Ladie, I made her com^^^ndresse of my will; and if yours, my true Lord and Father, doe not hinder it, she shall be my spouse this very day. For her sake haue I abandoned my fathers house, and for her I did on this attire, to follow her wheresoeuer she went, as the arrow doth the marke, or the marriner the North starre: she is, as yet, no further acquainted with my desires, then as much as she might vnderstand some times, by the teares which she saw mine eyes distill a farre off. Now Sir, you know the riches and nobilitie of my discent, and how I am my fathers sole heire, and if it seeme vnto you that these be conditio^s, wherupon you may venture to make me throughly happy, accept of me presently for your sonne in law: for if my father, borne away by others his designes shall not like so well of this good which I haue sought out for my selfe, yet time hath more force to vndoe, and change the affaires, then mens wils: Heere the amorous Gentleman held his peace, and the Iudge remained astonied as well at the grace and discretion wherewith Don Lewis had discouered his affections vnto him, as also to see himselfe in such a passe, that as he knew not what course he might best take in so sodaine, and vnexpected a matter: and therefore he answered no other thing at that time, but onely badde him to settle his minde, and intertaine the time with his seruants, and deale with them, to expect that day, because he might haue leasure to consider what might be most conuenient for all. Don Lewis did kisse his hands perforce, and did bathe them with teares, a thing able to moue a heart of Marble, and much more the Iudges who (as a wise man) did presently perceiue, how beneficiall and honourable was that preferment for his daughter: although hee could haue wished, if it had beene possible to effect it with the consent of Don Lewis his father, who he knew did purpose to haue his sonne made a Noble man of title.
By this time the Inkeeper and his guests had agreed, hauing paid him all that they ought more by Don-Quixotes
 perswasions, and good reasons, then by any menaces. And Don Lewes his seruants expected the end of the Iudges discourse, and his resolution: when the diuel (who neuer sleeps) would haue it, at that very time entred into the Inne, the Barber from whom Don-Quixote tooke away the helmet of Mambrino, and Sancho Panca the furniture of the Asse, wherof he made an exchange for hir owne: which Barber leading his beast to the stable, saw Sancho Panca, who was mending some part of the pannell, and as soone as he had eyed him, he knew him, and presently set vpon Sancho saying; A Sir Theefe haue I found you heere with all the furniture, whereof you robd mee? Sancho that saw himselfe thus assaulted vnexpectedly, and had heard the disgraceful termes which the other vsed, laying fast hold on the pannell with the one hand, gaue the Barber such a buffet with the other, as he bathed all his teeth in bloud: but yet for all that the Barber held fast his gripe of the pannell, and therewithall cried out so loud, as all those that were in the house came to the noyse, and conflict, and he said, I call for the king and Iustice, for this theefe and robber by the high waies goeth about to kill me, because I seeke to recouer mine owne goods, thou liest quoth Sancho, for I am not a robber by the high waies; for my Lord Don-Quixote wonne those spoiles in a good warre. By this time Don-Quixote himself was come thither, not a little proud to see how well his Squire defended himselfe, and offended his aduersary, and therefore hee accounted him from thenceforth to be a man of valour, and purposed in his mind to dubbe him Knight, on the first occasion that should be offered, because he thought that the order of Knighthood would be well imployed by him.
Among other things that the Barber said in the discourse of his contention, this was one: Sirs, this pannell is as certainly mine as the death which I owe vnto God, and I know it as well as if I had bred it, and there is my Asse in the stable, who will not permit me to tell a lie: or otherwise do but trie the pannell on him, and if it fit him not iustly, I am content
 to remaine infamous: and I can say more, that the very day wherein they tooke my pannell from mee, they robbed mee likewise of a newe brazen Basen, which was neuer vsed, and cost mee a crowne. Heere Don-Quixote could no longer containe himselfe from speaking, and so thrusting himselfe betweene them two, and putting them asunder, and causing the pannell to be laid publikely on the ground, vntill the truth were decided, he said; To the end that you may perceiue the cleere and manifest error, wherein this good Squire liues, see how he cals that a basen, which is, was, and shall be the helmet of Mambrino, which I tooke away perforce from him in faire warre, and made my selfe Lord therof, in a lawfull and warlike manner. About the pannell I will not contend, for that which I can say therein is, that my Squire Sancho demaunded leaue of me, to take away the furniture of this vanouished cowards horse, that he might adorne his owne withall: I gaue him authoritie to doe it, and he tooke them: and for his conuerting thereof from a horses furniture into a pannell, I can giue none other reason then the ordinary, one, to wit, that such transformations are vsually seene in the successes of chiualry: for confirmation whereof, friend Sancho, run speedily, and bring me out the helmet which this good man auoucheth to be a basen: by my faith Sir, quoth Sancho, if we haue no better proofe of our intention, then that which you say, I say that the helmet of Mambrino is as arrant a basen as this good mans furniture is a pannell: Doe what I commaund, said Don-Quixote, I cannot beleeue that all the things in this Castle will be guided by enchantment. Sancho went for the basen, and brought it, and as soone as Don-Quixote saw it, he tooke it in his hands and said: See Sirs with what face can this impudent Squire affirme, that this is a basen, and not the helmet that I haue mentioned: and I sweare to you all by the order of Knighthood which I professe, that this is the very same helmet which I wan from him, without hauing added or taken any thing from it. That it is questionlesse
 quoth Sancho, for since the time that my Lord wonne it vntill now, he neuer fought but one battell with it, when he deliuered the vnlucky chained men; And but for this Basen-Helmet, he had not escaped so free as hee did, so thicke a shower of stones rained all the time of that conflict.


CHAP. XVIII.

Wherein are decided the controuersies of the Helmet of Mambrinus, and of the pannell, with other strange and most true aduentures.

GOod Sirs quoth the Barber, what do you thinke of that which is affirmed by these Gentlemen, who yet contend that this is not a basen but a helmet? He that shall say the contrary, quoth Don-Quixote, I will make him know that he lies, if he be a Knight; and if he be but a Squire, that he lies and lies againe a thousand times. Our Barber, who was also present as one that knew Don-Quixotes humour very wel, would fortifie his folly, and make the iest passe yet a little farther, to the end that they all might laugh: and therefore speaking to the other Barber, he said. Sir Barber, or what else you please, know that I am also of your occupation, and haue had my writ of examination and approbation in that trade more then these thirty yeares, and am one that knowes very well all the instruments of Barbery whatfoeuer; and haue beene besides in my youthfull daies a souldier, and do therefore likwiese know what is a helmet, and what a morrion, and what a close Castle, and other things touching warfare, I meane all the kinde of armes that a souldier ought to haue: and therefore I say, (still submitting my selfe to the better opinion) that this peece, which is laid heere before vs, and which this
 good Knight holdes in his hand, not onely is not a Barbars basen, but also is so farre from being one, as is white from blacke, or veritie from vntruth, yet doe I withall affirme, that although it is an helmet, yet it is not a compleate helmet. No truly, quoth Don-Quixote, for it wants the halfe, to wit, the neather part, and the beauer. It is very true, quoth the Curate, who very well vnderstood his friend the Barber his intention; and the same did Cardenio, Don Fernando, and his fellowes confirme: yea and euen the Iudge himselfe, had not Don Lewis his affaire perplexed his thoughts, would for his part haue holpen the jest well forward. But the earnestnesse of that affaire held his minde so busied, as he litle or nothing attended the pastime. Lord haue mercy vpon me, quoth the other Barber, then halfe beside himselfe, and is it possible that so many Honourable men should say that this is no bason, but a helmet? this is a thing able to strike admiration into a whole Vniuersitie, how discreet soeuer it were: tis enough if this basen must needes be a helmet, the pannell must also be a horses furniture, as this Gentleman sayes. To mee it seemes a pannell, quoth Don-Quixote, but as I haue said, I will not meddle with it, nor determine whether it be a pannell or the capparison of a horse. Therein is nothing else to be done, said the Curate, but that Sir Don-Quixote say it once; for in these matters of Chiualrie, all these Noblemen, and my selfe, doe giue vnto him the pricke, and the price. I sweare vnto you by Ioue good Sirs, quoth Don-Quixote, that so many and so strange are the things which haue befallen me in this Castle, these two times that I haue lodged therein, as I dare auouch nothing affirmatiuely of any thing that shall be demaunded of me concerning the things contayned in it, for I doe infallibly imagine, that all the aduentures which passe in it, are guided by inchauntment: the first time I was very much vexed by an inchaunted Moore, that is in it: and Sancho himselfe sped not very well with the Moores followers: and yesternight I stood hanging almost two houres space by this
 arme, without knowing how, or how that disgrace befell me, so that for me to medle now in so confused and difficult a matter, as to deliuer mine opinion, were to passe a rash iudgement: So that which they say, that this is a bason, and no helmet, I haue already made answere; but whether this be a pannell, or furniture, I dare pronounce no definitiue sentence, but only remit it to your discreet opinions: perhaps because you are not dubbed Knights as I am, the inchauntments of this place, will haue no power ouer you, and your vnderstandings shall be free, and able to iudge of the things in this Castle really, and truly, and not as they seeme vnto me. Doubtlesse, quoth Don Fernando, Don-Quixote saies very well, that the definition of this case belongs vnto vs; and therefore, and because we may proceede in it vpon the better and more solid grounds, I will secretly take the suffrages of all those Gentlemen, and afterwards make a cleare and full relation of what shall come of them.
To those that knew Don-Quixote his humour, this was a matter of maruailous laughter, and sport; but to such as were not acquainted therewithall, it seemed the greatest folly of the world, especially to Don Lewis, and his foure seruants, and with other three passengers that had arriued by chance to the Inne, and seemed to be troupers of the holy Brotherhood, as indeede they were: but he that was most of all beside himselfe for wrath, was the Barber, whose basen they had transformed before his owne face into the helmet of Mambrino, and whose pannell he made full account should likewise be turned into the rich furniture, and equippage of a great horse. All of them laughed hartily to see Don Fernando goe vp and downe taking the suffrages of this man and that, and rounding euery one of them in the eare, that they might declare in secret whether that was a pannell or a furniture, for which such deadly contention had passed. After that hee had taken the suffrages of so many as knew Don-Quixote, he said very lowdly, The truth is good fellow that I grow weary of demaunding so many opinions;
 for I can no sooner demaund of any man what I desire to know, but they forthwith answere me, how it is meere madnesse to affirme, that this is the pannell of an Asse, but rather the furniture of a Horse, yea and of a chiefe horse of seruice; and therefore you must haue patience: for in despite both of you and of your Asse, and notwithstanding your weake allegations and worse prooues, it is, and will continue, the furniture of a great horse. Let me neuer inioy a place in heauen, quoth the Barber, if you all be not deceiued; and so may my soule appeare before God, as it appeares to mee to be a pannell, and no horse furniture: but the law carries it away, and so fare well it, and yet surely I am not drunke; for vnlesse it be by sinning, my fast hath not beene broken this day.
The follies which the Barber vttered, stirred no lesse laughter among them, then did the rorings of Don-Quixote, who then spoke in this manner: here is now no more to be done, but that euery man take vp his owne goods, and to whom God hath giuen them, let St. Peter giue his blessing. Then said one of the foure Seruingmen, if this were not a jest premeditated, and made of purpose, I could not perswade my selfe that men of so good vnderstanding as al these are, or seeme to be, should dare to say, and affirme, that this is not a basen, nor that a pannell: but seeing that they auerre it, so constantly I haue cause to suspect, that it cannot bee without mistery to affirme a thing so contrary to that which very truth it selfe and experience demonstrate vnto vs, for I doe vow (and saying so he rapt out a round oth or two) that as many as are in the world, should neuer make me beleeue that this is no basen, nor that no pannell of a hee Asse: it might as well bee of a shee Asse, quoth the Curate: that comes all but to one, replyed the other; for the question consists not therein, but whether it be a pannell or not, as you doe auouch? Then one of the Troupers of the holy Brotherhood (who had listned to their disputation, and was growne full of choler to heare such an errour maintayned,
 said: it is as very a pannell as my father is my father; and hee that hath said, or shall say, the contrary is, I beleeue, turned into a grape. Thou lyest like a clownish knaue, quoth Don-Quixote, and lifting vp his Iauelin, which he alwayes held in his hand, he discharged such a blow at the Troupers pate, as if hee had not auoided, it would haue throwen him to the ground: the Iaueline was broken by the force of the fall into splinters, and the other Troupers, seeing their fellow so misvsed, cryed out for help, and assistance for that holy Brotherhood: the Inkeeper who also was one of the same fraternity, ranne in for his rod of Iustice and his sword, and then stood by his fellowes. Don Lewis his foure seruants compassed him about, lest he should attempt to escape whilst the tumult indured. The Barber seeing all the house turned vpside downe, laid hand againe vpon his pannell, and the same did Sancho.
Don-Quixote set hand to his sword, and assaulted the Troupers: Don Lewis cryed to his Seruingmen, that they should leaue him, and goe to helpe Don-Quixote, Cardenio, and Don Fernando; for all of them tooke Don-Quixotes part. The Curate cryed out, the Hostesse shriked, her daughter squeaked, Maritornes howled, Dorotea stood confused, Luseinda amazed, and Donna Clara dismayed: the Barber battered Sancho, and Sancho pounded him againe. Don Lewis, on whome one of his Seruingmen had presumed to lay hands, and hold him by the arme, gaue him such a pash on the mouth, as hee broke his teeth, and then the Iudge tooke him into his owne protection. Don Fernando had gotten one of the Troupers vnder his feete, where he stoode belabouring him at his pleasure. The Inkeeper renewed his outcry and reinforced his voice, demaunding aide for the holy Brotherhood: so that all the Inne seemed nothing else but plains, cryes, schritches, confusions, feares, dreades, disgraces, slashes, buffets, blowes, spurnings, and effusion of bloud.
In the midst of this Chaos, and Labyrinth of things, Don-Quixote beganne to imagine, and fancie to himselfe, that he
 was at that very time plunged vp to the eares in the discord, and conflict of King Agramante his camp; and therefore he said with a voice that made all the Inne to tremble. All of you hold your hands, all of you put vp your swords, all of you be quiet, and listen to me, if any of you desire to continue aliue: That great and monstrous voice made them all stand still; thereupon he thus proceeded: did not I tell you, Sirs, that this Castle was inchaunted, and that some legion of Diuels did inhabit it? in confirmation whereof I would haue you but to note with your owne eyes, how the very discord of King Agromants camp is transferred hither, and passed euer among vs: looke how there they fight for the sword, here for the horse, yonder for the Eagle, beyond that for the helmet; and all of vs fight, and none of vs know for what. Come therefore you Master Iustice, and you Master Curate, and let the one represent King Agramant, and the other King Sobrino, and make peace and attonement among vs: for I sweare by almighty Ioue, that it is great wrong and pity, that so many Noblemen, as we are here, should be slaine for so slight causes.
The troupers which did not vnderstand Don-Quixotes manner of speech, and saw themselues very ill handled by Don Fernando and Cardenio, would in no wise be pacified; but the Barber was content, by reason that in the conflict both his beard and his pannell had beene torne in pieces. Sancho to his Masters voyce was quickly obedient, as became a dutifull seruant. Don Lewis his foure Seruingmen stood also quiet, seeing how litle was gained in being other: only the Inkeeper persisted as before, affirming that punishment was due vnto the insolencies of that mad man, who cry footconfounded and disquieted his Inne. Finally, the rumor was pacified for that time; the pannell remained for a horse furniture vntill the day of iudgment; the bason for a helmet, and the Inne for a Castle in Don-Quixotes imagination. All the broiles being now appeased, and all men accorded by the Iudges and Curates perswasions. Then began Don Lewis
 his seruants againe to vrge him to depart with them, and whilest he and they debated the matter together, the Iudge communicated the whole to Don Fernando, Cardenio, and the Curate desiring to know their opinions concerning that affaire, and telling them all that Don Lewis had said vnto him; whereupon they agreed that Don Fernando should tell the Seruingmen what he himselfe was, and how it was his pleasure that Don Lewis should goe with him to Andaluzia, where he should be cherished, and accounted of by the Marquesse his brother, according vnto his calling and deserts: for he knew well Don Lewis his resolution to be such as he would not returne into his fathers presence at that time, although they tore him into pieces. Don Fernando his quality and Don Lewis his intention being vnderstood by the foure, they agreed among themselues that three of them should goe backe, to beare the tidings of all that had passed to his father, and the other should abide there to attend on him, and neuer to leaue him vntill they returned to fetch him home, or knew what else his father would commaund. And in this sort was that monstrous bulke of diuision and contention, reduced to some forme by the authority of Agramant, and the wisedome of King Sobrino.
But the enemy of concord, and the aduersary of peace, finding his proiects to be thus illuded, and contemned, and seeing the little fruite he had gotten by setting them all by the eares, resolued once againe to trie his wits, and stirre vp new discords and troubles, which befell in this manner: The Troupers were quieted, hauing vnderstood the calling of those with whom they had contended, and retyred themselues from the braule, knowing that howsoeuer the cause succeeded they themselues should haue still the worst end of the staffe: but one of them, who was the very same whom Don Fernando had buffeted so well, remembred how among many other warrants which hee had to apprehend malefactors, he had one for Don-Quixote, whom the Holy brotherhood had commaunded to be apprehended for freeing of the
 Gally-slaues (a distaster which Sancho had before hand with very great reason feared.) As soone as he remembred it, hee would needes trie whether the signes that were giuen him of Don-Quixote did agree with his person, and so taking out of his bosome a scroule of parchment, hee presently found out that which he looked for, and reading it a while very leisurely, as one that was himselfe no great Clerke, at euery other word he looked on Don-Quiote, and confronted the markes of his warrant with those of Don-Quixotes face, and found that be was infallibly the man that was therein mentioned: and scarce was he perswaded that it was hee, when foulding vp his parchment, and holding the warrant in his left hand, he laid holde on Don-Quixotes choller with the right so strongly, as he could hardly breath: and cried out aloude, saying, Aide for the Holy Brotherhood; and that you may perceiue how I am in good earnest, reade that warrant, wherein you shall finde that this robber by the high way side is to be apprehended. The Curate tooke the warrant, and perceiued very well that the Trouper said true, and that the markes agreed very neere with Don-Quixotes; who seeing himselfe so abused by that base rascall, as he accounted him, his choler being mounted to her height, and all the bones of his body crashing for wrath, he seised as well as he could, with both his hands on the Troupers throate, and that in such sort, as if he had not beene speedily succoured by his fellowes, he had there left his life ere Don-Quixote would haue abandoned his gripe.
The Inkeeper who of force was to assist his fellow in office, forthwith repayred vnto his ayde. The Hostesse seeing her husband re-enter into contentions and brabbles, raised a new crie, whose burden was borne by her daughter and Maritornes, asking succour of heauen and those that were present. Sancho seeing all that passed; said, By the Lord, all that my Master hath said of the inchantments of this Castle is true; for it is not possible for a man to liue quietly in it one houre together. Don Fernando parted the Trouper and Don
 Quixote, and with the good will of both, vnfastned their holdes: but yet the Troupers for all this desisted not to require their prisoner, and withall, that they should helpe to get him tyed, and absolutely rendred vnto their wils; for so it was requisite for the King and the Holy Brotherhood, in whose name they did againe demand their helpe and assistance for the arresting of that publike robber and spoyler of people in common pathes and high wayes.
Don-Quixote laughed to heare them speake so idely, as he imagined, and said with very great grauity, Come hither you filthy base extractions of the dunghill, dare you terme the loosing of the inchained, the freeing of prisoners, the assisting of the wretched, the raising of such as are falne, and the supplying of those that are in want? Dare you (I say) terme these things robbing on the high way? O infamous brood, worthy for your base and vile conceipt, that heauen should neuer communicate with you the vallour included in the exercise of Chiualry, we giue you to vnderstand the sinne and errour wherin you are, by not adoring the very shadow, how much more the assistance of a Knight errant? Come hither O you that be no Troupers but theeues in troupe, and robbers of high wayes by permission of the Holy brotherhood: Come hither, I say, and tell me, who was that jolthead that did subscribe or ratifie a warrant for the attaching of such a Knight as I am? Who was he that knowes not how Knights errant are exempted from all Tribunals? and how that their sword is the law, their valour the Bench, and their wils the statutes of their Courts? I say againe, what madman was he that knowes not how that no priuiledge of Gentry enioyes so many preeminences, immunities, and exemptions, as that which a Knight errant acquires the day wherein he is dubd, and vndertakes the rigorous exercise of arms? What Knight errant did euer pay tribute, subsidie, tallage, carriage, or passage ouer water? What Taylor euer had money for making his clothes? What Constable euer lodged him in Castle that made him after to pay for the shot? What King hath not
 placed him at his owne table? what Damzell hath not falne in loue with him, and permitted him to vse her as hee liked? and finally what knight errant was there euer, is, or euer shall be in the world, which hath not the courage himselfe alone to giue foure hundred blowes with a cudgell to foure hundred troupers that shall presume to stand before him in hostile manner?


CHAP. XIX.

In which is finished the notable aduenture of the troupers, and the great ferocitie of our good Knight Don-Quixote, and how he was inchanted.

WHilest Don-Quixote said this, the Curate laboured to perswade the troupers, how the Knight was distracted, as they themselues might collect by his workes and words, and therefore it would be to no end to prosecute their designe any further, seeing that although they did apprehend and carry him away, he would be presently deliuered againe, as a madman. To this, he that had the warrant made answere, that it concerned him not to determine whether he was mad or no, but onely to obey and execute his superiours commaund; and that he being once prisoner, they might deliuer him three hundred times, and if it were their good pleasure: for all that quoth the Curate, you may not carry him with you at this time, nor as I suppose will he suffer himselfe to be taken. To be briefe, the Curate said so much, and Don-Quixote plaid so many mad prankes, as the troupers themselues would haue proued greater fooles then he, if they had not manifestly discerned his defect of iudgement: and therefore they held it to be the best course to let him alone, yea and to be compounders of peace and
 amitie betweene Sancho Panca and the Barber, which still continued their most rancorous and deadly contention. Finally they as the officers of Iustice, did meditate the cause, and were arbiters thereof, in such sort, as both the parties remained, though not wholy contented, yet in some sort satisfied, for they onely made them exchange their pannels, but not their gyrts or headstals.
As touching Mambrinos helmet, the Curate did vnawares to Don-Quixote, giue to the Barber eight reals by it, and the Barber gaue backe vnto him an acquittance of the receit thereof, and an euerlasting release of all actions concerning it. These two discords which were the most principall, and of most consequence, being thus accorded, it onely rested that three of Don Lewis his seruingmen would be content to returne home, and leaue the fourth to accompany his master whither Don Fernando pleased to carry him. And as good hap and better fortune had already begun to breake Lances, and facilitate difficulties, in the fauour of the louers, and worthie persons of the Inne, so did it resolue to proceede forward, and giue a prosperous successe vnto all: for the seruingman were content to doe whatsoeuer their master would haue them: whereat Donna Clara was so cheerfull, as no one beheld when her face in that season, but might reade therein the in ward contentment of her mind. Zorayda although she did not very well vnderstand all the successes of the things she had seene, yet was she interchangeably grieued and cheered according to the shewes made by the rest, but chiefly by her Spanyard, on whom her eyes were alwaies fixed, and all the affects of her minde depended. The Inkeeper, who did not forget the recompence made by the Curate to the Barber, demaunded of him Don-Quixotes expences, and satisfaction for the dammage he had done to his wine bags, and the losse of his wine, swearing that neither Rozina^te, nor Sancho his Asse should depart out of the Inne vntill he were paid the very last farthing. All was quietly ended by the Curate, and Don Fernando paid the whole
 summe; although the iudge had also most liberally offered to doe it; and all of them remained afterwards in such quietnesse and peace, as the Inne did no longer resemble the discorded campe of Agramante, (as Don-Quixote termed it) but rather enioyed the very peace and tranquility of the Emperours Octauians time: for all which, the co^mon opinion was, that thanks were iustly due to the sincere proceeding and great eloquence of Master Curate, and to the incomparable liberality, and goodnesse of Don Fernando, Don-Quixote, perceiuing himselfe free, and deliuered from so many difficulties, and brabbles, wherewith as well he, as his Esquire had beene perplexed) held it hightime to prosecute his commenced voyage, and bring to an end the great aduenture vnto which he was called and chosen. Therefore with resolute determination to depart, he went and cast himselfe on his knees before Dorotea, who not permitting him to speake vntill he arose, he to obey her, stood vp, and said. It is a common prouerbe, beautifull Ladie, That diligence is the mother of good hap: and in many and graue affaires, experience hath shewed, that the sollicitude and sore of the suiter oft brings a doubtfull matter to a certaine and happy end. But this truth appeares in nothing more cleerly, then in matters of warre; wherein celerity and expedition preuent the enemies dessignes, and obtaine the victory before an aduersary can put himselfe in defence: all this I say, high and worthy Ladie, because it seemes to mee that our abode in this Castle is nothing profitable, and many therewithall turne so farre to our hinderance, as we may palpably seele it one day. For who knowes but that your enemie, the Giant hath learned by spies, or other secreet intelligence and meanes, how I meane to come and destroy him, and (oportunitie fauouring his dissignes) that he may haue fortified himselfe in some inexpugnable Castle or Fortresse, against the strength whereof neither mine industrie, nor the force of mine inuincible arme can much preuaile; wherefore, deare Ladie, let vs preuent (as I haue sayde by our diligence, and let vs presently depart
 vnto the place wherunto we are called by our good fortune, which shalbe deferred no longer then I am absent from your highnesse foe. Heere he held his peace, and did expect, with great grauitie the beautifull Princesse answere: who with debonary countenance, and a stile accommodated vnto Don-Quixote, returned him this answere. I do gratifie and thanke Sir Knight, the desire you shew to assist me in this my great neede: which denotes very cleerely the great care you haue to fauour orphanes and distressed wightes: and I beseech God that your good desires and mine may bee accomplished, to the ende that you may see how there are some thankfull women on earth: as touching my departure, let it be forthwith, for I haue none other will, the^ that which is yours; therfore you may dispose of me at your owne pleasure, for she that hath once committed the defence of her person vnto you, and hath put into your hands the restitution of her estate, ought not to seeke to do any other thing then that which your wisedome shall ordaine. In the name of God (quoth Don-Quixote) seeing that your highnes doth so humble your selfe vnto mee, I will not lose the occasion of exalting it, and installing it againe in the throne of your inheritance. Let our departure be incontinent for my desires, and the way, and that which they call the danger that is in delay, doe spurre me on. And seeing that heauen neuer created, nor hell euer beheld any man that could affright me, or make a coward of me, go therefore Sancho and saddle Rozinante, and empannell thine Asse, and make readie the Queenes palfrey, and let vs take leaue of the Constable and these other Lords, and depart away from hence instantly.
Then Sancho (who was present at all this) wagging of his head, said: O my Lord, my Lord, how much more knauerie (be it spoken with the pardon of all honest kerchefes) is there in the little village then is talked of? what ill can there be in any village, or in all the Cities of the world, able to impaire my credite, thou villaine? If thou be angrie, quoth
 Sancho, I will hold my tongue, and omit to say that which by the dutie of a good Squire, and of an honest seruant I am bound to tell you, say what thou wilt quoth Don-Quixote, so thy words be not addrest to make me afraid; for if thou beest frighted, thou doest onely like thy selfe; and if I bee deuoid of terrour, I also doe that which I ought, it is not that which I meane quoth Sancho, but that I doe hold for most sure and certaine that this Ladie which cals her selfe Queene of the great Kingdome of Micomicon, is no more a Queene then my mother; for if she were what she saies, she would not at euery corner, and at euery turning of a hand be billing as she is, with one that is in this good company: Dorotea blushed at Sanchos words; for it was true indeede that her spouse Don Fernando would now and then priuately steale from her lips some part of the reward which his desires did merit, (which Sancho espying, it seemed to him, that that kinde of wanton familiarity was more proper to curtesans, then becomming the Queene of so great a Kingdome) and yet she neither could, nor would reply vnto him, but let him continue his speech, as followeth: This I doe say, good my Lord quoth he, to this end, that if after wee haue runne many waies and courses, and indured bad nights and worse daies, he that is in this Inne, sporting himselfe, shall come to gather the fruit of our labours, there is no reason to hasten me thus to saddle Rozinante, or empannell the Asse, or make readie the Palfrey, seeing it would bee better that we stayed still, and that euery whoore spunne, and we fell to our victuals.
O God, how great was the fury that inflaming Don Quixote, when he heard his Squire speake so respectlesly. I say it was so great, that with a shaking voyce, a faultering tongue, and the fire sparking out of his eyes he said. O villanous peasant, rash, vnmannerly, ignorant, rude, blasphemous, bold murmurer, and detractor, hast thou presumed to speake such words in my presence, and in that of these noble Ladies? and hast thou dared to entertaine such rash and dishonest surmises
 into thy confused imagination? depart out of my sight thou monster of nature, storehouse of vntruthes, armorie of falshood, sincke of roguerie, inuentor of villanie, publisher of rauings, and the enemie of that decency which is to be vsed towards royall persons. Away villaine, and neuer appeare before mee, vnder paine of mine indignation: and saying so he bended his browes, fild vp his cheekes, looked about him on euery side, and strucke a great blow with his right foote on the ground; all manifest tokens of the rage which inwardly fretted him: at which words and furious gestures poore Sancho remained so greatly affrighted, as he could haue wished in that instant, that the earth opening vnder his feete would swallow him vp. And knew not what to doe, but turne his backe, and get him out of his Lords most furious presence: but the discreete Dorotea (who was now so well schooled in Don-Quixotes humour) to mitigate his yre said vnto him; be not offended good Sir Knight of the sad face, at the idle words which your good Squire hath spoken: for perhaps he hath not saide them without some ground, nor of his good vnderstanding and Christian mind can it be suspected, that he would wittingly slaunder or accuse any body falsely: And therefore we must beleeue, without all doubt, that as in this Castle as you your selfe haue said, Sir Knight all things are represented, and succeed by manner of inchantment, I say it might befall, that Sancho may haue seene by diabolicall illusion, that which he saies, he behold so much to the preiudice of my reputation, I vow by the omnipotent Ioue, quoth Don-Quixote, that your highnes hath hit the very pricke, and that some wicked vision appeared to this sinner, my man Sancho, that made him to see that which otherwise were impossible to be seene by any other way then that of inchantment: for I know very well the great goodnesse, and simplicitie of that poore wretch is such, as hee knowes not how to inuent a lye on any bodie liuing. It is euen so, and so it shall be quoth Don Fernando: and therefore good Sir Don-Quixote you must pardon him, and reduce
 him againe to the bosome of your good grace: Sicut erat in principio, and before the like visions did distract his sense. Don-Quixote answered, that he did willingly pardon him: and therefore the Curate went for Sancho, who returned very humbly, and kneeling downe on his knees demaunded his Lords hand, which he gaue vnto him, and after that hee had permitted him to kisse it, he gaue him his blessing, saying. Now thou shalt finally know Sancho, that which I haue told thee diuers times, how that all the things of this Castle are made by way of inchauntment. So doe I verily beleeue, said Sancho, except that of the Canuassing in the blanquet, which really succeeded by an ordinary and naturall way: doe not beleeue that, said Don-Quixote, for if it were so, I would both then, and also now haue taken a dire reuenge: but neither then, nor now could I euer see any, on whom I might reuenge that thine iniurie. All of them desired greatly to know what that accident of the blanquet was, and then the Inkeeper recounted it point by point, the flights that Sancho Panca made, whereat they all did laugh not a little, and Sancho would haue beene ashamed no lesse, if his Lord had not anew perswaded him, that it was a meere inchauntment: And yet Sanchos madnesse was neuer so great as to beleeue that it was not a reall truth, verily befallen him without any colour, or mixture of fraude, or illusion: but that hee was tossed by persons of flesh, bloud, and bone, and not by dreamed and imagined shadowes or spirits, as his Lord beleeued, and so constantly affirmed.
Two dayes were now expired, when all that Noble company had soiourned in the Inne, and then it seeming vnto them high time to depart, they deuised how (without putting Dorotea and Don Fernando to the paines, to turne back with Don-Quixote to his Village, vnder pretence of restoring the Queene Micomicona) the Curate and Barber might carry him backe as they desired, and indeauour to haue him cured of his folly in his owne house. And their inuention was this; they agreed with one, who by chaunce passed by that
 way with a Teame of Oxen, to carry him in this order following. They made a thing like a Cage of timber, so bigge as that Don-Quixote might sit, or lye in it at his ease: and presently after Don Fernando, and his fellowes, with Don Lewis his seruants, the Troupers, and the Inkeeper, did all of them by Master Curates direction couer their faces and disguise themselues, euery one as he might best, so that they might seeme to Don-Quixote other people then such as he had seene in the Castle. And this being done, they entred with very great silence into the place where hee slept, and tooke his rest after the related conflicts: and approching him who slept securely, not fearing any such accident, and laying hold on him very strongly, they tyed his hands and his feete very strongly, so that when hee started out of his sleepe, hee could not stirre himselfe, nor doe any other thing, then admire, and wonder at those strange shapes which he saw standing before him: and presently he fel into the conceipt which his continuall and distracted imagination had already suggested vnto him, beleeuing that all those strange figures were the spirits and shadowes of that inchaunted Castle, and that he himselfe was now without doubt inchaunted, seeing hee could neither moue nor defend himselfe. All this succeeded iust as the Curate (who plotted the jest) made full account it would. Only Sancho, among all those that were present, was in his right sense and shape; and although hee wanted but little to be sicke of his Lords disease, yet for all that hee knew all those counterfait Ghosts: but hee would not once vnfold his lips, vntill hee might see the end of that surprisall and imprisonment of his Master. Who likewise spoke neuer a word, but only looked to see what would be the period of his disgrace. Which was, that bringing him to the Cage, they shut him within, and afterwards nailed the barres therof so well as they could not be easily broken. They presently mounted him vpon their shoulders, and as he issued out at the chamber dore, they heard as dreadfull a voice as the Barber could deuise (not he of the pannell but the other) which
 said: O Knight of the sadde countenance bee not grieued at the imprisonment whereinto thou art led, for so it must bee, that thereby the aduenture into which thy great force and valour haue thrust thee, may bee the more speedily ended; and ended it will be when the furious Manchegal Lyon, and the white Tobosian Doue, shall be vnited in one, and after they haue humbled their lofty crest vnto the soft yoke of wedlocke: from whose wonderfull consort, shall issue to the light of the Orbe, fierce whelps which shal imitate the raunching pawes of their valorous father, and this shall bee, before the pursuer of the fugitiue nymphe doe with his swift and naturall course make two turnes, in visitation of the glistring Images; And thou O the most noble, and obedient Squire, that euer had sword at a gyrdle, beard on a face, or dent in a nose, let it not dismay, or discontent thee to see carried away before thy eyes the flower of all Chiualrie errant. For very speedily, if it please the framer of the world, thou shalt see thy selfe so exalted and ennobled, as thou shalt scarce knowe thy selfe: Nor shalt thou bee defrauded of the promises made vnto thee by thy Noble Lord: and I doe assure thee, from the wise Mentironiana, that thy wages shall be payed thee, as thou shalt quickly see in effect: and therefore follow the steps of the valorous and inchaunted Knight; for it is necessary, that thou goe to the place where you both shall stay: and because I am not permitted to say any more, farewell; for I doe returne I well know whither. Towards the end of this prophecie, he lifted vp his voice, and afterwards lesned it with so slender an accent, that euen those which were acquainted with the jest, almost beleeued what they had heard.
Don-Quixote was very much comforted by the prophecie; for hee presently apprehended the whole sense thereof, and perceiued how hee was promised in marriage his beloued Dulcinea of Toboso, from whose happy wombe should sally the Whelps (which were his sonnes) to the eternal glory of the Mancha. And beleeuing all this most firmely, hee eleuated his voice, and breathing forth a great sigh, thus said: O thou whatsoeuer thou beest, which hast prognosticated so great
 good to me, I desire thee to request in my name, the wiseman who hath charge to record mine acts, that he permit me not to perish in this prison (to which they now do carry me) before the accomplishment of so ioyfull and incomparable promises, as now haue beene made vnto me. For so that this may befall, I will account the paines of my prison a glory, and the chaines that inuiron me an ease: and will not esteeme this bed whereon I am laid a hard field of battaile, but a soft ticke, and a most fortunate lodging. And as concerning the consolation of my Squire Sancho Panca, I trust in his goodnesse, and honest proceeding, that he will not abandon me in good or bad fortune: for though it should fall out through his, or my hard hap, that I shall not bee able to bestow on him an Iland, or other equiualent thing, as I haue promised, his wages at least cannot be lost, for in my Testament, which is made already I haue set downe what he is to haue, though not conformably to his many good seruices, yet according to my possibility. Sancho Panca bowed his head with great reuerence, and kissed both his hands (for one alone he could not by reason they were bound together) and presently those visions did lift vp the cage, and accommodate it on the Teame of Oxen.


CHAP. XX.

Wherein is prosecuted the manner of Don-Quixotes inchauntment, with other famous oceurrences.

WHen Don-Quixote saw himselfe to bee incaged after that manner, and placed in the Cart he said, I haue read many and very graue histories of Knights errant, but I neuer read, saw, nor heard, that they were wont to carry Knights errant inchaunted after this manner, and with the leisure that those slothfull and heauy beasts doe threaten: forthey were euer accustomed to be carried in
 the aire with wonderful speed, shut in some duskie and obscure clowd; or in som fiery chariot; or on som Hippogrifus, or some other such like beast: but that they cary me now on a Terme of Oxen, I protest it driues me into a great amazement, but perhaps both Chiualrie, and the inchauntments of those our times, doe follow a course different from those of former ages: and peraduenture it may also bee, that as I am a new Knight in the world, and the first that hath againe reuiued the now-neglected, and forgotten exercise of armes, so haue they also newly inuented other kinds of inchauntments, and other manners of carrying away inchaunted Knights. What doest thou thinke of this Sonne Sancho? I know not, quoth Sancho, what to thinke, because I am not so well seene in Scriptures errant as you are; but for all this I durst affirme and sweare, that these visions which goe vp and downe in this place are not altogether Catholike. Catholikes, my father, quoth Don-Quixote, how can they bee Catholikes, when they be all Diuels, which haue assumed phantasticall bodies to come and put me into this state? and if thou wilt proue the truth hereof, doe but bouch and feele them, and thou shalt finde them to haue no bodies, but of aire, and that they consist of nothing but an outward appearance. Now by my faith Sir, quoth Sancho, I haue already touched them, and find this Diuell that goeth there so busily vp and downe, both plump and soft fleshed; and that hee hath besids an other property very different from that which I haue heard say Diuels haue: for it is said, that they smell all of brimstone and other filthy things; but one may feele at least halfe a league off, the ambar that this Diuell smels off. Sancho spoke this of Don Fernando, who belike (as Lords of his ranke are wont) had his attyre perfumed with Ambar.
Maruell not thereat friend Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, for the diuels are very craftie; and although they bring smels or persumes about them, yet they themselues smell nothing (because they are spirits) or if they doe smell ought it is
 not good, but euill and stinking sauors: the reason is, for that as they doe alwayes beare wheresoeuer they be, their hell about them, and can receiue no kind of ease of their torments, and good smels bee thinges that delight and please; it is not possible that they can smell any good thing: and if it seeme to thee, that that diuell whom thou dost mention, smels of Ambar, either thou art deceiued, or he that would deceiue thee, by making thee to thinke that he is no diuell. All these discourses passed betweene the Master and the man; the whilst Don Fernando and Cardenio (fearing least Sancho should finde out the deceit whereto he was already come very neere) resolued to hasten the Knights departure; and therefore calling the Inkeeper aside, they commaunded him to saddle Rozinante, and empannell Sancho his beast; which he did with all expedition: and the Curate agreed with the Troupers for so much a day to accompany him vnto his village. Cardenio hanged at the pommell of Rozinantes saddle, the Target on the one side, and on the other the Bason, and by signes commaunded Sancho to get vp on his Asse and leade Rozinante by the bridle; and afterwards placed on either side of the Cart two Troupers with their firelockes.
But before the Cart departed, the Hostesse, her daughter, and Maritornes came out to bid Don-Quixote farewell, fayning that they wept for sorrow of his disaster; to whom Don-Quixote said: My good Ladies doe not weepe for all these mischances are incident to those which professe that which I doe: and if these calamities had not befalne me, I would neuer haue accounted my selfe for a famous Knight errant: for the like chances neuer happen to Knights of little name or renoune, because there are none in the world that makes any mention of them. But they often befall to the valorous, who haue emulators of their vertue and valour, both many Princes and many other Knights that striue by indirect meanes to destroy them. But for all that, vertue is so potent, as by herselfe alone (in despite of all the Nigromancy
 that euer the first inuenter thereof Zoroastes knew) she will come off victorious from euery danger, and will shine in the world as the Sunne doth in heauen: Pardon me faire Ladies if by any carelesnesse I haue done you any displeasure, for with my will and knowledge I neuer wronged any. And pray vnto God for me, that he will please to deliuer me out of this prison, whereinto some ill meaning inchanter hath thrust me; for if I once may see my selfe at liberty againe, I will neuer forget the fauours which you haue done me in this Castle, but greatly acknowledge and recompence them as they deserue. Whilest the Ladies of the Castle were thus intertained by Don-Quixote, the Curate and Barber tooke leaue of Don Fernando and his companions, of the Captaine and his brother, and of all the contented Ladies, specially of Dorotea and Luscinda, all of them embraced and promised to acquaint one another with their succeeding fortunes. Don Fernando intreating the Curate to write vnto him what became of Don-Quixote, assuring him that no affaire he could informe him of should please him better then that, and that he would in lieu thereof acquaint him with all occurrences which he thought would delight him eyther concerning his owne marriage or Zoraydas baptisme, or the successe of Don Lewis, and Luscindas returne into her house.
The Curate offered willingly to accomplish to a haire all that he had commaunded him: and so they returned once againe to embrace one another, and to renew their mutuall and complementall offers. The Inkeeper came also to the Curate, and gaue him certaine papers, saying, that he had found them within one of the linings of the wallet, wherein the Tale of the curious impertinent was had; and that since the owner did not returne to fetch it, he bad him take them all with him: for seeing he could not reade, hee would keepe them no longer. Master Curate yeelded him many thanks; and then opening them, found in the beginning therof these wordes: The Tale of Riconnette and Cortadillo, by which he
 vnderstood that it was some History, and collected that it must be a good one, seeing that of the curious Impertinent, contriued perhaps by the same Authour, had proued so well, and therefore he laid it vp, with an intention to reade it as soone as he had oportunity. Then hee mounted on horsebacke with his friend the Barber; and both of them putting on their maskes that they might not quickly be knowne by Don-Quixote, they trauelled after the teame, which held on in this order; first went the Cart, guided by the Carter: on both sides thereof the Troupers rode with their firelockes: then followed Sancho vpon his Asse, leading Rozinante by the bridle; and last of all came the Curate and Barber vpon their mighty Mules, and with their faces couered: all in a graue gesture, and with an Alderman-like pace, and trauelling no faster then the slow steps of the heauie Oxen permitted them. Don-Quixote sate with his hands tyed, his legges stretched out, and leaning against the barre of the Cage, with such a silence, and patience, as he rather seemed a statue then a man. In this quiet and leisurely manner they trauelled for the space of two leagues, when arriuing to a valley, it seemed to their Conductor a fit place to repose and bait his Oxen. And acquainting the Curate with his purpose, the Barber was of opinion that they should yet goe on a little further, because he knew that there lay behinde a little mountaine, which was within their view a certaine vale, much better furnished with grasse then that wherein hee meant to abide. The barbarous opinion was allowed, and therefore they continued on their trauell, when the Curate looking by chance behinde him, saw comming after them sixe or seauen men on horsebacke, and very well appointed, who quickly got ground of them; for they came not the lazie and flegmaticke pace of Oxen, but as men that were mounted on Canons Mules, and pricked forward with a desire to passe ouer the heat of the day in their Inne, which was not much more then a league from thence. Finally, those diligent trauellers ouertooke our slouthfull ones, and saluted
 them courteously, and one of them that was a Canon of Toledo, and Master of the rest, noting the orderly procession of the Cart, Troupers, Sancho, Rozinante, the Curate and Barber, but chiefly the ingaged Don-Quixote, he could not forbeare to demand what meaned the carriage of that man, in so strange a manner, although he did already coniecture by obseruation of the Troupers that hee was some notable robber or other delinquent, the punishment of whom belonged to the Holy Brotherhood. One of the Troupers to whom the demaund was made, did answere in this manner: Sir we know not wherefore this Knight is caried in this forme, and therefore let he himselfe, who best may, tell you the reason thereof.
Don-Quixote had ouerheard their discourse, and said, if Gentlemen you be conuersant and skilfull in matters of Chiualry, I will communicate my misfortunes with you, but if you be not, I haue no reason to trouble my selfe to recouer them. The Curate and Barber seeing the trauellers in talke with Don-Quixote, drew neere to make answere for him, in such sort that their inuention might not be discouered; the whilest the Canon replied to the Knight, and said, Truely brother I am better acquainted with bookes of Knighthood then with Villapandas Logicke: and therefore if all the difficultie rest onely in that, you may safely communicate whatsoeuer you will with me. A Gods name be it, quoth Don-Quixote: You shall therefore vnderstand Sir Knight, that I am caried away inchanted in this Cage, through the enuie and fraude of wicked Magicians, For vertue is much more persecuted of the wicked, then honoured of the good. I am a Knight errant, but none of those whose names are not recorded in the bookes of fame, but one of those who in despite of enuie it selfe, and of all the Magicians of Persia, the Bracmanes of India, or the Gymnosophists of Aethiopia shal hang his name in the Temple of Eternity, that it may serue as a modell and patterne to insuing ages; wherein Knights errant may view the steps which they are to follow if they
 meane to aspire to the toppe and honourable height of armes. The Knight Sir Don-Quixote saith true, quoth the Curate, speaking to the trauellers, that he is carried away in this Chariot inchanted, not through his owne default or sinnes, but through the malignant treacherie of those, to whom vertue is loathsome and valour odious. This is good Sir, the Knight of the sad countenance (if you haue at any time heard speake of him) whose valorous acts shall remaine insculped in stubborne Brasse, and time-suruiuing Marble, though Enuie and Malice doe labour neuer so much to obscure them.
When the Canon heard the imprisoned man and the free speake thus in one tenour, hee was about to blesse himselfe for wonder, and could not coniecture what had befallen him, and into no lesse admiration were they brought that came with him. But Sancho Panca hauing in the meane time approched to heare their speech, to plaister vp the matter, added: now Sirs, whether you will loue me well or ill, for what I shall say, the very truth of the matter is, that my Lord Don-Quixote is as much inchaunted as my mother, and no more. For his iudgement is yet whole and sound; hee eates, and drinks, and doth his necessities as other men doe, and as he himselfe did yesterday, and other daies before they incaged him: all which being so, how can you make me beleeue that he goeth inchaunted, for I haue heard many persons auouch, that inchaunted persons neither eate, nor drinke, nor speake, and yet my Lord, if he be not thwarted, will talke more then twentie barresters, and then turning towards the Curate, he said: O Mr. Curate, Mr. Curate, doe you thinke that I doe not know you? and thinke you that I doe not suppose, yea and presage whereto these new inchauntments are addressed? well know then, that I know you well, although you couer your face neuer so much, and that I vnderstand your meaning, how deepely soeuer you smother your drifts: but in fine, where emulation and enuy raines, vertue cannot liue; where pinching swayes, liberalitie
 goes by. A pox take the Diuell, for but for your reuerence my Lord had ere this time beene wedded to the Princesse Micomicona, and I my selfe had beene created an Earle at least, for no lesse might be expected either from the bountie of my Lord, or the greatnesse of my deserts: but now I perceiue that to bee true, which is commonly said, That the wheele of Fortune turnes about more swiftly then that of a mil: and that they which were yesterday on the top thereof, lye to day all along on the ground. I am chiefly grieued for my wife and ^hildren; for whereas they ought and might hope to see their father come in at his gates, made a Gouernour, or Viceroy of some Ile, or Kingdome, they shall now see him returne vnto them no better then a poore horse-boy. All which I haue vrged so much, Mr. Curate, only to intimate to your paternitie, how you ought to haue remorse, and make a scruple of conscience, of treating my deare Lord as you do, and looke to it well that God doe not one day demaund at your hands, in the other life, amends for the prison wherein you carry him: and that you bee not answerable for all the succours and good deedes, which hee would haue afforded the world in this time of his captiuitie. Snuffe me those candles, quoth the Barber, hearing him speake so: what Sancho, art thou also of thy Masters confraternitie? I sweare by the Lord, I beginne to see that thou art very like to keepe him company in the cage, and that thou shalt bee as deepely inchaunted as hee, for the portion which thou hast of his humour, and Chiualrie. Thou wast in an ill houre begotten with child by his promises, and in a worse did the Isle, which thou so greatly longest for, sinke into thy pate: I am not with child by any body, said Sancho, nor am I a man of a humour to let any body get me with child, no though it were the King himselfe: and although I be poore, yet am I a Christian, and owe nothing to any one; and if I desire Ilands, others there are that desire worse things, and euery one is the sonne of his owne workes: and vnder the name of a man, I may become Pope, how much more the Gouernour of an Iland;
 and chiefly seeing my Lord may gaine so many as hee may want men to bestow them on, and therefore Mr. Barber you should take heede how you speake; for all consists not in trimming of beards: and there is some difference betweene Peter and Peter. I say it because all of vs know one another, and no man shall vnperceiued put a false Die vpon mee. As concerning my Lords inchantment, God knowes the truth, and therefore let it rest as it is, seeing it is the worse for the stirring in. The Barber would not reply vnto Sancho, least that with his simplicities, hee should discouer what the Curate and himselfe did, laboured so much to conceale, and the Curate doubting the same, had intreated the Canon to prick on a little forward, and he would vnfold to him the mysterie of the encaged Knight, with other matters of delight. The Canon did so, and taking his men along with them, was very attentiue to all that he rehearsed, of the condition, life, madnesse, and fashions of Don-Quixote. There did he briefly acquaint him with the originall cause of his distraction, and all the progresse of his aduentures, vntill his shutting vp in that cage: and their owne designe in carrying home to his Countrey, to trie whether they might by any meanes finde out a remedy for his frensie. The Canon and his men againe admired to heare so strange a Historie as that of Don-Quixote, and as soone as the Curate had ended his relation, the Canon said.
Verily Master Curate I doe finde by experience that those bookes which are instituted of chiualrie, or knighthood, are very preiudiciall to welgouerned commowealths: and although (borne away by an idle and curious desire) I haue read the beginning of almost as many as are imprinted, of that subiect, yet could I neuer indure my selfe to finish and reade any one of them through: for me thinks that somewhat more or lesse, they all import one thing, and this hath no more then that, nor the other more then his fellow. And in mine opinion this kind of writing and inuention fals within the compasse of the fables called Malesiae, which are wandring
 and idle tales, whose onely scope is delight, and no instruction; quite contrary to the proiect of those called Fabulae Apologae, which delight and instruct together. And though that the principall ende of such bookes be recreation, yet cannot I perceiue how they can yeelde it, seeing they be forced with so many, and so proportionlesse vntruthes. For the delight that the mind conceiues, must proceed from the beautie, and conformitie which it sees or contemplates in such things as the sight, or imagination represents vnto it; and all things that are deformed, or discordant must produce the contrary effect. Now then what beautie can there be, or what proportion betweene the parts, and the whole, or the whole and the parts, in a booke or fable, wherein a youth of sixteene yeares of age giues a blow to a Giant as great as a Iewes, and with that blow deuides him in two as easily as if he were a pellet of Sugar. And when they describe a battell, after that they haue tolde vs how there were at least a million of men on the aduerse side, yet if the Knight of the booke be against them, wee must of force, and whether we will or no, vnderstand that the said Knight obtained the victory through the inuincible strength of his arme? what then shall we say of the facilitie wherewithall the Inheretrix of a Kingdome, or Empyre falles betweene the armes of one of those errant and vnknowne knights? what vnderstanding, if it be not altogether barren or barbarous, can delight it selfe, reading how a great tower full of knights doth passe through the Sea as fast as a ship with the most prosperous wind? And that going to bed a man is in Lombardie, and the next morning findes himselfe in Prester Iohns countrey, among the Indians) or in some other Region which neuer was discouered by Ptolomeus, nor seene by Marcus Polus? and if I should be answered, that the inuentors of such bookes do write them as fables: and therefore are not bound vnto any respect of circumstances, or obseruation of truth, I would reply, that an vntruth is so much the more pleasing, by how much the neerer it resembles a
 truth; and so much the more gratefull, by how much the more it is doubtfull and possible: for lying fables must bee suited vnto the readers vnderstanding, and so written, as that facilitating impossible things, leuelling vntrue things, and holding the mind in suspence, they may rauish a more delight and entertaine such manners, as pleasure and wonder may step by step walke together, all which things hee that writes not likelihoods, shall neuer be able to performe. And as touching Imitation (wherein consistes the perfection of that which is written) I haue not seene in any bookes of Knighthoode, an entire bulke of a fable, so proportioned in all the members thereof, as that the middle may answere the beginning, and the end the beginning and middle. But rather they haue composed them of so many members, as it more probably seemes, that the authors intended to frame Chimeraes or monsters, then to deliuer proportionate figures, most harsh in their stile, incredible in exploits, impudent in loue matters, absurd in complements, prolixe in battels, fond in discourses, vncertaine and senselesse in voyages, and finally, deuoide of all discretion, art and ingenious disposition. And therefore they deserue (as most idle and friuolous things) to be banished out of all Christian commonwealthes.
Master Curate did listen to the Canon with very great attention; and he seemed vnto him to be a man of good vnderstanding, and that he had great reason for what hee had alledged: and therfore said, that in respect they did concurre in opinions, and that he had an old grudge to the vanity of such bookes, he had likewise fired all Don-Quoxotes library, consisting of many bookes of that subiect: And then he recounted to him the search and inquisition hee had made of them; and which he had condemned, and which reserued; whereat the Canon laughed heartily, and said, that notwithstanding all the euill he had spoken of such bookes, yet did he find one good in them, to wit, the subiect they offered a good wit to worke vpon, and shew it selfe in them;
 for they displayed a large and open plaine, through which the Pen might runne without let or incumbrances; describing of shipwracks, tempests, incounters, and battels: delineating a valorous Captaine, with all the properties required in him; as wisedome to frustrate the designes of his enemie; eloquence to perswade or disswade his souldiers; ripenesse in aduice; promptnesse in execution; as much valour in attending as in assaulting of an enemie. Deciphering now a lamentable and tragicall successe, then a ioyfull and vnexpected euent; there a most beautifull, honest, and discreete Ladie, heere a valiant, courteous, and Christian knight, there an vnmeasurable barbarous braggard; heere a gentle, valorous, and wise Prince: Representing the goodnesse and loyalty of subiects, the magnificence and bountie of Lords: Sometimes he may shew himselfe an Astrologian, sometimes a Cosmographer, sometimes a Musitian, sometimes a Statist, and sometimes if he please, he may haue occasion to shew himselfe a Nigromancer: There may he demonstrate the subtiltie of Vlisses, the pietie of Aeneas, the valour of Achilles, the misfortunes of Hector, the trechery of Sinon, the amitie of Eurialus, the liberality of Alexander, the resolution of Caesar, the clemency and truth of Traianus, the fidelitie of Zopirus, the prudence of Cato; and finally all those parts that make a worthy man perfect: one whiles by placing them all in one subiect; another by distributing them among many: and this being done, and set out in a pleasing stile, and a wittie fashion that approacheth as neere as is possible vnto the truth, will questionlesse remaine a worke of many faire draughts, which being accomplished, will represent such beauty and perfection, as shall fully attaine to the best end aymed at in all writing, that is, as I haue said, ioyntly to instruct, and delight: for the irregularity, and liberality of those bookes giuen to the author, the means to shew himselfe an Epicke, Lyricke, Tragedian, and Comedian; with all other things which the most gracefull and pleasant sciences of Poetry and Oratorie include in themselues.
 For the Epickes may be as well written in prose as in verse.


CHAP. XXI.

Wherein the Canon prosecutes his discourse vpon bookes of Chiualrie, and many other thinges worthy of his wit.

YOu say very true, quoth the Curate; and for this very reason are they, which haue hitherto inuented such bookes, the more worthy of reprehension, because they neither heeded the good discourse, the arte, nor the rules, by which they might haue guided themselues, and by that meanes haue growen as famous for their prose as be the two Princes of the Greeke and Latin Poetrie for their verse. I haue for my part, quoth the Canon, at least attempted to write a booke of Chiualrie, obseruing therein all the points by me mentioned; and in truth I haue written aboue a hundred sheetes thereof: and to the end that I might trie whether they were correspondent to my estimation, I did communicate them, both with certaine skilfull and wise men, that are maruailously affected to that subiect, and with some ignorant persons that only delight to heare fanaticall inuentions; and I haue found in them all a gratefull approbation of my labours: yet would I not for all that, prosecute the worke, as well because it seemed vnfit for my profession, as also because I finde the number of the ignorant to exceede that of the iudicious: and though more good come to a man by the praise of a few wisemen, then hurt by the scoffes of a number of fooles, yet would I not willingly subiect my selfe to the confused iudgement of the senselesse vulgar, who commonly giue themselues most vnto the reading of such bookes. But that which most of all rid
 my hands, yea and my memorie of all desire to end it, was this argument, drawne from our moderne Comedies, and thus made to my selfe: If those, (as well the fictions, as historical ones) are all or the most part of them notorious fopperies, and things without either head or foote, and yet are by the vulgar heard with such delight, and held and approued for good: and both the Authors that compose them, and actors that represent them, say, that they must be such as they be for to please the peoples humors, and not more conformable to reason or truth, and that because those wherein Decorum is obserued, and the fable followed according to the rules of Art, serue onely for three or foure discreete men (If so many may be found at a Play) which doe attend vnto them, and all the rest of the Auditours remaine fasting, by reason they cannot conceiue the artificiall contexture thereof; therefore is it better for them to gaine good money and meanes by many, then bare opinion or applause by a few. The very same would be the end of my Booke after I had vsed all possible industrie, to obserue the aforesaid precept; and I should remaine onely for a neede, and as the Taylour that dwels in a corner, without trade or estimation.
And although I haue sundry times indeuoured to perswade the Players that their opinion was erronious herein, and that they would attract more people and acquire greater fame by acting artificiall Comedies then those irregular, and methodicall Playes then vsed: yet are they so wedded to their opinion, as no reason can wooe, nor demonstration winne them from it. I remember how dealing vpon a day with one of those obstinate fellowes, I said vnto him: doe not you remember how a few yeeres agoe were represented in Spaine three Tragedies, written by a famous Poet of our Kingdome, which were such as delighted, yea and amazed all the auditours as well the learned as the simple, the exact as the sleight ones; and that the Players got more by those three alone, then by thirtie of the best that were penned, or Acted since that time? You meane without question,
 quoth the Actor answering mee, Isabella, Filis, and Alexandra. The very same quoth I; and note whether in them were not rightly obserued all the rules and precepts of Art, and yet thereby they neither wanted any part of their dignitie, nor the approbation of all the world. So that I inferre the fault not to be in the vulgar that couets idle toyes, but rather in those which know not how to penne or Act any other thing, for no such fond stuffe was in the Comedie of Ingratitude reuenged: nor found in Numantia, nor perceiued in that of the Amorous Merchant, and much lesse in the Fauourable enemy, nor in some others made by iudicious Poets, which both redounded to their infinite fame and renowne, and yeelded vnto these Actors aboundant gaine. To these I added other reasons, wherewith I left him, in mine opinion, somewhat perplexed, but not satisfied, or desirous to forgoe his erronious opinion.
Truely M. Canon, quoth the Curate, you haue touched a matter that hath rowsed an ancient rancour and heart-burning of mine against the Comedies now in request; the which is equall to the grudge that I beare to Bookes of Knighthood. For seeing the Comedie as Tully affirmes ought to be a mirrour of mans life, a patterne of manners, and an Image of truth: Those that are now exhibited, are mirrours of vanitie, patternes of folly, and Images of voluptuousnesse. For what greater absurditie can be in such a subiect, then to see a child come out, in the first Scene of the first Act, in his swadling cloutes, and issue in the second already growne a man, yea a bearded man? And what greater vanitie then to present before vs, a valiant old man, and a young coward? A Lay man become a Diuine, a Page a Counsellour, a King a scoundrell, and a Princesse a scowrekettle? What should I say, of the little care had of the due obseruation of time, for the succeeding of that they represent, other then that I my selfe haue seene Comedies, whose first Act began in Europe, the second in Asia, and the third ended in Africa, and truely if there had beene a fourth, it
 would questionlesse haue finished in America, and by consequence we should haue seene a round walke about the foure parts of the world. And fayning an exployt performed in the time of King Pepin, or of Charlemaine, they make the principall Actors thereof, either Heraclius the Emperour that entred into Hierusalem bearing of the holy Crosse; or Godfree of Bulloin that recouered the Holy-land; Many yeeres, yea and ages hauing occurred betweene the times of the one and the other: yea and the Comedie being grounded on a fiction, to attribute vnto it the verities of a Historie, and mingle it and patch it vp, with peeces of others, hauing relation to different persons, and times; and this with no plausible inuention, or draught resembling the truth, but rather with palpable, grosse, and inexcusable errours. And which is worse, some guls are found to affirme, that all perfection consists herein, and that they are too daintie that looke for any other.
Now if wee would passe further to examine the diuine Comedies that treate of God, or the liues of Saints, what a multitude of false miracles doe the composers deuise? what a bulke of matters Apocriphall, and ill-vnderstood? attributing to one Saint the miracles done by another: yea and in humane Comedies they presume to doe miracles (without farther respect, or consideration, but that such a miracle or shew, as they terme it, would doe well in such a place) to the end that the ignorant folke may admire them, and come the more willingly to them: all which doth preiudice truth, discredit histories, and turne to the disgrace of our Spanish wits: for strangers which doe with much punctualitie obserue the method of Comedies, hold vs to be rude and ignorant, when they see such follies, and absurdities escape vs: and it will be no sufficient excuse for this errour, to say, that the principall end of well gouerned Commonwealths, in the permitting of Comedies, is only to entertaine the Comunaltie with some honest pastime, and thereby diuert the exorbitant and vicious humours which idlenesse is wont to ingender:
 and seeing that this end is attained to by whatsoeuer Comedies good or bad, it were to no purpose to appoint any lawes, or limits vnto them; or to tie the composers to frame, or actors to play them, as they should doe: For herevnto I answere, that this end would without all comparison be compassed, better by good Comedies then by euill ones: for the auditour, hauing heard an artificiall and well ordered Comedie, would come away delighted with the jests, and instructed by the truths thereof: wondering at the successes, grow discreeter by the reasons, warned by the deceits, become wise by others example, incensed against vice, and enamoured of vertue; al which affects a good Comedie should stirre vp in the hearers minde, were hee neuer so grosse or clownish: And it is of all impossibilities the most impossible, that a Comedie consisting of all these parts, should not entertaine, delight, satisfie, and content the mind much more, then another that should bee defectiue in any of them, as most of our now-a day Comedies bee. Nor are the Poets that pen them chiefly to be blamed for this abuse: for some of them know very well where the errour lurkes, and know also as well how to redresse it. But because that Comedies are become a vendible merchandize, they affirme, and therein tell the plaine truth, that the players would not buy them, if they were of any other, then the accustomed kinde, and therefore the Poet indeauours to accommodate himselfe to the humour of the Player, who is to pay him for his labour, and that this is the truth may bee gathered by an infinite number of Comedies, which a most happy wit of this Kingdome hath composed, with such delicacy, so many good jests so elegant a verse, so excellent reasons, so graue sentences, and finally with so much eloquence, and such a loftinesse of stile, as hee hath filled the world with his fame: and yet by reason that hee was forced to accommodate himselfe to the Actors, all of them haue not arriued to the height of perfection which Arte requires. Others there are that write without any iudgement, and with so little heede of what they do,
 as after their workes haue once beene acted, the Players are constrained to run away and hide themselues, fearing to bee punished, as often they haue beene, for acting things obnoxious to the Prince, or scandalous to some families.
All which inconueniences might be redressed, if there were some vnderstanding and discreet person ordained at the Court, to examine all Comedies before they were acted, and that not only such as were played at the Court it selfe, but also all others that were to be acted throughout Spaine, without whose allowance, vnder his hand and seale, the Magistrate of no Towne should permit any Comedie to bee played: By which meanes the players would diligently send their plaies to the Court, and might boldly afterwards act them, and the composers would with more care and studie examine their labours; knowing that they should passe the strict censure of him that could vnderstand them: and by this meanes would good Comedies be written, and the thing intended by them most easily attained to, viz. the entertainement of the people, the good opinion of Spanish wits, the profit and securitie of the players, and the sauing of the care that is now imployed in chastising their rashnesse. And if the same charge were giuen to this man, or to some other, to examine the bookes of Knighthood, which should be made hereafter, some of them doubtlesse would be put forth adorned with that perfection whereof you spoke but now: inriching our language with the pleasing and pretious treasure of eloquence; and being an occasion that the old bookes would become obscure in the bright presence of those new ones published, for the honest recreation, not only of the idler sort, but also of those that haue more serious occupations. For it is not possible for the bow to continue still bent: nor can our humane and fraile nature sustaine it selfe long, without some helpe of lawfull recreation.
The Canon and Curate had arriued to this point of their discourse, when the Barber spurring on, and ouertaking them, said to the Curate, this is the place I lately told you was fit
 to passe ouer the heate of the day in, while the Oxen baited amidst the fresh and abundant pastures: it likes me very wel, quoth the Curate: and telling the Canon what he meant to doe, he also was pleased to remaine with them, as well inuited by the prospect of a beautifull vally, which offered it selfe to their view, as also to inioy the Curates conuersation, towards whom he beganne to beare maruailous affection: and lastly with the desire hee had to bee throughly acquainted with Don-Quixotes aduentures, therefore he gaue order to some of his men, that they should ride to the Inne, which was hard by, and bring from thence what meate they could finde sufficient to satisfie them all, because he likewise meant to passe the hot time of the day in that place: to which one of his men did answere, that their sumpture Mule was by that time, as he thought, in the Inne, so copiously furnished with prouision of meate, that as hee supposed, they needed not buy any thing there but barly for their Mules: if it bee so, quoth the Canon, let our Mules be carryed thither, and the sumpture one returned hither.
Whilest this passed, Sancho being free from the continuall presence of the Curate and Barber, whom he held as suspected persons, thought it a fit time to speake with his Lord, and therefore drew neare to the cage wherein he sate, and said to him in this manner. Sir, that I may discharge my conscience, I will reueale vnto you all that hath past in this affaire of your inchauntment: which briefly is, that those two which ride with their faces couered, are the Curate of our Village and the Barber, and as I imagine they both are the plotters of this your kinde of carrying away, for meere emulation that they see you surpasse them both in atchieuing of famous acts. This truth being presupposed, it followes, that you are not inchaunted, but bee gulled and made a foole. For the proofe whereof I will but demaund of you one question, and if you doe answere me according to mine expectation, as I beleeue you will, you shall feele the deceipt with your owne handes, and perceiue how you are not inchaunted,
 but rather haue your wits turned vpside-downe. Sonn Sancho demaund what thou wilt, quoth Don-Quixote, and I will satisfie thee, and answere directly to thy desire: But as touching thy auerment, that those which goe along with vs be the Curate, and Barber, our Gossips, and old acquaintance; it may well befall that they seeme to bee such; but that they are so really, and in effect, I would not haue thee beleeue in any manner. For that which thou art to beleeue, and shouldest vnderstand in this matter is, that if they be like those our friends as thou sayest, it must needs be that those which haue inchaunted mee, haue assumed their semblance, and likenesse (for it is an easie thing for Magicians to put on any shape they please) thereby to giue thee occasion to thinke that which thou doest, to driue thee into such a labyrinth of imaginations, as thou shalt not afterwards know how to sallie out, although thou hadst the assistance of Theseus clew: and withall to make me wauer in mine vnderstanding, to the end I may not coniecture from whence this charme is deriued vnto me: for if thou on the one side doest affirme, that the Barber, and Curate of our Village doe accompany me; and I on the other side finde my selfe incaged, and am so assured of mine owne force, that no humane strength bee it not supernaturall, is able thus to incage mee, what wouldest thou haue mee say, or thinke, but that the manner of mine inchantment exceeds as many as euer I read throughout all the Histories, intreating of Knights errant which haue beene inchaunted. Wherefore thou maiest very well appease, and quiet thy selfe in that point of beleeuing, then to be those thou saist; for they are those as much, as I am a Turke: and as touching thy desire to demaund somewhat of me, speake, for I will answere thee, although thou puttest me questions vntill to morrow morning.
Our Ladie assist me quoth Sancho (as loude as he could) and is it possible that you are so brainsicke, and hard headed as you cannot perceiue that I affime the very pure truth, and that malice hath a greater stroake in this your disgrace, and
 imployment, then any inchantments. But seeing it is so, I will proue euidently that you are not inchanted: if not, tell me, as God shall deliuer you out of this tempest, and as you shall see your selfe, when you least thinke of it in my Ladie Dulcineas armes: make an end of coniuring mee, said Don-Quixote, and aske me what question thou wilt; for I haue alreadie told thee that I will answere with all punctuality: that is it I demaund quoth Sancho; and the thing I would know is, that you tell me without adding or diminishing ought, but with all truth vsed or looked for of all those which professe the exercise of armes as you doe, vnder the title of Knights errants? I say answered Don-Quixote, that I will not lie a iot: make therefore a beginning, or an ende of his demaunds, for in good sooth thou dost weary me with so many salutations, petitions and preuentions? Sancho replied, I say that I am secure of the bountie and truth of my Lord: and therefore, because it makes to the purpose in our affaire, I doe with all respect, demaund, whether your worship since your incagement, and as you imagine inchantment in that coope, haue not had a desire to make greater or lesse water, as men are wont to say. I do not vnderstand good Sancho, that phrase of making water: and therefore explicate thy selfe if thou wouldest haue me to answere thee directly: and is it possible, replied he, that your worship vnderstands not what it is to make great or little waters? then goe to some schoole, and learne it of the boyes, and know that I would say, haue you had a desire to doe that which cannot be vndone? O now, now, I vnderstand thee Sancho; yes verie many times, yea and euen now I haue, wherefore, I pray thee, deliuer mee from the extremitie thereof for I promise thee I am not altogether so cleane as I would be.



CHAP. XXII.

Wherein the discreete discourse that passed betweene Sancho Panca and his Lord Don-Quixote, is expressed.

HA, quoth Sancho, haue I caught you at last? this is that which I desired to know, as much as my soule or life. Come now Sir, and tell me, can you denie that which is wont to be said, when a bodie is ill disposed, I know not what ayles such a one; for hee neither eates nor drinkes, nor sleepes, nor answeres directly to that which is demaunded him, so as it seemes that he is inchanted? by which may be collected, that such as neither eate, drinke, sleepe, nor do the other naturall things you wote of are inchanted: but not those which haue a desire as you haue, and eate meate, when they get it, and drinke drinke when it is giuen them, and answere to all that is propounded vnto them? Thou sayest true Sancho quoth Don-Quixote: but I haue told thee alreadie, that there are diuers sorts of inchantments, and perhaps they change with the times from one kinde into another; and that now the inchanted vse to doe all that which I doe, although they did not so in times past; and therefore there is no disputing or drawing of conclusions against the customes of the time. I know, and doe verily perswade my selfe, that I am inchanted, and that is sufficient for the discharge of my conscience, which would be greatly burdened if I thought that I were not inchanted, and yet permitted my selfe to be borne away in this Cage idlely, and like a coward withholding the succour I might giue to many distressed and needie persons, which euen at this houre be like enough to haue extreame want of mine aide, and assistance. Yet say I notwithstanding replied Sancho, that for more abundant satisfaction your worship might do wel to attempt
 the getting out of this prison, the which I do oblige my selfe with all my power to facilitate, yea and to get you out, and then you may recount eftsoons on the good Rozinante, who also seemes inchanted, so sad and melancholy he goes: And this being done, we may againe assay the fortune of seeking aduentures, which if it haue no good successe, we haue time enough to returne to our Cage; wherein I promise, by the faith of a good and loyall Squire, to shut vp my selfe together with you, if you shall proue so vnfortunate, or I so foolish, as not to bring our designes to a good issue. I am content to doe what thou sayest, brother Sancho, replied Don-Quixote, and when thou seest oportunity offered to free me, I will be rated by thee in euery thing, but yet thou shalt see, how far thou art ouerwrought in the knowledge thou wilt seeme to haue of my disgrace.
The Knight errant, and the ill errant Squire beguiled the time in these discourses, vntill they arriued vnto the place where the Canon, Curate, and Barber expected them; and then Sancho allighting, and helping to take downe the Cage, the waineman vnyoaked his Oxen, permitting them to take the benefit of pasture in that greene and pleasant valley, whose verder inuited not such to inioyne it as were inchanted like Don-Quixote, but rather such heedfull and discreete persons as was his man, who intreated the Curate to licence his Lord to come out, but a little while, for otherwise the prison would not be so cleanly as the presence of so worthie a Knight as his Lord was required. The Curate vnderstood his meaning, and answered that he would satisfie his request very willingly, but that hee feared that when he saw himselfe at liberty, he would play then some pranke or other, and goe whither no bodie should euer set eye on him after: I will be his surety that he shall not flie away quoth Sancho: and I also, quoth the Canon, if he wil but promise mee, as he is a knight, that he will not depart from vs without our consent. I giue my word that I will not, said Don-Quixote (who heard all that they had said) and the rather
 because that inchanted bodies haue not freewill to dispose of themselues as they list; for he that inchanted them, may make them vnable to stirre from one place in three daies: and if they make an escape, he can compell them to returne flying: and therefore since it was so, they might securely set him at liberty, especially seeing that it would redound so much to all their benefits: for if they did not free him, or get further off, he protested that he could not forbeare to offend their noses. The Canon tooke his hand (although it were bound) and by his faith, and word, that he would not depart, and then they gaue him liberty; whereat he infinitely reioyced, especially seeing himselfe out of the Cage. The first thing that he did after was to stretch all his bodie, and then he went towards Rozinante, and striking him twice or thrice on the buttocks, he said: I hope yet in God, and his blessed mother: O flower and mirrour of horses, that wee two shall see our selues very soone in that state which our hearts desire; thou with thy Lord on thy backe, and I mounted on thee, and exercising the function for which God sent mee into this world. And saying so, Don-Quixote with his Squire Sancho, retired himselfe somewhat from the companie, and came backe soone after a little more lightned, but greatly desiring to execute his Squires designes.
The Canon beheld him very earnestly, and with admiration wondering to see the strangenesse of his fond humour, and how that he shewed, in whatsoeuer he vttered, a very good vnderstanding, and onely left the stirrops (as is said before) when any mention was made of Chiualrie; and therefore moued to compassion, after they were all laide downe along vpon the grasse, expecting their dinner, hee said vnto him: Gentlemen, is it possible that the idle and vnsauourie lecture of Bookes of Knighthood, hath so much distracted your wit, as thus to beleeue, that you are caried away inchanted, with other things of that kind, as much wide from truth, as vntruths can be from veritie it selfe? Or how is it possible that any humaine vnderstanding can frame
 it selfe to beleeue, that in this world there haue beene such an infinitie of Amadises, such a crew of famous Knights, so many Emperours of Trabisonda, such a number of Felixmartes of Hyrcania; so many Palfrayes, Damzels errant, Serpents, Robbers, Giants, Battailes, vnheard of aduentures, sundrie kinds of inchantments, such vnmeasurable in Counters, such brauerie of apparell, such a multitude of enamoured and valiant Princesses, so many Squires-Earles, wittie Dwarfes, Viragoes, Loue letters, amorous dalliances; and finally so many, so vnreasonable, and impossible aduentures, as are contained in the Bookes of Knighthood. This much I dare auouch of my selfe, that when I read them as long as I doe not thinke that they are all but toyes and vntruthes, they delight me: but when I ponder seriously, what they are, I throw the very best of them against the wals, yea and would throw them into the fire if they were neere me, or in my hands. Hauing well deserued that seueritie, as false Impostures, and seducers of common sence; as broachers of new Sects, and of vncouth courses of life; as those that giue occasion to the ignorant vulgar to beleeue in, such exorbitant vntruthes as are contained in rhem. Yea, and are withall so presumptuous, as to dare to confound the wits of the most discreete, and best discended Gentlemen; as we may clearely perceiue by that they haue done to your selfe, whom they haue brought to such termes as it is necessarie to shut you vp in a Cage, and carie you on a Teame of Oxen, euen as one caries a Lion or Tygre from place to place, to gaine a liuing by the shewing of him. Therefore, good Don-Quixote, take compassion of your selfe, and returne into the bosome of discretion; and learne to imploy the most happie talent of vnderstanding, and abundance of wit, wherewith bountifull heauen hath inriched you, yet some other course of studie, which may redound to the profit of your soule, and aduancement of your credit and estate. And if, borne away by your naturall disposition; you will yet persist in the reading of warlike, and Knightly
 discourses; Reade in the holy Scripture the Acts of Iudges, for there you shall find surpassing feates and deedes, as true, as valorous. Portugall had a Viriate. Rome a Caesar. Carthage an Hannibal, Greece an Alexander, Castile an Earl, Fernan Goncalez, Valencia a Cid, Andaluzia a Goncalo Fernandez, Estremaduza a Diego Garcia de Paredes, Xerez a Garci Perez de Vargas, Toledo a Garci Lasso, Siuil a Don Manuel de Leon, The discourses of whose valorous Actes, may entertaine, teach, delight, and make wonder, the most sublime wit that shall reade them. Yea, this were indeed a studie fit for your sharpe vnderstanding, my deere Sir Don-Quixote, for by this you should become learned in Histories, enamoured of vertue, instructed in goodnesse, bettered in maners, valiant without rashnesse, bold without cowardice: and all this to Gods honour, your owne profit, and renowme of the Mancha, from whence, as I haue learned, you deduce your beginning and progenie.
Don-Quixote listned with all attention vnto the Canons admonition, and perceiuing that he was come to an end of them, after he had looked vpon him a good while, he said, me thinkes Gentleman, that the scope of your discourse hath beene addrest to perswade me, that there neuer were any Knights Errant in the world; and that all the bookes of Chiualrie are false, lying, hurtfull, and vnprofitable to the Common-wealth; and that I haue done ill to reade them, worse to beleeue in them, and worst of all to follow them, by hauing thus taken on mee the most austere profession of wandring Knighthood, where of they intreate: denying moreouer that there were euer any Amadises, either of Gaul or Greece; or any of all the other Knights, wherewith such Bookes are stuffed; All is iust as you haue said, quoth the Canon: whereto Don-Quixote replied thus, You also added, that such Bookes had done me much hurt, seeing they had turned my iudgement, and immured me vp in this Cage; and that it were better for me, to make some amendment, and alter my studie, reading other that are more authenticall,
 and delight and instruct much better. It is very true answered the Canon. Why then, quoth Don-Quixote, I finde by mine accounts, that the inchanted, and senslesse man is your selfe; seeing you haue bent your selfe to speak so many blasphemies against a thing so true, so currant, and of such request in the world, as hee that should denie it, as you doe, merites the same punishment, which as you say you giue to those Bookes, when the reading thereof offends you: For to goe about to make men beleeue, that Amadis neuer liued; nor any other of those Knights, wherewith Histories are fully replenished, would bee none other then to perswade them, that the Sunne lightens not, the Earth sustaines not, nor the Ice makes any thing cold. See what witte is there in the world so profound, that can induce another to beleeue, that the Historie of Guy of Burgundy, and the Princes Floripes, was not true? Nor that of Fierabras, with the bridge of Mantible, which befell in Charlemaines time, and is, I sweare, as true, as that it is day at this instant; and if it be a lie, so must it bee also, that euer there was an Hector Achilles, or the warre of Troy; The twelue Peeres of France, or King Arthur of Brittaine, who goes yet about the world in the shape of a Crow, and is euery foote expected in his Kingdome. And they will as well presume to say, that the Historie of Guarino Mezquino, and of the quest of the holy Sangriall be lies; and that for the loue betweene Sir Tristram and La Belle Ysonde, and betweene Queene Gueneuor and Sir Launcelot Dulak, we haue no sufficient Authoritie, and yet there bee certaine persons aliue, which almost remember, that they haue seene the Lady Quintaniona, who was one of the best skinkers of Wine that euer Great Brittaine had; and this is so certaine, as I remember that one of my Grandmothers of my Fathers side, was wont to say vnto me, when shee saw my matrone, with a long and reuerend kerchiefe or vaile, my boy, that woman resembles very much Lady Quintaniona, from which I argue, that either shee knew her selfe, or at the least, had seene some portraiture
 of hers. Who can moreouer denie the certaintie of the Historie of Peter of Prouaunce, and the beautifull Magolona, seeing that vntill this very day one may behold in the Kings Armorie, the Pinne wherewith he guided, and turned any way he listed, the Horse of wood, whereupon he rode thorow the Ayre; which Pinne, is a little bigger then the Thill of a Cart, and neere vnto it is also seene Babieca his saddle: and in Roncesuals there yet hangs Rowlands hornes, which is as bigge as a very great Ioyst, whence is inferred, that there were twelue Peeres, that there was a Pierres of Prouance, that also there were Cides, and other such Knights as those which the world termes aduenturers; if not, let them also tell me, that the valiant Lusitanian, Iohn de Melo, was no Knight Errant, who went to Burgundie, and in the Citie of Ras fought with the famous Lord of Charni called Mosen Pierres, and after with Mosen Henry of Ramestan in the Citie of Basilea, and bore away the victorie in both the conflicts, to his eternall fame: and that there were no such curres as the aduentures, and single combats begunne, and ended in Burgundie, by the valiant Spaniards Pedro Barba, and Gutierre Quixada (from whom I my selfe am lineally discended) who ouercame the Earle of Saint Pauls sonnes. They may also auerre vnto me, that Don Fernando de Gueuarra went not to seeke aduentures in Germanie, where he fought with Micer George a Knight of the Duke of Austria his house: Let them likewise affirme, that Suero de Quinonnes of the passage, his Iustes were but iestes; as also the enterprise of Mosen Lewis de falses, against Don Goncala de Guzman a Gentleman of Castile, with many other renoumed Acts, done as well by Christian Knights of this Kingdome, as of other forraine lands, and so authenticall and true, as that I am compelled to reiterate what I said before, that whosoeuer denies them, is defectiue of reason and good discourse.
Full of admiration remained the good Canon, to heare the composition, and medly, that Don-Quixote made of
 truths, and fictions together; and at the great notice he had of all things that might any way concerne his Knighthood errant: and therefore he shaped him this answere: I cannot denie Sir Don-Quixote, but that some part of that which you haue said is true, specially touching those Spanish aduenturers of whome you haue spoken; and will likewise graunt you, that there were twelue Peeres of France, but I will not beleeue that they haue accomplished all that which the Archbishop Turpine hath left written of them: for the bare truth of the affaire is, that they were certaine Noblemen chosen out by the Kings of France, whom they called Peeres, because they were all equall in valour, qualitie, and worth; or if they were not, it was at least presumed that they were; and they were not much vnlike the militarie orders of Saint Iames, or Calatraua, were in request, wherein it is presupposed that such as are of the profession, are, or ought to be valorous, and well descended, Gentlemen: and as now they say, a Knight of St. Iohn, or Alcantara, so in those times they said, a Knight of the twelue Peeres; because they were twelue equals, chosen to be of that military order. That there was a Cid, and a Bernard of Carpio, is also doubtlesse; that they haue done the acts recounted of them, I beleeue there is very great cause to doubt. As touching the pinne of the good Earle Pierres, and that it is by Babicca his saddle in the kings Armourie, I confesse that my sin hath made me so ignorant, or blind, that although I haue the saddle very well, yet could I neuer get a sight of that Pinne, how great soeuer you affirme it to bee. Well, it is there without question, said Don-Quixote, and for the greater confirmation thereof they say it is laid vp in a case of Neates leather, to keepe it from ^usting. That may very well so be, said the Canon, yet by the orders that I haue receiued, I doe not remember that euer I saw it: and although I should graunt it to be there, yet doe I not therefore oblige my selfe to beleeue the Histories of all the Amadises, nor those of the other rabblement of Knights, which bookes doe mention vnto vs: nor is it reason
 that so Honorable a man, adorned with so many good parts, and indowed with such a wit, as you are, should beleeue, that so many, and so strange follies, as are written in the rauing bookes of Chiualrie, can be true.


CHAP. XXIII.

Of the discreet contention betweene Don-Quixote and the Canon, with other accidents.

THat were a jest indeed, quoth Don-Quixote, that books which are printed with the Kings licence, and approbation of those to whom their examination was committed, and that are read with vniuersall delight and acceptance; and celebrated by great and little, rich, and poore, learned and ignorant, Plebeans and Gentlemen, and finally by all kinde of persons of what state or condition soeuer, should be so lying and fabulous; specially seeing they haue such probabilitie of truth; seeing they describe vnto vs the Father, Mother, Countrey, Kinsfolke, Age, Towne, and Acts of such a Knight, or Knights, and that so exactly, point by point, and day by day: Hold your peace and neuer speake againe such a blasphemie, and beleeue me, for I doe sincerely counsaile you what you, as a discreet man, ought to doe herein; and if not, reade them but once, and you shall see what delight you shall receiue thereby: if not, tell me what greater pleasure can there be, then to behold (as one would say) euen here and before our eyes, a great lake of pitch boiling hot, and many Serpents, Snakes, Lizarts, and other kinds of cruell and dreadfull beasts swimming a thwart it, and in euery part of it, and that there issues out of the lake a most lamentable voice, saying. O thou Knight, whatsoeuer thou art, which doest behold the fearefull lake, if thou desirest to obtaine the good concealed vnder these
 horride and blacke waters, shew the valour of thy strong brest, and throw thy selfe into the midst of this sable, and inflamed licour; for if thou doest not so, thou shalt not be worthy to discouer the great wonders hidden in the seuen Castles of the seuen Fates, which are seated vnder these gloomie waues: and that scarce hath the Knight heard the fearefull voice, when without entring into any new discourses, or once considering the danger whereinto he thrusts himselfe, yea or easing himselfe of the waight of his ponderous armour, but only commending himselfe vnto God, and his Ladie Mistris, hee plunges into the midst of that burning puddle, and when he neither cares nor knowes what may befall him, hee finds himselfe in the midst of flourishing fields, with which the very Elisean plaines can in no sort be compared; There it seemes to him that the element is more transparent, and that the Sunne shines with a cleerer light then in our Orbe: there offers it selfe to his greedie and curious eye, a most pleasing forrest replenished with so greene, and well-spred trees, as the verdure thereof both ioyes and quickens the sight; whilest the eares are entertained by the harmonious, though artlesse songs of infinite and enamelled birds, which trauerse the intricate bowes of that shadie habitation: Here hee discouers a small streame, whose fresh waters resembling liquid Cristall, slides ouer the small sands, and white litle stones, which resemble sifted gold wherein Orientall Pearles are inchaced: there he discernes an artificiall Fountaine wrought of motly Iasper and smooth Marble: and hard by it an other, rudely and negligently framed, wherein the sundry Cockle shels with the wreathed white and yellow houses of the Peruincle, and Snaile intermingled, and placed after a disorderly order (hauing now and then peeces of cleare Cristall, and counterfait Emeralds mingled among them) do make a worke of so gracefull varietie, as Arte imitating Nature, doth herein seeme to surpasse her. Suddainely he discouers a strong Castle or goodly Palace, whose walles are of beaten gold, the pinacles of Diamonds, the gates of Iacints; finally, it is of so
 exquisite workemanship, as although the materials whereof it is built, are no worse then Diamonds, Carbuncles, Rubies, Emeralds, Pearles, and Gold, yet is the Architecture thereof of more estimation and value then they, and is there any more to be seene, after the seeing hereof, then to see sallie out at the Castle gates, a goodly troupe of louely Damzels, whose braue and costly attyre, if I should attempt to describe as it is laid downe in Histories, wee should neuer make an end? and shee that seemes the chiefest of all to take presently our bold Knight, that threw himselfe into the boiling lake, by the hand, and carry him into the rich Castle or Palace without speaking a word, and cause him to strip himselfe as naked, as he was when his Mother bore him, and bathe him in very temperate waters, and afterward annoint him all ouer with precious ointments, and put on him a shirt of most fine, odoriferous, and perfumed Sendall; and then another Damzell to come suddainely, and casts on his backe a rich mantel, which they say is wont to bee worth, at the very least a rich City, yea and more? then what a sport it is, when they tell vs after, that after this hee is carried into another Hall, where he finds the tables couered so orderly as he rests amazed? what, to see cast on his hands water distilled all of Ambar, and most fragrant flowers? what, to see him seated in a chaire of Yuorie? what, to see him serued by all the Damzels with maruailous silence? what, the fetting before him such variety of accates, and those so excellently dressed, as his appetite knowes not to which of them it shall first addresse his hand? what, to heare the Musicke which sounds whilst he is at dinner, without knowing who makes it, or whence it comes? and after that dinner is ended, and the tables taken away, the Knight to remaine leaning on a chaire, and perhaps picking of his teeth, as the custome is, and on a suddaine to enter at the Hal-dore another much more beaufull Damzell then any of the former, and to fit by his side and beginne to recount vnto him what Castle that is, and how shee is inchaunted therein, with many other things that amazed
 the Knight, and amazed the Readers. I will not enlarge my selfe any more in this matter, seeing that you may collect out of that which I haue said, that any part that is read of any booke of a Knight errant, will delight, and astonish him, that shall peruse it with attention: and therefore I pray you beleeue me, and as I haue said already, reade those kinde of bookes, and you shall finde that they will exile all the melancholie that shall trouble you, and rectifie your disposition, if by fortune it be depraued: for I dare affirme of my selfe that since I am become a Knight errant, I am valiant, curteous, liberall, well mannered, generous, gentle, bold, mild, patient, an indurer of labours, imprisonments, and inchauntments: and although it be but so little a while since I was shut vp in a cage like a mad man, yet doe I hope by the valour of mine arme (heauen concurring and fortune not crossing me) to see my selfe within a few dayes, the King of some Kingdome, wherein I may shew the bounty and liberalitie included within my brest. For in good truth Sir, a poore man is made vnable to manifest the vertue of liberalitie towards any other, although he virtually possesse it himselfe in a most eminent degree: and the will to gratifie which only consists of will, is as dead a thing, as Faith without Workes. For which cause I doe wish, that fortune would quickly present me some occasion whereby I might make my selfe an Emperour; that I may discouer the desire I haue to doe good vnto my friends, but especially to this my poore Squire Sancho Panca, who is one of the honestest men in the world, on whome I would faine bestow the Earledome which I promised him many dayes past, but that I feare mee he will not be able to gouerne his state.
Sancho ouerhearing those last words of his masters said, labour you, Sir Don-Quixote, to gette mee that Earledome as often promised by you, as much longed for by me, and I promise you that I will not want sufficiency to gouerne it, and though I should, yet haue I heard say, that there are men in the world who take Lordships to farme, paying the Lord
 so much by the yeare, and vndertaking the care of the gouernment thereof, whilst the Lord himselfe with outstretched legs doth liue at his ease; enioying the rents they bring him, and caring for nothing else: and so will I doe, and will not stand racking it to the vtmost, but presently desist from all administration, and liue merrily vpon my rent like a yong Duke; and so let the world wagge, and goe how it will. That friend Sancho is to be vnderstood quoth the Canon, of enioyning the reuenewes; but as concerning the administration of iustice, the Lord of the Signiory is bound to looke to it, in that is required a sufficiency and ability to gouerne, and aboue all, a good intention to deale iustly, and determine rightly: for if this be wanting when we beginne, our meanes and ends will alwaies be subiect to errour. And therefore is God wont as well to further the good designes of the simple, as to disfauour the bad ones of those that be wittily wicked.
I vnderstand not those Philosophies quoth Sancho Panca, but this I know well, that I would I had as speedily the Earldome, as I could tell how to gouerne it, for I haue as much soule as another, and as much bodie as hee that hath most, and I would be as absolute a king in my estate, as any one would be in his; and being such, I would doe what I liked, and doing what I liked, I would take my pleasure, and taking my pleasure I would be content; and when one is content, he hath no more to desire, and hauing no more to desire the matter were ended: and then come the state when it will, or farewell it, and let vs behold our selues, as one blinde man said to another. They are no bad Philosophies which thou comest out with kind Sancho, quoth the Canon, but yet for all that there is much to be said concerning this matter of Earledomes. To that Don-Quixote replied: I know not what more may be said, onely I gouerne my selfe by the the example of Amadis de Saule, who made his Squire Earle of the firme Iland: and therefore I may without scruple of conscience make Sancho Panca an Earle; for
 he is one of the best Squires that euer knight errant had. The Canon abode amazed at the well-compacted and orderly rauings of Don-Quixote; at the manner wherewith he had deciphered the aduenture of the Knight of the lake; at the impression which his lying bookes had made into him: and finally he wondred at the simplicitie of Sancho Panca, who so earnestly desired to be made Earle of the county his Lord had promised him.
By this time the Canons seruingmen, which had gone to the Inne for the sumpture Mule, were returned, and making their table of a carpet, and of the greene grasse of that meadow, they sate downe vnder the shadow of the trees, and did eate there, to the end that the waineman might not lose the commoditie of the pasture, as we haue said before, and as they sate at dinner, they sodainly heard the sound of a little bell issuing from among the briars and brambles that were at hand, and instantly after they saw come out of the thicket a very faire she-Goate, whose hide was poudered all ouer with blacke, white, and browne spots: after her followed a Goatheard crying vnto her, and in his language bidding her stay, or returne againe to the fould: but the fugitiue Goate all affrighted and fearefull ranne towards the company, and as it were seeking in her dumbe manner to be protected, strayed neere vnto them, then did the Goatheard arriue, and laying hold of her hornes (as if shee had beene capable of his reprehension) said vnto her. O yee wanton ape, ye spotted else, how come you to halt with me a late daies? what wolues do skarre your daughter? will you not tell me, faire, what the matter is? but what can it be other then that you are a female, and therefore can neuer be quiet, a foule euill take your conditions, and all theirs, whom you so much resemble, turne backe loue, turne backe, and though you be not so content withall, yet shall you at least be more safe in your fold, and among the rest of your fellowes: for if you that shall guide and direct them, go thus distracted, and wandering, what then must they doe, what
 will become of them? The Goatheards words did not a little delight the hearers, but principally the Canon, who said vnto him, I pray thee good fellow take thy rest heere a while, and doe not hasten that Goate so much to her fould, for seeing she is a female, as thou sayest, she will follow her naturall instinct how much soeuer thou opposest thy self vnto it: take therefore that bit, and drinke a draught wherewithall thou maist temper thy choller, and the Goate will rest her the whilst: and saying so, hee gaue him the hinder quarter of a cold Rabbet, which he receiuing, rendred him many thankes, and drinking a draught of wine, did pacifie himselfe, and said presently after: I would not haue you my masters account me simple, although I spoke to this beast in so earnest a fashion; for in truth the words which I vsed vnto her were not without some mysterie. I am indeed rustick, and yet not so much, but that I know how to conuerse with men, and with beasts. I beleeue that easily quoth the Curate, for I know alreadie by experience, that the woods breede learned men, and sheepe coats containe Philosophers. At the least Sir, replied the Goatheard, they haue among them experienced men: and that you may giue the more credite to this truth, and as it were, touch it with your owne hands, (although till I be bidden, I may seeme to inuite my selfe) I will, if you please to heare me but a while, relate vnto you a very true accident, which shall make good what this Gentleman (pointing to the Curate) and my selfe haue affirmed, to this Don-Quixote answered, because the Case doth seeme to haue in it some shadow of knightly aduentures, I will for my part listen vnto thee with a very good will, and I presume that all these Gentlemen will doe the like, so great is their discretion, and desire to know curious nouelty which amaze, delight, and entertaine the senses, as I doe certainly beleeue thy history will. Therefore begin it friend, and all of vs wil lend our eares vnto it, I except mine quoth Sancho, for I will goe with this pastie vnto that little streame, where I meane to fill my selfe for three daies; for I haue heard my
 Lord Don-Quixote say, that a Knight errants Squire must eate when he can, and alwaies as much as he can, because that oftentimes they enter by chance into some wood so intricate, as they cannot get out of it againe in fiue or sixe daies: and if a mans panch be not then well stuffed, or his wallet well stored, he may there remaine, and be turned as many times it happens, into mummie. Thou art in the right of it Sancho, quoth Don-Quixote, goe therefore where thou wilt, and eate what thou maist, for I am alreadie satisfied, and onely want refection for my minde, which now I will giue it by listening to this good follow. The same will wee also giue vnto ours quoth the Canon, who therewithall intreated the Goatheard to keepe promise, and beginne his tale. Then he stroking once or twice his prettie Goate, (which he yet held fast by the hornes) said thus: Lye downe pide foole, by mee, for we shall haue time enough to returne home againe. It seemed that the Goat vnderstood him; for as soone as her master sate downe, she quietly stretched her selfe along by him, and looking him in the face, did giue to vnderstand, that she was attentiue to what hee was saying. And then he began his history in this manner.


CHAP. XXIIII.

Relating that which the Goatheard told to those that carried away Don-quixote.

THeere is a village distant some three leagues from this valley, which albeit it be little, is one of the richest of all this commark: therein sometime did dwell a wealthie farmer of good respect, and so good, as although reputation and riches are commonly ioyned together, yet that which he had was rather got him by his vertue then by any
 wealth he possessed: But that which did most accumulate his happinesse (as he himselfe was wont to say) was, that he had a daughter of so accomplished beauty, so rare discretion, comlinesse, and vertue, that as many as knew and beheld her, admired to see the passing indowments wherewith heauen, and nature had inriched her. Being a child she was fayre, and increasing daily in feature, she was at the age of sixteen most beautiful. The fame wherof extended it selfe ouer all the bordering villages, but why say I the bordring villages alone, if it spread it self ouer the farthest cities, yea and entred into the kings Pallace, and into the eares of all kinde of people? so that they came from all parts to behold her as a rare thing, and patterne of miracles? her father did carefully keepe her, and she likewise heeded her selfe: for there is neither guard, locke, nor bolt able to keepe a mayden better, then is her owne warinesse, and care. The wealth of the father, and worth of the daughter moued diuers, as well of his owne village as strangers, to demaund her to wife, but he (as one whom the disposall of so rich a iewell most neerely concerned) was much perplexed, and vnable to determine on whom, among such an infinite number of importunate woers, he might bestow her: among others that bore this good wil towards her, I my self was one to whom gaue many, and very great hopes of good successe, the knowledge that her father had of mee, my birth in the same village, my descent honest, and blood vntainted, flourishing in yeares, very rich in goods, and no lesse in gifts of the mind. Another of the same village, and qualities was also a suiter vnto her: which was an occasion to hold her in suspence, and put his will in the ballance, deeming as he did, that she might be bestowed on either of vs two: and that he might be rid of his doubt, he resolued to tell it to Leandra, (for so do they call the rich maids which hath brought mee to extreame misery) noting discreetly, that seeing we both were equals, it would not be amisse to leaue in his deere daughters power the making choyce of whether she liked best. A thing worthy to be noted by all those parents that would
 haue their children marry. Wherein my meaning is not that they should permit them to make a bad or a base choyce, but that they propound certaine good ones, and referre to their liking which of them they will take. I know not what was the liking of Leandra, but only know this, that the father posted vs off by alleaging the ouer greene yeares of his daughter, and vsing generall termes, which neither obliged him, nor discharged vs. My riuall was called Anselmo, and my selfe Eugenio: that you may also haue some iustice of the persons which were actors in this tragedie, whose conclusion is yet depending, but threatens much future disaster.
About the very same time arriued to our village one Vincent of the Rose, sonne to a poore labourer of the same place, which Vincente returned as then from Italy, and diuers other countries, wherin he had beene a souldier, for being of some twelue yeares of age, a certaine Captaine that with his company passed along by our village, did carry him away with him, and the youth after a dozen yeares more, came backe againe attired like and a soldier, painted with a hundred colours, full of a thousand deuises of Cristall, fiue steele chains: to day he would put on some gay thing, the next day some other, but all of them slight painted, and of little waight, lesse worth. The clownish people which are naturally malicious, and if they haue but euer so little idlenesse or leasure become malice it selfe, did note and recken vp all his braueries, and iewels, and found that he had but three suits of apparrell of different colours, with garters and stockings answerable to them; but he vsed so many disguisements, varieties, transformations, and inuentions, which they, as if they had not counted them all, some one would haue sworne that he had made shew of more then tenne suits of apparrell, and more then twenty plumes of feathers: and let not that which I tell you of the apparrell be counted impertinent, or from the matter; for it makes a principall part in the history. He would sit on a bench that stood vnder a great Poplar tree in the midst of the market place, and there would hold vs all,
 with gaping mouthes, listening to the gallant aduentures, and resolute acts he recounted vnto vs, there was no land in all the world, whose soile he had not troden on, no battell wherein he had not been present, he had slaine more Moores, then the kingdomes of Marrocco, and Tuney contained, and vndertaken more single combats, as he said, then euer did either Gant, Luna, or Diego Garcia de Paredes, and a thousand others whom he named, and yet hee still came away with the victory, without hauing euer left one drop of blood. On the other side he would shew vs signes of wounds, which although they could not be discerned, yet would he perswade vs that they were the markes of bullets, which he receiued in diuers skirmishes, and manners. Finally he would thou his equals, and those which knew him very well with maruellous arrogancy: and said, that his arme was his father, his workes his linage, and that beside his being a souldier, hee ought not a whit to the king. To these his arrogancies was annext some superficiall skill in musicke, for he could scratch a little on a Gytterne, and some would say that hee made it speake: but his many graces made not a stop there; for hee had likewise some shadowes of Poetry, and so would make a ballade of a league and a halfe long vpon euery toy that hapned in the village.
The souldier therefore, whom I haue deciphered, this Vincente of the Rose, this braggard, this Musician, this Poet, eyed and beheld many times by Leandra from a certaine window of her house that looked into the Market place; and the golden shew of his attire enamoured her: and his Ditties inchanted her; for hee would giue twentie Copies of euery one he composed: The report of his worthy acts, beautified by himselfe, came also vnto her eares, and finally (for so it is likely the Diuell had ordered the matter) shee became in Loue with him before he presumed to thinke once of soliciting her. And as in Loue aduentures no one is accomplished with more facilitie, then that which is fauoured by the womans desire; Leandra and Vincente made a short and easie
 agreement, and ere any one of her suiters could once suspect her desires, shee had fully satisfied them; abandoned her deere and louing Fathers house, (for her mother liues not) and running away from the Village with the Souldier, who departed with more triumph from that enterprise, then from all the others which he had arrogated to himselfe. The accident amazed all the Towne, yea and all those to whome the rumour thereof arriued, was astonished, Anselmo amazed, her father sorrowfull, her kinsfolke ashamed. The ministers of Iustice carefull, and the Troupers readie to make pursuit; all the wayes were laide, and the woods, and euery other place meerely searched; and at the end of three dayes they found the lustfull Leandra hidden in a Caue within a wood, naked in her smocke, and dispoyled of a great summe of money, and many precious Iewels, which shee had brought away with her: they returned her to her dolefull fathers presence, where asking how shee became so despoyled, shee presently confessed, that Vincent of the Rose had deceiued her; for hauing passed his word to make her his wife, he perswaded her to leaue her fathers house, and made her beleeue that he would carrie her to the richest, and most delightfull Citie of the world, which was Naples. And that shee through indiscretion, and his fraude, had giuen credit to his words, and robbing her father, stole away with him the very same night that shee was missed; and that he caried her to a very rough thicket, and shut her vp in that Caue wherein they found her: Shee also recounted how the Souldier, without touching her honour, had robd her of all that shee caried, and leauing her in that Caue, was fled away; which successe stroke vs into greater admiration then all the rest: for we could hardly be induced to beleeue the yong gallants continencie, but shee did so earnestly protest it, as it did not a little comfort her comfortlesse father, who made no reckoning of the riches hee had lost, seeing his daughter had yet reserued that Iewell which being once gone, could neuer againe be recouered. The same day that Leandra appeared,
 shee also vanished out of our sights, being conueied away by her Father, and shut vp in a Nunnerie at a certaine Towne not farre off; hoping that time would illiterate some part of the bad opinion already conceiued of his daughters facilitie. Leandra her youth serued to excuse her errour, at least with those which gained nothing by her being good or ill; but such as knew her discretion, and great wit, did not attribute her sinne to ignorance, but rather to her too much lightnesse, and the naturall infirmitie of that sexe, which for the most part is inconsiderate, and slipperie. Leandra being shut vp, Anselmos eyes lost her light, or at least beheld not any thing that could delight them; and mine remained in darknesse without light, that could addresse them to any pleasing obiect in Leandraes absence. Our griefes increased, our patience diminished, wee cursed the Souldiers ornaments, and abhord her Fathers want of looking to her. To be briefe, Anselmo and my selfe, resolued to abandon the Village, and come to this valley, where hee feeding a great flocke of Sheepe of his owne, and I as copious a Heard of Goates of mine, we passe our liues among these trees giuing vent to our passions, either by singing together the beautifull Leandraes praises, or dispraises: or by sighing alone, and alone communicating our quarrelsome complaints with heauen. Many others of Leandras suitors haue since, by our example, come to these intricate woods, where they vse our very exercise; and they are so many, as it seemes that this place is conuerted into the Pastoral Arcadia, it is ful of shepheards and sheepfolds, and there is no one part thereof wherein the name of the beautifull Leandra resoundeth not: There one doth curse her, and termeth her humours inconstant and dishonest an other condemnes her of being so facile and light; some one absolues, and pardons him, an other condemnes and dispises her, and celebrates her beautie, an other execrates her disposition, and finally all blame, but yet adore her, and the rauing distraction of them all, doth so farre extend it selfe, as some one complaines of disdaine, that neuer
 spoke word vnto her, and some one laments, and feeles the inraged fits of iealousie, though shee neuer ministred any occasion thereof; for as I haue said her sinne was knowne before her desires; There is no clift of a Rocke, no banke of a streame, nor shadow of a tree without some Shepheard or other, that breathes out his misfortunes to the silent ayre. The Eccho repeates Leandras name, wheresoeuer it can bee formed; the woods resound Leandra, the brokes doe murmur Leandra, and Leandra holds vs all perplexed and inchanted, hoping without hope, and fearing without knowledge what we feare.
And among all this flocke of franticke men none shewes more, or lesse iudgement, then my companion Anselmo; who hauing so many other titles vnder which hee might plaine him, onely complaines of absence, and doeth to the sound of a rebecke (which he handles admirably well) sing certaine dolefull verses, which fully discouer the excellencie of his conceit. I follow a more easie, and (in mine opinion) a more certaine way; to wit, I rayle on the lightnes of women, on their inconstancie, double dealing, dead promises, crackt trust, and the small discretion they shewe in placing of their affections, and this Sir was the occasion of the words, and reasons I lately vsed to this Goate, whom I doe esteeme but little because shee is a female, although shee be otherwise, the best of all my heard: And this is the Historie which I promised to tell you, wherein if I haue beene prolixe, I will bee altogether as large in doing you any seruice, for I haue here at hand my Cabine, and therein store of fresh milke, and sauory cheese, with many sortes of excellent fruite, no lesse agreeable to the sight then pleasing to the taste.



CHAP. XXV.

Of the falling out of Don-Quixote and the Goateheard: with the aduenture of the disciplinants, to which the Knight gaue end to his cost.

THe Goateheards tale bred a generall delight in all the hearers, but specially in the Canon, who did very exactly note the manner wherewithall he deliuered it, as different from the stile or discourse of a rude Goateheard, as approching to the discretion of a perfect Courtier; and therefore he said, that the Curate had spoken very iudiciously, in affirming that the woods bred learned men, all of them made bountifull tenders of their friendship and seruice to Eugenio, but hee that enlarged himselfe more then the rest, was Don-Quixote, who said vnto him: certes, friend Goateheard, if I were at this time able to vndertake any aduenture, I would presently set forward, and fall in hand with it to doe you a good turne, and I would take Leandra out of the Monasterie (wherein without doubt shee is restrained against her will) in despight of the Ladie Abbesse, and of all those that should take her part; and would put her into your hands, to the end you might dispose of her at your pleasure, yet still obseruing the lawes of Knighthood, which command, that no man doe any wrong, and offer violence vnto a Damzell: yet I hope in our Lord God, that the skill of a malicious inchaunter shall not be of such force, but that the science of a better meaning wisard shall preuaile against him; and whensoeuer that shal befall, I doe promise you my help and fauour, as I am bound by my profession, which chiefly consists in assisting the weake and distressed.
The Goateheard beheld him, and seeing the Knight so ill arrayed, and of so euill-fauoured a countenance, hee wondred, and questioned the Barber, who sate neare to him, thus
 I pray you Sir, who is this man, of so strange a figure, and that speaks so odly? who else should he be, answered the Barber, but the famous Don-Quixote of the Mancha, the righter of wrongs, the redresser of iniuries, the protector of Damzels, the affrighter of Giants, and the ouercommer of battails? that which you say of this man, answered the Goateheard, is very like that which in bookes of Chiualrie is written of Knights errant; who did all those things which you apply to this man: and yet I beleeue that either you iest, or else that this Gentlemans head is voide of braines. Thou art a great villaine, said Don-Quixote, and thou art hee whose pate wants braines; for mine is fuller then the very, very whoores that bore thee; and saying so, and snatching vp a loafe of bread that stoode by him, he caught the Goateheard so furious a blow withall, as it beate his nose flat to his face: but the other, who was not acquainted with such iests, and saw how ill hee was handled, without hauing respect to the Carpet, Napkins, or those that were eating, he leaped vpon Don-Quixote, and taking hold of his collar with both the hands, would certainely haue strangled him, Sancho Panca had not arriued at that very instant, and taking him fast behinde, had not throwen him backe on the Table, crushing dishes, breaking glasses, and shedding, and ouerthrowing all that did lie vpon it. Don-Quixote seeing himselfe free returned to get vpon the Goateheard, who all besmeered with bloud, and trampled to peeces vnder Sanchos feete, groped here and there groueling as hee was for some knife or other to take a bloudy reuenge withall, but the Canon and Curate preuented his purpose; and yet, by the Barbers assistance, he got vnder him Don-Quixote, on whome hee rained such a shower of buffets, as hee powred as much bloud from the poore Knights face, as had done from his owne: the Canon and Curate were ready to burst for laughter: The Troupers danced for sport; euery one hissed, as men vse to doe when Dogges fall out, and quarrell together: only Sancho Panca was wood, because he could not get from one of the Canons
 Seruingmen, who with-held him from going to helpe his Master. In conclusion, all being very merry, saue the two buffetants, that tugged one another extremly, they heard the sound of a trumpet so dolefull, as it made them turne their faces towards that part from whence it seemed to come: but hee that was most troubled at the noise thereof was Don-Quixote; who although he was vnder the Goateheard, full sore against his will, and by him exceedingly bruised and battered, yet said vnto him: brother Diuell (for it is impossible that thou canst bee any other, seeing that thou hast had valour and strength to subiect my forces) I pray thee let vs make truce, for one only houre; for the dolorous sound of that trumpet which toucheth our eares, doth, mee thinks inuite me to some new aduenture. The Goatheard, who was weary of buffetting, and being beaten, left him off incontinently, and Don-Quixote stood vp, and turned himselfe towards the place from whence he imagined the noise to proceede, and presently he espyed descending from a certaine height many men apparelled in white like disciplinants. The matter indeed was, that the clowdes had that yeere denyed to beflow their due on the earth, and therefore they did institute Rogations, Processions, and Disciplines, throughout all that Countrey, to desire almighty God to open the hands of his mercy, and to bestow some raine vpon them: and to this effect the people of a Village, neere vnto that place, came in Procession to a deuout Eremitage builded vpon one of the hilles that inuironed that Vally.
Don-Quixote noting the strange attyre of the Disciplinants, without any calling to memorie how hee had often seen the like before, did forthwith imagine that it was some new aduenture, and that the triall thereof only appertained to him, as to a Knight errant; and this his presumption was fortified the more, by beleeuing that an Image which they carried all couered ouer with blacke, was some principall Lady whom those miscreants and discourteous Knights did beare away perforce. And as soone as this fell into his brain,
 he leaped lightly towards Rozinante, that went feeding vp and downe the plaines, and dismounting from his pomell the bridle, and his target that hanged thereat, hee bridled him in a twice; and taking his sword from Sancho, got instantly vpon his horse, and then embracing his target, said in a loude voice to all those that were present: you shall now see, O valorous company, how important a thing it is to haue in the world such Knights as professe the order of Chiualrie errant: now I say, you shall discerne by the freeing of that good Lady, who is there carryed captiue away, whether Knights aduenturous are to be held in price; and saying so, he strucke Rozinante with his heeles (for spurs he had none) and making him to gallop (for it is not read in any part of this true Historie, that Rozinante did euer passe one formall or full carreer) he posted to encounter the disciplinants, although the Curate, Canon, and Barber did what they might to withhold him, but all was not possible; and much lesse could he be detained by these outcries of Sancho, saying, whether do you goe Sir Don-Quixote? what Diuels doe you beare in your brest that incite you to runne thus against the Catholike faith? see Sir, vnfortunate that I am, how that is a Procession of disciplinants, and that the Lady whom they beare, is the blessed Image of the immaculate Virgin, looke Sir what you doe, for at this time it may well be said, that you are not you know what. But Sancho laboured in vaine, for his Lord rode with so greedie a desire to encounter the white men, and deliuer the morning Ladie, as he heard not a word, and although he had, yet would he not then haue returned backe at the Kings commandement. Being come at last, neere to the Procession, and stopping Rozinante (who had already a great desire to rest himselfe a while) he said with a troubled and hoarse voice: O you that couer your faces, perhaps because you are not good men, giue eare and listen to what I shall say: the first that stood at this alarme were those which carryed the Image; and one of the foure Priests which sung the Litanies, beholding the strange shape of Don-Quixote,
 the leanesse of Rozinante, and other circumstances worthy of laughter, which he noted in our Knight, returned him quickly this answere. Good Sir, if you would say any thing to vs, say it instantly; for these honest men, as you see, are toiled extremely; and therefore wee cannot, nor is i^ reason wee should stand lingring to heare any thing, if it be not so brief, as it may be deliuered in two words; I will say it in one, said Don-Quixote, and it is this, that you doe forthwith giue libertie to that beautifull Lady, whose teares and pittifull semblance cleerely denote, that you carry her away against her will, and haue done her some notable iniurie; and I, who was borne to right such wrongs, will not permit her to passe one step forward, vntill shee be wholly possessed of the freedome shee doth so much desire and deserue. All those that ouerheard Don-Quixote, gathered by his words that he was some distracted man; and therefore beganne to laugh very hartily, which laughing seemed to adde gun-powder to his choler; for laying his hand on his sword without any more words, he presently assaulted the Image-carriers; one whereof leauing the charge of the burden to his fellowes, came out to encounter the Knight with a wooden forke (whereon he supported the beere whensoeuer they made a stand) and receiuing vpon it a great blow which Don-Quixote discharged at him, it parted the forke in two; and yet hee with the peece that remained in his hand returned the Knight such a thwacke vpon the shoulder, on the sword side, as his target not being able to make resistance against that rusticall force, to poore Don-Quixote was ouerthrowen to the ground, and extremely bruised.
Sancho Panca (who had followed him, puffing and blowing as fast as he could) seeing him ouerthrowne cryed to his aduersary that hee should strike him no more: for hee was a poore inchaunted Knight, that had neuer all the daies of his life done any man harme: but that which detained the swaine was not Sanchos outcries, but to see that Don-Quixote stirred neither hand nor foote, and therefore beleeuing
 that he had slaine him, hee tucked vp his coate to his gyrdle as soone as he could, and fled away through the fields like a Deere. In the meane while Don-Quixotes companions did hasten to the place where hee lay, when those of the Procession seeing them (but principally the troupers of the holy Brotherhood with their Crosse-bowes) runne towards them, did feare some disastrous successe; and there fore they gathered together in a troupe about the Image, and lifting vp their hoods, and laying fast hold on their whips, and the Priestes on their Tapers, they attended the assault, with resolution both to defend themselues, and offend the assaylants if they might: but fortune disposed the matter better then they expected; for Sancho did nothing else then throw himselfe on his Lords body, making ouer him the most dolorous and ridiculous lamentation of the world, and beleeuing that hee was dead. The Curate was knowen by the other Curate that came in the procession; and their acquaintance appeased the conceiued feare of the two squadrons. The first Curate in two words, the other with what Don-Quixote was, and therefore he, and all the crew of the disciplinants went ouer to see, whether the poore Knight were dead or aliue; and then might heare Sancho Panca, with the teares in his eyes, bewayling him in this maner. O flower of Chiualrie, who hast with one blow alone ended the Carreere of thy so well bestowed Peeres? O renowme of this linage, thy honour and glorie of all the Mancha, yea and of all the world beside; which seeing it wanteth thee, shall remaine full of miscreants, secure from being not punished for their misdeedes. O liberall beyond all Alexanders, seeing thou hast giuen mee, for onely for eight moneths seruice, the best Iland that the Sea doeth compasse or ingirt. O humble to the proude, and stately to the humbled, vndertaker of perils, indurer of affronts, enamoured without cause, imitator of good men, whip of the euill, enemie of the wicked, and in conclusion, Knight Errant, then which no greater thing may be said.

Don-Quixote was called againe to himselfe by Sancho his out-cries, and then the first word that euer he spake was; he that liues absented from thee most sweete Dulcinea, is subiect to greater miseries then this: helpe me friend Sancho to get vp into the inchanted Chariot againe, for I am not in plight to oppresse Rozinantes Saddle, hauing this shoulder broken all into peeces, that will I doe with a very good wil, my deere Lord, replied the Squire; and let vs returne to my village, in companie of those Gentlemen, which desire your welfare so much; and there we will take order for some other voyage, which may bee more profitable, and famous then this hath beene, thou speakest reasonably Sancho replied Don-Quixote, and it will bee a great wisedome to let ouerpasse the crosse aspect of those Planets that raigne at this present. The Canon, Curate, and Barbour commended his resolution, and so hauing taken delight enough in Sancho Pancas simplicitie, they placed Don-Quixote as before in the Teame. The processioners returning into their former order did prosecute their way; the goateheard tooke leaue of them all. The troupers would not ride any farther, and therefore the Curate satisfied them for the paines they had taken: The Canon intreated the Curate to let him vnderstand all that succeeded of Don-Quixote; to wit whether he amended of his frensie, or grew more distracted, and then he tooke leaue, to continue his iourney. Lastly, all of them departed, the Curate, Barber, Don-Quixote, Sancho Panca, and the good Rozinante onely remaining behind. Then the waineman yoked his Oxen, and accommodated the Knight on a bottle of Hay; and afterward followed on in his wonted low maner, that way which the Curate directed. At the end of two dayes they arriued to Don-Quixotes Village, into which they entred about noone; this befell on a Sunday, when all the people were in the Market stead, through the middle whereof Don-Quixotes Cart did passe: all of them drew neere to see what came in it, and when they knew their Countrie man, they were marueilously astonished:
 the whilst a little boy ranne home before, to tell the old wife and the Knights nice, that their Lord and vncle was returned, very leane, pale, disfigured, and stretcht all along on a bundell of hay.
It would haue moued one to compassion to haue heard the lamentations, and out-cries, then raisd by the two good women; the blowes they gaue themselues, and the curses and execrations which they powred out against all Bookes of Knighthood, all which was againe renewed, when they saw Don-Quixote himselfe entred in at their doores. At the newes of this his arriuall, Sancho Pancas wife repaired also to get some tidings of her goodman; for shee had learned that he was gone away with the Knight, to serue him as his Squire, and as soone as euer shee saw her husband, the question shee asked him was, whether the Asse were in health or no. Sancho answered that hee was come in better health then his Master: God be thanked quoth shee, who hath done me so great a fauour, but tell me now friend, what profit hast thou reaped by this thy Squireship? What Peticote hast thou brought me home? What shooes for thy little boyes? I bring none of these things good wife, quoth Sancho, although I bring other things of more moment, estimation: I am very glad of that, quoth his wife; shew me those things of more moment and estimation good friend, for I would faine see them, to the end that this heart of mine may be cheered, which hath beene so swollen and sorrowfull, all the time of thine absence? Thou shalt see them at home quoth Sancho, and therfore rest satisfied for this time; for and it please God, that we trauaile once againe to seeke aduentures, thou shalt see me shortly after an Earle, or Gouernour of an Iland, and that, not euery ordinarie one neither, but of one of the best in the world. I pray God husband it may be so, (replied shee) for wee haue very great neede of it. But what meanes that Iland, for I vnderstand not the word. Honny is not made for the Asses mouth, quoth Sancho: wife thou shalt know it in good time, yea, and
 shalt wonder, to heare the title of Ladiship giuen thee by all thy vassalles, what is that thou speakest, Sancho, of Lordships, Ilands, and vassalles? Answered Ioan Panca (for so was shee called, although her husband and shee were not kinsfolke; but by reason that in the Mancha the wiues are vsually called after their husbands surname) doe not busie thy selfe Ioan, quoth Sancho to know those things on such a suddaine; let it suffice that I tell thee the truth, and therewithall sow vp thy mouth. I will onely say thus much vnto thee, as it were by the way, that there is nothing in the world so pleasant as for an honest man to be the Squire of a Knight Errant, that seeke aduentures, it is very true, that the greatest number of aduenturers found out, succeeded not to a mans satisfactions so much as he would desire: for of a hundred that are incountred, the ninetie and nine are wont to be crosse and vntoward ones; I know it by experience, for I haue come away my selfe out of some of the^ well canuassed, and out of others well beaten. But yet for all that it is a fine thing to expect euents, trauerse groues, search woods, treade on rockes, visite Castles, and lodge in Innes at a mans pleasure, without paying the diuell a crosse.
All these discourses passed betweene Sancho Panca, and his wife Ioan Panca, whilst the old woman, and Don-Quixotes Niece did receiue him, put off his clothes, and lay him downe in his ancient bed: hee looked vpon them very earnestly, and could not coniecture where he was. The Curate charged the Niece to cherish her Vncle very carefully, and that they should look wel that he made not the third escape; relating at large all the adoe that they had had to bring him home. Here both the women renewed their exclamations: their execrations of all bookes of Knighthood here came to be reiterated: here they besought heauen to throw downe into the very Center of the bottomlesse pit, the outcries of so many lies and rauings. Finally, they remained perplexed and timerous, that they should loose againe their Master and Vncle, as soone as he was any thing recouered; and it befell iust
 as they suspected: but the Authour of this historie, although he haue with all diligence and curiositie inquired after the Acts atchieued by Don-Quixote in his third sallie to seeke aduentures, yet could he neuer attaine (at least by authenticall writings) to any notice of them: Only fame hath left in the memories of the Mancha, that Don-Quixote, after his third escape, was at Garagoca; and present at certaine famous iusts made in that Cittie; and that therein befell him euents most worthy of his valour and good wit. But of his end hee could finde nothing, nor euer should haue knowne ought, if good fortune had not offered to his view an old Phisition, who had in his custodie a leaden box, which as he affirmed, was found in the ruines of an old Eremitage, as it was a repairing; in which box were certaine scrolles of Parchement written in with Gothicall Characters, but containing Castilian Verses, which comprehended many of his Acts, and specified Dulcinea of Toboso her beautie, decyphered Rozinante, and intreated of Sancho Pancas fidelity; as also of Don-Quixotes Sepulchre, with sundry Epitaphes, and Elogies, of his life and manners, and those that could bee read and copied out throughly, were those that are here set downe by the faithfull Authour of this new and vnmatched relation. Which Authour demaunds of the Readers no other guerdon, in regard of his huge trauaile spent in the search of all the old records of the Mancha, for the bringing thereof vnto light, but that they will deigne to afford it as much credit as discreet men are wont to giue vnto bookes of Knighthood, which are of so great reputation now a daies in the world; for herewith he will rest most fully contented, and satisfied; and withall incouraged to publish and seeke out for other discourses, if not altogether so true as this, at least of as great, both inuention, and recreation. The first words written in the Scrowle of Parchement, that was found in the leaden box, were these.





The Academikes of Argamisilla, a Towne of the Mancha, on the life and death of the valorous Don-Quixote of the Mancha, hoc scripserunt.
An Epitaphe of Monicongo the Academike of Argamasilla, to Don-Quixotes SEPVLCHER.

THe clattring thunderbolt that did adorne
The Mancha, with more spoiles then Iason, Creete:
The wit whose wether-cocke, was sharpe as Thorne,
When somewhat flatter it to be was meete.


The arme which did his power so much dilate,
As it Gaeta and Cathay did retch.
The dreadfulst Muse, and eke discreetest, that
In brazen sheetes, did praises euer stretch.


He that the Amadises left behinde,
And held the Gataors but in small esteeme:
Both for his brauerie and his louing minde.
He dumbe that made Don Belianis to seeme:
And he that farre on Rozinante erde,
Vnder this frozen stone doth lye interde.



Paniagando an Academike of Argamasilla in praise of Dulcinea of Toboso.
SONNET.

SHe which you view with triple face and sheene
Hie brested and couragious like a man,

Is tall Dulcinea of Toboso Queene,
Of great Quixote welbeloued than.


He for her sake, tread th'one and th'other side,
Of the browne mountaine, and the famus fields,
Of Montiel and Aran Iuez so wide
On foote all tyrde, loaden with speare and shield.


(The fault was Rozinantes:) O hard starre!
That this Manchegan Dame and worthy Knight,
In tender yeares when people strongest are,
She lost by death the glimse of beautie bright:
And he although in Marble richly done:
Yet loues wrath, and deceits, she could not shunne.



Caprichioso the most ingenious Academicke of Argamasilla, in praise of Rozinante, Don-Quixote his steede.
SONNET.

IN to the proud, erected Diamond stocke
VVhich Mars with bloudie plants, so often boared,
Halfe wood with valour, the Manchegan stucke:
His wau'ring standard: and his armes restored.


For them, thereon he hung, and his bright sword,
VVherewith he hacks, rents, parts, and ouerthrowes;
(New prowesses,) to which art must affoord
New stiles on this new Palatine to gloze.


And if Gaule, much her Amadis does prize
VVhose braue discendants, haue illustred Greece,
And fild it full of Tropheis and of Fame:
Much more Bellonas Court doth solemnize
Quixote: whose like in Gaule, nor Grecia is
So honourd's none, as in Mancha, his name.


Let no obliuion his glory staine,
Seeing in swiftnesse Rozinant his steede
Euen Bayarde doth, and Briliador exceede.




Burlador Academicke of Argamasilla, to SANCHO PANCA.
SONNET.

THis Sancho Panca is, of body little
But yet, O miracle! in valour great,
The simplest Squire, and sooth to say, lest suttle
That in this world I sweare, liued euer yet.


From being an Earle, he scarce was a threeds bread,
Had not at once conspir'd to crosse his guerdon,
The malice of the times, and men misled
VVhich scarce an Asse incountring, would him pardon.


Vpon the like he rode, O giue me leaue
To tell how this meeke Squire after the horse
Mild Rozinante, and his Lord did driue!
O! then vaine hopes of men, what thing is worse?
VVhich proues vs, desired ease to lend,
Yet doe at last in smokes our glories end.



Cachidiablo Academicke of Argamasilla, on Don-Quixote his Tombe.
AN EPITAPH.

The worthy Knight lies there
VVell bruisde, but euil-andant
VVho borne on Rozinante
Rode waies both farre and neere.
Sancho his faithfull Squire
Panca yeleep'd also
Lieth besides him too:
In his trade without peere.




Tiquitoc Academicke of Argamasilla, on Dulcinea of Tobosos Sepulcher.
AN EPITAPH.

DVIcinea here beneath
Lies, though of flesh so round
To dust and ashes ground,
By fowle and ougly death.
Shee was of gentle breath,
And somewhat like a Dame,
Being great Quixotes flame.
And her Townes glorie, eath.





These were the Verses that could be read, as for the rest, in respect that they were halfe consumed and eaten away by time, they were deliuered to a Scholler, that hee might by coniectures declare their meaning: and we haue had intelliligence that hee hath done it with the cost of many nights watching, and other great paines, and that he meanes to publish them, and also giues hope of a third sallie made by DON-QVIXOTE.

FINIS.


