


AVGVSTVS. OR, AN ESSAY OF THOSE MEANES and Counsailes, by which the Common-wealth of ROME was altered and reduced unto a Monarchy.

I.
THEY which have heretofore written of Common-wealths,
 have divided them into three Species: The government of the King; secondly, of the Nobles; and thirdly of the People. Eyther of these is againe subdivided into good and evill: The evill forme being onely the good corrupted; The good nothing else, but the bad refined. So is the government of a King, divided into a Monarchy, and a Tyranny: Of the Nobles, into an Aristocracy, and an Oligarchy: Of the People into a Republicke, and a Democracy. All these, as well in generall, as in the several couplets, have
 a secret Inclination to change the one into the other, and to make a Pythagoricall transmigration (as it were) into each others being. I need not stand on many instances. The Co^mon-wealth of Rome (into whose stories whosoever looketh, will judge them rather to containe the acts of the whole World, then a particular Nation) will serve for all. ROMVLVS at the foundation of his City, reserved unto himselfe the chiefe Soveraignty, leaving it entire to his successors. NVMA, ANCVS, TVLLIVS, TARQVINIVS
 PRISCVS, and SERVIVS, governed themselves so moderately, the people so justly: that they affected not Tyranny; nor the Commons liberty. They appeared more desirous to fill the Coffers of their Subjects, then their owne Treasuries: And when necessity compelled them to a Taxe; they rather seemed to sheere their sheepe, then fleece them.


II.
BVt SVPERBVS, a man of insupportable vices, having by violence enthronized himselfe in that
 Chayre of State, which had not his ambitious spirit beene impatient of delay, would have beene his rightfull Inheritance; made his gouernment answerable to his entrance, cruell and bloudy. How many men, eminent aswell by their owne vertue, as their Parents Nobility, did hee cut off? How many did he for no cause promote, to make their fall the more remarkable? What part of the Senate was free from slaughter? What corner of the City from lamentations? Yet this was not
 all. The miserable Romans were visited with Three plagues at once. Pride in the Father, Cruelty in the Mother, and Lust insatiable in their sonne SEXTVS; a true Copie of the old Originals. Either of these had beene more then enough, to exercise the peoples patience. But meeting all at one time, it seemed that nothing could now bee added to the wretchednesse of the one, and the wickednesse of the other. BRVTVS, a man fatall to Tyrants, did easily perswade the Commons to shake off this
 yoake. For they, aswell desirous of Novelties, as sensible of Oppressions, had long since murmured at the present State; and wanted nothing but a head, to breake into actuall rebellion. So the people got the freedome, and the Kings lost the Dominion of the City. (An. V C. 244.)


III.
BRVTVS although hee wanted no faire title to the Crowne; yet eyther perceiuing how odious the name of King was
 growne; or perhaps willing to be rather the first Consull, then the last Prince; instituted a new forme of Government. Wherein the sway of all, was referred to the Fathers of the City: Out of whom two were annually chosen as chiefe of the rest. Herein certainly hee dealt very advisedly, For had he sought to confirme himselfe in the Kingdome, what could men judge, but that, not love to his Country was the cause that stirred him to take Armes; but desire of Rule. Againe, besides
 that secure privacie, is to bee preferred before hazardous Royaltie; what hope had hee to keepe the seate long, having by his owne example taught the people, both the Theorie and practise of Rebellion. Vnder this new Aristocracy the Roma^ affaires succeeded so prosperously, their dominions were inlarged so infinitly: that it may well bee questioned; whether the Roman fortune caused their greatnes; or their valour co^manded their fortune. For the Governors not seeking wealth but honour, or not their owne
 wealth but the publike; did so demean themselves both in peace and warre: that there was betweene all, a vertuous emulation; who should most benefit his Countrey.


IV.
THis happinesse was too great to continue long. The people had as yet no written Statutes: Custome bearing most sway; and the rest of the Law, locked up in the breast of the Iudges. To avoid such inconveniences as might hence ensue,
 there were some men, knowne to be as sound in judgement, as honest in their actions, deputed by a generall Commission to take an abstract of the Graecian lawes: according to the tenor whereof, the people framed their lives; the Iudges, their sentences. Here followed the Oligarchy or Decemvirate State of Rome; (An. V C. 304.) but long it lasted not. For these new Lords joyning forces together, made themselves rich with the spoyle of the people: not caring by what unlawfull meanes, they
 could purchase either profit or pleasure. APPIVS CLAVDIVS, one of the Decemviri, was the breakneck of this government. Hee, unmindfull of LVCRETIA and the Tarquins, lusted after VIRGINIA; a woman though of lowe Condition, yet such a woman, in whom beauty and vertue strove for the preheminencie. She was, in an open assembly to prevent the dishonor of his child, slaine by her Father: APPIVS forced to make away himselfe, in prison; and the rest of that Magistracie abdicating
 their Offices, the Consuls were for a time restored.


V.
THe People fleshed with this victory, and calling to minde how their Ancestors had in like manner banished the Kings; began to know their owne strength: and stomacked it exceedingly, that they on whose shoulders the frame of the State was supported, should bee so much under the Command of others; that they who were Lords abroad,
 should be below the condition of Slaves at home. Hereupon they raise a tumult, under the conduct of their Tribune, CANVLEIVS. Nor could they by any perswasions bee induced to lay downe Armes, till they had obtained a Decree, That from thenceforth, the Nobles and the Commons, might promiscuously bee married. And this was the first step to the Republique. (An. V C. 308.) The gaining this new Priviledge, put them in possibility of obtaining greater. They now sue to bee capable of
 the Consulship. The Fathers consulting of this demand, wisely fore-saw, that to grant their Petition, and to deny it was alike dangerous. For were it utterly dashed, it was to bee feared the People would againe forsake the Citty; and yet make their stay more insolent and insupportable, if it were granted. C. Claudius, one who by his honourable behaviour, was by both parties had in an equall degree of Reverence; quickly proposed a middle course; whereby the fury of the multitude
 might be appeased, without blemish to the Consular dignity. He constituted 6. Annuall Officers, equally chosen out of the People, and the Nobles: calling them Tribuni Militu^ Co^sularis potestatis. (A. V. C. 310). This Office continued, but not without many Interstitiums, the space of 78. yeares. Which time expired, and some experience being had of the peoples government; the Lords of the Senate did decree, that one of the Consuls should fro^ thenceforth be chosen by, and out of the Commons; that
 they should be capable of all Magistracies; yea even of the Dictatorship. (An. V. C. 388.) So that now vertue was as speedy a Ladder, to climbe unto Honours, as Nobility of Birth: and a good man as much respected as a great. A rare felicity of the times.


VI.
THe People being thus mixt with the Nobles, as well in marriages, as honours; one would
 have thought that this Common-wealth, being thus equally poysed had been immortall. But as in the naturall body, there can be no exact and arithmeticall proportion of the humors and elements, without some predominancie: So in the body politique, can there bee no equall mixture of Plebeians and Patritians, without the supremacy of the one or the other. The people had presently after the institution of the Consuls, raysed a Commotion; and withdrew themselves into Mount Aventine. Nor
 could they bee intreated to returne into the Citty, till there were granted unto them peculiar Officers, called Tribuni Plebis, or Protectors of the Commons. (A. V. C. 260.) These being not long after by the common Councell, pronounced to bee Sacrosancti, and inviolable; began to heave the Popular State too high, and thrust the Aristocraticall too low; not regarding to lose the love of the one, so they might get the applause of the other. Insomuch, that matters of judgement
 were devolved from the Fathers to the Commons; and the authority of the Senate, trode under foote by the People. Nay they proceeded so farre, That MARIVS being Tribune, threatned to send COTTA the Consull unto Prison. And SVLPITIVS in the same Office, made the Consuls forsake the Senate-house: and slew one of their sonnes, whose heeles were not nimble enough, to flye away. And now were the Romans governed by that forme of Rule, than which there is no lower. So that as
 well by an inevitable necessity in Nature, as the ordinary course of Policies; there must be a Recession to the first, and Monarchicall Iurisdiction. For questionlesse it fareth many times with a Common-wealth, as with the Sunne: which runneth through all the signes of the Zodiack, till it return to the place where its motion first began. And the Platonicke yeare of reducing all things to the same beginning, continuance, and period; how false soever in the bookes of Nature, is in some sort true
 in the change of Government.


VII.
THe way downe-Hill is easie and ordinary but to ascend unto the top requireth both wit to frame steps, and courage to give the attempt. So was it here also wth the Roma^s. They had naturally, and almost insensibly falne from a Monarchy, to a Populacy, or Democracy. But to asce^d fro^ a Populacy to a Monarchy, required many steps and degrees in many, much industry
 in al. Marius and Sylla, well skilled in feeding the humors of the people, were the first that attempted, and severally mounted to such a height of Co^ma^d; as never durst any promise to the^, nor they hope for themselves. Marius was of an harsh and sterne nature, equally cruel to the enemies in war, and the people in peace: one whose birth the Rom. might have had just cause to curse, had hee not saved the^ from the Cimbri. Sylla was one whose cariage none could enogh co^me^d before, or sufficiently co^demn after his prosperity.
 A man, whose Peace was farre more bloudy than his Warres; a better Subiect, than a Prince. These two gave way each to other, and both to death.


VIII.
NExt these, as wel in faction and designes, as bloud and alliance, succeeded CAESAR and POMPEY: Two men never truly paraleld, since their owne times. CAESAR had a wit to invent so pregnant, a heart to execute
 so stout, and to both a Fortune so favourable; that hee durst undertake what no man dared, and his performances commonly were answerable to his undertakings. POMPEY, a man greater than his owne or his friends wishes; had triumphed over all the parts of the knowne world: and could hee but have brooked an equall, hee had never met superiour. Had these two lived in divers Ages, or exercised their valour on the common Enemy; the world had beene too little to yeeld them imployment.
 But turning their forces one against the other, POMPEY overthrowne in the Field, was basely murthered in Aegypt: and CAESAR victoriously Conquerour in Thessalie, was barbarously massacred in the Capitoll. And though none of these foure Worthies, could settle the Monarchie in himselfe; yet this shall bee to their eternall memory recorded, that they first opened the passage to others, and first mooved the stone, which rowling along tumbled the People out of the Government.



IX.
AFter the overthrow of POMPEY, and death of CAESAR, the Commonwealth might have recovered Liberty, if either CAESAR had left no heire, and POMPEY no Children: or rather if ANTONIVS, a man of an unquiet and turbulent spirit, had not begun new troubles. For hee, knowing the affection of the Common people unto young OCTAVIVS, CAESARS heire:
 and hearing the continuall report of his approach to Rome for his Inheritance; did by Decree of Senate restore SEXTVS the sonne of POMPEY to his blood and honours. Hoping that they two, inheriting their Fathers hatreds, would like Pellets in a Boyes Pot-gun, drive out each other; and so he might remaine Lord of the whole. But young OCTAVIVS, was too old to be so fetcht over: and had moreover more desire to revenge his Fathers death on BRVTVS and CASSIVS, than turne
 himselfe upon an enemy, that neither had done, nor could doe him any hurt. At his first entry into Rome, hee declared himselfe CAESARS heire; though some regarding more his welfare than his honour, disswaded him from it. His retinue at his entrance was but small, his behaviour gentle and courteous: So that all had cause to love him, none to feare him. His first businesse was to ANTONIVS, then possessed of all CAESARS estate. His words as modest, as his Petition just. ANTONIES
 answere somewhat churlish, forbidding him to meddle in matters of State, that hee was too young to take upon him the Name of CAESAR, and so dismissed him unsatisfied.


X.
AVGVSTVS (for by that name wee meane to call him, though hee was not yet so called) perceiving that ANTHONIES answer, though in shew but a Delay, was in effect
 a Deniall: insinuated into the acquaintance of CICERO, then potent among the Senators, and a capitall Enemy of ANTHONY; by meanes whereof the Lords of the Senate, began to cast great affection towards him. Next in a solemne Oration to the People, he let them know, how he intended to have distributed his Fathers wealth among them; and how ANTONIVS did unjustly detain it from them both. Certainly there is not any thing prevaileth sooner with the ignoble men, than hope of gaine. No
 sooner had he finished his speeches, and given away that to them which hee thought impossible to get for himselfe; but all was in a tumult. None was so sparing of his words, but hee had some curse in store for ANTONIVS: Every one vowing the destruction of that man; whom they supposed to deprive them of AVGVSTVS Donative.



XI.
IN this hurly burly ANTHONY quits the Towne, and is by the generall voyce of both houses, declared an enemy to the State. An army is given to HIRCIVS and PANSA then Consuls: AVGVSTVS aged but xviij. yeres, being proclaimed Imperator, and made head of the League against the common foe. AVGVSTVS, as he loved not to bee absent from a necessary warre;
 so hee alwayes used to reserve himselfe from the dangers of it: and therfore he committed the whole enterprize unto the Consuls. Well knowing, that though the Officers and soldiers took most paines to get the Victory; yet would the honor of it be referred to him, as Imperator. Whereas, if any thing fell out to the Army, not well; his beeing a Non agent in the busines, would bring his honor off without staine. The Consuls therefore proceed in the warre against Anthony: who seeing little possibility
 of prevailing, resolved to sell the losse of his own liberty, and his soldiers lives at a deare rate. And indeed the fortune of the day was so equally shared, that as the Consuls might boast of the vanquishment of ANTONY; So ANTONY might triumph in the death of the Consuls.


XII.
AVGVSTVS now had as much as he could desire, more, than hee expected; a populous Army
 at his service. He therefore applyes himselfe so to them, that giving that among them which he had in present, and promising them greater favours, according as his fortune and their valour should advance him: he bound the^ unto him in an eternall bond of allegiance; and made them the first step by which he ascended the Royalty. The Lords of Rome hearing of the young mans fortune, thought it best to strangle these hopes even in their Cradles: and to that end, Decree the honour of overcomming
 ANTONY, not to belong unto AVGVSTVS, but to D. BRVTVS; for whose defence (being besieged by ANTONY in Mutina) their Army had bin levied. Nor did they thinke this frost of unexpected unkinknesse, sufficient to nip the blossome of his hopes: but they denyed him the Consulship. These harsh proceedings compelled AVGVSTVS, his honour now lying at the stake, to enter Rome as Conquerour; and force the Fathers to grant him his desires. Having thus gotten what for the time
 he aymed at, he generally shewed himselfe gratefull to all, and particularly to some of the Souldiers: paying them what was behind by promise; and openly protesting that without their ayde hee durst not have adventured into the Capitoll. So by keeping his day with the Military men; and shewing his Noble and generous Nature, in a thankfull Commemoration of their service, hee added stronger bonds to such as were already his owne; and won many dayly to his side, which before were
 eyther Neutrall, or Adversaries.


XIII.
ANTONY in the meane time was not idle; but knowing that LEPIDVS was beyond the Mountaines with a puissant Army, he posted thither: and so farre prevailed with the Soldiers, that he was admitted into the Campe; where the Generall entertained him with all expressions of love and welcome. ANTONY
 perceiving the facile nature of Lepidus, soone perswaded him to leade his forces into Italy: promising him no lesse than the Lordship of the world, if he durst but shew his face to the Romans. Augustus having continual newes of this combinatio^, and fearing much the prowesse of Antony, now strengthened; conceived no cause so fitting and convenient to his ends, as to joyne friendship, and to enter into confederacy with them. (A.V. C. 710.) And this he did, not for any good will to eyther,
 but because being destitute of meanes to resist them, and also to revenge the death of his Father IVLIVS, which hee much laboured; he might with their forces oppresse CASSIVS and M. BRVTVS and after as occasion fell out, deale with them beeing severed.


XIV.
THis League was solemnly co^firmed by a bloudy Proscription, immediatly following. Wherin to
 be revenged on their enemies, they betrayed their friends. A lamentable and ruthfull time, good and bad, rich and poore, being alike subject to the slaughter. Now was the time of IVLIVS CAESARS Government, thought to be the golden age: and every one began to curse BRVTVS and CASSIVS as the Authors of these present miseries: whom they but lately honoured as the Restorers of the Commonwealth. Nay the very Kings were deemed tolerable; and such as lived in their dayes, happy. The
 poore Romans had not changed the Tyranny, but the Tyrants. Yea they had three for one into the bargaine. Such is the quality of us men; we know not our owne happinesse in the fruition, but the wvnt. Two of these Triumviri glutted themselves with bloud, taking pride in hearing the lamentable cryes and groanes of the people. AVGVSTVS on the contrary shewed himselfe much grieved at this barbarous cruelty: so that his consent seemed rather forced than voluntary.



XV.
THis Proscription in it selfe, though cruell and tyrannicall, yet produced some good and profitable effects in the Republicke. For when by this Proscriptioa and the insuing Civill warre, the stoutest of the Nobles and Commons were made away; few beeing left which durst endeavor to recover the old Liberty: AVGVSTVS did the more easily establish his Monarchy, and
 restore peace to the City. Moreover the prosecutio^ of this cruelty so incensed the people against Anthony and Lepidus, that Augustus, whom most held excusable, found them alwayes his fast friends; if not for love to him, yet in spight to them. I cannot here omit the like effect springing fro^ the like cause, in our Rich. 3. Who (though far enough fro^ conceiving any such happy event) made riddance of so many in the then factious families: that leaving a Male in the one, and a female in the other, surviving;
 this Kingdome by a marriage betweene them grew well setled, which might otherwise have beene againe indangered by some new competitors. So unsearchable are the judgements of GOD, and his wayes past finding out. But to proceed. Antony and Augustus leaving the guard of the City to Lepidus, and with joynt forces march against BRVTVS and CASSIVS, both overthrowne by ANTONY: whom therefore did AVGVSTVS put upon that service, as well to diminish ANTONIES forces; as to keepe
 his owne, entire. As for himselfe, eyther he in policy suffered himselfe to be driven out of the field by BRVTVS, to make ANTONY more worke: or else indeed durst not abide the battell. Such end had BRVTVS and CASSIVS: Two men, whom Fortune seemed to be in love with on the suddain, and did as suddainly forsake them. BRVTVS the more accomplished man; CASSIVS the more expert soldier. (A.V.C. 711.)



XVI.
I Passe over AVGVSTVS wars in Italy, ANTONIES in Asia: the discontents betweene them, and their reconciliation by the meanes of OCTAVIA, Sister to the one, and Wife to the other Emperor. As also how joyning forces together to oppresse Sextus, then Lording it over the Sea, and proud with the conquest of Sicilia: they received him into the Confederacie, and joyned
 the Island of Sardinia, to his other conquests. To recompence which kindnes, Sextus invited the two Generals aboord his Admirall Galley: and after a bountifull entertainment, return'd them safe to their Campes. I scarce have ever heard so great an oversight, among so many able Politicians. And much I marvell with my selfe, upon what confidence Augustus and Anthony, durst so far trust their persons to a reconciled Enemy: or on what reason Sextus having both of them in his power would let slip so slightly that
 advantage; greater than which was never offered to a discontented and ambitious person. This I am sure of, that he afterward repented it; and could have wished that hee had hearkened to the voyce of MENAS his old servant; who had perswaded him to make his best of that opportunity. The Kings of France and Arragon, of old enemies made new friends, had the like enterview at Savona: which that notable Historiographer, and States-man GVICCIARDINE, describeth with much wonder
 and Commendation. Yet in the like case, have many, and as I thinke, worthily, condemned LEVVIS the 11. and CHARLES of Burgundy, the Archpoliticians of those dayes: in that LEVVIS at Peronne, put himselfe into the hands of CHARLES his Enemy; who also after a short restraint, dismissed him.


XVII.
THese solemne expressions of amity betweene
 the three Generals, being thus ended; and ANTONY gone for Egypt: AVGVSTVS then began to contrive his establishment in the State, though with the ruine of his Colleagues. Hee beginneth first with SEXTVS, having by gifts and promises drawne MENAS unto his side; who by reason of his inwardnesse with his Master, knew most of his designes. By the directions of this MENAS, and the assistance of LEPIDVS, he quickly overthrew SEXTVS: who flying death in Europe, by the hand of AVGVSTVS:
 found it in Asta, by the command of ANTONY. After this victory, AVGVSTVS eyther having or pretending a quarrell against LEPIDVS; entreth into his Campe, seiseth his person, and depriving him of all honours, confineth him to Rome. A man that halfe against his will, stumbling upon the Government; had beyond any desert of his, enjoyed ten yeares continuance of Empire and prosperity.



XVIII.
AVGVSTVS durst not have beene so venturous, if ANTONY had beene in Italy. He therefore advisedly removed him out of his way, before he would attempt this action. It hath beene ever a chiefe Maxime in Court-policy, to remove that man out of the way, under pretence of some honourable charge: whom we intend eyther to cast from his present honours;
 or else to make lesse potent with Prince and People. For which cause did AVGVSTVS also perswade ANTONIES absence from the City; to bring him at the last into discredit, and contempt. His dotage on CLEOPATRA, could not but draw him into many inconveniences. Neyther could his neglecting the State, to Ryot with his Lemman; bee other than distastfull to the Lords and People. Next, he commanded his Sister OCTAVIA, to leave her Husband ANTONIES house, yet privately hee perswaded her
 to live there still, and bring up his children: that so the Romans seeing her noble demeanor and love to her Husband; might the more heartily detest him; who so ignobly and unkindly had rejected her. to adde more fuell to this flame of hatred, he readeth ANTONIES will unto the people: in which many of the Roman Provinces were bequeathed to CLEOPATRAES children; and other things ordained to the common prejudice. ANTONY likewise preferred many Bils against Augustus; as that he had deposed
 Lepidus from the Triumvirate; that he had divided Italy, amongst his own soldiers only; that he had not restored the ships, borrowed to make warre against SEXTVS.


XIX.
THose discontents seco^ded with an ambitious hope of prevailing; made them both resolute to refer all to the decision of a Battell. Antony had a fleet consisting of 500. Ships, high built, and trimmed up rather for a Triumph,
 than a fight. His Land forces consisted of 10000. foot, and 12000. Horse. AVGVSTVS had the like number of Horsemen, 80000. foot, and 250. good Men of Warre, snug and close, built more for use than ostentation. The Rendesvous is Actium, a place seeming to be marked out for notable designes: Here being fought also in our fathers dayes, that famous battaile; wherein the Venetians gave the world to understand, that the Turkes forces by Sea, were not invincible. ANTONY was on
 the Offensive side, and therefore much doubted whether it were better to give the Onset by Sea or by Land. CLEOPATRA whose words were Oracles, perswaded him to the Sea-fight: not that shee thought it more safe, but that if ANTONY lost the day, she might with more facility escape.


XX.
TO this resolution, when most of the Captaines had for feare agreed;
 one of the old soldiers thus bluntly gainsayd it. What a miserable security art thou possessed withall, most noble Emperor? Where is that ancient foresight, wherewith thou hast formerly prevented all disasters; and turned the enemies devises on their owne heads? Consider with thy selfe Noble Generall, what uncertaine friends the Wind and Sunne are? To how fickle an Element thou dost trust thy fortune. Let the Aegyptians and Phoenicians old Mermaides, borne and
 nurst up in the Sea, follow this kind of warfare. But let us thy true Roman spirits, try our valor on the firme land; and there fight for thy Empire and our owne lives. Perhaps thou dost mistrust our faith. Look here Antony (with that he opened his bosome) and thou shalt see many an honbl. scar, got in thy service. Wee are now too old to learn new treasons. Alter thy resolution; and to please a woman cast not away so many: certenly, the powers of heave^ whe^ they decree a mans destruction overthrow those
 Counsels by which hee should escape it. ANTONY turneth a deafe eare to this Souldiers wholsome advice: and borrowing fro^ CLEOPATRA two or three kisses, as if from the fountaine of her lips hee had derived all his courage; without any more ceremony, prepareth himselfe unto the battaile.


XXI.
AVGVSTVS on the other side, seeing a necessity of a Sea-fight, was
 yet in this comforted; that his Vessels were more useful and better manned, though fewer than his enemies. That his men to him were faithfull, and by reason of their many Victories, in good heart. But from ANTONY there daily revolted some Kings and Captaines of note, to the great encouragement of the one side, and disheartning of the other. The whole charge of the warre hee committed to M. VIPSANVS AGRIPPA, who failing in no duty of a good Captaine, tooke from his Galleyes
 whatsoever might be impediments to the valiant, or shelter to the Cowardly; all that was combersome to his owne men, or advantagious to the enemie.


XXII.
THings thus ordered; and the battaile ready o joyne, AVGVSTVS CAESAR standing where hee might see and bee seene of all, is sayd to make this or the like Oration. Fellowes and Companions
 in Armes, I suppose it needlesse, to hearten you, which never were acquainted with feare; or bid you overcome wch never yet knew what it was, not to vanquish. Conquest hath alwayes sate upon the edges of your swords, and victory beene written in your fore-heads. Be not now backward to adde this one to your other tryumphs. When after the death of my father Iulius, of famous memory, I first dealt in matters of warre; I rather found, than made you good soldiers. And during
 this twelve yeares service under me, neyther have you beene wanting in the duty of faithfull followers; nor I (I hope) of a vigilant and gratefull Leader. Sure I am, I expressed my selfe as farre as I could; and more I would, had I beene able. Let not the number not the greatnesse of the adverse Gallyes, any way affright you. The hugenesse of the Bulkes, maketh them unapt for imployment: and the multitude over-clogging and hindring the others; may
 as much further our victory as theirs. They exceed us in multitudes of Men; wee them in number of Soldiers. The meaning of the word Pilot, is unknowne among them. And for their Mariners, the best of them are but Carters, Reapers, and Harvestmen, raked out of the field; the rest the excrement of common prisons: wherewith their Vessels are loaded, not manned. The Generall is indeed a fit Captaine, for such a selected company. It is the same ANTONIE
 whom you once drave out of the Field before Mutina. I perswade my selfe, that neyther hee dares thinke of recovering, or you of losing, your former glories. It is the same Antony who being shamefully chased out of Parthia; onely in that he was not vanquished, proclaimed himselfe Victor. It is the same ANTONY, who intendeth to make Rome subject to the Egyptians; and to distribute the Provinces, purchased with the bloud and treasure of our Ancestors;
 amongst Iras, and her fellow Chamber-maides. Nay indeed, it is not Antony at all; but the shadow onely of that substance, which now is hid in Cleopatra's Cabbin. Courage then brave men of Armes; Bee, as you have still beene, Conquerors. To speake more, were to deteine you fro^ Victory. Onely this, call to minde your ancient valour. Remember that I am CAESAR, you Romans.



XXIII.
THis speech animated the new Soldiers, and confirmed the old: So that with a generall acclamation, they give the assault. Death, wounds, and blowes dished in divers fashions, and served in by severall men, were the best delicates prepared for these unwelcome visitants. CLEOPATRA beholding the battaile, and doubting the successe; through the thickest of
 ANTHONIES fleet, made away with the 60. Gallyes appointed for her Guard. This disorder made the breach at which the victory entred. Antony seeing her flight, left his squadron also: and being taken into her Galley, hoysed sayle for Aegypt. Herein playing the part of a cowardly Soldier; whilst each of his Soldiers executed the Office of a couragious Generall. For they so obstinately persisted in the fight, that AVGVSTVS was faine to offer them mercy sooner than they would demand
 it; and divers time, before they would accept it. At last they all sware Allegeance unto him. (An. V. C. 723.)


XXIV.
AVGVSTVS no loser of advantages, speedeth into Egypt, which he reduceth into the forme of a Province; making the people pay for fine 20. Millions of gold. By receiving this money he so weakned them, that they had no ability to raise an
 after warre; and by distributing part of it among his soldiers, he confirmed them in obedience. As for ANTONY he seeing his fortunes desperate, redeemed the honours lost in his life, by a noble and heroick death. And Cleopatra ennded her life, also not long after; a woman more welfavored than faire; wel-spoken, rather than either. Antonies Courtiers had seene many Ladies more lovely, none more prevailing; men being cheyned to her by the eares, rather then the eyes.



XXV.
I Willingly omit AVGVSTVS entry into Rome; as also the state and Magnificence of his Triumph. His victory he used so justly, that none felt the fury of the warre, but such as were slaine in the Battaile. To assure himselfe of Antonies adherents, was his first care: burning in the Common-Forum, the Coffers of ANTONIE, unopened; wherein all his Letters
 from his friends in Rome, had beene inclosed. Well knowing that as long as any thought themselves suspected adversaries, they would neuer shew themselves true friends. To the Senators and Magistrates, he made sumptuous feasts. To the Common-people, hee exhibited magnificent and pleasing stage-playes: and with all varietie of pleasure banished from both, aswell sorrow for the old Proscription, as feare of a new.



XXVI.
THere were two men most deare unto him, and privy to his Counsels; MECENAS and AGRIPPA: which in the object of their love differed onely in this; Mecenas was a lover of AVGVSTVS; Agrippa of the Emperor. Mecenas was of the ranke of Knights, a man of good and bad parts equally co^pounded. When his businesse required care, vigilant and circumspect; at
 leisure times, excessively vertuous. Agrippa was the first of his house, a man alike fit for Campe and Counsell; one neither carelesse of a good name, nor covetous of a great. For although hee onely was the man, which vanquished Sextus and Antony: yet well skilled in the humours of Princes, he gave AVGVSTVS the honor of all his Conquests; making the vertue; not the reward, the end of his actions. So by doing nobly, and speaking modestly of it, he was without envy, but not without glory.



XXVII.
WIth these two AVGVSTVS withdrew into a private Closet, and then brake unto them in this sort. Hee made first unto the^ a long discourse of the Civill warres. Then added, That having by his owne fortune, and the valor of his soldiers, put an end to the troubles, he was unresolved what to doe; Whether to resigne the Empire, to the (...) retaine
 it still in his owne owne hands. That in a businesse of such importance, he durst not relye altogether on his owne wisedome. That hee had made them his judges, as men that could speake soundly, and durst speake freely: That he knew the^ to haue more care of his honour, than profit; but of the Common-wealth, more than both: That his Counsels, which course soever he tooke, would not bee by them eliminated. Hee therefore intreated them to consider what was to be
 done, and to give up their verdicts.


XXVIII.
AGRIPPA after a short silence thus began. I know thou canst not but marvell, O CAESAR, that I, who under thine Empire, am sure to be beyond precedent exalted; should perswade thee to live private. I esteeme more thy honor, than my profit; the publique good, then my particular preferment.
 And yet perhaps my Counsell shall be as profitable, if not applausible as the contrary. I know thee to be no way delighted with lyes and flattery; and will therefore deale with thee freely and plainly. Thou hast indeed put a period to the Civill warres; but to what end, unlesse thou dost restore unto the Common-wealth the liberty for which the wars were raised? What benefit can the people reape fro^ thy Victory, if thou dost use it only as an instrume^t for their greater bo^dage? Dost thou think that the
 Romans having so many hundred yeares maintained their liberty; will now be willing to foregoe it? No CAESAR, no. Flatter not thy selfe with these hopes. Marius the younger, and Sertorius, were quickly cut off when their ends were once knowne; and IVLIVS thy Father of happy Memory, did not long live, after his actions seemed to bring the Common-liberty in hazard. And shall we think that there is no true Roman spirit surviving; No BRVTVS living, to
 attempt the like against thee? Believe mee CAESAR, believe me, it is far better not to meddle with the Empire at all; than to bee forced to abandon it. But say, Divine Providence will so protect thee, that thou mayst out-live such practices; and shalt thou also not out-live thy glories? This present age perchance will not censure their actions, because it dares not. But Posterity free from all respects of love or hatred, cannot but call them into question; and brand thy enterprise
 with ambition, and perhaps Tyranny. If thy designes prosper, they will judge thee to have risen unjustly; if otherwise, to have falne deservedly. How much better then were it, now when thine honour is without blemish, and thy reputation unstained; to resigne thy authority? Inded when SEXTVS lorded it over the Sea, and ANTONY over Aegypt; it might have been thought want of spirit, to have deposed thy selfe from the Government. But now
 to doe it, when thou art without Rivall, in thy Empire; now, when thou art sole Commander of the worlds forces; now when the People and Senate, lye prostrate at the feet of thy mercy; were to strike dumbe detraction, and to make the world admire thy Temper. Thou art at this present the joy and comfort of the world; there is wanting to thee neyther wealth nor fame. Heere then fix thy foot. For go but one step beyond this Non ultra, and thou wilt run into a
 boundlesse Ocean of perils, which have no end, but the lend of thy life and reputation.


XXIX.

NOt so, excellent AGRIPPA, replyed MECENAS. I never hard good Pilot finde fault with Sea-roome; or of more Vessels cast away in the Ocean, than in the Streights and narrow passages. Our Republicke is a Ship, fraught with divers Nations: Shee
 hath beene long tost on the Waves of Civill dissentions, long driven up and downe with the Wind of ambition: and there is now no place so fit for her safety, as the unlimited Ocean of one mans power. This Empire at first rising, seemed not to require a Monarch; but it is now grown too unweedly, to be without one. Take then upon thee, O CAESAR; this Empire; or to say better, doe not forsake it. I should never thus advise thee, did I conceive any possible
 inconveniences. The Senate doth allow thee a competent guard of valiant and faithfull soldiers; who^ then shouldest thou feare? Nay ill may I prosper, if I see any cause of feare, were thy Guard cashiered. Enemies thou hast none. For such as were, are either already slaine by thy valor, or made fast friends by thy bounty and clemency. To omit Marius and Sertorius, I will a litle touch at thy Father Iulius. He too good a soldier to be a Statist, was too heady and violent in
 establishing his government. Nor could he cunningly temporize, and suffer the people insensibly, and by degrees, to drop into bondage; but oppressed the^ all at once. Againe he committed a great Solecisme in State, when discharging his Guard, he sought to retain that Emp. by faire means, wch he had gotte^ by violence. I know thee O Caesar, to be of a more wary and cunning behaviour. Learn also to worke out thine owne safety, by POMPEYS misfortunes. Hee after the finishing
 of the Ponticke warre, at Brundusium, disbanded his Army: and thereby merited to bee accounted an honest and moderate man. Certainly; he shewed himselfe in the course of this action, rather vertuous than fortunate and politicke. For presently he began to be contemned, and by this improvident weakning of himselfe, made an open passage to his owne ruine. I commend his modesty more than his braine; Neyther did hee himselfe on better considerations, approve
 his owne doings; and therefore hee resolved, had he beene Victor in Pharsalia, never to have committed the like Oversight. So is it, and so will fall out with thee, O CAESAR, if in this action thou propose him to be thy Patterne. It is not safe AGRIPPA saith, to take the Empire: lesse safe is it to refuse it. A setled and innative vice it is in man, never to endure that any man above our owne rancke, should overtop us. Romes second founder Camillus; Scipio, that scourge
 of Carthage, were disgraced; and M. Coriolanus banished by our Ancestors: only because their worth had lifted them above the ordinary pitch of subjects. Doe not thou hope to fare better than thy Predecessors. Heretofore perchance, thou mightest have sought the Empire, to satisfie thy ambition. The Empire must now be thy refuge and Asylum. Credit me, the Lords of the Senate, after so many yeares obedience, know not how to governe: neither canst thou, having so long beene a
 Governor, learne Obedience. Truth is in matters of domesticall businesse, a man may stop and desist where he will. But in the getting of an Empire, there is no meane between the death of an Enemy, and the life of a Prince. Thou hast already gone too farre to retire. Now thou must resolve to be CAESAR or nothing. To say more were superfluous. Thine owne discretion will suggest unto thee, better Arguments. Onely this, I know that thou hast in thee too much Iulius, not to governe.




XXX.
AVGVSTVS, seemed to incline to this latter opinion; whether moved with MECENAS Oration, especially his instance in POMPEY; or that he was before resolved to follow that course, is uncertaine. Howsoever, seeming with great attention to observe their speeches, and gathering their severall reasons and motives together, he made this Reply. A most hard thing it is, for a divided
 minde, to make a well-joyn'd answer. Divided I am, and troubled between your two opinions; loath to follow eyther, sithence in so doing I must offend one. Yet sithence there is a necessity of Resolution; I intend, though I like well of thine advice, AGRIPPA; to follow thine MECENAS. In doing which, I am but an instrument of the Destinies, to put their will in execution. Often have I heard my Father OCTAVIVS report, how Nigidius, famous for his
 skill in Iudiciary Astrologie, told him once in open Senate, That he had gotten an Emperor for the Romans. As also, how M. Cicero, so renowned for wit and eloquence, dreamed that he saw Iupiter place me on the top of the Capitoll, with a Whip in mine hand. Certainly, if the powers of Heaven promise me so great an Empire; I will not bee wanting to my selfe: but will adde by my wisdome, to their influence. To further my designes, I doe desire you; nay I conjure you
 both: that as you have been ever ready in your Counsels; so you would not now be backward, in any necessary assistance. This said, they presently enter into a new conference, how to manage a businesse of this weight; what Senators to acquaint with their intent; how to dispose of the Army, not yet cashiered; with what Plummet were best to sound the minds of the common people.



XXXI.
THis Consultation ended, AVGVSTVS continued his affability to the People, and respect to the Nobles. An opportunity he had to expresse himselfe to both. There was at that time a Famine, which shrewdly raged among the Commons. To the poorer sort, hee distributed Corne, Gratis; to others, at a meane price. Riches and honours he communicated to both sorts; the
 better to wipe out of their memories, the ancient freedome. Such parts of the Citty, as were destroyed by casualty of fire, ruined by length of time, or defaced during the Civill-warres; he re-edified. Houses of Common-assemblies he repaired; Temples consecrated to the Gods, hee spared no cost, to adorne and beautifie. And finally so freely diffused his bounty, that there was no part or member of the Citty, which had not some taste of it. Next, he dismissed his soldiers, assigning them Lands and
 habitations in divers parts of Italy. That so the Lords of the State, might conceive his Resignation to be reall; and yet if need were, his forces might bee quickly reassembled. Nor were AGRIPPA and MECENAS wanting for their parts, to promote the cause: but carefully acquainted some of the Senate with it, who stood well affected to them; and cunningly prepared others.



XXXII.
THe foundation thus layd, and the Senate sate, AVGVSTVS rose fro^ his seat, and spake to this or the like effect. When I consider, with my selfe, the infinite extent of the Roman Empire; I protest I stand at amaze: Marvailing how such, as heretofore have raysed combustions in State, durst undertake the sole administratio^ of it. What Natio^
 in the world, hath not eyther begged their Peace at our Gates; or felt the fury of our wars at their owne? What Countries have not wee h^rried with fire and sword, making the rising and setting of the Sun, the bounds of our Dominions. It must questionlesse proceed from an overweaning conceit in the^, of their owne abilities; who thought themselves so fit to undergoe that burden, which none but the immortall Gods can carry. Of my selfe I will not say much. Onely I
 am not inferiour to Cinna, nor it may be, to Sylla. Yet have I found in my selfe, by late experience, how unable I was to manage the affaires of State; even then when I had two Coadjutors. There is no Atlas of strength sufficient to beare up this Heaven: No Starre of influence sufficient to animate this Spheare; No one forme of vertue sufficient to actuate this matter. Neyther indeed is it fit, that the Republique wch ought to be immortall, should depend only on the life and well-fare
 of one man. There never was, since the beginning of time, a City replenished with greater store of worrhy and able men; eyther to consult or execute. Never was there seene so grave and discreet a Consistory. Never so many of both sorts, so fit to governe. I have by your Directions, and the valor of your soldiers, put an end to al homebred quarrels. I have beene your instrument, to reduce peace internall and externall, to your City: and desire now no other Guerdon
 or recompence for any former services, than a quiet and a private life; free from all such dangers and inconveniences, as are inseparably annexed to the Principalitie. Now therefore, and may my action bee auspitious and fortunate to my Country, doe I resigne my authority: committing my selfe, and the Commonwealth, into the hands of the Senate and people of Rome.



XXXIII.
THis Oration ended, there followed a soft and silent buzzing in the house. Some supposed this speech, not to have so much truth, as art and cunning, yet smothered their conceits, for feare of after-claps. Others were Creatures of his owne making, and they hoping to rise in the fall of theyr Country, would not heare of a Resignation. Some few of the wiser
 sort, thought it not expedient, to put the Reines againe into the hands of the Multitude. The rest out of a sluggish and phlegmatique Constitution, chose rather the present estate with security; than to strive to recover the old, with danger. All therfore with a joynt consent proclaime him sole Emperor: and solemnely intreat him to save the Commonwealth, otherwise running to inevitable ruine. He for a while, as vainely denyed to accept the Government, as they vainely persisted to desire him. At
 last, wearied with the clamours of all in generall; and importance of some in particular; he by little and little yeelded to their requests, taking upon him the Empire for ten yeares, with this Proviso, that if before that time expired, hee could fully settle and order the present State, hee would give up his charge. (An. V.C. 725.) This hee gave out, not with a purpose of performance. (For at the end of every Decennium hee renewed his lease of the Regiment:) But that the people seeing a nigh possibility
 of regaining their Liberties, might not practice against him. Whereas, had hee for tearme of life, received the supreame authoritie; hee had no doubt hastened his owne overthrow.


XXXIV.
NOt the title of Dictator, but the Epithite, Perpetuall; was the destruction of CAESAR; Yet also great respect was to be had in the choyce of the title. The name of King
 he refused, as beeing odious to the Citizens. Neyther would he be called Romulus, though he much desired it; lest they should suppose that he did affect the Tyranny. When the people called him Dictator, he rent his Garments, desiring them to discharge him of a name so hated: and being once called Lord, (Dominus) hee forbad also that title by publique Edict. Princeps Senatus was the onely title he admitted. Well knowing, that the like glorious attributes were heaped on his Father IVLIVS, by
 them which least loved him; onely to this end, that growing more and more into hatred, hee might the sooner bee dispatched. Nor was he ignorant, that the Common-people led more by appearances, than truth; discernd names more plainly than executions: and that the onely course to make greatnesse stand firmely, was to receive extraordinary Iurisdiction, under a Title not offensive. The name also of AVGVSTVS, put upon him by the Senate, as if there had beene something in
 him more than mortall, he denyed not: as a title expressing more dignity and reverence, than authority.


XXXV.
VVhen first at the hands of the Lords of the Senate, he had for 10. yeares received the Government; there was appointed unto him two Cohorts of Praetorian Soldiers, for the guard of his person; to who^ the Senate allowed the double wages
 of a Legionary souldier, to make them the more vigilant and heedfull in their charge. Over these, he appointed two Prefects or Governors, (Captaines of the Guard wee may best tearme them.) To commit the charge to one onely, might breed danger; to more, confusio^. Agrippina, to settle Nero in the Empire, prevailed with Claudius, to muke Burrus, whom she had at her devotio^s, the sole Captain: and Nimphidius, falne from his hopes of setting Galba besides the quishio^; desired the co^ma^d of the Gard as the next step
 to the Soveraignty. In choice of these Captaines, he observed two Rules. First, he ever chose them, Ex ordine Equestri, not Senatorio; lest that so high a dignity, joyned to so high a Birth, might startle their resolutions to some designes against his quiet. Secondly, he made choice of two such, which were of contrary humors, and somewhat at oddes: That so the ill intents of one (if they should harbour any) might be thwarted and revealed by the other; and both in a noble emulation should contend,
 to be most forward in his service. The next course wch he took for his owne security, was a law he made to curbe the very wills and attempts of the great ones. For whereas it had beene formerly unlawfull, to question a Bondman, in matters concerning the life and death of his Lord: AVGVSTVS passed an Act, that all such Bondmen should bee first sold to him, or the Common-wealth. By meanes wherof he kept the Lords, before presuming on the secrecie of their Slaves; from all close and private
 Conspiracies against him.


XXXVI.
HAving thus strengthened his person, he assumed to himselfe the Imperiall, Censoriall, and Tribunitian authority together with the Sacerdot all dignity. As Emperor and Generall of the men of Warre, hee could presse Soldiers, raise Taxes, proclaime wars, make peace; yea and put to death the very best and stoutest of the Senators: as Censor, it
 was in his power, to reforme corrupt manners, inquire after mens carriage, to take in and put out of the Senate, whom he listed; to place and displace the people from an honorable tribe to a lesse honorable. Yet would he not be called Censor, as a name too inferiour: but accepted the Prerogative. After the surrendry of MANVTIVS and his associate; two men so unfit for that Magistracie, that they could object no crime to old or young, of which themselves were not gilty. The
 Tribunitian authority, enabled hinder any thing attempted against his liking: It preserved his person from all contumely and injury; Giving him leave to punish as an execrable person, yea and without any formality of law; whosoever had offended him eyther in word or deed. As for the Pontificiall Dignity, it made him a little more reverenced, not more potent. Onely it added to his title, the stile of Pontifex Maximus; or Chiefe Bishop; and made him of authority amongst the Priests, and in sacred
 matters, things that concerned Religion. The light of Reason taught him, that it was convenient for him, beeing a Prince, to have command on all his people. He had beene else but halfe a Monarch. Such as some Princes are with us, who quit their Clergy to be governed by a forreigne head. These severall Prerogatives annexed together, seemed not yet sufficient: and therefore he so cu^ningly dealt with the Senators that they gave him a generall Exemption from the Coactive power of the law. Which once
 effected, he seriously and totally bendeth his Studies to settle the Commonwealth.


XXXVII.
TO what Republique hee should conforme the Roman, was his next care. The forme described by Plato, rather sheweth how a Citty ought to be, than how it may bee governed. Aristotle bred in the free State of Greece, was no friend to Monarchies: and therefore no fit
 Instructer. Solon afforded the people, too much authority, the Nobles, too little; the King, none. The old Carthaginian Legislator attributed too much to Riches; too little to vertue. The Pensian Law-makers allotted to the King too much, and nothing to the Subiects, Zaleuchus was rather an Author of some particular Lawes, than the framer of a Republique: Phalaeus and Hippodamus was as unimitable as Plato. Lacedaemon onely, and her Lycurgus, were found fittest for his purpose. For
 LYCVRGVS a man of a deepe reach; and brought up under the most able Politicians of all Crete, well understanding that the unmixt forme of Rule was mutable, and by consequence pernicious: framed his Spartan Commonwealth; out of the perfections of the three good formes: their imperfections rejected. Reserving to the King, absolute Majesty; to the Nobles, convenient authority; to the People entire Liberty; all in a just and equall proportion. AVOVSTVS as hee neglected the peculiar
 Customes of that State, Community of Women, Equality of Possessions, and the like; So in the maine Platforme, hee was a diligent follower of his Constitutions. So mixing the Soveraignty of one, with the Liberty of all; that both the Lords and people without feare of bondage or sedition, enjoyed their hereditary freedome. The Consuls and Nobles of the Citty assembled, as formerly they used; Matters of State, they handled by themselves: Ambassadors of forreine Nations, they heard and
 dispatched. The Commons assembled in the Comitia, to enact Lawes, and elect Magistrates; as in the free Common-wealth. Yet so that nothing was done without the consent and privity of the Prince; who for the most part, nominated the successive Magistrate: leaving the confirmation of him to that people. So that the change, as hee contrived it, was not violent and at once, but by degrees, and by the silent approbation of both the Estates: as seeming to
 consist more in the alteration of the Magistrate, than of the Lawes.


XXXVIII.
BVt to proceed particularly: the first care he tooke, was to confirme Religion in the same state he found it. I meane Religion as the Romans used the word, for those particular though idolatrous formes of Worship; which to their severall GODS had beene used among them. This, though hee might have
 changed, as the Pontifex Maximus, or chiefe Bishop of the Citty; yet very wisely he forbare it; It is not safe for Princes that are setled in a long descent of Government, to be too active in such changes; But it is dangerous to attempt it in a Greene State, and in an Empire not well quieted, and inured to bondage: Men are more sensible of the smallest mutations in the Church, than greater changes in the State, and rayse more frequent troubles about it. The Romans specially were exceeding tender in this point. The
 ancient Aediles formerly received it into their charge, that they permitted no externall, eyther Gods or Ceremonies, to bee introduced into the City. And by AEMILIVS it was enacted for a Law, That none should offer sacrifice in any publike place, after a new and forraine fashion. Excellent therefore was the counsell that MECEnas gave him, when hee first undertooke the Empire. That hee should follow constantly the Religion, which he found established, and compell others also to doe the
 like: For forreigne and strange rites (sayth he) will offend the people, worke many inconvenient alterations in the State, yea and most likely will occasion many both seditions and conspiracies: Words which he spake not to the ayre, but to a Prince exceeding apprehensive of the best advice; Nor did AVGVSTVS ever shew himselfe more carefull in any one Arca of the Empire; than in this. That which MECENAS noted, we find true in these later Ages, in times more skilfull of obedience,
 than the most quiet houre of AVGVSTVS Gouernment. No one thing more hath caused so frequent, and so generall Rebellions in the States of Christendome, than alterations of this Nature; I cannot therefore but commend it, as a pious Resolution, in a late mighty Monarch. Better some few corruptions should be suffered in a Church, than that a change.



XXXIX.
REligion thus established; In the next place the wellfare of the whole Empire, consisted chiefly in reforming of the Citty; From which as from the heart, life was convayed to all the Provinces: And in the Citty the corruption was most apparant, in the Senate. With them therefore he beginneth, well knowing that crimes in men of eminent place end not in the^selves:
 but by degrees become diffused among their Clyents and followers. Now in the Senate were many and desertlesse men, who had been taken into the Consistorie during the Civill wars: as they could court the people, and humor such as were most potent. Of these he expelled none by his own power: but making a speech to them in the Senate, of the ancient order and present Confusion of the house; he first exhorted them to looke backe on their former lives, and to judge of their owne abilities
 and merits, for so honourable a roome. Then he desired some of them to picke out such among them, as were in disposition factious, and in life faulty, but loath to conceive so ill of their owne actions; Which they did accordingly. Yet as it often happeneth, that the great Thiefe leadeth all the rest to the Gallowes; and as Commines observeth, that after the Battell of Monthillery, Officies were taken from many for flying away, and conferred on such as ran ten Miles
 beyond them: So remained many in the Senate, neyther lesse vicious, nor lesse violent; onely more potent to maintaine their doings, than some others whom they had removed. AVGVSTVS therefore joyning to him AGRIPPA, proceedeth to a new review. And certainely, it much concerned him in the setling of his affaires, that none should have a voyce in that famous Councell, but such as were of able judgments, honest repute,
 and well affected to the the Prince. An enterprise which hee esteemed so dangerous, that permitted entrance to no Senator till he were scarched; himselfe wearing a Brigandine under his Gowne; and being enuironned with 10 of the most couragious and best beloved of the whole company. Such as hee found in eyther kind inexcusable, he discharged fro^ their attendance; electing such into their places, which were eyther ennobled for their wisedome, of noted moderation, and strong in their dependants.
 Yet so that greatnesse of Revenue, was esteemed neither a fit Patronage for any if they were offensive; nor a just cause to challenge interest in the house. Those of them which were rich rather in the guifts of the minde, than fortune; he relieved with honourable Pensions: and finally he bestirred himselfe so resolutely, that all confessed that they had need of such a wise Physitian, to cure that dull Consumption, whereinto the Commonwealth was falne.



XL.
IN other things he seldome did proceed against them as of himselfe: But when that any of them had conspired his Ruine, he referred them to the Iudgement of their fellowes. And this hee did partly to reserve unto the Court, the ancient Prerogative; partly, not to be Iudge and party in his owne cause: but principally following the example of his father IVLIVS, who counterfeiting
 a wretchlesse contempt of his adversaries, used when he was least suspected, under-hand and by publike Officers to worke their destruction. Many also of them, whom the Senate had condemned, he would freely pardon. Conceiving truly, that the questioning of me^ of high calling, would produce as much terrour; though it argued not so much rigor as the punishment. Yet if extremity of Law was used towards some few, it was to settle quietnesse in the whole; and as it were a particular
 blood-letting for the generall health. Those who had followed the factions of BRVTVS and ANTHONY, he forgave freely. And not so onely, but by manifesting his words by his deeds, and adding trust and honours to his pardons: he made his Chayre of State more setled, and immoveable. So CAESAR by erecting the fallen and broken Images of POMPEY, made his owne statues stand more firmely.



XLI.
BVt the chiefe Act by which he brideled the Nobles, was an Edict by him promulgated, forbidding any of them, his leave not granted, to travell out of Italy. For well he knew that in an Empire unsetled, and Provinces not quieted, the presence and authority of men of that ranke, might rayse greater troubles, than could be easily suppressed. Examples he wanted
 not; that especially of Cato, who after the overthrow of Pompey, stirred such a warre against Caesar in Affricke: that he never bought Victory at a dearer rate. Yet not altogether to imprison them, he licensed them at their pleasure to visite Sicilia, and Gaul Narbonoyse: Provinces close to the continent of Italy, altogether unfurnished for warres; and indeed such, as by reason of the variety of pleasures in them used, were more likely to weaken their minds, than to arme their bodies.



XLII.
NOw to give the Seuate some sweet meat, to their sowre sawce; he as much honoured and reverenced the Order, as ever it was in the free-state: submitting himselfe to their Iudgements; and appearing of his owne accord, at most of theyr dayes of Session. Out of those he chose 15. alterable every halfe yere, to be of his privy Councell, but the^ cha^ging the^ for others
 that so all of them might participate that honour; and yet none of them bee acquainted with too many of his secrets. At his entrance into the Senate, he used courteously to salute the Lords; and so likewise at his departure. Hee knew full well that it was noted for great pride in his father IVLIVS, so much to sleight the Lords of that House, as he alwayes did: never making to them any obeysance, no not then, when they came to tel him what honors were decreed unto him.



XLIII.
THis Reformation of the great Ones, soone made the lower sort more carefull; both to observe good order, and to learne obedience. Yet did not AVGVSTVS referre all to President; but somewhat to Precept. The Roman Knights he enforced to yeeld an account of their lives: an Ordinance full of health: Idlenesse being the root of all private vices, and publike
 disorders. To the Commons in their Comitia and other meetings, he prescribeth Lawes and Orders as himselfe listed. The old authority of the Tribunes, dashed in the Dictatorship of SYLLA, he would not restore. He suffred them to intercede for the people, but not to preferre or hinder any Bill to the advancement or the prejudice of the Third estate. Without this Curbe, the Common sort would never quietly have suffered him to sit fast in the Saddle. For had the people
 had their Tribunes, and had the Tribunes had their ancient dignity and power, which they had usurped: there had beene little or no hope; of altering the forme of Government. So different are the ends of the Common-people, especially if nuzled in a factious Liberty; from the designes of soveraigne Princes.



XLIV.
THe City thus reformed in the principall errors and defects of it; he againe exhibiteth unto them divers pleasures: As Shewes of Fencers, Stage-playes, Combates of wilde beasts, publique dancings, with variety of other delightfull spectacles. And this as well to breed in them a good conceit of the change; as fearing lest their cogitations, for want of other objects,
 would fixe themselves upon his actions, and the old freedome. Horse-races, Tilts, and Tornaments, he gladly cherished; but he permitted them only to the Inhabitants of Rome: That so that City being the Seat-Towne of his Empire, might be stored with good Horses, and expert Riders. Such of the Commons as were behind hand, he relieved: and when that any of them had made him Heyre to their goods; hee well knowing that no good Father did appoint to his Heyre any Prince but a
 Tyrant, presently restored to the Children of the deceased, the whole Patrimony. An action truly worthy of AVGVSTVS; as true a Guardian of Orphanes, as a Father of his Country. Such Princes as gape covetously after other mens possessions, seldome enjoy the benefit of their owne. The treasures of Kings are then greatest, not when their own Coffers are full onely, but their subjects rich.



XLV.
YEt one thing more he seemed to leave unto the people, which they thought most pleasing; Liberty of speech. Wherein sometimes they were so licencious, that they spared not AGRIPPA himselfe, so potent with the Emperour. But hee good man, never using the Princes favour to the prejudice of any, seemed not to marke their
 taunts and slanders: whether with greater moderation or wisedome, I cannor tell. Neyther did AVGVSTVS scape their foolish Pasquils and infamous Libels. All which he winked at, knowing, that Co^tumelies of that Nature, slighted and co^te^ned, soone vanish of themselves: but if repined and stormed at, they seeme to be acknowledged. A temper which he learnt of his Father IVLIVS, who was perfect at it. And certainely it was a notable poynt of wisedome in both of them. It is the misery of
 the best Princes, even when they doe well, to be ill spoken of. And therfore many times such follyes, are with more policy dissembled than observed, by the greatest Kings.


XLVI.
AS for this Lavishnesse of the tongue, it is an humour that springeth for the most part, rather from a delight in pratling, than any malice of the heart: and they which
 use it are more troublesome than dangerous. IVLIVS feared not the fat men, but the leane and spare. And so AVGVSTVS thought, that not men liberall of speech, but silent, close, and sparing of their words, were most likely to rayse tumults. Moreover, as long as the Common-people reteined Liberty of speech, they were the lesse sencible of the losse of Liberty in State. Whereas in the dayes of DOMITIAN, when not onely they were prohibited to commune together, but
 even their secret sighes and teares were Registred; then began they to looke with a serious eye, backe on the old and Common Liberty: Neglect is the best remedy for this Talking veine. When the humour is spent, the People will cease on their owne accords: till then, no forces can compell them Tacitus taxeth Vitellius of great folly, for hoping by force to hinder the continuall reports of Vespatians revolt; that being the only way to increase, not diminish the rumor. And as much he extolleth (I will
 not say how fitly the Reigne of Prince NERVA; wherein it was lawfull for the Subject to thinke what hee would, and speake what he thought.


XLVII.
THese courses though he tooke to rectifie the Senate, and content the people, yet he stayed not here. There were too many of both sorts, dangerous and unquiet spirits, who stomacked his proceedings: and under
 the pretence of the ancient Liberty, were apt to any bold attempt, and sodaine alteration. These as he winked at for the present, so he imployed them as occasion served, in his forreine warres. Wherein he followed the example of his father IVLIVS, who when his soldiers had displeased him, in their Mutinies and tumults; would lead them presently unto some desperate and dangerous service. So weakning both his foes, which lay next unto him, and punishing those Soldiers which had
 disobeyed him. For though AVGVSTVS had thrice shut the Temple of Ianus; and cherished peace, no Emperor more, of so large a Territory: Yet when he saw his times, and that mens minds were active, and their thoughts disquieted; he could find presently occasion for some new imployment. In this a body politique, may be compared most fitly, to the body Naturall. when we are full of bloud, and our spirits boyling, there is not any Physicke better than Phlebotomie. But if a
 veyne* be broken in us, and we bleed inwardly; our estate commonly is dangerous, and almost incureable. So Princes, when their people are tumultuous, and apt to mischiefe; or that their thoughts are working, and hearkening after action; doe commonly imploy them in some service farre from home; that there they may both vent their Anger, and employ their Couraege. For let them stay at home, to confirme their practises, and grow at last into faction:
 the State will suffer in it; if it be not ruined. We cannot have a fairer instance of this truth than the proceeding of the 5. HENRY, and of the times next following. Whose forreine warres kept us all quiet here at home; wasted those humours, and consumed those fiery spirits: which afterwards, the warres being ended, inflamed the Kingdome.



XLVIII.
THe Soldiers some of them he dispersed as before I sayd, all about Italy, in 32. Colonies: as well for the defence of the Country, as for their more speedy reassembly, if need should require. Abroad amongst the Provinces, were maintained upon the common charge, 23. Legions with theyr aydes, besider 10000. of his Guard, and those which were appointed for
 the bridling and the safety of the Citty. As to all of them he shewed an excellent thankfulnesse, for their faithfull services: So in particular, to AGRIPPA, and to one other, whose name the Histories of that age have nor remembred. This latter had valiantly behaved himselfe at the battell of Actium: and being summoned to appeare before the Lords of the Senate in a matter which concerned his life, cryed to AVGVSTVS for succour; who assigned him an Advocate. The poore fellow
 not contented with this favour, baring his breast, and shewing him the markes of many wounds; These (quoth he) have I received, AVGVSTVS, in thy service, never supplying my place by a Deputy. Which sayd, the Emperor descending to the Barre, pleaded the Souldiers cause, and wonne it. Never did Soveraigne Prince, or any that command in Cheefe, lose any thing, by being bountifull of favors to theyr men of war. For this act quickly spreading
 it selfe over all the Provinces, did so indeere him to the military men; that they all thought their services well recompenced, in that his graciousnesse to that one man.


XLIX.
AND now were they so farre given over to him, that the honours conferred on AGRIPPA, could not increase their love; well it might their admiration. AGRIPPA was of a meane
 and common Parentage, but supplying the defects of his Birth, with the perfections of his minde; he became very potent with AVGVSTVS, who not onely made him Consull, but his companion in the Tribunitian authority, and Provost of the Citie. So many titles were now heaped on him, that MECENAS perswaded the Prince, to give him his Daughter IVLIA to wife; affirming it impossible for AGRIPPA to live safe, considering how open new Creatures lye to the attempts of Malicious men; unlesse
 he were ingraffed into the royall Stemme of the CAESARS. On which cause questionlesse, for the stronger establishment of his new honours; SEIANVS afterward attempted, but not with like successe, the like march, with LIVIA, TIBERIVS Daughter in Law.



L.
THe Senate, People, and Men of Warre, thus severally reduced to a Mediocrity of power and content: The next labor is to alter the old, and establish a new government of the Citty it selfe. To effect which, hee dashed all former Lawes, by which the Allyes and Confederates of the State, were made free Denizens of the Towne. That hee conceived to be a way, to
 draw the whole Empire into one City; and by the monstrous groweth and increase of this, to make poore the rest. Therefore this Priviledge he communicated unto a few onely: partly that in the times of dea^th, the Citty might not so much feele the want of sustenance; and partly that so ancient an honour might not be disesteemed; but principally lest Rome replenished with so huge a multitude of stirring and unruly spirits, should grow too headstrong to be governed in due order.
 The greatest and most populous Cities, as they are pronest unto faction and sedition; so is the danger greatest, both in it selfe, and the example, if they should revolt.


LI.
THis provident course notwithsta^ding, there were in Rome men more than enough; and among them not a few malecontents, and murmurers at the present state; such as contemned the Consuls,
 and hated the Prince. To keepe these in compasse, AVGVSTVS, it being impossible for him to be still resident at Rome, and dangerous to bee absent; constituted a Provost of the Citie, for the most part chosen out of the Senators: assigning him a strength of 6000. men, called Milites Vrbani, or the City Souldiers. To him he gave absolute and Royall authority, both in the Towne and Territory neare adjoyning, during his owne absence. To him were appeales brought fro^ the Magistrates: and finally
 to his Tribunal were referred, all causes of importance, not in Rome onely; but the greatest part of Italy. Mesalla was the first Provost, but proofe being had of his insufficiency, the charge was committed to AGRIPPA: who did not onely settle and confirme the City; but speedily freed Italy from Theeves, and Robbers, and stopped the courses of many other troublers of the State.



LII.
IT is recorded that in the Civill warres of MARIVS and SYLLA, one PONTIVS VELESINVS of the MARIAN Faction, told his Generall, that he did well to scoure the Country; but Italy would never want Wolves, as long as Rome was so fit a Forrest, and so neare to retyre unto. The like might have beene spoken to AGRIPPA; That he did well, to cleare the Common
 Rodes and passages: but Italy would never want Theeves, whilst Rome was so good a place of Refuge. For though he did, as farre as humane industry could extend, endeavour a generall Reformation, both within the City and without: yet neyther could he remedy nor foresee all mischiefes. Still were there many and those great disorders, co^mitted in the night season; when as no eye, but that to which no darkenesse is an obstacle, could discerne the Malefactors. For in the first Proscriptio^,
 many men used to walke the Streets well weaponed; pretending onely their owne safety. Indeed it was to make their best advantage of such men, as they met eyther in unfrequented Lanes and passages; or travelling, as their occasions did direct them in the Night.



LIII.
TO represse therefore the foule insolencies of these Sword-men, AVGVSTVS did ordaine a Watch consisting of 7000. Freemen: their Captaine beeing a Gentleman of ROME. In the day time, the Guard of the Towne was committed to the Provost and his Citie
 Soldiers: These Vigiles resting in their standing Campes. In the Night season, one part tooke their Stations in the most suspicious places of the City: another, in perpetuall motion traversed the Streets, the rest lying in the Corps du Guarde, to relieve their companions. By which meanes, he not onely remedied the present disorders, but preserved the City from danger of fire also; Yea and secured himselfe from all night tumults, which carry with them (though but small) more terror and
 affrightment; than greater Commotions in the day. Never till now were the Commnn people Masters of their owne, both lives and substance. And now was travell in the night, ^s safe; though not so pleasant as at Noone.


LIV.
THe People and Cittie thus setled, his next study is to keepe the Provinces in a liking of the Change. But little Rhetorique needed to win their
 liking, who had long desired the present forme of Government: mistrusting the peoples Regiment, by reason of Noblemens factions, Covetousnesse of Magistrates; the Lawes affording no security, being swayed hither and thither by ambition and corruption. These Provinces, when he first rid the Government, he thus divided. Asia, Africa, Numidia, Betica, Narbonensis, Sicilia, Corfica, Sardinia, all Greece, Crete, Cyprus, Pontus, and Bythinia, being quiet and peaceable Provinces, of knowne
 and faithfull obedience; he assigned unto the Senate. But the new conquered Regions, such as had not disgested their losse of liberty, with who^ any rebellion or warre, was to be feared, he retayned under his owne command. Such were Tarraconensis, Lusitanica, Lugdunensis, Germany, Belgica, Aquitanica, Syria, Cilicia, Aegypt, Dalmatia, Mysia, Pannonia, etc. This hee did as hee gave out, to sustaine the danger himselfe alone, leaving to the Senate, the sweete at theyr ease:
 but the truth was, to keep them without armes, himselfe alwayes strong and in a readinesse. Questionlesse the Caesarean Provinces, growing so strong; and perceiving the Consular so weake: assumed to themselves the creating, and establishing the future Princes. Galba was made Emperour by the Spanish and French Legions; Vitellius, by the German; Vespatian by the Syrian and Pannonian: The Consular Provinces never stirring, eyther to prevent their attempts, or to revenge them.



LV.
THese Provinces, the better to manage the affaires of the Empire, he had peculiarly specified in his Register, what Tributes they payed, what Presents they sent in, what Customes in them were levyed. That booke also co^prehended, the wealth of the publike Treasury, and necessary charge issuing out of it: What number of Citizens and Allies, there were in Armes;
 What strength there was by Sea, with all other circumstances concerning the extent, strength, riches; and particulars of his Estate. William of Normandy did the like, at his first entrance into England: when he composed that Censuall Roll of all this Kingdome; which we call Doomes-day Booke, or the Roll of Winton: according unto which, Taxations were imposed, and Aydes exacted. The greatest Princes have not thought it a disparagemen to be good Husbands; to know the riches
 of their Crownes; and have an eye to theyr Intrado.


LVI.
BRitaine was left out of this Bead-roll, eyther because from hence there neyther was much hope of profit, nor much feare of hurt: or else because, being more desirous to keepe than inlarge the Monarchy; he thought it most expedienr to confine it within the bou^ds appointed by Nature. Danubius,
 on the North; Mount Atlas on the South; Euphrates, on the East; and the maine Ocean on the West: did bound his Empire and defend it. Some Kingdomes have their limits layd out by Nature: and those which have adventured to extend them further, have found it fatall. The Persians never did attempt to stretch their Territory beyond Oxus, but they miscarried in the action. And what was that poore River, if compared unto the Ocean?



LVII.
MAny who loved action, or expected preferment by the Wars, incited him unto the conquest and plantation of these Countries. Affirming that the barbarous people were naturally bad neighbors; and though for the present not very strong nor well skill^^ in Armes; yet mi^^^ ^ weake Enemy in ^^gather great str^^^^^ That he ought (...)
 the warre, for his Father Iulius sake, who first shewed that Iland to the Romans: that it yeelded both refuge and supply to the Malecontents of France, and enemies in Germany: That he would lose the benefit of a wealthy Country, stored with all manner of provision; and the command of a valiant Nation, borne as it were unto the warres. That it was an Apostacy from honor, to lye still and adde nothing to the conquest of his ancestors: that he was in all equity bound as farre as
 in him was, to reduce to Civility, from Barbraisme so many proper and able men.


LVIII.
TO these motives Augustus replyed, That he had already refused to wage warre with the Parthian; a more dangerous neighbour, and far worse enimy than the Britaines: That he had w^st and desart ground enough, in his own dominions for many a large Plantation; when
 he saw it needfull; that he had constantly refused, though with great facility he might, to conquer any more of the barbarous Nations: That as in the Naturall body, a surfeit is more dangerous tha^ fasting; So in the body Politique too much is more troublesome than a litle. That the Roman Monarchy, had already exceeded the Persian and Macedonia^: and to exte^d it further, was the next way to make it totter and fall by its owne weight: that he had learned in the Fable, not to lose the substance, by
 catching the shadow: That many puissant Nations lay in, and about Britany, against whom Garrisons must be kept; and he feared the Revenue would not quit the Cost.


LIX.
FOr the assurance of the Provinces already conquered, he dispersed into them 23. Legions with their Aydes: whose pay onely, besides provision of Corne and Officers wages; amounted to five
 Millions and an halfe of our English pounds, and somewhat more, were so sodainly payd unto the Armies, that we read seldom in the Histories of that Empire, of any Mutinie amongst the Soldiers for want of pay. An happinesse whereof these ages have beene little guilty. For the amassing of his treasure, and defraying of this charge; AVGVSTVS made not use onely of his owne revenue. Warres which are undertaken, and Soldiers that are levied for the Common safety; ought in all reason to be maintained on the Common-purse.
 Grandour and security of an Empire, concernes in all respects, asmuch the people as the Prince. For which cause, he erected an Ezchequer in the Citsy, which was called Aerarium militare, or the Soldiers Treasurie, whereto the xx. part of every mans estate, was brought; according to the true and perfect valuation. This was esteemed an heavy burden at the first, and indeed it was: but that the people felt the sweetnes and effects of it, in the common safety. In that respect, the interest was
 greater than the principall. Subiects that have a care either of the common peace or honour; will not r^pine at payments and taxations, though more tha^ ordinary. It is a poore conceit to thinke that Princes eyther are able or obliged, to maintaine the warres without assistance from their people: or that the treasures, which in these respects they give the King; they doe not give unto themselves. I may perhaps repute him for a cunning Sophister, (...) never for a faithfull (...); which coynes
 distinctions betwixt the welfare of the King, and the weale of the Kingdome.


LX.
THese Legions he employed as occasion was, eyther to curbe the Natives, or secure the Borders. The Roman Empire seldome had such perfect peace but that there were imployments alwaies for the Soldiers. If that they had in any place a short Cessation from the wars;
 yet they were not idle. Idlenesse doubtlesse is the greatest enimy to Martiall Discipline. Therefore he kept them at such times perpetually busied: eyther in paving Bogges, or in dreaning Marishes. By meanes whereof, he made not onely many of the barbarous Countries, both fruitfull in themselves, and profitable to the Chequer: but thereby also he secured his owne affaires, and disarmed his enemies. For many times the Barbarous people trusting to such advantages; were apt too often to rebell:
 and having got themselves within those Myres and Fastnesses, stood on theyr Guard; as in some fashionable or defensible Fortresse. The surest meanes to keepe a conquered people, from all occasion of revolting, is to lay waste their Wood-lands, and make all parts passable. The opportunity of a safe retreat, makes not more Theeves, than Rebels.



LXI.
THose whom he placed over his Provinces and Armies: hee neyther would remove under 3. yeares government; nor yet continue after five. A longer stay might teach them too much of the nature of the people; and perhaps prompt them, to worke into the favour of the Natives, and the men of warre; and so at last to establish in themselves a Soveraignty. Caesars long
 stay in Gaul, (a second 5. yeares being added unto that, which was first allowed him;) made him so potent with the people, and gracious with the Soldiers; that in the end hee brought the Roma^ Empire under his subjection. And on the other side, to take them from their charges, under 3. yeares continuance, were to have called them home, before they were well learned in the Customes and the nature of the Provinces: so making them unable, to instruct their Successors. As for the men whom he
 imployed in those Commands; he called them alwayes out of the most valiant and upright, in Campe, and Senate. A Prince more willing and desirous not to imploy men likely to offend; than after the offence to punish and chastise them.


LXII.
BEsides his forces by Land, he also maintained at Sea two invincible Armadoes. The one lay at Anchor neare Ravenna, in the up Sea, to awe and
 defend Dalmatia, Crete, Greece, Cyprus, Asia, etc. The other at Misenum, in the lower Sea, to protect and keepe under France, Spaine, Africa, Aegypt, Syria, etc. Neyther was this the onely use of two such puissant Fleets. But in all probability, they were to clense the Sea of Pyrates; to have a care to the conducting of the Tributes and Customes into the Exchequer: and served also for transporting Corne, and other necessary provisions, for the sustenance, and reliefe of the Citty. In the ensuing
 Civill warres, these two Navies proved to bee of great importance: The revolt of them giving as great a blow to the one side, as a comfort to the other. The principall assurance of Otho in the wars, was the immoveable fidelity of the Misenian Fleet: and the siding of th'other with Vespatian, brake the hearts of Vitellius best followers.



LXIII.
AVGVSTVS as hee strengthened the Provinces in generall, so did he cast an especiall eye on 3. particulars: viz. Italy, France, and Aegypt. Italy rounded Rome the Metropolis of the Empire; and therefore he ought to be well assured, of its good faith and allegiance to him. Nor was he ignorant, that the Bellum Sociale raised by the people of that Country in the free-State,
 more shooke and endangered the Empire; than the Invasions of Pyrrhus, or Anniball. Therefore as formerly he planted in it 32. Colonies, of old and trusty soldiers, to keepe it sure unto himselfe: So now he did divide it into eleven Regions; each having peculiar Magistrates, and under Officers. This not so much to ease the Citty Praetor, although hee had imployment enough at Rome: but because it was thicke set and as it were overlayd with People, whose rising might endanger the Common-wealth.
 So by his Colonies he kept a Garrison upon them as it were, that they could not revolt: and by his Officers and Iusticiers (as I may call them) he set so strait a Watch about them; that they durst not practise.


LXIV.
FRaunce, then called Gaul, was both a large and fertile Country: stored with a people, valiant in all attempts, and in
 many desperate. A people with which the old Romans fought rather to maintaine their owne liberty, than to increase their Dominions. A people whose Progenitors had sacked the Citie; and finally with whom the Romans durst not make warre, till they had almost all the residue of the world in subjection. Remembrance of their ancient Reputation, and store of money might occasion many desperate practises against the quiet of the Empire. The readiest
 way to keepe them in Obedience, was to keepe them poore, for without wealth, high Stomacks may well feed on the hope of Liberty, but disgest it neuer. Licinius his freedman, was the fittest fellow for such an Office: who is presently made the Taske-master of the Province. The French used to pay a Monthly Tribute, which he much inhaunced (besides private and petty meanes of prevailing) by making foureteene Moneths in a yeare. The French Solicitors at Rome make complaint to
 AVGVSTVS. He sometimes yeilded unto them, sometimes excused his Freedman; some things hee would not know, many he would not believe; others he dissembled. LICINIVS to make up his peace, sent to the Emperour all his treasure, and that huge Masse of gold and silver by those unlawfull meanes, heaped up together: which hee not onely willingly received, but his turne being served and the French not a little impoverished; he recalled Licinius, and sent Tiberius to settle the Province. So
 old and common a thing it is with great Princes, to suffer their Vice-Roys, and Vnder-Officers, to sucke like Spunges, the Wealth of the Subiect, till they are quite full; and then o squeeze them into their owne Coffers.


LXV.
BVt the Province whose tuition and defence he principally regarded, was Aegypt: not so much for the valour and animositie of the Inhabitants ^s the naturall strength and scituatio^
 of the place. Alexander of Macedon having annexed it to his Empire, never committed the entire government and Iurisdiction thereof to one man: fearing least he presuming on the wealth of the People, and site of the Country, would settle the possession in himselfe. And so AVGVSTVS calling to minde aswell the multitude, as the levity and incenstancie of the Natives; that it was very rich in coyne, and the Roman Granary, (as serving the Citty foure Moneths yearely with Corne) not
 onely trusted not the rule thereof into the hands of any of the Senators, but expresly forbad any of that order, without his especial permission, to sojourne there. It is a principle in State, never to licence me^ of great houses, and credit among the people, to have free accesse into that Country, whose revolt may endanger the whole Empire Wherefore it was a weaknesse doubtlesse, in the Councell of K. Henry of that name the 6. to suffer Rich. D. of Yorke, to passe at pleasure into Ireland; where he had harbour and
 reliefe, and whence hee brought supply both of men and money. But to return to Aegypt, Germanicus entring once into Alexandria, onely to see the Antiquities of it, and returne; stirred such suspicions and distractions in the jealous head of Tiberius, that hee spared not sharpely to rebuke him for it. Vespasian also being by the Syrian Legions chosen Emperor, first assured himselfe of Aegypt; as the key of the Sea and land, with a small power against a stro^g host, easily defended. This place he resolved to make
 his Sanctuary, if his designes succeeded not luckily. And to this place hee hastened, after the defeate of the Vitellian army: that so detaining the ordinary provision of victuals; hee might by famine compell the City of Rome to stand at his devotio^. The government of this Province was by Augustus alwaies committed to some one of the Romane Gentry; as lesse able, by reason of his low fortunes, to worke against the Princes safety neyther would he allow his substitute the glorious attributes of Lievtenant, Legatus,
 Vice-Roy, or Propraetor. Captaine or President of Egypt, was their highest Title: their being even in Titles no small motives to Ambition.


LXVI.
AVgustus having by these meanes reduced both the Citty and Provinces, under his absolute co^mand: and being now declining in strength, by reason of a sodaine and violent sicknesse; began to call his wits to Councel, how to dispose of the Estate after
 his decease. Male-child he never had any. His Daughter Iulia a woman of immodest carriage, never made further use of her Fathers greatnesse, than that she satified her lusts with the grtater insolence. Marcellus his Sisters sonne, and Iulias husband was a young man of an ingenuous disposition; and seemingly capable of the fortunes which attended for him. Him being yet young, Augustus preferred to the Pontificiall dignity, and Aedileship; yet once upon his sicknes, he privately determined,
 to choose a successor in the Common-wealth, rather (...) his owne family: and not to leave the Empire, unto Marcellus, whom (...) held unable to under^ it; But to his companion in armes, Agrippa, a man daunted neither with adverse, nor altered with prosperous fortunes.


LXVII.
This Marcellus afterwards so stomacked, that hee beganne to grutch at Agrippas greatnes; and to beare a vigilant eye on his plots and actions. Contrary Agrippa unwilling to
 offend him, under whose future government hee was in all likelyhood to end the rest of his daies; with much adoe obteyned leave to retire unto Lesbos; that so his absence eyther might allay, or remove the displeasure, conceived against him by the young Prince. An action full of wisedome and magnanimity. For though Augustus cheef end was, to discountenance the popular depe^dancies of his sonne, by the favours heaped upon his servant: Yet did Agrippa know, that a Favorite ought to have so much
 in him of the Persian Religion, as to worship the Rising Sunne, and that hee should resemble old Ianus with the two faces; with th'one looking on the King Regnant; with th'other, on the Prince successive.


LXVIII.
MArcellus being dead, Agrippa returning married his Widdow; and on her begat two sonnes, Caius and Lucius, whose actions afterward afforded such variety for censure,
 that there was wanting neither much reaso^ to co^mend, nor little to reprove them. On these two, or at the least one of them, Augustus now growne aged, resolves to settle the estate, and if they failed, upon such others, as by the liberty of the Lawes, he might adopt: Adoption; in the estimation of the Roman Lawes, being indeed an other nature. Posterity whether it be naturall, or onely legall, is the best supporter of the Armes Imperiall, Such as both fortifies the Prince,
 and assures the subject. Yet this he did not without much reluctancy and a great co^flict in his mind. Sometimes his thoughts suggested to him, that the designed Successors draw to them all the attendance, and respect, from the Prince in possession: that they have alwaies a lingring desire, to be actually seated in the Throne: That they suppose the life of the present Prince, too tedious; not caring by what means it were shortned: That sometime it is pernicious, yea even to the appointed Successor himselfe also.

On the other side, his better thoughts prompted him to consider, in what a miserable distraction he should leave the Empire; if sodaine death should take from him an ability to nominate his heyre: The feare conceived in the whole City, at his last sicknes: that Pyrrhus of Epirus, was of all hands condemned, for leaving his Kingdome to the sharpest sword; That the Commo^-wealth falne into dissentions, could not be setled againe without a lame^table war, and a bloudy victory: That the people seeing
 him and childish, would not only contemne him, but perhaps, endeavor to recover the old liberty; though with the ruine of the State: That it was the custome of Tyrants, to desire the eternizing of their deaths, by the downfall of their Cou^tries.


LXIX.
HIs minde thus distracted and perplexed, at last he brake, in this ma^ner. Thou hast Octavian a Wolfe by the eares; which to hold still, or to
 let goe, is alike dangerous. Many inconveniences may ensue, if thou dost not declare thy Successor; More, if thou dost. The good of the Republique, consisteth in knowing the future Prince Thine owne welfare dependeth on the concealement. The Common good is to be preferred before any private; Yet ought Charity to begin at home. No, Octavian no; As thou hast receiv'd, so shew thy selfe worthy of, the title of Pater Patriae. Yea, and perhaps this designation may secure thine owne
 Estate. For what will it profit the people, to contest with thee when they shall see a successor at hand, eyther of thine owne body, or thine own appointment, ready to take thy place, and revenge thy wrongs?


LXX.
THus resolved, he adopteth Caius and Lucius; desiring, though he made shew to the contrary, they should be Consuls Elect, and called Princes of the Youth. Yet wisely fore-casting the
 dangers incident to himselfe, if they should make their abode in Rome; he sendeth them with honourable charge, into the Provinces abroad: as well to exercise them in feates of Warre, as to take away all cause of faction in the Court, and sedition in the Citty. Which mystery of State as it was anciently practised by most Princes, so at this day by the Grand Seigneur: who alwayes sendeth his eldest sonne unto Amasia, as Governour thereof; from whence, till the death of his Father, he never returneth.

In these journeyes dyed the 2. young Princes, a mishap which Augustus bare Nobly: neither banishing griefe, with a Stoicall Apathy; nor spending the time in womanish lamentations. having performed due rights to the dead, he adopted his Wives sonne Tiberius: A man for the conveniency and ripenes of his age, not unfit, in feates of Armes not unexpert; in humane learning not ignorant: but withall suspected to be cruelly given, and possessed with the hereditary pride of the Claudian family: A
 strong medley of vertuous and vicious qualities. Tiberius such was the will of his Father, to establish the succession, with more stayes than one, adopted Germanicus, his brother Drusus sonne; Then co^manding over 8. Legions in Germany, which done, he speedeth to his charge in Illyricum: This man, Augustus appointed to be his heyre, as it was afterwards, and not improbability conjectured: neither in care to the State, nor in love to the party: but to win honour to himselfe, and to make the Roman
 people, againe wish for him; whe^ they should see that infinite disproportion in all royall and Kingly qualities, between the old and new Emperors. A fetch after imitated by Tiberius, in the adoption of Caius Caligula.


LXXI.
THe last (though not the least) helpe of the Empires establishment; was the long life and reigne of our Augustus: as having ruled the State 16. yeares before, and 44. yeares after his confirmation, in the Soveraignty;
 by the Senate and people. All the young men in the City, were borne after the first Decennium, of the Monarchy. Most of the old men during the Civill wars. Few had seene what was the ancient forme of Government; in the free Commonwealth; Many did not desire it. For at the present, enjoying peace both at home and abroad, and hearing what sad and tragicall reports their fathers made of the former troubles and proscriptions: they co^tented themselves with the new government; as more esteeming a secure
 and happy subiection, than a dangerous and factious liberty. By which long time of Empire, and the policies already recited, besides many others, which I can neither learne by Relations, nor gather by presumptions; did Augustus so firmely settle the Roman Monarchy: that it continued many hundreds of yeares, immoveable and vnaltered; though all his immediate successors were in a manner Monsters, incarnate divels, and indeed any thing rather than men. Tiberius, Caius, Claudius, Nero, Galba
 Otho, and Vitellius, both by their owne Tyrannies, and their Bondmens extortion, would haue ruined any Monarchy, not founded by Augustus.


LXXII.
TO speake concerning the domestical affaires of this Emperor, is beyond my Theme. As either how farre he suffered himselfe to bee ordered, by his Wife Livia, or whether hee used variety of women, not so much to satisfie a disordinate appetite,
 as by so many women to fish out the secret designes of many men. Hee was too exact a Statesman to be perfect in Soldiery: and in all his wars, was prosperous by fortune rather than by valor, or his Captaines valour, than his owne. The Common-wealth which hee found weake and in Rubbish; he left Adamantine, and invincible. In behaviour he was affable, and gracious; in his discourse sentencious: to the good, of a most sweet disposition; to the lewd and dishonest, harsh and unpleasant,
 Friendship he contracted with few, and that slowly; but to them, whom hee once loved, constant and bountifull to the last. Finally such a one he was, of whom I will only say what I find spoken of Severus. It had beene an ineffable benefit to the Common-wealth of Rome, if eyther he had never dyed, or never beene borne.

FINIS.

