


THE ETERNALL TRVTH OF SCRIPTVRES, AND CHRISTIAN BELIEFE, THEREON WHOLLY Depending: manifested by it owne LIGHT. THE FIRST BOOKE.


SECT. I. [I beleeue in God the Father, etc.]
IF in any at all, most of all in this present argument, may the truth of that vsuall axiome best appeare,
Dimidium facti qui bene coepit, habet.
What's well begunne, is wel nigh done.
If God shall enable mee rightly to vnfold the contents and meaning of this first word [Beleeue] I may iustly presume, the one halfe of this intended worke to be finished in it; seeing it is an essentiall part of euery Article in the Creed: such a part, as, if it be vnderstood amisse, we can not possibly vnderstand any one proposition of this whole confession aright. I shall not therefore seeme tedious (I trust) vnto the iudicious Reader, although I be somewhat long in vnfolding the nature and conditions of beliefe; the diuers acceptions and degrees of the same; with the meanes how it is, or may be wrought in our hearts.
Whether we speake of the Act, and operation of beleeuing, or of the disposition, and inclination of the mind, whence this operation
 proceedeth, it skilleth not much: hee that knoweth the true meaning of the one, without anie further instruction may know the other. And because the Act or Operation is more easie to bee knowne, let vs beginne with the most common and general thereof, that is, with the best and most vsually knowne acception or notion of beliefe.

CHAP. I. Of Beliefe in generall.
TO beleeue a thing, is to assent vnto it as true, without any euident certaintie of the trueth thereof, either from our sense or vnderstanding.
2 That beliefe is an assent; that to beleeue is to assent, all agree: but what more besides assent is required to some, especially to Christian beliefe, is much controuersed amongst Diuines: of which (God willing) in the Articles following.
3 That euident certaintie, either of sense or vnderstanding, must be excluded from the assent, which is properly called beliefe, is euident and certaine by our vsuall and common speech. Thus whiles we demaund of him that relates any thing vnto vs for true (as newes or the like) whether he know his relation to be certainly true, or no: if he neither haue immediately heard nor seene the things which he relates, but haue onely taken them at the second hand, his vsuall answere is: Nay, I know not certainly, but I verily beleeu^ they are true, for diuers reasons and credible reports: but if he had either seene or heard them himselfe, he would not say, I beleeue, but, I know they are most true. For euident certaintie doth drowne beliefe.
4 Yet is this euident knowledge (whether sensitiue or intellectuall) to be excluded only from the thing it selfe which is to be directly beleeued, not from other things that are linked or vnited to it by nature.
5 That which we euidently know, may oft-times be the cause, why we beleeue some other matters, that haue affinity with it. As he that seeth it very light in the morning, when he first openeth his eyes, may probably beleeue the Sunne is vp, because he euidently
 seeth the ayre to be light. But no man (if you should aske him the same question) would say, that hee beleeued the Sunne was vp, when either the heate thereof doth scortch his face, or the beames dazell his eyes; for now he knoweth this trueth directly and euidently in it selfe. Nor is there any man that hath his right minde, that will say he verily beleeueth twice two make foure: for this is euident, and certaine to ordinarie capacities, and hee that onely beleeueth this, knoweth nothing. For what men know certainely and euidently, they will not say, they only beleeue, but know: what they so know not, they may truely and properly say, they beleeue, if their assent to it be greater than to the contrary.
6 Some againe distinguish this vneuident assent (which is properly called beliefe) from other assents or opinions, by the grounds on which it is built. The ground of it (in their opinion) is authoritas docentis, the authoritie of the teacher or auoucher of the points proposed to be beleeued.
7 This distinction in some cases is true, but it is not necessarie to all beliefe; nor doth it fully and properly distinguish beleefe from other vneuident assents or perswasions. For euen those assents or perswasions, which seeme most to relie vpon authorities, may be strengthened by other motiues or inducements: yea our beliefe, or relying vpon authorities, vsually (alwayes if it be strong) ariseth from experiment of our Authors fidelity and skill, as shall appeare hereafter. For our present proceedings we take it here as granted or supposed, that this word [Beleefe] as it is vsually taken, is more generall than that assent or perswasion, which relies vpon authoritie; yet not so generall, as to comprehend these assents or perswasions, which are euidently certaine.
8 It may be obiected, that the Apostle calleth euident knowledge, beliefe, when he saith, The diuells beleeue there is a God, and tremble. For it should seeme, that the diuels know as euidently that there is a God, as we do that the Sunne did shine but yesterday, or this morning. For they once enioyed the presence of God, and sawe his glorie, and since haue had euident experience of his power.
9 Of Gods being (no doubt) they haue euident certaintie, albeit of his other attributes their knowledge is not so directly nor euident, but coniecturall, or a kind of beliefe. Wherefore vnto this
 place of our Apostle we may answere two wayes: Either that vnder this word [Beliefe] he comprehends not onely their assent vnto the being, or existence of the Godhead; but their assent vnto other attributes of God, which they know not so euidently, and therefore may be said to beleeue them. Or if he vnderstand onely that assent, which they gaue vnto the existence or beeing of the Godhead, he calleth this (though ioyned with euident knowledge) a beliefe, in opposition or with reference vnto the beliefe of hypocrites (against whom he there speakes) which was much lesse than this assent of diuells. For albeit that which is greater in the same kind, cannot be properly and absolutely said to be the lesse; as wee cannot properly and absolutely say that foure is three, but rather containes three in it: yet vpon some reference of the greater vnto the lesse contained in it, or vnto some other third, we may denominate the greater with the name of that which is lesse in the same kind: as wee may say of him that promised three and gaue foure, that he gaue three, because three is contained in foure. So the Philosopher saith, that Habitus est dispositio, euery habite is a disposition, not absolutely and properly, for it is more; yet because it is more, with reference vnto that which is lesse, or vnto the subiect in whom it is, we may say it is dispositio, that is, it containes disposition in it, albeit no man would say that habitus were dispositio, if he should define it.
10 And men vsually obiect to such as scoffe at matters of religion, that the day will come, wherein, if they repent not, they shal beleeue the things which now they little regard. Albeit they cannot be said in that day to beleeue them, if wee speake properly and absolutely, without reference to their former incredulitie. Our meaning is, they shall doe more than beleeue them, for they shall feele them. Nor can we say properly, that the elect after the resurrection shall beleeue the articles of faith: seeing all agree, that of these three principall vertues, Faith, Hope, and Loue, onely Loue shall then remaine. The reason is that which you haue heard alreadie; because euident knowledge must be excluded from the nature of faith and beliefe; and the godly shall then clearely see Christ face to face, and fully enioy the fruit of his passion, which now they only beleeue.
11 As for certaintie, we may not exclude it from the nature
 of beliefe, vnlesse this speech be warily vnderstood. For the certaintie of the articles of our saith ought to be greater, than the certaintie of other knowledge; for we must beleeue them, although they be contrarie to the capacitie of our vnderstanding: for euen this must we beleeue, that many things (as all supernatural things) surpasse the reach of our vnderstanding. Yet this we may safely say, that the certaintie of the articles of our beliefe, [as of Christ his death, of his and our resurrection,] cannot be so great to vs in this life, as it shall be in the world to come, when we shall euidently know them. This rule then is infallible; that the knowledge of any thing is more certaine, than the beliefe thereof: although the beliefe of some things (as of Christ his passion) bee more certaine, than the knowledge of other things; as namely, than the knowledge of humane sciences. So then out of this it is euident, that beliefe, taken generally, doth neither exclude all certaintie, nor necessarily require any; seeing some beliefe hath a kind of certaintie adioyned with it, and some cannot admit it. Wherefore it remaineth, that assent is the essence of beliefe in generall; I say such an assent, as is not ioyned with euidencie.
12 This assent may be weaker or stronger, and so come nearer vnto, or be further from certaintie, according to the nature of that obiect, whereunto we giue assent; or according to the nature of that, whereupon our beliefe is grounded; or lastly, according to our apprehension either of the obiect, or that which is the ground of our assent. Excesse in the first of these [to wit, in certaintie or stabilitie of the obiect] doth rather argue a possibilitie of firmer beliefe, or more credibilitie; not more firme or actuall beliefe. For as many things are more intelligible than others, and yet are least vnderstood of many: so many that are most credible, are least beleeued.
13 Excesse in the second of these, whence the assent of beliefe may be strengthened, [that is, in the ground of beliefe,] doth rather argue a stronger hypotheticall beliefe, than any absolute beliefe; vnlesse the apprehension or conceit of this ground be strong and liuely. In ordinary reports or contracts, it skils not of what credit the partie be, vnto whose credence or authoritie we are referred for the truth of any promise or report; vnlesse wee haue good inducements to thinke, that he did either say, or promise as
 we were told. If we be not thus perswaded by some apprehension of our owne; we giue onely conditional assent vnto the report or promise, and beleeue both with this limitation, [if he say so, whose credit wee so esteeme.] But if we can fully apprehend that he said so; we beleeue absolutely.
14 As in science or demonstrations it is requisite, both that we know the true cause of the effect, and also that we apprehend it certainly as the true cause; (otherwise we haue only an opinion:) so in true and absolute beliefe it is requisite, that we haue both a sure ground of our beliefe, and a true apprehension of that ground* otherwise our beliefe must needs be conditionall, not absolute. It remaineth therefore that we set downe, first the nature of the obiects that may be beleeued: secondly, the seuerall grounds of beliefe: and thirdly, the manner of apprehending them, albeit in some the apprehension of the obiect in it selfe, and the ground of beliefe, are in a sort all one; as in that beliefe, which is not grounded vpon the auhoritie of the teacher. This rule is generall; wheresoeuer the obiects are in themselues more credible, the ground may be more strong, and the apprehension more liuely, so men be capable of it, and industrious to seeke it: and equall apprehension of such obiects as are more credible in themselues, (vpon such grounds as are more firme) makes the beliefe stronger, than it could be of obiects lesse credible, or vpon grounds lesse firme. Ceteris paribus, euery one of these three, first, Greater credibilitie of the obiect, secondly, Surer ground of beliefe, thirdly, More liuely apprehension of the obiect or ground, encrease beliefe.
15 For the obiects of beliefe, (whence this assent must bee distinguished,) they are either naturall, or supernaturall; but first of tha^ which is naturall. The obiects of naturall beliefe are of two sorts, either scibilia, or opinabilia; either such things as may be euidently knowne in themselues, but are not so apprehended by him that beleeues them; or else such things, as we can haue no euident or certaine knowledge of, but onely an opinion. And of this nature are all the monuments of former ages, and relations of ancient times, in respect of vs which are now liuing: all future contingents, or such effects, as haue no necessarie naturall cause why they should bee, nor no ineuitable let or hinderance why they may not be; as whether wee should haue raine or faire weather the next
 moneth, whether such or such nations shall wage warre against each other the next yeare. These matters past, and contingent which are not yet, but may be, albeit they agree in the generall nature of opinabilia, that neither of the^ can be exactly knowne, but only by opinio^ beleued: yet both differ in that which is the ground of our assent or beliefe. The ground or reason why we beleeue things past, (as that Tully liued in Iulius Caesars time, or that the Saxons inhabited this land,) is the report of others. The ground or reason why we beleeue future contingents, is the inclination or propension which we see in second causes to produce such effects; or the coherence betwixt any naturall or morall contingent cause, and their possible or probable issue. As if we see one kingdom mightie in wealth, and at peace and vnitie in it selfe, bearing inueterate hate to another; or if we know that the one hath suffered wrong, not likely to be recompenced, and yet able in politique estimation to make it selfe amends: we beleeue that such will shortly be at open hostilitie one with another. Or if we see the ayre waterish, we beleeue it will shortly be rainy. Yet are not the grounds why we beleeue things past, and the grounds of beleeuing future contingents, alwayes so opposite, but that they may iumpe in one, and conspire mutually for the strengthening of beliefe. For we would beleeue our former coniecture of warre or weather a great deale the better, if a cunning States-man should giue iudgement of the one, or an Astronomer, or some that we know very weather-wise, his opinion of the other. For now, besides the probabilitie of our owne coniectures, we haue other mens authoritie to confirme our beliefe. In both kinds (either where the grounds of each are seuerall, or where both conspire together) as the ground of beliefe, or our apprehension of the ground is greater, so our beliefe waxeth stronger. THVS we beleeue the Romane stories of Caesars times more firmely, than the relations of Herodotus concerning matters of Aegypt, or other countries; because more Writers, and they such as are lesse suspected of vanitie or imposture, do testifie the truth of Romane affaires.
16 Other things, which are credible, or may be beleeued, are (as we said) scibilia; such things as may be exactly knowne by natura^l reason, though not of the partie which only beleeues them; (for exact knowledge alwayes expels meere beliefe of the same
 thing in the same partie.) That the Sunne is bigger than the earth, or that the motion thereof is swifter than any arrowes flight, may bee knowne exactly by a Mathematician; but ordinarie country-men (such as are not rustically wayward) do beleeue it; euidently and exactly know it they cannot. The ground of their beliefe in such a case is authoritas docentis. And this authoritie of teachers, or others, vpon whose assertions we rely, consisteth partly in a perswasion of the teachers or relators skill in those matters which he teacheth or relateth; and partly in his honestie, fidelitie, or veracitie in his dealings, or sayings. And as these are reputed greater, so do we more beleeue him in these things which he auoucheth for true, and rely more securely vpon his authoritie. For as we said before, Caeteris paribus, the certaintie of beliefe encreaseth as the ground of beliefe doth, both for the number of points belieued, and for the firmenesse of the beliefe it selfe. If two of the same facultie teach vs diuers things, whereof we haue no other ground but their assertion, we beleeue him better, whose skill and fidelitie we account of better; and the more the parties be that report or auouch the same thing, the more we beleeue them, if they be reputed skilfull and honest. And where the authoritie is the same, both for extension and degrees: yet we beleeue the things taught better, from the better or more immediate apprehension of the authoritie. As if Aristotle, Euclide, or Archimedes were aliue, and in that reputation for skill in their seuerall professions, which their workes are in; we would beleeue those conclusions, which wee heard them teach, better than such as we had from them by others, or (as we said) at the second hand. For though the authoritie in both cases were the same: yet should not our apprehension of it be so; but more immediate in the former. We see by daily experience, how opinions, only grounded vpon the authoritie of teachers for their skill in such matters well reputed of, doe inforce others (especially inferiours in that kind of skill) to giue an assent vnto the same truth, although they haue good shew of reason to the contrarie. As what country-man is there, but would thinke he might safely sweare, that the earth were an hundred times greater than the Sunne? yet if an Astronomer, (of whose skill he hath had experience in other matters, which he can better discerne) one whom he knew to be an honest plaine dealing man, not accustomed
 to cog with his friend, should seriously auouch the contrarie, that the Sunne is bigger then the earth; few country men would be so wayward as not to beleeue their friend Astronomer, albeit (his authoritie set aside) they had no reason to thinke so, but rather the contrarie. And it were a signe of ignorant arrogancie, if punies or fresh-men should reiect the axiomes and principles of Aristotle, vsuall in the schooles, because they haue some reasons against them, which themselues cannot answere. For reason might tell them, that others (their betters) which haue gone before them, haue had greater reasons to hold them, then they can yet haue to deny them. This perswasion of other mens skill or knowledge will winne the assent of modest and ingenuous youths, vnto such rules or axiomes, as otherwise they would stiffely deny, and haue wittie reasons to ouerthrow. But albeit this assent, which men giue to conclusions, they know not themselues, but onely beleeue vpon other mens asseuerations, may be very great; as many countrymen will beleeue an Astronomer affirming that the Sun is greater then the earth, better then they will the honestest of their neighbours in a matter that may concerne both their commodities: yet if the relators or auouchers could make them conceiue any probable reason of the same conclusions, [as if the Astronomer in the mentioned case could shew, how euery body the further it is from vs seemeth the lesse, and then declare how many hundred miles the Sunne is from vs:] mens minds would be a great deale better satisfied, and this assent or beliefe, which formerly did onely relie vpon authoritie, would be much strengthened by this second tie or hold-fast. And if we would obserue it, there is vsually a kind of regresse betwixt our beliefe of authorities, and our assent vnto conclusions taught by them. First (vsually) we beleeue authoritie, and afterwards the conclusions taught by it, for the authorities sake. But after we once find experiment of the truth of conclusions so taught, we beleeue the authoritie the better from this experimentall truth of the conclusion.
17 But of all these acceptions and degrees of beliefe or assent, something may be gathered for better expressing the seuerall degrees of true Christian beliefe; which like Iacobs ladder reacheth from earth to heauen. The first step whereof is beliefe or assent vnto things supernaturall.




The first generall part. SECT. 2.

CHAP. I. Of assent vnto obiects supernaturall.
 THings supernatural we call such, as the naturall reason of man cannot attaine vnto; or such, as naturally can neither bee knowne or assented vnto as probable, but are made knowne or probable by reuelation. Such are the mysteries of our saluation, and the articles of christian beliefe. For no article of our beliefe (if we consider them with all the circumstances, and in that exact manner as they are proposed in Scripture to be beleeued) could euer haue come into corrupted mens cogitation, vnlesse God had reuealed it vnto him. Seeing then we cannot know them in any sort by humane reason and authoritie; neither can humane reason or authority be the ground of our assenting to them; it remaineth then, that authoritas docentis, the word of God, be the ground of our beliefe.
2 Here then must you call to mind what wee said before, that authoritas docentis did consist in two things; namely in the ski^l, and fidelitie, or sinceritie of the Teacher: and by how much we know those to be greater, by so much is our assent or beliefe strengthened. Now it is euident to reason that God is infinitely wise, and therefore can not be deceiued; whence necessarily it followeth that hee knoweth, and can tell vs the truth. Againe it is euident that God is most iust and true, and therefore will not deceiue vs, but will tell vs the truth if hee professe so. Againe, wee can not conceiue of God aright, but wee must conceiue of him as omnipotent, and full of power; and consequently such a one as needes not in policie, or iealousie of our emulating him in knowledge, to tell vs otherwise than he knowes.Lib. 1. ca 2. And therefore Aristotle in the beginning of his Metaphysickes reprehendeth the Poets, for saying,
 that the Gods did enuie men knowledge. His resolution is in English to this effect,
That Poets should the Gods belie,(...).More like, than Gods should men enuie.
3 And if the Heathen were of opinion, that the Gods did not enuie men knowledge; then must they needes beleeue, that if they taught them any, they would teach them true knowledge. Wherfore this must be laid downe as a certaine ground, that whatsoeuer God teacheth vs, is most true. Nor is there any (admitting there were a God) but would assent vnto this. But here is the difficultie. How can we be assured that God doth teach vs any of these things? Or, how shall we know, that this wee call Scripture, is the word of God? If our apprehension of this ground be sure, our faith is firme and absolute: if our apprehension hereof be doubtfull, our faith must needs be vnstable, or, at the best, but conditionall.
4 Let vs first therefore looke what this conditionall assent or beliefe doth bind vs vnto.
Although many, that firmely beleeue whatsoeuer God saith, is true, either doe not acknowledge or doe not firmely beleeue that these Scriptures are the word of God: yet thus much in all sense and reason any naturall man will grant; there bee great presumptions and probabilities, why they should be taken for the word of God. And he that doth acknowledge but thus much, doth by this acknowledgement bind himselfe to reuerence them aboue all humane writings. For all men naturally know, that if they be Gods word, they are worthy all possible reuerence. Wherefore if a man suppose it only as probable, that they are, or know nothing ro the contrary why they may not be Gods word: he is bound to reuerence and esteeme them aboue all words or writings of man. As for example; If any subiect in this land should receiue letters concerning some lawfull and indifferent request from any other his equal or fellow subiect, whom he had great reason wel to respect; suppose he certainly knew that they were such a mans letters, and no counterfaite: yet if hee should receiue letters in his Maiesties name, containing the same or other as reasonable request: although he knew not so certainly that these were his Maiesties letters,
 as that the others were some wel-respected Subiects, yet is he in duty bound to vse them with greater respect and reuerence, than the former. The bare presumption and probabilitie that they were the Kings letters, doth bind him to inquire further, whether they were his Letters or no: nor were his fault excusable, if hee should shew any signe of disloyalty, or irreuerence towards them, vntill hee knew that they were not such, as their Title or Superscription did import.
5 He that hath but the same probabilitie, that the Scriptures containe in them Gods owne wordes, as that Liuie his Histories containe the Roman affaires, must needs esteeme of them infinitly aboue all humane workes. And this fruit hypotheticall or supposed beliefe may bring forth, euen in the vnregenerate or natural man. And what hath beene said of reuerence to the Scriptures vpon this supposall, is also most true of mans actions. If men doe but beleeue it as probable, that the Scriptures are the Word of God: this beliefe will procure many good morall actions, and much amendment of life; though not such spirituall perfection, as God in his word requireth. And the reaso^ of this assertion is euident. For we see daily, that men vndertake actions of great difficultie and danger, not so much according to the probabilitie of attaining some good, as according to the greatnesse of that good which possibly may be attained. So we see many, that might liue in ease at home with certaintie of moderate gaines, to vndertake voyages to the West or East Indies, onely vpon this resolution, That if it be their lucke or lot to bee rich, there they may haue enough; although the aduenture bee subiect to great dangers, and obnoxious to infinite casualties. And many there be, that wil not vsually lay out a penny, but vpon very faire ground of some gaine or sauing thrift, who yet will be well content to venture a crowne or an angell in a Lotterie, where there may bee some possibilitie, though no probabilitie, of obtaining twentie or thirtie pounds. These and infinite other examples, obuious to daily experience, may serue as a perfect induction of our generall assertion: That the meere possibilitie of obtaining some great and extraordinary good, is of greater moment in swaying mens actions, than certaintie of accomplishing pettie desires, or greatest probabilities of purchasing ordinarie commodities or delights. To deduce then out of this
 generall the particular we intended: In the Scripture are promised to all such as loue God and do his will, farre greater blessings, than humane knowledge could euer haue conceiued. The like is true in auoyding dangers. Men oftentimes vndertake matters of more difficulty and charges, to preuent some grieuous mischaunces which may insue, than they would doe to escape some imminent but ordinary daunger, or to release themselues from some smaller harmes that already haue befallen them. Could men consider these things seriously, and account of them but as probable: what is there in this life, which in any reason they should not venture for the obtaining of so great a good? Were men but probably perswaded that there were (as the Scriptures and the articles of our Beliefe tell vs) a life euerlasting, full laden with all the fruites of true life, ioy, peace and all choisest pleasures, without any annoyance: how could they not be most readie, and willing to spend this whole transitorie life (whose dayes are but few, and most of them euill, full fraught with griefe and distresse) in the seruice of God, who would thus reward them? Yea, how could they not be desirous to lay downe this life it selfe, vpon hope of obtaining such a life? For this life compared to that to come, hath not the proportion of a farthing to whole millions of Golde, or all the treasures in this world. Nor is the case herein like vnto that of aduentures or Lotterie; where a man may venture his life, or goods if he list, but if hee doe not, none calleth him to an accompt for not doing it: But in the Scriptures euerlasting torments, griefe, and perpetuall horror are threatned to all such, as frame not their liues according to Gods will in them reuealed.



The first generall Part. SECT. 2. CHAP. II. Of generall incitements to search the truth of Scriptures or Christian beliefe.
 WE may hence clearely see how inexcusable, euen in the iudgement of flesh and bloud, all men are, that either by hearing or reading haue anie accesse vnto the Gospell, and doe not vse the best indeuours of their naturall witte (if God as yet haue touched their hearts with no better grace) to search out the truth thereof. For seeing in the Scriptures are proposed to euery mans choice euerlasting life, or euerlasting death: what extreame madnesse is it for men to enter into any course of life, or to vndertake any matter of moment, which may exact their chiefe imployments, before they haue diligently looked to the maine chaunce? before they haue tried the vtmost of their wits, and others best aduise, to know the tenour of their owne estate? Wee see daily what great paines men of no small account doe take in the studie of Alchymie, spending their spirites, and most of their substance in trying conclusions, and searching out the truth of those things, for which they haue but weake grounds of Philosophie or reason; onely the conceit of the good they aime at, (which is rather possible than probable for them to attaine) inforceth a kinde of hope, and incourageth them to goe forward.
2 To speake nothing of the good the Scripture promiseth, the very conceit of eternall death (me thinkes) should moue, either the Chymickes, (which spend much gold only vpon hope of getting more) or any other man whatsoeuer, to spend all the treasure, whatsoeuer either this their Art, or all other could yeeld, to secure themselues from such horrible torments, as the Scriptures
 threaten to their Contemners or negligent Hearers. And why should not all men then in reason bestow most time and paines, in searching the truth of those things, which concerne their soules estate; whose securitie in all reason they should purchase with the highest hopes, and vtmost aime of all other trauelles in this life. Here then (as I said) the full height of mans iniquitie, and his inexcusable madnesse, is most plainely discouered; that hauing these two motiues, which in naturall reason doe sway all humane actions, offering themselues to incourage him in searching the Scriptures: yet notwithstanding most men bestow lesse labor in them, than in other ordinarie studies. First, if we compare the good they set before vs, as a recompence and reward of our trauelles, it is beyond all comparison greater than the scope of any other trade, or science. For here is a double infinitie of solid good; first, they promise ioy two waies infinit, both in degree and continuance; secondly, they threaten vnto their contemners and despisers death and torments doubly infinite, both in degree and continuance. Now if the probabilities of the truth of Scriptures were farre lesse, than is vsually found in other studies, or humane hopes: yet could this in humane reason be no reason why wee should labour lesse in them, than in other affaires; seeing the incomparable excesse of the good they promise, doth aboundantly recompence this. But if the probabilitie of the truth of Scripture, be in naturall reason equall to the probabilities which men vsually take for their grounds in many greatest attempts; then certainly not to bestow as great paines and trauell, in trying the truth of their promises, as in any other humane attempts, or affaires, doth argue infinit madnesse. Aske we the Chymick, what reason he hath to toile so much in the studie of Paracelsus, or other intricate writers of his facultie; (the like we may say of any Physitians:) their answere (as you may reade in their writings) is this: Many Philosophers in former ages haue laboured much in this studie, and haue set downe good rules of their experiments; who (as is probable) would neuer haue taken such paines vpon no ground. And verily this tradition, or the authoritie they giue to their Writers, is their chiefe motiue. For I thinke few of their ancient Authors haue bequeathed to their successors any gold made by this art, thereby to encourage them. If then tradition, consent of time, or approbation of authors, or
 relation of experiments, be an especiall inducement for men to aduenture their charge, paines, and trauell in this facultie, as in all other affaires: without all controuersie the Scriptures in all these motiues haue an especiall prerogatiue aboue all other faculties or sciences, albeit humane reason were admitted iudge. For the authoritie of Gods Church is farre more generall, then the consent of any writers in one faculty whatsoeuer. The consent of time likewise is greater. For no age since Christs time in these ciuill parts of the world, but by the report of other Writers, as well as Christians, hath yeelded obedience vnto Scriptures as the word of God. Men of most excellent spirits and learning in euery age, haue addicted their studies vnto this truth. About the time of our Sauiours comming, curious arts, and other ciuill disciplines did most flourish. The Grecians sought after wisdome and secular Philosophie with the like; the Romans after policie, state-knowledge, and discipline of warre; all the world almost, (aboue others, those places wherein Christianitie was first planted) was then set vpon curious arts: yet we see how the studie and search of Scriptures in short time did proue, as Aarons rod amongst the Magitians serpents. It hath deuoured all, and brought them to acknowledge allegiance vnto it; vsing the helpe of best secular arts, as it were nutriment for the growth of Christianitie, and expelling the rest as excrements out of the Church. Nor can the Atheist name any age, wherein the Heathen had an Oliuer to oppugne our profession,Porphyrius in vita Plautini. but we had a Rowland to defend it: if they had a Porphyrie or Celsus to oppose philosophie against it, we had an Origen (a man, by their owne confession, of the most rare wit and hope for philosophie then liuing,) to forsake philosophie and follow Christianitie. It was not despaire which made him and many other excellent schollers, Christians: but the sure hope which they found in this profession, made them contemne all other hopes, and cleaue to it with their hearts and soules; albeit their soules should for so doing be violently separated from their bodies. This triall, I am perswaded, few of their greatest Philosophers would haue endured; but they had the potentates of the world, as readie to applaud them, as to disgrace the Christians; and yet the Christians multiplied as the Israelites did by oppression in Aegypt. How resolute they were, if we may not be beleeued bearing witnes of our own
 profession, letEpistol. lib. 10. ep. 100. ad Traianum. In ijs, qui ad me tanquam Christiani deferebantur, hunc sum sequntus modum. Interrogaui ipsos, an essent Christiani: confitentes iterum, ac tertio interrogaui, supplicium minatus persenerantes duci iussi. Neque enim dubitaui, qualecunque esset quod fatere^tur? peruicaciam certe, and inflexibilem obstinationem debere puniri. Plinie testifie, in whose iudgement, constancie and resolution was the only crime in our profession deseruing punishment. And for this cause he tooke want of resolution, in such as had been accused before him vnder the name of Christians, as a sufficient argument that they were not ChristiansIbid. Propositus est libellus sine autore multorum nomina continens, qui negint se esse Christianos aut fuisse. Quum prae eunte me deos appellarent, and imagini tuae, quam propter hoc iusseram cum simulachris numinum adferri, thure, ac vino s^p^l carent, praeterea maledicerent Christe; quorum nihil cogi posse dicuntur, qui sunt re vera Christiani; dimittendos putaui. in deed or heart; for such, as he had been informed, could not be inforced to any such idolatrous practise as he perswaded these men vnto.
3 Lastly, the experiments which are related by Authors of this profession, men (in any reasonable mans iudgement) as much to be beleeued herein, as any other writers in theirs; are farre more notable, and apt to produce beliefe, and hope of attaining the truth in this profession, than any others can haue in theirs. The experiments of others were but ordinarie and naturall; these are extraordinarie and supernaturall. If the Atheist should impudently deny the truth of their report: we may conuince him with Saint Augustines acute dilemma. If the miracles related by our Writers be true, they giue euident experiment of the truth of Scripture: if there were no such particular miracles, but all feigned; then this was a miracle aboue all miracles, that Christian religion should preuaile against all other arts, power, or policie, without any extraordinary euent or miracle. It was not so easie a matter to cozen all the Romane Emperours, and their deputies, with feigned tales; the world, which hated Christians so much, was inquisitiue enough to know the truth of their reports. I may conclude; nisi veritas magna fuisset non praeualuisset. It was miraculous, doubtlesse, that it should so encrease without armes; without any promise of carnall pleasure, or securitie: but euen against their naturall inclination that did professe it, and all the worlds opposition against it. It had enemies both priuate and publike, domestique and forren, euen the flesh and sence of those which followed it fought against it.
4 Mahomet since that time hath found a multitude of followers; but all either inforced to follow him by threats of shame, disgrace, and tortures in this life; or else allured thereto by faire promises of carnall pleasures to be perpetuall without interruption in the life to come. He hath set his followers such a course, as they might be sure both of winde and tide. And if the hauen whereat they arriue were as safe as their course is e^sie, they were of all men
 the most happy. But Christianitie from its first beginning, was to rowe against the streame of flesh and bloud, and to beare out saile against all the blasts that the diuell, world, or flesh could oppose against it. In a word, the increase of Mahumetisme hath followed the barbarous Turkish monarchies aduancement, as moysture in bodies doth the increasing fulnesse of the Moone. And it had bin an extraordinary miracle, if a barbarous multitude (neuer acquainted with any ciuill pleasures,) should not haue composed theyr mindes vnto their Emperours; in following a religion, framed, as it were, to court the senses, and wooe the flesh. But Christianitie then flourished most, when the scorching heat of persecution was at the height: When the countenance of Emperours, as terrible to their foes (for their heroicall valour) as plausible to their friends (for their louely carriage) were most fiercely set against it. What Princes either more terrible to their enemies, or more amiable to their friends, than Traian, Dioclesian, or others of the Christians persecutors were? What man liuing is there of ciuill education, that would not haue lothed Mahomet, and the whole succession of the Ottoman familie, in respect of these Roman Princes? And yet a great part of their natiue subiects, men, as otherwise excellently qualified, so of a quiet and peaceable disposition; yet readie alwayes to venture their liues for these heathen Princes, in most dangerous seruice against the enemies of the Roman Empire, but most ready to follow the crucified Christ through fire and sword, against their Emperors command (dearer to them than this mortall life) and all the worlds threats, or allurements. It were sottish to thinke, that such men had not perfect notice of some higher powers commaundement to the contrarie, (whom they thought it safer to obey) when they contradicted the commaundements, or faire allurements of these supreame earthly powers. And it were as seely a persuasion to thinke, that, if the great Turke would change his religion for any other, that might yeeld like hopes of carnall pleasure after this life, any great number of his subiects would loose their dignities for refusing Subscription.
5 The briefe of what hath beene, or may be said concerning the grounds or motions of our assent vnto obiects supernaturall, may be comprised in these 4. propositions following; of which the first two are axiomes euident in nature, and receiued by all:
 The two latter vndoubted axiomes amongest true beleeuers, but suppositions onely to meere naturall men, or nouices in Christianitie.
6 The first, The stile or title of these sacred Books pretending diuine authoritie, binde all men to make triall of their truth, commended to vs by our ancestours, confirmed to them by the bloud of Martyrs their predecessors; to vse the meanes which they prescribe for this triall; that is, abstinence from things forbidden, and alacritie in doing things commaunded by them.
7 The second, Ordinarie apprehension, or naturall beliefe of matters contained in Scriptures, or the Christian Creede, are of more force to cause men vndertake any good, or abstaine from anie euill, than the most firme beliefe of ordinarie matters, or anie points of meere naturall consequence.
8 The third, Obiects and grounds of Christian beliefe, haue in them greater stabilitie of truth, and are in themselues more apt to found most strong and firme beliefe, than any other things whatsoeuer meerely credible.
9 For, as the most noble essences, and first principalls of euery Art, are most intelligible: so are diuine truths of all other most credible. Not that they are more easie to be assented to of anie, at their first proposall, but that they haue a greater measure of credibilitie in them: and as their credibilitie and truth is inexhaustible, so beliefe of them once planted, can neuer grow to such fulnesse of certaintie, as not to receiue daily increase, if we apply our minds diligently vnto them: so that true Christian beliefe admits no stint of growth in this life, but still comes nearer and nearer to that euidencie of knowledge, which shall swallow it vp in the life to come. For the conceit of impossibilities are repugnances in nature, obiected by the obdurate Atheists to make the principles of Christian Religion seeme incredible (that they might like olde truants haue the company of nouices in Christianitie to loiter, or mis-spend good houres with them:) we shall by Gods assistance dispell them, and all other cloudes of like errours, in vnfoulding the truth of those Articles, which they most concerne.
10 The fourth, the means of apprehending the truth of Scriptures, and experiments confirming their diuine authoritie, are, both for varietie of kindes, and number of indiuidualles in euerie
 kind, farre more and more certaine, than the meanes of apprehending the grounds of any other beliefe, or the experiments of anie other teachers authoritie.
11 Some particulars of euery kinde, with the generall heads or common places whence like obseruations may be drawne, we are now to present, so farre as they concerne the confirmation of the truth of Scriptures in generall. For the experiments, which confirme the truth of such particular places of Scripture, as teach the Articles of our Creede expresly, will come more fitly into the vnfolding of the Articles themselues.




The second generall part of the first Booke.

SECT. 1.
Containing Experiments or Obseruations confirming the truth of Scriptures in generall.
ALthough the Experiments confirming the trueth of Scriptures be, as I haue said, many and diuers; yet all may bee reduced into these two generall heads or kinds. They may be found, either in the stile or character of these writings themselues; the affections or dispositions of their writers; or in euents or experiments (whatsoeuer the course of times affords) answerable to the rules set downe in scriptures.

SECT. I. Of Experiments of the former kind. CHAP. I. Of Historicall Characters of sacred writings.
TO anie man indued with reason not peruerted, the Bookes of Moses giue more perfect proofe of matters done and acted, than anie other historie in the world can possibly doe: albeit we set aside the secret Characters of Gods spirit speaking in them, which
 we suppose can be discerned of none, but such as haue the marke of the Lambe answereable to it ingrauen vpon their hearts: But now wee seeke such inducements to beliefe, as may perswade the naturall vnregenerate man of the historicall truth of these sacred volumes.
2 The preiudices arising from the strangenesse of matters related by him, the Reader shall finde mitigated in the next discourse: In the meane time I must request him to suspend his iudgement of them, and onely to intend the liuely characters of historicall truth in other relations, of matters neither strange nor incredible in themselues. Either he wrote a true historie, or else his wordes are but a fiction: either poeticall to delight others, or politicall to aduantage himselfe or his successors. Ler such as doubt of theyr historicall truth, duely examine, whether many things related by him can possibly be referred to any of these two ends. As for example, if these relations, Genesis 4.1, and the 25. had not beene either reall adiuncts of some famous truth then sufficiently known, or else appoynted by God to be notified for some speciall purpose to posteritie: Low could it possibly haue come into anie mans thought, or to what end should it haue gone thence into his pen, to shew the reason why Euah should call her first son Caine, or her third Seth?
3 He that would set himselfe to contradict, might replie; Moses his inuention was so copious, as to forecast that those insertions might make his Historie seeme more probable: or that hee spake vnawares according to the custome of the times wherein he liued. But why then should he omit the like in all the generations from Cain and Seth vnto Noah; the reason of whose name giuen him by his father he likewise specifies, Genesis 5.29. Then Lamech begate a sonne, and called his name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort vs concerning our worke, and sorrow of our hands, as touching the earth which the Lord hath cursed? It was doubtlesse from some diuersitie in the matter presupposed vnto this worke, not from the workemans choice or inuention, why the reason of these three mens names should be specified; as afterwards will more plainly appeare. For the positiue notes, or sure tokens of a true historie, they are most plentiful^ in the Stories of Abraham, Iacob, and Ioseph. Each part of which the Diuine Prouidence, (where of these
 are the most ancient, most perfect, most liuely patternes,) would haue set out with such perspicuitie of all circumstances, that the Reader might bee an eie-witnesse of their historicall truth. The subiect and issue whereof is in it selfe so pleasant, as will rauish sober and attentiue mindes, and allure them to follow the maine current of Diuine Mysteries, which flowe from these Histories mentioned, as from their first heads or fountaines. To point at some few, rather than handle any particulars.
4 If we may iudge of the truth of mens writings by their outward forme or character, as wee doe of mens honestie by their lookes, speach or behauiour: what historie in the world beares so perfect resemblance of things done and acted, or yieldes (without further testimonie than its owne,) so full assurance of a true narration, as the stories of Abrahams departure out of his Land, his answers to God; Sarahs distrust vpon misconceit of Gods promises; her seeking to fulfill it by giuing her Maid to Abraham, the maner of her speach vpon her Maides contemning her; the debatement and issue of her controuersie, the dialogue betweene the Angells of God and Abraham, with Sarahs apologie for her laughing at their message; Abrahams iourney to mount Moriah, his seruants expedition to Aram Naharim, with his commission to prouide his young maister a wife? There appeares not in any of these the least surmise of any politicall respect, not any signe of affected delight, or poeticall representations: seeing this Author falles immediately into other matters, and relates euerie thing (though many of most diuerse natures) with such naturall specification of euerie circumstance, as vnlesse our hearts were praepossest with beliefe, that hee had writ them by his direction, who perfectly knoweth all things, aswell fore-past, as present, or to come, we would be perswaded that most of them were relations of such as acted them, vttered to their familiar friends immediatly vpon the fact, whilest all circumstances were fresh in memorie.
5 How others are affected I can not tell, mee thinkes when I reade that storie, Genesis 34. I am transformed into a man of the old world, and become a neighbor of old Iacob, ouer-hearing him and his sonnes debating the slaughter of the Sichemites. The old man complaines; Yee haue troubled mee, and made me stincke among the inhabitants of the Land, as well the Canaanites as the Perizites:
 and I being few in number, they shall gather themselues together against me, and so shall I and mine house be destroyed and they answered and said; Shall he abuse our sister as a whoore?
6 Or if this description, though issuing as naturally out of the reall disposition of the true, no fained parties described, as brightnesse out of the bodie of the Sunne, yet because but short, may seeme more imitable by art: I will propose a longer dialogue betwixt this old man and his sons for a patterne: of which the fairest colours, that Art or Inuention can put vpon any fained Subiect, will come as farre short, as Salomons gawdy, but artificiall attire, did of the natiue beautie of wild Lillies; or any die that Arte can giue of the naturall splendor of finest pearles, the Onix or other more precious stone. The story is,Genesis 42.29. And they came to Iacob their father vnto the land of Cana ^, and told him al that had befallen them, saying, vers. 30. The man, who is Lord of the Land, spake roughly vnto vs, and put vs in prison as Spies of the Countrey v. 31. And we said vnto him, wee are true men, and are no Spies. verse 32. Wee bee twelue brethren, sonnes of our father: one is not, and the yongest is this day with our father in the Land of Canaan, verse 33. Then the Lord of the Countrey said vnto vs, Hereby shall I know if yee be true men. Leaue one of your brethren with me, and take food for the famine of your houses, and depart, verse 34. and bring your yongest brother vnto me; that I may know that ye are no Spies, but true men: So wil I deliuer you your brother, and ye shal occupie in the Land. verse 35. And as they emptied their sackes, behold, euery mans bundell of money was in his sacke, and when they and their father saw the bundels of their money, they were afraid verse 36. Then Iacob their father said vnto them, Ye haue robbed me of my children: Ioseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Beniamin: all these things are against me, verse 37. Then Reuben answered his father, saying, Slay my two sonnes, if I bring him not to thee againe: Deliuer him to mine hand, and I will bring him to thee againe, verse 38. But he said, My sonne shall not goe downe with you: for his brother is dead, and hee is left alone: if death come vnto him by the way which yee goe, then yee shall bring my gray gead with sorrow vnto the graue. Chapter 43. verse 1. Now great famine was in the land. verse 2. And when they had eaten of the vict^als, which they had brought from Aegypt, their father said vnto them, Turne aga^ne, and buy vs a little food. verse 3. And Iudah answered him, saying, The man charged vs by an oath, saying, Neuer see m ^^ce, e^cept your brother be with you. verse 4. If thou wilt send our Brother with vs, wee will goe downe and buy thee food: verse 5. but if thou wilt not send him, wee will not goe downe: for the man said vnto vs, Looke me not in the face, except your Brother be with you. Genesis 42. from the 29. vnto the 15. verse of the 43. Chap. The circumstances, which I would especially commend vnto the Readers consideration, are; first, the old mans iealousie, verse 36. vpon his sonnes relation what had befallen them in their iourney, and the Gouernours desire of seeing Beniamin, verse 31.32.33.34.35. his peremptorie replie, v. 38. to Reubens answer, v. 37. the manner of his relenting, chap. 43. v. 6. vpon necessitie of their going for more food; and his sonnes peremptorie refusall to goe without Beniamin, in the fiue first verses
 of the 43. Chap.Verse 6 And Israel said, Wh^refore draft yee so euill with me, as to tel the man, whe^her yee had yet a brother, or no? verse 7. And they answered, The man asked straitly of our selues, and of our kinred, saying, Is your father yet aliue? Haue yee any brother? And we told him according to these wordes. Could we know certainly that hee would say, Bring your brother down? verse 8. Then said Iudah, to Israel his father, Send the boy with me, that wee may rise and goe, and that wee may l ue and not die, both we, and thou, and our ch ldren verse 9. I will bee suretie for him: of my hand shalt thou require him: If I bring him not to thee, and se^ him before th^e, then let mee beare the blame for euer. verse 10 For except yee had made thi^ tarrying, doubtlesse by this wee had returned the second time. verse 11. Then their Father said vnto them, If it must needes bee so now, doe thus: Take of the best fruits of the Land in your vessels* and bring the man a present, a little rozen, a little hony, spices and myrrhe, nuts, and almonds, vers^ 12. And take double mony in your hand, and the mony that was brought againe in your sack^ mouths(...) carry it againe in your hand, lest it were some ouersight. verse 13. Take also your brother, and arise, an^ goe againe to ^he man, verse 14 And GOD Almightie giue you mercie in the sight of the man(...) that hee may deliuer you your other brother, and Beniamin: but I shall bee robbed of my child, as(...) haue beene. his condescending, verse 11. vpon their iust apologie for mentioning their yongest brother to the Gouernours and Iudahs vndertaking for Beniamins safe conduct backe, and forth, in the 10.9.8. and 7. verses; lastly, the close or epiphonema of his speech, verse 13 and 14. Whilest I compare one of the circumstances with another, and all of them with other precedent and consequent, (chiefly with Iudahs speech to Ioseph, Genesis 44. from the sixteenth verse to the end of the Chapter) although I knew no other Scripture to make me a Christian, this one place would perswade me to become a Pythagorean, and thinke that my soule had been in some of Iacobs sonnes, where it had heard this controuersie; rather than to imagine, that it could haue beene fained by any that liued long after.
7 Or if we consider not the particular relations onely, but the whole contriuance and issue of this storie; what paterne of like inuention had Moses to follow? If the Atheist graunt such a Diuine prouidence, as hee describes; let him tell vs whence hee learned it. If from any more Ancient description, let this be suspected for artificiall; if not, let this bee acknowledged for the first and naturall representation of it. Without either a former patterne to imtate, or true resemblance of such a Diuine Prouidence in euents immediatly to bee related; how could such a Supreame power, gouerning and disposing all thinges contrary to the designes and purposes of man, be by mortall man conce^ued? More probable is the Poets fiction, that Minerua should be conceiued in Iupiters braine; than that humane fancie should bring forth a more Omnipotent, more wise or excellent deitie, than the Poets make their Iupiter, without any true Image of his Prouidence, manifested in the effectes? But after the manifestation of it in the story of Ioseph,
 and the liue-picture of it taken by Moses; all imitation of it was not so difficult, though he that would seeke to imitate him fully should herein come as far short of the solide marks of his historicall truth, as the Egyptians Iuglers tricks did of true miracles.
8 As all these, and many other places yeelde vndoubted characters of true historicall narrations, so doe his speeches vnto this people, Deut. 39.30, 31. infallible symptomes of a dying man, and one that indeed had borne this mighty nation, as an Eagle beares her yong ones vpon her wings. These admirable straines of his heauenly admonitions, and diuine Prophecies, compared with the liue images of former truths, witnesse, that hee was the Ianus of Prophets, Va^es oculatus tam praeteritorum quam futurorum, one that could both cleerely see what had beene done before his birth, and what should fall out after his death: Both which shall hereafter (God willing) better appeare, by matters related, and euents foretold by him.
9 But to proceede, the whole historicall part of the Bible, not Moses his Bookes alone, yeeld plenty of such passages, as beeing compared with other circumstances, or the maine drift and scope of the entire stories, whereof they are parts, leaue no place for imagination, either why they should, or how possibly they could haue beene inserted by Art or Imitation; or haue come into any mans thoughts, not moued by the reall occurrence of such occasions a^ are specified in the matters related. And seeing all of them are related by such as affect no Art; many of them by such as liued long after the parties that first vttered or acted them: wee can not conceiue how al particulars could be so naturally and fully recorded, vnlesse they had beene suggested by his spirite, who giueth mouth and speech to man, who is alike present to all successions, able to communicate the secret thoughts of forefathers to their children, and put the very words of the deceased, neuer registred before, in the mouths or pennes of their successours for many generations after, as distinctly and exactly, as if they had bin caught in characters of steele or brasse as they issued out of their mouths,
10 When I reade that Speech in Ouid, 4. Metam. Fab. 8.


Siue es mortalis, qui te genuere beati


Et mater foelix, and fortunata profecto


Si qua tibi soror est, and quae dedit vbera nutrix.


If mortall thou, thrice happy sure thy parents bee;
Or if thou any sister hast, thrice happy shee;
Thrice happy Nurse, whose breasts gaue sucke to thee.

I see no inducement to beleeue this for a true Storie, because I know the end and aime of his writing was, to inuent Verisimilia, to faine such speeches, as best befitted the persons whose part hee tooke vpon him to expresse, thereby to delight his hearers with varietie of liuely representations. But when I reade that narration of our Sauiors Apologie for himselfe against the Iewes, which said he had an vncleane spirit, Luke 11.14. and a woman comming in with her verdict; Now blessed is the wombe that bare thee, and the pappes that gaue thee sucke, verse 27. This vnexpected straine, with our Sauiours reply vnto it; Yea rather, blessed are those that heare the word of God and keepe it, verse 28. so briefly inserted into the storie, inforce me to thinke, that it was penned by one that sought only to relate the truth, part of which was this womans speech. But with the meanes of knowing the New Testament to be the word of God, I will not heere meddle: the Old Testament sufficiently proueth it, besides many other experiments to bee prosecuted in the vnfolding of sundry articles.


CHAP. II. Of the Harmonie of sacred Writers.
AN other Inducement for beleeuing the truth of the Old Testament, is the harmonie of so many seuerall writers, liuing in such distance of Ages, handling such diuersitie of arguments, and couering them with stiles, for the maiestie of some, and the familiaritie of others, more different, than Virgils verses, and the rudest countrymans talke; and yet all of them retaining the selfe same relish. Whiles we reade Tully, Virgil, Liuie, Salust and Ouid, though all liuing neare about one time; yet their writings differ as much as flesh and fish. Many learned men like some one or few of these, and yet much mislike others, reputed as excellent writers in their
 kind, liuing about the same time: much more might he that should haue read the common or vulgar Historiographers, Poets, or Orators of that time, haue contemned them as base in respect of the former. But the Prophets of the Old Testament, and the Historiographers of the same, though differing infinitely in degrees of stile and inuention; yet agree as well in the substance or essentiall qualitie of their writings, as the same Pomander chafed and vnchafed. There is the same odour of life, and goodnesse in both, but more fragrant and piercing in the one than in the other. And no man that much likes the one, can mislike the other: hee may like it ^esse, but dislike it he cannot, if he like the other:
Omnibus est illis vigor and coelestis origo.
2 Many other inducements of this kind are set downe at large, by that Flower of France, and glorie of Christian Nobilitie, in the 24. and 25. chapters of his booke De Veritate Christianae religionis, of the Truth of Christian religion: as also in Ficinus and Viues, whose labours it is hard to say whether he hath more augmented or graced. One especiall motiue is from the drift, and scope of all these sacred writings; whether Histories, Prophets, Psalmes, or the Gospel. The end and scope of all these, is onely to set out the glorie of God, and the good of mankinde. In their most famous victories, and good successe of their best contriued policies, they ascribe the glorie wholly to God. There is no circumstance inserted to erect the praise of man, not of the chiefest managers of such affaires. They account it the greatest praise that can be giuen vnto their Worthies, to let the world know they were beloued of God, and that God did fight for them. Not one Writer in this sacred volume bewraies the least signe of enuy towards others, that liued with him, or had gone before him: Not one that giueth the least suspition of seeking his owne praise by lessening others deserts, as if hee had corrected wherein others had erred, or finished what they had well begunne, but left imperfect. No imitation in any of them to let posterity vnderstand, that it should thinke it selfe beholding to them for their good directions. They seek no thanks, as if they vndertooke their labors voluntarily, only for the good of others; but proclaime a necessitie laide vpon them, for doing that which they doe, and a woe, if they doe it not. They spare not to rehearse the iniquitie, and shame of their progenitors
 and nearest kinsfolkes, with Gods fearefull iudgements vpon them for the same, to register their prince and peoples, or their owne disgrace (as the world counteth disgrace) to all posteritie: so Gods name may thereby be more glorified, and his church edified, Ierem. 9. verse 23, 24. Let not the wise man glorie in his wisedome, nor the strong man glorie in his strength: but let him that glorieth, glorie in that he vnderstandeth and knoweth the Lord. Ieremy himselfe reuealeth his owne slackenesse, in vndertaking his appointed charge, Iere. 20. verse 7, 8, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19: hee no where bewrayes any desire of praise, as if he had excelled all his equalls in wit: all that is good in him, or his people, hee giueth to God. Daniel, who did excell in the interpretations of dreames and prophecies, and had the estate of many kingdomes for many yeares to come reuealed vnto him; so as if he would haue chalenged the reuelation of his Countries returne from captiuitie, he could not haue bin disproued, yet ingeniously sheweth that he learned this out of the Prophecie of Ieremie, Dan. 9 verse 2. Although his measure of knowledge was exceeding great, yet he affects not the reputation of Knowing aboue that measure, which God had giuen him, Rom. 12.3.
3 This one qualitie (in them all) of not seeking their owne, nor their countries praise, but onely the praises of their God, and the profit of his church (if we consider it well) may sufficiently testifie, that they speake not vpon priuate motions, who were thus cleere from all suspition of priuat respects. Nor can we suspect, that they should thus conspire together vnto one end, from the will and purpose of man. For what man could limit others thoughts, or rule their wits which liued after him? Least of all can Chaunce be imagined the author of so many seuerall Writers constancie, in conspiring thus to one end in seuerall Ages. Let vs coniecture what causes we can, Saint Peter must resolue the doubt, 2. Peter 1.20, 21. All of them spake as they were moued by the holy Spirit, which was present one and the same to all? If they had not spoken as they were moued by the Spirit, but as if they had moued themselues, to finde out matter, or stretched their wits to inlarge inuention: then would the later sort especially haue catched at many by-narrations, and inserted many (...), little pertinent to that foundation which others had laied before them. But now wee see the
 continuall drift of their writings so seriously set vpon one and the selfe same end, as if they had all wrought by an others direction, who had cast the platforme of the edifice himselfe, not minded to finish his worke in any of the first worke-mens age: and yet will haue the later to beginne where the other left, without any alteration or trickes of their owne inuention.
4 All these properties of these sacred Writers, doe sufficiently witnesse their motiues to haue been Diuine, but more abundantly whilest we consider the vanitie of the Iewish people, if we take them as they are by nature, not sanctified by the Spirite of God. For naturally they are giuen to magnifie their owne nation, more than any other people liuing, yea to make God beholding vnto them for their sanctitie: few of them would seek the praise of their God, but with reference to their owne. Hence our apostle S. Paul brings it as an argume^t of the truth of his gospel, 2. Cor. 4.5. in that he did not preach himselfe but Christ Iesus the Lord, and himselfe their seruants for his sake, so doth our Sauiour, Iohn 7. verse 18. He that speaketh of himselfe seeketh his owne glory, but he that seeketh his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no vnrighteousnesse is in him. This sinceritie in teaching, (especially in a man of Iewish progenie) when it is tried to continue without all affectation or dissimulation, is the true (...) or touchstone, the liuerie or cognisance of a man speaking by the Spirit of God. The like liue characters of sinceritie are not to be found in any else, saue only in these sacred Writers, or such as haue sincerely obeyed their doctrine. And in many of those Books which our Church accounts Apocryphall, there euidently appeares a spice of secular vanitie; howsoeuer the pen-men of them were truely religious sanctified men, and haue sought to imitate the writings of the Prophets, and other Writers of this sacred volume; But much more eminent is the like vanitie in Iosephus, a man otherwise as excellent for meere naturall parts, or artificiall learning, as his Countrey yeelded anie, not inferior to any Historiographers whatsoeuer.
5 Seeing in this whole bodie of Scriptures there appeares one and the same Spirit, albeit the members be of diuerse fashion and qualitie: this sacred volume it selfe may serue as a liuely type or image of that Vnitie of the Spirite in the bond of peace, which ought to be in the Church and mysticall bodie of Christ, Ephesians 4. v. 3.
 They all indeuour to keepe the vnitie of the Spirite in the bond of peace: None of them presumed to vnderstand aboue that which was meete for them to vnderstand: all according to sobrietie, as God dealt to euery one of them the measure of faith. They are as many members of one body, which haue not one office, verse 4. And wee may see that verified in the Canon of the Old Testament, which Saint Paul attributes vnto the Church in Christ;1. Corint. 12.4. There are diuersities of giftes, but the same Spirite.Verse 14. And againe, To one was giuen the spirit of wisedome, as vnto Solomon; to another knowledge, as vnto Ezra, Nehemiah; to another faith, as vnto Moses, Abraham; to another prophecie,Verse 11. as vnto Esay, Ieremy: All these giftes were wrought by one and the same Spirite, which distributeth to euery one as hee would. The best meanes to discerne this harmony in their seuerall writings, would be, to retaine the vnitie of the Spirite by which they wrote. But alas wee haue made a diuision in the bodie of Christ, whilest one of vs detracts, enuies or slaunders another; or whiles we wrangle vnmanerly about idle questions, or termes of art or iarres, (ours that haue the name of Christs messengers) make all the world besides, and our selues oft-times (wee may feare) doubt of the true and reall vnitie betwixt Christ and his members, now eclipsed by our carnall diuisions. But howsoeuer, these here mentioned are in their kinde good motiues vnto sober minds; and the more diligent and attentiue men are to obserue these and the like, the more fully shall they be perswaded, that these writings are the dictates of the holy Ghost.


CHAP. III. Of the affections or dispositions of the sacred Writers.
WIth the experiment of this kinde wee may rancke the vehemencie of affection, which appeares in many of these sacred writers, most frequent in the booke of Psalmes: And to distinguish fained or counterfait from true experimentall affections is the most easie, and most certaine kind of Criticisme. He that neuer had any himselfe may safely sweare, that most Poets ancient or moderne,
 haue had experience of wanton loues. For who can think that Catullus, Ouid, and Martial had neuer beene acquainted with any but painted women, or written of loue matters onely as blinde men may talke of colours? Or, who can suspect, that either Ouid had penned his bookes de Tristibus, or Boetius his Philosophicall Consolation, onely to moue delight, (as children oft-times weepe for wantonnesse:) or fained these subiects to delude the world, by procuring reall compassion to their counterfait mourning? But much more sensible may wee feele the pulses of our Psalmists passions beating their ditties, if wee would lay our hearts vnto them. Albeit wee seeke not to prooue their Diuine authoritie from the strength of passion simply, but from the obiects, causes, or issue of their passions. And the argument holds thus; As the Ethnicke Poets passions, expressed in their writings, bewray their experience in such matters as they wrote of; as of their carnall delight in loue inioyed, or of earthly sorrow for their exiles, death of friends, or other like worldly crosses: So doe these sacred Ditties witnesse their pen-mens experience in such matters as they professe; as of spirituall ioy, comfort, sorrow, feare, confidence, or any other affection whatsoeuer. If we compare Ouids elegie to Augustus with that Psalme of Dauid,Trist. lib. 2. (in number the 51.) why should wee thinke that the one was more conscious of misdemeanour towards that Monarch, or more sensibly certaine of his displeasure procured by it; than the other of foule offences towards God, and his heauie hand vpon him for them? Dauids penitent bewayling of his soules losse, in being separated from her wonted ioyes, his humble intreatie and importunate suite for rest^uration to his former estate, argue hee had beene of more entire familiar acquaintance with his heauenly, than Ouid with his earthly Lord; that hee had receiued more sensible pledges of his loue, more deepely touched with the present losse of his fauour, and better experienced in the course and meanes of reconcilement to it againe. Haue mercie vpon me, O God,Psalme 51.^. according to thy louing kindnesse: according to the multitude of thy compassions put away mine iniquities. Wash me throughly from mine iniquitie, and cleanse me from my sinne. For I know mine iniquities,Verse 2. and my sinne is euer before me. Against thee, against thee only haue I sinned, and done euill in thy sight. What was it then which caused his present griefe?Verse 3. bodily paine? exile, losse of goods, want, or restraint of sensuall
 pleasures? Yea, what was there that worldly minded men either desire or know, which was not at his command? And yet, he, well for health of bodie, onely oppressed with griefe of mind, most desirous to sequester himselfe from all solace, which his Court or Kingdome could afford, in hope to finde his company alone who was inuisible, and to renew acquaintance with his Spirite. Create a cleane heart (O God) and renew a right spirite within me. Cast mee not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirite from me. He accounts himselfe but as an exile, though liuing in his natiue soile, but as a slaue, though absolute Monarch ouer a mightie people; whilest hee stoode separate from the loue of his God, and liued not in subiection to his spirite. If one in hunger should loathe ordinarie or course fare, wee would coniecture hee had beene accustomed to more fine and daintie meates. Heereby then it may appeare, that Dauid had tasted of more choice delights, and purer ioyes, than the carnall minded knew, in that hee loathes all earthly comfort in this his anguish, (wherein he stood in greatest neede of some comfort,) desiring only this of God; Restore me to the ioy of thy saluation, and establish me with thy free Spirit. So farre was hee from distrusting the truth of that ineffable ioy, which now hee felt not (at the least) in such measure as hee had done before, that hee hopes by the manifest effects of it once restored, to disswade the Atheist from his Atheisme, and cause lasciuious or bloud-thirstie mindes to wash off the filth, wherein they wallow, with their teares. For so hee addeth; Then shall I teach thy wayes vnto the wicked, and sinners shall be conuerted vnto thee. Deliuer me from bloud, O GOD, which art the GOD of my saluation, and my tongue shall sing ioyfully of thy righteousnesse. Open thou my lippes, O Lord, and my mouth shall shew foorth thy praise; which as yet hee could not shew foorth to others, because aboundance of ioy did not lodge in his heart; for God had sealed vp sorrow therein, vntill the sacrifice of his broken and contrite heart were accomplished. From the like aboundant experience of this heauenly ioy, the Psalmist in the threescore and sixt Psalme and sixteenth verse, bursteth out into like confident speeches; inuiting vs, as Christ did his Apostle Thomas, to come neere and lay our hands vpon his healed sore, and by the scarres to gather the skill and goodnesse of him that had thus cured him beyond all expectation:
 Come and hearken all yee that feare God,Psalme 66.16. and I will tell you what hee hath done to my soule; I called vnto him with my mouth,Verse 17. and hee was exalted with my tongue.Verse 20. Praised bee GOD which hath not put backe my prayer, nor his mercy from mee. The fulnesse of his inward ioyes was such, and Gods prouidence ouer him so manifest and wonderfull, that the present age wherein hee liued could not (to his seeming) but take notice of it, whilest the particulars, wherein the Lord had heard him, were in fresh memorie: and all posteritie, he presumes out of the aboundance of his owne beliefe, should still beleeue the goodnesse of God, from this experimentall relation of his goodnesse towardes him. Hee that hath least experience of the like in himselfe, would hee but attentiuely marke the feruencie of those mens zeale, and vehemencie of their godly passions, expressed in these heere mentioned, and many like vnaffected straines, could not but acknowledge that famous inscription, which a later degenerate lasciuious Poet, (out of such a vaine glorious humour, as moues some basely descended to vsurpe the armes of Noble men whose names they beare,) sought to bestow on all, euen vpon such as himselfe was, Vates in name, but not in qualitie, to belong of right onely to these Psalmists or auncient sacred Poets.



Est Deus in vobis, agitante calescitis illo:


Impetus hic sacrae semina mentis habet.



Since in your breasts Gods Spirit hath his seate,
T'is Diuine motion breeds this heauenly heate.


For who can imagin, that the Author of the three score and fourteenth Psalme and the ninth verse should complaine, without some touch of that Spirite, which hee knew had beene more plentifull in such as had gone before him; Wee see not our signes, there is not one Prophet more, not any that knoweth how long. Verse 10. O GOD, how long shall the aduersary reproach? shall the enemie blaspheme thy name for euer? Verse 11. Why withdrawest thou thine hand, euen thy right hand? Drawe it out of thy bosome and consume them. Verse 12. Euen God is my King of olde, working saluation in the middes of the earth. These sober and constant motions, as it were of Systoles and Diastoles betweene Despaire and Hope, exprest
 in this and the foure and fortieth Psalme, argue that those woonders and noble workes, which they had heard with their eares, and their fathers had told them, were no fables, but matters truely and really acted, which had left deepe impression in their forefathers hearts, who had so thorowly felt and tasted the extraordinarie goodnesse of their God, that the longing desire of like fauour is transfused as hereditarie to posteritie, as the desire of such meates as parents best affect, and vse most to feede vpon, vsually remaines in their children.
2 Or, to vse the Author of the two and fortie Psalme his owne comparison; Braying doeth not more sensibly notifie the Hartes panting after the water brookes, than that Psalme doth his thirsting after the Spirite of Life; which sometime had beene diffused through his faculties, and had fructified in ioy and comfort, but now in these stormes of affliction lieth hid in his heart, onelie supporting it with hopes of like fruit against a better season; as the sap whereby trees flourish in Summer, retiring to the roote in Winter, preserueth them sound within, so that although frosts may nippe, and stormes outwardly deface them, yet they breake forth againe, and beare fruit in the Spring. And although I neuer mistrusted the truth of that dissension, betwixt the willingnesse of the Spirite, and weakenesse of the flesh, oft mentioned in Scripture; yet, I know not how, it addeth more life to my beliefe, whilest I see this conflict acted by the Author of the two and fortie and the three and fortie Psalme. The flesh complaines, as if his heart were readie to close with deiected feare; My soule is cast downe within mee, all thy waues and flouds are gone ouer mee: the Spirite like a good Physitian, by reiterating that speech of comfort, Why arte thou cast downe, O my soule, and why art thou so disquieted within mee, raiseth it vp againe, and dilateth his heart with hope in God against all hope in worldly sight. For so hee concludeth both these Psalmes, Wait on God: for I will yet giue him thankes: hee is my present helpe and my God. Generally, though the Psalmists complaints bee oft-times grieuous, yet they neuer end them but with hearty praier; though God oft-times lay great plagues vpon them; yet is their confidence alwayes as great that hee will heale them. The beginning of their mournefull Ditties,
 alwayes represent the stormes of griefe and sorrow, that had gone ouer their soules: their end and cloze is like the appearing of the Morning Starre, fore-shewing the remoueall of the shadow of death, wherein they sate. Their sodaine transitions from griefe to ioy, is euen as the breaking out of the Sunne from vnder a thicke tempestuous cloude: So that the outward Character of theyr Songs, is a liuely representation of that trueth, which one of them out of his inmost experience hath left registred to the world; His wrath endureth but the twinckeling of an eie, and in his pleasure is life: heauinesse may endure for a night, but ioy commeth in the morning.
3 This Patience in Aduersitie, and confident expectation of deliuerance from aboue, compared with the Heathens impatience, alwayes readie to accuse their Gods in their vnexpected calamities, and seeking to vent their griefe in Poeticall Inuectiues against them: infallibly testifie, that the one did onelie know the Diuine Powers by heare say, the others by experience; and that GOD was neare to this people in all which they called vppon him, and beheld the affaires of the Heathen onelie a farre off.
4 Yet beside these particular liuely Characters of experimentall ioy or griefe, feare or confidence: their consonancie with the historicall trueth of alterations in the state of Iewrie, will much illustrate the former obseruations. For albeit the Psalmists in their greatest distresse or calamities, murmure not against the Lord God, as the heathens doe: yet the tenour of some late mentioned, with diuerse other Psalmes, argue that the people of God in those times wherein they were written, either had not such manifest signes of Gods fauour; or else found not such speedie deliuerance from the daungers feared, or calamities suffered by them, as the Prophet Dauid in the seauen and twentie Psalme and the first verse, and other of their godlie Auncestours had done. The Lord (saieth Dauid) is my light and my saluation, whome shall I feare? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whome shall I bee affraide? Though an hoast pitched against mee, mine heart should not be afraide: though warre bee raysed against me, yet I will trust in thi^; to wit, vppon his former experience of
 Gods mercies specified in the second verse; When the wicked mine enemies came, and my foes came vpon me to eate vp my flesh, they stumbled and fell. But greater was his confidence from the more often experience of Gods fauour, when as his case otherwise, for the multitude and malignitie of his enemies, was more desperate, Psal. 3. vers. 1. Many were his aduersaries that rose vp against him; and many that said vnto his soule (when hee fled from his sonne Absolon) Verse 2. There is no helpe for him in his God. Yet hee, as an expert souldier, can not be terrified with stales or bragges, but betaketh himselfe vnto his weapons; Verse 3. Thou Lord art a buckler for mee, my glorie, and the lifter up of my head. So little is he dismaied, that after his prayers hee taketh his quiet rest; Verse 4. I did call vpon the Lord with my voyce, and hee heard mee out of his holy mountaine. I laide mee downe and slept, and rose againe, for the Lord sustained me. Verse 5. I will not bee afraide for tenne thousand of the people, that should beset me round about. The same confidence, raised from the experience of Gods assistance, was in the Author of the sixe and fortie Psalme; God is our helpe and strength, a very present helpe in trouble: Therefore will wee not feare though the earth be moued, and though the mountaines fall into the middest of the Sea. The manner of Dauids carriage, his confident presaging of good successe in times more apt to breede despaire in others lesse experienced in assistance from aboue, exprest in sundry Psalmes, composed when hee fled from Saul, yeeld aboundance of obseruations pregnant for this purpose.
5 Other-whiles this Kingly Prophet expostulates the wrongs offered by his enemies so confidently, and relateth his owne integritie in such patheticall and serious manner, that vnlesse the Inscription of his Petitions, or other historicall circumstance, did giue vs notice, to whome hee tendered his complaints, wee would thinke that they had beene so many reports, of what hee had openly pleaded at some Barre, or Court of ciuile Iustice, in the personall presence, sight, or audience of some visible Iudge, ready to giue sentence for him vpon the first hearing of his cause. If any ciuile Heathen, that neuer had heard of any inuisible God, should haue taken vp some of his Psalmes (the ninth for example) in the streetes, hee would haue imagined that the Author
 of them had either heard some supreame Magistrate in his time, deepely protesting his resolution for righting the poore, or else had beene most intimately acquainted with the integritie of his proceedings in matters of Iustice, that hee durst so confidently auouch vnto the world on his behalfe; Psalme 9. verse 8. He shall iudge the world in righteousnesse, and the people with equitie. Verse 9. The Lord also will bee a refuge for the poore, a refuge in due time, euen in affliction. Verse 10. And they that know thy Name, will trust in thee: for thou Lord hast not fayled them that seeke thee. So liuely was Dauids, and other ancient Psalmists experience of the Inuisible Gods assistance alwayes readie, aswell in warre as in peace, as well in executing iudgement vpon their treacherous, deceitfull, or secret enemies, as in giuing them victorie ouer their profest and potent foes.
6 But posteritie had not often times so full experience of the same assistance, as appeareth from the manner of their complaints. The reason of this Diuersitie, in the auncient and latter Psalmists apprehension of GODS fauour; eyther in deliuering them from daunger, or righting them from wrong; was from the Diuersitie of Times, the later not yeelding so manifest and frequent Documents of GODS mercie or iustice, as the former had done. As Gods plagues vppon the auncient Israelites were oft times sodaine, and (for the time) violent: so their deliuerance from them was speedie, because their stubbornenesse was lesse, and the sinnes, for which they were to repent, of lesse continuance. But the continuall increase of this peoples wickednesse, in their successions, and Posterities slackenesse, in sorrowing either for theyr owne or Predecessours sinnes, made Gods plagues inflicted vppon them more durable, as appeareth by the long captiuities and oppressions of this people in later Ages, if wee compare them with the often, but short afflictions, which in former times had befallen them. This long duraunce of great calamities, made Posteritie lesse apprehensiue of Gods promises than theyr Forefathers had beene; at the least whiles these continued, they were lesse acquainted with Gods fauour than their Predecessours were. And from the want of like sensible experience of his present helpe in the time of trouble, of later
 generations are more querulous and lesse confident in their prayers vttered in their distresse, as wee may see in the foure score and eighteenth and other Psalmes, conceiued by the godlie amongest this people in the calamities of later Times. Thus wee may see how truely the diuersitie of Gods dealing with his people in different Ages, is represented in the Character, Stile, or Affection of these sacred Writers, all much different in former and later Ages: much more may wee presume, that the generall and true Diuersitie of Times, and GODS diuers manner of proceeding with mankinde in their seuerall Generations, is most truely related and exemplified in the Historicall relations of the same sacred Volumes; of which in the Section following.
7 Thus much of Experiments, or Obseruations drawne from the Character, or tenor of these sacred Writings themselues, or their Writers affections represented in them. These I haue gathered, not that I can hope to perswade any man so much by reading them, as by occasioning him to obserue the like, whiles hee readeth these sacred Volumes. For euerie man that readeth them with attentiue Obseruation, may apprehend much more for the framing of true beliefe in his owne heart, than hee can expresse to others: yea, to seeke to make full resemblance of our inward beliefe, or such Experiments as confirme it, by outward discourse, were all one, as if a man out of the slight impression or transitorie representation of his owne face which hee had lately beheld in a Glasse, should seeke to describe it as fully and perfectly to an other mans apprehension, as if he had looked vpon it with him in the same Glasse.
8 As the representation of our bodily shape, is liuely and perfect whilest wee beholde it in a true and perfect Glasse; but the memoriall or phantasie of it when wee are gone thence, imperfect and dull: So is the apprehension of our owne, or Experiments of others beliefe, sensible and fresh, whilest we set our harts and mindes vnto this perfect Lawe of Libertie, the onely true Glasse of our Soules; but more hard to retaine in memorie, or to bee fully represented to an other by Discourse, than our bodily shape is by a bare description. And as in the Arte of Painting, generall rules may bee giuen for the right drawing of Pictures, yet
 he that will take any particular mans, must looke vppon the liue face it selfe, or vse the benefite of his Glasse: So in this case, there may bee good directions giuen, how men should drawe Experiments, or take Obseruations of this kinde, which being taken, can not bee fully imprinted in an other, by him that tooke them: but euerie man must haue continuall recourse vnto this Spirituall Glasse, which farre surpasseth all bodily Glasses in this; that in it wee may see, not onely the true shape and proportion of our Soules as they are, or of what fashion they should be; but it hath also an operatiue force of assimilating them vnto the patternes of godly and religious mens Soules represented herein, yea euen of transfourming them into the similitude of that Image wherein they were first created. The Idaea of Sanctitie and Righteousnesse contained in this Spirituall Glasse, are the causes of our edification in good life and vertue: as the Idaea or platforme in the Artificers head, is the cause of the materiall house that is builded by it.



SECT. 2.
Of Experiments and Obseruations answerable to the rules of Scriptures.

CHAP. I. Containing the topicke, whence such Obseruations must be drawne.
1 IF the Bookes of some auncient rare Author, who had written in sundry Arts, should be found in this Age; all bearing the Authors name and other commendable Titles prefixed: a reasona- man would soone be perswaded, that they were his whose name they bore; but sooner, if hee had any positiue arguments to perswade himselfe of their Antiquitie, or if they were
 commended to him by the authority or report of men in this case credible. But, besides all these, if euery man according to his experience or skill in those arts and faculties which this ancient writer handles, should vpon due examination of his conclusions or discourse finde resolution in such points as he had alwayes wauered in before; or be instructed in matters of his profession or obseruation, whereof he was formerly ignorant: this would much strengthen his assent vnto the former reports or traditions concerning their Author, or vnto the due praises and titles prefixed to his workes; albeit he that made this triall, could not proue the same truth so fully to another, nor cause him to beleeue it so firmly as he himselfe doth, vnlesse he could induce him to examine his writings by like experiments, in some facultie wherein the examiner had some, though lesse, skill. And yet, after the like triall made, he, that had formerly doubted, would beleeue these workes to be the supposed Authors, and subscribe vnto the titles and commendations prefixed; not so much for the formers report or authoritie, as from his owne experience. Now we haue more certaine experiments to proue that the Scriptures are the word of God, than we can haue to proue any mens workes to be their supposed Authors: for one Author in any Age may be as good as an other; he perhaps better, of whome we haue heard lesse. We could in the former case onely certainely beleeue that the Author, whosoeuer, was an excellent Scholler; but wee could not bee so certaine that it was none other but hee whose name it did beare: for there may be many Aristotles, and many Platoes, many excellent men in euery profession, yet but one God that is all in all; whose workes we suppose the Scriptures are, which vpon strict examination will euince him alone to haue beene their Author.
2 The meanes then of establishing our assent vnto any part of Scripture, must be from experiments and obseruations agreeable to the rules in Scripture. For when we see the reason and maner of sundry euents, either related by others, or experienced in our selues, which otherwise we could neuer haue reached vnto by any naturall skill; or, generally, when we see any effects or concurrence of things which cannot be ascribed to any but a supernaturall cause, and yet they fully agreeing to the Oracles of Scriptures
 or Articles of Beleefe: This is a sure pledge vnto vs, that he who is the Author of Truth, and giues being vnto all things, was the author of Scriptures.
3 Such euents and experiments are diuerse, and according to their diuersities may worke more or lesse on diuerse dispositions: some may finde more of one sort, some of another, none all; some againe may be more induced to beleeue the truth of Scriptures from one sort of experiments, some from others. Those obseruations are alwaies best for euery man, which are most incident to his vocation. With some varietie of these obseruations or experiments we are in the next place to acquaint diuerse Readers.


CHAP. II. That Heathenish fables ought not to preiudice diuine Truth.
1 NOthing more vsuall to men, wise ynough in their generation, than for the varietie or multitude of false reports concerning any subiect, to discredit all that are extant of the same. And all inclination vnto diffidence or distrust is not alwayes to be misliked; but onely when it swayes too farre, or extends it selfe beyond the limits of it proper circumference, that is, matters of bargaine or secular commerce. As this diffident temper is most common in the cunning managers of such affaires: so the first degree or propension to it were not much amisse in them, did they not transcendere a genere ad genus; that is, were not their mistrust commonly too generally rigid and stiffe. For most men of great dealings in the world, finding many slipperie companions, hold it no sinne to be at the least suspitious of all: others, being often cosened by such as haue had the name and reputation of honest men, begin to doubt whether there be any such thing indeed, as that which men call honestie; and from this doubting about the reall nature of honestie in the abstract, they resolue vndoubtedly, That if any man in these dayes doe not deale ill with others, it is onely for want of fit oportunitie to doe himselfe any great good. But as facilitie in yeelding assent, vnlesse it be moderated by discretion,
 is an infallible consequent of too great simplicitie, and layes a man open to abuse and wrong in matters of this life: so generall mistrust is the certaine fore-runner of infidelitie, and makes a man apt ynough to cousin himselfe, without a tempter, in matters of the life to come; though otherwise this is the very disposition which the great Tempter workes most vpon: who for this reason, when any notable truth of greater moment falls out, labours by all meanes to fill the world with reports of like euents, but such as vpon examination he foresees will proue false: for hee knowes well, that the beleefe of most pregnant truthes may by this meanes be much impaired, as honest men are vsually mistrusted when the world is full of knaues. And, to speake the truth, it is but a very short cut betwixt generall and rigid mistrust in worldly dealings, and infidelitie in spirituall matters; which indeed is but a kind of diffidence or mistrust: and he that from the experience of often cousenage comes once to this point, That he will trust none in worldly affaires but vpon strong securitie or legall assurance, may easily be transported by the varietie or multitude of reports, in spirituall matters, notoriously false, to beleeue nothing but vpon the sure pledge and euidence of his owne sense or naturall reason. This is one maine fountaine of Atheisme; of which (God willing) in the Article of the Godhead. In this place I onely desire to giue the Reader notice of Sathans policie, and to aduertise him withall, that as there is a kind of ingenuous simplicitie, which if it maketh with sobrietie and serious meditation, doth prepare our hearts to Christian beleefe: so there is a kind of suspition by which we may out-reach the old Serpent in his subtiltie, and preuent his former method of deceit. So, whilest wee read or heare varietie of reports concerning any notable euent, or many Writers beating about one matter, euery one of which may seeme vnprobable in particular circumstances, or else their diuersitie such as makes them incompatible; we should be iealous, that there were some notable truth, whose beleefe did concerne vs, which Sathan hath sought to disparage by the mixture, either of grosse improbable fruitlesse fables, or else of dissonant probabilities.
2 Truth is the life and nutriment of the world, and the Scriptures as the Veines or Vessels wherein it is contained; which
 straight corrupts and putrifies, vnlesse it be preserued in them, as in it proper receptacles, as both the fabulous conceits of the Heathen and foolish practises of the Romish Church in many points may witnesse. But as from Asphaltites, or the dead sea, we may finde out the pleasant streames and fresh springs of Iordan: so from the degenerate and corrupted rellish of decayed truth, which is frequent in the puddle and standing lakes of Heathen Writers, we may be led into the pure fountaine of truth contained in these sacred volumes of Scripture.
3 The experiments, which now wee seeke or would occasion others (chiefely young students) to obserue, are such as the Heathen did guesse at, or men out of the workes of nature, by reading of Poets, or auncient Writers, may yet doubt of; whereas the true resolution of them onely depends vpon the truth set downe in Scripture.


CHAP. III. Obseruations out of Poets in generall, and of Dreames in particular.
1 THe most exquisite Poemes are but a kind of pleasant waking dreame, and the art of Poetrie a liuely imitation of some delightfull visions. And as nothing comes into a mans fancie by night in dreames, but the parts or matters of it haue bin formerly in his outward senses (for euen when we dreame of golden Mountaines or Chymeraes, the seuerall ingredients haue a reall and sensible truth in them; onely the frame or proportion is such, as hath no sensible example in the workes of nature:) so in auncient Poemes, which were not made in imitation of former, as pictures drawne from pictures, but immediately deuised (as wee now suppose) from the sensible experiments of those times (as pictures drawne from a liuing face) many parts and limmes haue a reall and sensible truth, onely the composition or frame is artificiall and fained, such as cannot perhaps be paralelled in euery circumstance, with any reall euents in the course of times. And albeit
 the euents (which the most auncient Poets relate) through long distance of time, seeme most strange to vs, yet is the ground of their deuises (especially) such, as vpon better search may alwaies be referred to some Historicall truth, which yeelded stuffe to Poeticall structure, as dayes spectacles doe vnto nights visions. This Aristotle had obserued out of the practise of the best auncient Poets, and prescribes it as a rule to Poets, to haue alwayes an Historicall truth for their ground. Nor durst the Poets haue been so audacious in their fictions at the first, seeing their profession was but either to imitate nature, or adorne a knowne truth; not to disparage any truth by prodigious or monstrous fictions, without any ground of like experience. For this is a fundamentall law of their Art;
Hieronym. Vida, ^b. 2. Poet.Curandum, vt quando non semper vera profamur,Fingentes: saltem sint illa simillima veri.Though all's not true that faining Poets sing,Yet nought on Stage but in truths likenesse bring.
None, I thinke, will be so foolish as to take Homer in the literall sence, when he tels vs how Iris by day, and Sleepe by night, runne errands for the greater Gods, and come with these and the like messages vnto Kings chambers:
(...),Who will by counsell guide a State,Must early rise, and lye downe late.
Yet with such artificiall and painted plumes oftentimes are couered true and naturall bodies, though the messengers be poeticall and fained; yet these kinds of night-messages had an Historicall truth: for not the Poets onely, but many great Philosophers of the old world, haue taken nocturnall presages for no dreames or fancies. Hence did Homer vsurpe his libertie, in faining his Kings and Heroickes, so often admonished of their future estate by the gods: he presumed at least, that these fictions might carrie a shew of truth in that age, wherein such admonitions by night were not vnusuall. And his conceit is not dissonant vnto the sacred
 storie, which beares record of like effects in auncient times, and giues the true cause of their expiration in later.
2 So vsuall were dreames amongst the Patriarchs, and their interpretations so well knowne, that Iacob could at the first hearing interprete his young sonne Iosephs dreame, Gen. 37. vers. 10,Gen. 37.10. 11. What is this dreame that thou hast dreamed? Shall I, and thy mother and thy brethren come indeed, and fall on the ground before thee? Nor did he take it only for a fable, no more than his brethren had done his former for a fancie; for, as the Text sayth,Vers. 11. his brethren enuied him, but his father noted the saying. And Ioseph himselfe comming to riper yeares, was as expert in interpreting Pharaohs and his seruants dreames, Gen. 40. vers. 12, 13. Then Ioseph said vnto him, this is the interpretation of it: The three branches are three dayes; within three dayes shall Pharaoh lift vp thine head, and restore thee vnto thine office, and thou shalt giue Pharaohs cup into his hand, after the old manner when thou wast his Butler. And vers. 19. Within three dayes shall Pharaoh take thine head from thee, and shall hang thee on a tree, and the birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee. These considerations will not suffer me mistrust diuerse auncient Historiographers, making report, how Princes and Fathers of Families haue had fore-warnings of future euents, either concerning themselues, their Kingdome, or Posteritie. Nor were all dreames among the Heathens illusions of wicked spirits:Iob. 33. for Elihu spake out of the common experience of those auncient times wherein hee liued; God speaketh once or twice (that is,Vers. 14. Vers. 15. vsually) and one seeth it not. In dreames and visions of the night, when sleepe falleth vpon men and they sleepe vpon their beds, then he openeth the eares of men,Vers. 16. Vers. 17. euen by their corrections, which he had sealed, that he might cause man to turne away from his enterprise, and that he might hide the pride of man, and keepe backe his soule from the pit, and that his life should not passe by the sword. A liuely experiment of Elihu his obseruation wee haue Gen. 20.3. When Abimelech King of Gerar had taken Sarah, Abrahams wife, God came to him in a dreame by night, and said to him, Behold, thou art but dead, because of the woman which thou hast taken; for she is a mans wife. And againe, vers. 6, 7. God said vnto him by a dreame, I know that thou didst this euen with an vpright minde, and I kept thee also that thou shouldest not sinne against me, therefore suffered I not thee to touch her: Now then deliuer the man his wife
 againe; for he is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee, that thou mayest liue: but if thou deliuer her not againe, be sure that thou shalt die the death, thou, and all that thou hast. And Moses witnesseth the ordinarie prophecie of auncient times to haue consisted of dreames and visions, Numb. 12.6, 7. If there be a Prophet of the Lord amongst you, I will be knowne vnto him by a vision, and will speake vnto him by a dreame. My seruant Moses is not so (that is, he is no ordinarie Prophet) vnto him will I speake mouth to mouth, and by vision, and not in darke words, but he shall see the similitude of the Lord.
3 These allegations sufficiently proue, that night-dreames and visions were frequent, and their obseruation (if taken in sobrietie) to good vse, in auncient times, euen amongst the nations, vntill they forgot,Gen. 40.8. as Ioseph said, That interpretations were from God, and sought to find out an art of interpreting them: Then night-visions did either cease, or were so mixt with delusions, that they could not be discerned; or, if their euents were in some sort foreseene, yet men being ignorant of Gods prouidence, commonly made choise of such meanes for their auoidance, as proued the necessarie occasions or prouocations of the euents they feared.
4 Much better was the temper of the Nations before Homers time: They, amongst other kindes of Prophecyings and Southsayings, held dreames and their interpretations (as all other good gifts) to be from God; as no euill was done in the Grecian campe, which the gods, in their opinion, did not cause. So Homer brings in Achilles, aduising Agamemnon to consult their gods interpreters with all speed, for what offence committed against them they had sent the pestilence into their Campe.


Hom. Iliad. 1.(...)
(...).


But to what Priest, or Prophet shall we wend,
Or dreamer? for euen dreames from Ioue descend.


All those kindes of predictions had beene in vse amongst the Heathens, as they were amongst the Israelites; albeit in later times they grew rare in both: for the encrease of wickednesse throughout the world, the multiplicitie of businesse and solicitude of humane affaires, and mens too much minding of politike meanes,
 and other second causes of their owne good, did cause the defect of true dreames and other diuine admonitions for the welfare of mankind.
5 This cause the Scriptures giue vs, 1. Sam. 28.6. After Saul (who had followed the fashions of other Nations, not the prescripts of Gods word) asked counsell of the Lord, and the Lord answered him not, neither by dreames, nor byi. by Priests. Vrim, nor by the Prophets, his sinnes had made a separation betweene him and the god of Israel: who for this cause will not affoord his presence to his Priests or Prophets, that came as mediators betwixt Saul and him; much lesse would hee vouchsafe his spirit vnto such Priests or Prophets as were carnally minded themselues. This was a rule so well knowne to the people of God, that Strabo from the tradition of it (for Moses his storie he had not read) reckons vp this as a speciall point of Moses his doctrine, concerning the worship of the god of Israel; his words are to this effect: Moses taught,Strabo, lib. 16. in the description of Iurie. that such as liued chastly and vprightly should be inspired with true visions by night, and such men, it was meete, should consult the Diuine Powers in the Temple by night-visions: but others, who were not so well minded, ought not to intrude themselues into this sacred businesse; or, if they would, they were to expect no true visions, but illusions or idle dreames; from God they were not to expect any. Yet may it not be denied, but that the Heathens were oft times, by Gods permission, truly resolued by Dreames or Oracles (though ministred by diuels) of euents that should come; but seldome were such resolutions for their good: So the Witch which Saul most Heathen-like consulted, when God had cast him off, did procure him a true prediction of his fearefull end. This is a point wherein I could be large; but I will conclude. As the Heathens relations of sundrie euents vsuall in auncient times, confirme the truth of the like, recorded in Scripture; so the Scriptures giue the true causes of their being, ceasing, or alteration: which the corrupt and polypragmaticall disposition of later ages, without reuelation from the cause of causes and disposer of times, could neuer haue dreamed of; as may partly appeare from what hath beene said of Dreames, more fully from that which followes next of Oracles.





CHAP. IIII. Of Oracles.
I Haue often and daily occasion (for the satisfaction of my mind in sundrie questions that might otherwise haue vext me) to thanke my God, that as he made me a reasonable creature, and of a reasonable creature a student or contemplator, so he did not make me a meere Philosopher: (though Plato thought this deserued the greatest thankes, as being the greatest benefit bestowed vpon him by his God) but neuer was I more incited in this respect to blesse the day wherein I was made a Christian, than when I read Plutarchs Tract of the causes why Oracles ceased in his time. Whether Heathen Oracles were all illusions of diuels, or some vttered by God himselfe for their good (though oft times without successe, by reason of their curiositie and superstition) I now dispute not. That Oracles in auncient times had beene frequent; that such euents had been foretold by them, as surpassed the skill of humane reason: all records of vnpartiall antiquitie beare vncontrollable euidence. Nor did the Heathen Philosophers themselues, which liued in the ages immediately following their decay, call the truth of their former vse in question: but from admiration of this knowne change, they were incited to search the cause of their ceasing.Lib. de Defectu oraculorum. Plutarch, after his acute search of sundrie causes and accurate Philosophicall disputes, referres it partly vnto the absence of his daemoniacall spirits, which by his Philosophie might dye or flit from place to place, either exiled by others more potent, or vpon some other dislike; and partly vnto the alteration of the soyle, wherein Oracles were seated, which yeelded not exhalations of such a diuine temper as in former times it had done; and without a certaine temperature of exhalations or breathing of the earth, the daemoniacall spirits (hee thought) could not giue their Oracles, more than a Musitian can play without an Instrument. And this decay or alteration of the soyle of Delphi, and like places, was (in his iudgement) probable, from the like knowne experience in sundry Riuers, Lakes, and hot-Baths; which, in some places, did quite
 drie vp and vanish; in others, much decay for a long time, or change their course; and yet afterwards recouer their former course or strength, either in the same places, or some neere adioyning. Thus he expected Oracles should either come in vse againe in Greece, or else burst out in some more conuenient soyle. The Atheists of this age (our English home-bred ones at least) haue altogether as great reason to denie the decay or drying vp of Riuers and Lakes, as to suspect the frequencie of Oracles, or other euents in times past: for neither they nor their fathers haue had any more experience of the one than of the other. Plutarchs testimonie (amongst many others) is authentike for the vse and decay of Oracles: but neither his authoritie, nor the reasons which he brings, can giue satisfaction to any man that seekes the true cause of their defect. He referres it (indeed) in a generalitie to the gods; not that they wanted good will to mankind still, but that the matter did decay which their ministers (the daemoniacall spirits) did worke vpon, as you heard before. Wee may vpon sure grounds with confidence affirme, That euen this decay of matter, which he dreames of (had it conferred ought to the vse of Oracles) was from God. And he (as the Psalmist speakes) that turneth the flouds into a Wildernesse, and dryeth vp the water Springs, and maketh a fruitfull land barren, for the iniquitie of them that dwell therein, did also bring, not onely the Oracle of Delphi, so much frequented amongst the Grecians, but all other kinds of diuinations, vsed amongst his owne people in the old world, to desolation: and by pouring out his spirit more plenteously vpon the barren hearts of vs Heathen, hath filled the barbarous nations of Europe with better store of riuers of comfort than the ancient Israel, his owne inheritance, had euer knowne. Or if wee desire a more immediate cause of these Oracles defect amongst the Heathens; the time was come,Matth. 12.29 that the strong mans house was to be entred, his goods spoyled, and himselfe bound;Iob. 12.31. now the Prince of this world was to be cast out.
2 Plutarchs relation of his daemoniacall spirits mourning for great Pans death, about this time, is so strange, that it might perhaps seeme a tale, vnlesse the truth of the common bruite had beene so constantly auouched by eare-witnesses vnto Tiberius,
 that it made him call a conuocation of Wisemen, as Herod did at our Sauiours birth, to resolue him who this great Pan, late deceased, should be. Thamus, the Aegyptian Master, vnknowne by that name to his passengers, vntill he answered to it at the third call of an vncouth voice, vttered (sine authore) from the land, requesting him to proclaime the newes of great Pans death, as he passed by Palodes, was resolued to haue let all passe as a fansie or idle message, if the winde and tide should graunt him passage by the place appointed: but, the wind fayling him on a suddaine, at his comming thither, he thought it but a little losse of breath to crie out aloud vnto the shoare, as hee had beene requested, Great Pan is dead. The words, as Plutarch relates, were scarce out of his mouth, before they were answered with a huge noyse, as it had beene of a multitude, sighing and groaning at this wonderment. If these spirits had beene by nature mortall, as this Philosopher thinkes, the death of their chiefe Captaine could not haue seemed so strange: but that a farre greater than the greatest of them, by whose power the first of them had his being, should die to redeeme his enemies from their thraldome, might well feeme a matter of wonderment and sorrow vnto them. The circumstance of the time will not permit me to doubt, but that vnder the knowne name of Pan was intimated the great Shepheard of our soules, that had then layd downe his life for his flocke; not the fained sonne of Mercurie and Penelope,(...). Plut. vt supra. as the Wisemen foolishly resolued Tiberius: Albeit euen this base and counterfeit resolution of these Heathens coyning, beares a liuely image (for the exact proportion) of the diuine truth, charactred out vnto vs in Scripture. For it shall appeare by sufficient testimonies, in their due time and place to be produced, that sundry generall, confused, or aenigmaticall tradiditions of our Sauiours conception, birth, and Pastorall office, had beene spread abroad amongst the Nations. Hence, in stead of him, they frame a Pan, the God of Shepheards; in stead of the holy Spirit, by whom he was to be conceiued, they haue a Mercurie (their false God, fained Messenger and Interpreter) for Pans father; in stead of the blessed Virgine, who was to beare our Sauiour, they haue a Penelope for their young Gods mother.
 The affinitie of qualitie and offices, in all the parties here paralelled, made this transfiguration of diuine Truth easie vnto the Heathen; and the manner of it cannot seeme improbable to vs, if we consider the wonted vanitie of their imaginations, in transforming the glorie of the immortall Godhead into the similitude of earthly thinges, most dislike to it in nature and qualitie. Thus admitting Plutarchs storie to be most true, it no way proues his intended conclusion, that the wilde goatish Pan was mortall: but the Scriptures set foorth vnto vs the true cause, why both he, and all the rest of that hellish crue should at that time howle and mourne, seeing by the great Shepheards death they were become dead in law; no more to breath in Oracles, but quite to be depriued of all such strange motions, as they had seduced the ignorant world with before. All the anticke trickes of Faunus, the Satyres, and such like creatures, were now put downe; God had resolued to make a translation of his Church; and for this cause the Diuels were enforced to dissolue their old Chappels, and seeke a new forme of their Liturgie or Seruice. Whilest the Israelites were commaunded to consult with Gods Priests, Prophets, or other Oracles, before they vndertooke any difficult warre or matters of moment, Sathan had his Priests and Oracles as much frequented by Heathen Princes vpon the like occasions. So Strabo witnesseth,Lib. citato. That the auncient Heathen, in their chiefe consultations of State, did relye more vpon Oracles than humane policie. If Moses were fortie dayes in the Mount, to receiue Lawes from Gods owne mouth, Minos will be Iupiters Auditor,Plato in Min^e. in his denne or caue, for the same purpose. In emulation of Shiloh, or Kireath-jearim, whilest the Arke of God remained there; the Heathens had Dodona; and for Ierusalem they had Delphi, garnished with rich donatiues of forraine Princes as well as Grecians; so magnified also by Grecian Writers, as if it had beene the intended paralell of the holy Citie. Insomuch,Plut. ibid. that Plutarch thinkes the storie, commonly receiued of that Oracles originall, to be lesse probable, because it ascribes the inuention of it to chaunce, and not to the diuine prouidence, or fauour of the Gods: when as it had beene such a direction vnto Greece, in vndertaking
 warres, in building Cities, and in time of pestilence and famine. Whether these effects in auncient times had beene alwayes from the information of Diuels (as I said before) I will not dispute. That this Oracle had beene often consulted, it is euident; and that oftentimes the Diuels deluded such as consulted them, is as manifest. But since that saying of the Prophet was fulfilled,Ier. 31.33. I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; since the knowledge of Truth hath beene so plenteously made knowne and reuealed, and the principles of Religion so much dilated and enlarged by discourse, the Diuell hath chosen prowd hearts and busie braines for his Oracles; seeking by their subtiltie of wit, and plausibilitie of discourse, to counterfeit and corrupt the forme of wholesome Doctrine; as he did of old, the truth of Gods visible Oracles, by his apish imitations.
3 This conclusion then is euident, both from the ioynt authoritie of all auncient Writers, as well prophane, as sacred; That God in former times had spoken vnto the world by Dreames, Visions, Oracles, Priests, and Prophets; and that such reuelations had beene, amongst the Israelites, as the Starres or Night-lampes; amongst the Heathen as Meteors, fierie Apparitions, or wandering Comets, for their direction in the time of darkenesse and ignorance. But when both the sensible experience of our times, and the relations of former ages, most vnpartiall in this case, haue sufficiently declared vnto vs, That all the former twinckling lights are vanished; the reason of this alteration, I see, men might seeke by naturall causes, as Plutarch did. But this doubt is cleared, and the question truely resolued by our Apostle in these wordes:Heb. 1.1. At sundrie times, and in diuerse manners, God spake in the old time to our Fathers by the Prophets; in these last dayes he hath spoken vnto vs by his Sonne, whom he hath made heire of all thinges, by whom also he made the world: who, being (as the Apostle there sayth) the brightnesse of his glorie, hath put the former lights, which shined in darkenesse, to flight. The consideration hereof confirmes that truth of our Apostle to all such as are not blinded in heart, where he sayth, That the night was past, and the day was come: For the suddaine
 vanishing of all former lights, about this time assigned by Christians of our Sauiours birth, abundantly euince, That this was the Sunne of Righteousnesse which (as the Prophet had foretold) should arise vnto the world.Malach. 4.2. It was the Light which had lately appeared in the Coasts of Iurie, then approaching Italie, Greece, and other of these Westerne Countries, which did cause these sonnes of darkenesse (the daemoniacall Spirits) to flit Westward, as Darkenesse it selfe doth from the face of the Sunne, when it beginnes to appeare in the East. And Plutarch tells vs,Plut. ibid. That after they had forsaken the Countrey of Greece, they haunted little desart Islands, neere adjoyning to the coasts of this our Britanie; where they raysed such hideous stormes and tempests, as Nauigators report they haue done of late in that Island, called by their owne name. Both reports had their times of truth; and the like may be yet true, in some places, more remote from commerce of Christians. But the Heathen (as Heathenish minded men doe euen to this day) sought the reasons of such alterations from sensible Agents, or second Causes, which haue small affinitie with those effects: or if they had, yet the disposition of such causes depends wholly vpon his will; who, though most immutable in himselfe, changeth times and seasons at his pleasure. And wheresoeuer the light of his Gospell commeth, it verifieth that saying of our Apostle, Ecce vetera transierunt, and noua facta sunt omnia: And new times yeeld new obseruations; which cannot be taken aright, nor their causes knowne, without especiall directions from this rule of Life. By which it plainely appeareth, that the second maine period of the World, since the Floud (whose beginning wee account from the promulgation of the Law, and the distinction of the Israelites from other people, vntill the time of Grace) yeeldes great alteration and matter of much different obseruation from the former. And in the declining, or later part of this second age, wee haue described vnto vs, as it were, an ebbe or staunch in the affaires of the Kingdome of Israel, going before the generall fullnesse of time: After which wee see the tenure of all thinges in Iurie, and of other Kingdomes of the world, quite changed. But the particulars of this change I intend to handle
 hereafter: I now would prosecute my former obseruations of the old world.
4 Continually, whilest we compare ancient Poets or stories with the booke of Genesis, and other volumes of sacred Antiquitie: these sacred bookes giue vs the patterne of the waking thoughts of ancient times; and the Heathen Poems, with other fragments of Ethnike writings (whose entire bodies, though not so aged as the former, being but the workes of men, haue perished) containe the dreames and fancies which succeeding ages by heare-say, and broken reports, had conceiued, concerning the same or like matters: So no doubt had God disposed, that the delight which men tooke in the vncertaine glimpse of truth in the one, should enure their mindes the better to obserue the light which shineth in the other; and that the vnstable varietie of the one should prepare mens hearts more stedfastly to imbrace the truth and stabilitie of the other, when it should be reuealed vnto them. And, as any man almost, if hee bee obseruant of his former actions, cogitations, and occurrents, may finde out the occasion how dreames (though in themselues oftentimes prodigious, absurd, and foolish) come into his braine or fancie: so may any iudicious man, from the continuall and serious obseruation of this Register of truth, finde out the originall, at least, of all the principall heads or common places of Poeticall fictions or ancient Traditions, which cannot be imagined they should euer haue come into any mans fancie, vnlesse from the imitation of some Historicall truth, or the impulsion of reall euents stirring vp admiration. For admiration (as shall afterward appeare) did breede, and imitation spoile, the diuine art of Poetrie.



CHAP. V. Of the apparitions of the Heathen Gods and their Heroicks.
1 WEre all the workes of auncient Poets vtterly lost, and no tradition or print of their inuentions left, so as the art of Poetrie were to begin anew, and the Theater to bee raysed from the ground; the most curious wits in this or neere adioyning Countries might for many generations to come beat their braines, and sift their fancies, vntill they had runne ouer all the formes and compositions which the whole Alphabet of their fantasmes could affoord, before they could euer dreame of bringing the gods in visible shape vpon the Stage, or interlacing their Poemes with their often apparitions. And vnlesse ensuing times should yeeld matter of much different obseruations from that which these present doe, this inuention would be accounted dull, and finde but sorrie and vnwelcome entertainement of the auditors or spectators. That the like inuention finds some acceptation now, it is, because mens mindes haue beene possessed with this conceit from the tradition of their forefathers. For many inuentions, which in succession cease to be of like vse and consequence as they were in former times, become yet matters of delight and sport vnto posteritie: as Shooting continues still an Exercise of good recreation to vs of this Land, because it hath beene a practise of admirable vse and consequence vnto our worthie auncestors. But whence came this conceit of the gods appearing in sensible shapes, into Homers and other auncient Poets heads? How became it a common place of Poeticall inuention, whilest Poetrie it selfe was but beginning? Surely, as God had spoken in diuerse manners vnto the old world, so had he appeared in diuerse formes (perhaps) not onely to the Israelites, but vnto other nations also before the distinction of this people from them: howsoeuer, as the diuels had counterfeited Gods manner of speaking to his people, so did they the manner of his, or his Angels apparitions.
2. Such apparitions of God or his Angels, the sacred Storie
 tels vs, were frequent, not onely in Abrahams, Isaacks, Iacobs, and the Patriarches times, but in the ages immediatly going before the times that Homer wrote of: so that the traditions of these vndoubted experiments (if Greece or Asia had not the like in Homers time) might then bee fresh and vnquestionable.Exod. 3.2. Numb. 22.22. So God appeared to Moses, in the bush; his Angell to Balaam, to Gedeon, to Manoah and his wife.Iudg. 6.11. Iudg. 13.3. The like apparitions in times following were more rare in Israel; not that the date of Gods, or his Angels extraordinarie presence, was vtterly expired: but their presence was seldome apprehended, by reason of that peoples blindnesse of heart, and want of Prophets eyes. For Elishaes seruant had not seene so much as a glimpse of any Angell, albeit a mightie host of these heauenly souldiers had pitched their tents about him, vnlesse his master, by his prayer to God, had opened his eyes. His master and hee may be a perfect embleme of the heauenly and worldly wise. The seruant did see the host of the Assyrians as clearely, perhaps more clearely, at the least hee descryed it sooner than his master did: And when the seruant of the man of God arose earely to goe out,2. King. 6.15. and sequent. behold, an Hoste compassed the Citie with horses and chariots. Then his seruant said vnto him, Alas master, how shall wee doe? And hee answered, Feare not: for they that bee with vs, are moe than they that bee with them. Then Elishah prayed, and said, Lord open his eyes that hee may see. And the Lord opened the eyes of the seruant, and hee looked, and behold, the mountaine was full of horses and chariots round about Elishah. This place, and that other of the Angels appearing to Balaam, may instruct vs that such apparitions might bee conspicuous to some one or few whom they concerned, though not to others present with them: and that the eyes of some, which were open enough to worldly spectacles, might be close shut to these celestiall visions, as the eares of others haue beene in like case.Act. 22.9. For S. Paul onely heard the voice which cryed alowd vnto him: though those that were with him did see the light that shone at his conuersion, and were astonished at it. From the like experience about Greece or Asia, in his owne, or the vsuall tradition of the like in former times, did Homer bring in Pallas appearing thus to Achilles:
(...):Iliad. ^.Of all the rest not one but heeThe Goddesse did, though present, see.
3 As the end and purpose which Homer assignes for these apparitions of his gods; so are both these, and many other particular circumstances of his gods assisting the ancient heroickes, such as might iustly breed offence to any serious reader, if a man should auouch them in earnest, or seeke to perswade him to expect more than meere delight in them. Yet I can not thinke, that he would haue fained such an assistance, vnlesse the valour of some men, in former times, had beene extraordinarie, and more than naturall. Which supernaturall excellencie in some, before others, could not proceede but from a supernaturall cause. And thus farre his conceit agrees with Scripture: that there were more heroicall spirits in olde times, than in later, and more immediate directions from God, for managing of most warres. And from the experience hereof, the auncient Poets are more copious in their hyperbolicall praises of their Worthies, than the discreeter sort of later Poets durst be, whilest they wrote of their owne times. Not that the auncient were more licentious, or lesse obseruant of decorum in this kinde of fiction, than the other: but because the manifestation of a Diuine power in many of their victories, was more seen in ancient, than in later times: so that such fictions, as to the ancient people might seem, by reason of these extraordinarie euents, then frequent, very probable; would haue beene censured as ridiculous and apish in succeeding Ages, wherein no like euents were manifested. The like extraordinarie manifestation of Gods power in battell, and of this heroicall valour inspired into men, we see most frequent in the auncient Stories of the Bible, as in the bookes of Moses, Iosuah, Iudges, Samuel: some one man in those times, was worth a thousand others: but in the Histories of the later Kings of Iudah and Israel, such extraordinarie heroical spirits are very rare. One or two miraculous victories Israel had in Elishahs, and Iudah in Ezekiahs time: but by the power, of Angells: no extraordinarie valour of anie man was much seene in them. And, these few excepted, their battels, their victories, and maner of fight, come neere vnto the nature of other nations in the same time. Generally from Rehoboams time, the Histories of Iudah and
 Israel fall much more within the compasse of moderne and ordinarie obseruation, than did the euents of former Ages. And if we had any perfect register of such matters as had fallen out in other nations and kingdomes during the time of Moses, Iosuah, and the Iudges: wee should finde them much more consonant to the sacred Stories of these times, than are any Histories of later times, or of former ages, wherein any Historiographer of better account did liue. And albeit I can not excuse Herodotus and Ctesias, either from affecting fabulous narrations, or too great facilitie in admitting the superstitious report or hearesay-traditions of others: yet is mens mistrust of them vsually more vniuersall, than in scholastike discretion and obseruation it neede to be; onely because the like euents haue not beene vsuall in any Age throughout these parts of the world, since the times whereof they wrote. No maruell if many since that time suspect the signes and wonders of the old world, when as the Psalmist, that liued before most heathen Writers that are extant (besides such as relate like strange euents) complaines; Psal. 75.9. We see not our signes, there is not one Prophet more. Generally, after Iudah had beene captiued by the Gentiles, that and other kingdomes lie, as it were, vnder one paralel, and may almost be measured by the same line: the eleuation of the Iew and Gentile is much-what the same, and the same celestiall obseruation may serue for both. The Priests after their returne from captiuitie, were forbidden to eate of the most holy thing, till there arose vp a Priest with Vrim and Thummim, Ezra 2.63. But; either no such did arise at all, from the erection of the second temple vntill Christs time: or, if any did, it was but to giue this people a farewell of Gods extraordinarie speaking vnto them, either by Priests or Prophets.Antiquitatum. lib. 3. cap. 9. Iosephus confesseth, that reuelations by Vrim and Thummim did finally cease two hundred yeares before his time. But more probable is the opinion of others, that this, as all other kind of Prophecies, and many extraordinary signes of Gods power and presence (sometime most frequent in that nation) did cease with that generation which returned from captiuitie, or immediately after the finishing of the second temple: as if God during all that time, had appoynted a Fast or Vigil, as an introduction to the time of fulnesse, Ioel 2.28. Wherein their sonnes and daughters should prophecie, and their old men dreame dreames, and
 their yong men see visions, and his Spirit should be powred out on all flesh; as well vpon the seruant, as the master; as well vpon the Gentile, as the Iew, Malach. 1.11. For this cause. as I said, God had enioyned this long fast in Iudah, to humble the Iew, and ^each him, that he was no more his God than the Gentiles; and imposed silence to all his prophets, dis-inuring his chosen Israel from his wonted call: that so, this people might grow more mild, and apt to herd together with his other flocke, now to bee brought into the same fold, wherein both might ioyntly heare the great Shepheards voice. As God, elsewhere, had threatned, so it came to passe, that visions had ceased in Iudah, before the rising of the Romane Empire: and likely it is that presages by dreames, or like meanes, formerly vsuall among the Ancient heathen, did either altogether determine, or much decrease in many Nations about the same time. For which reasons, the Romans of that Age, being the onely wise men of the world (giuen too much by nature vnto secular policie:) did giue lesse credite to the relations of the Ancient Greekes, or the euents registred by their Auncestours in their owne Countrey. The like incredulitie remaineth in most of vs: but may be easily remoued by discouering the root of it.


CHAP. VI. The reasons of our mistrusting of Antiquities.
1 IT is the common practise of men to measure matters of Ancient times, by obseruation of the times and place wherein they liue: as commonly wee passe our censure on other mens actions and intentions, according to our owne resolutions and secret purposes in like cases. And, besides this generall occasion of mistaking other mens actions, and euents of other times, euery particular sort of men seek to assigne causes of things sutable vnto their proper faculties. The naturall Philosopher striueth to reduce all effects to the matter and forme, or some other sensible quality; the Mathematician, to abstract formes or figures
 or insensible influences; the Politician thinks no alteration in publike States, or priuate mens affaires, f^lles out, but from some politike cause or purpose of man: and whilest in the Annales of Antiquities hee reades of sundrie euents, surpassing the reach or skill of mans inuention, or contrarie to the ordinary course of nature, hee attributes all vnto the simplicitie or credulitie of their Ancestors. Albeit, if we should search the true cause of their credulitie in yeelding assent vnto such strange reports, it will easily confute the error of posteritie: for this credulitie in such particulars, could not haue beene so great in their Ancestors, vnlesse their mindes had beene first inclined to the generall, from the tradition of their Predecessors. But why their forefathers should either haue inuented such strange reports, or be so inclinable to beleeue them: if we search into the depth or first spring of this perswasion, we cannot imagine any other cause, but the reall and sensible experience of such strange euents as they reported to posterity. This did inforce beliefe vpon the first Progenitors of any Nation: and from the fulnesse of this perswasion, or actuall beliefe in them, was bred this credulitie or aptnesse in posteritie, to beleeue the like, which yet in successe of time did by little and little weare out. It is great simplicitie and vncharitable credulitie in vs, to thinke, that either the most Ancient, or middle Ages of the world, were generally so simple, credulous, or apt to beleeue euery thing, as some would make them. It had beene as hard a matter to haue perswaded men of these times, that there were no Gods, no diuine power or prouidence: as it would be to perswade the moderne Atheists, that there is an Almightie power, which created all things; gouerneth and disposeth all things to his glorie. The most politike Atheist now aliue, is as credulous in his kinde, as the simplest creature in the old world was: and will yeeld his assent vnto the Epicures or other brutish Philosophers conclusions, vpon as light reasons, as they did their beliefe vnto any fable concerning the power or prouidence of the Gods: the reason of both their credulities in two contrarie kinds, is the same. The often manifestation of an extraordinary power in battels, or presence in oracles, and sensible documents of reuenge from heauen, made the one prone to intertain any report of the Gods, though neuer so strange: and the want of like sensible signes or docume^ts of the same power in our daies
 (whilest all mens minds are still set on politike meanes and practises for their owne good,) doth make the other so credulous and apt to assent vnto any politike Discourse, and so auerse from beliefe of the Prophets or sacred Writers, which reduce al effects to the first cause. But this we can not doe so immediately as the ancient did: because God vseth his wisedome more in the managing of this politike world, than he did in times of old; and men naturally are lesse apprehensiue of his wisedome, than of his power; so that his present wayes are not so obuious at the first sight vnto sense as sometimes they were, though more conspicuous to sanctified reason now at this day than before, and the manner of his proceeding more apt to confirme true beliefe in such as follow his prescripts, than euer it was. For the same reason were the auncient Israelites more prone to idolatrie, than their successours were, after the erection of the second Temple; or eyther of them were at any time to serue their GOD. For the sensible signes and bewitching inticements of some extraordinarie powers, mistaken for Diuine, were then most common; and Gods wonders and miracles grew more rare, because they swarued from his commaundements. What Iew was there, almost, in the time of the Machabees, but would haue giuen his body for an Holocaustum, rather than sacrifice to any of the heathen Gods? The vndoubted experience of long woe and miserie for their former idolatrie, made them so auerse from this sinne; and the certaine signes of the Messiahs approach, did support them from falling into Atheisme. Such violence as these later willingly suffered at the hands of heathen Princes, rather than they would consent vnto idolatrie, their forefathers in the wildernesse were as readie to offer vnto Aaron, for not furthering them in their idolatrous imaginations So we reade Exod. 32. when God had but for a while withdrawne his extraordinarie presence from them, and Moses his instrument in working myracles, had bin but a short time out of their sight: they complaine he taried long, and gathered themselues together against Aaron, and said vnto him; Vp, and make vs Gods to goe before vs: for of this Moses, the man that brought vs out of the land of Egypt, we know not what is become of him. There was no danger lest they should turne Atheists, this was a sinne vnknowne in that age. And this people had experience enough of extraordinary
 powers in Egypt, which they took for Gods. So far are they from thinking there was no god that guides the world, that they thoght there were many: and if one did withdraw his presence, an other might serue to conduct them: one they must haue, otherwise all help of man was in vaine. As Iannes and Iambres had withstoode Moses miracles with their magick; so had the diuels, their masters, sought to work wonders about the Egyptian idols, which did obstupifie the people. For albeit their wonders were not so great, as gods: yet were they more delightfull to their outward sense; for their seruice for the most part, was sport and play. They were neuer daintie to shew their iugling tricks, for their owne aduantage; alwaies pliable to the humors and lusts of men: whereas the omnipotent maiestie of God would haue all to frame their liues and actions according to his written Laws, which might not be altered or mis-interpreted, at the pleasure of men; nor would he vouchsafe to worke his miracles in all ages, or vnto such as were vnworthie spectators of them. Thus had Satan his oracles and sacrifices oft times better frequented, than God had his; as in these times, such Preachers as will accommodate themselues vnto the peoples humors, are most frequented, but such as hold this sinne as sacrilege and dishonour to their God, are despised and set at naught. And though we may not mitigate Aarons fault, nor diminish these Israelites transgression (as their foolish posterity doth) by transferring the blame of this idolatrous fact vpon the Magicians which followed the host of Israell out of Egypt: yet it is more than probable from the circumstance of the Text (besides the tradition of the ancient Hebrews,) that there was some magicall or daemoniacall skill practised in the sodain moulting of this Egiptia^ god, whence this peoples superstition towards it was increased.Plutarch. de defecta oraculor. pag. 742. edit. H. Steph. The heathen princes of those times were no babies; as wary (we may presume) vpon what occasion to forgoe their children, as misers are to part with mony: and yet these were wrested from them, and their blood shed by their owne hands, to pacifie the rage of powers, then manifestly knowne for supernatural. But when both Gods wonders grew rare, and the diuells trickes waxed scant, either by restraint from aboue, or of their owne free choice, as if by their long continuance they had growne out of request: they see it more boote to draw the politike world vnto Atheisme, which neuer did florish
 vntill the rising of the Roman monarchie. Vnto this maine inconuenience of the late Romans, and other worldly wise mens distrust of wonders past, this second mischiefe did accrew, That sundry Writers of those times, did hold it a part of their profession, to fill their bookes with such stuffe, as they found in ancient stories; as if their Histories or Poems had not been currant, without as many parts or heads of inuention, as others had in former Ages. And this experience of counterfeit wonders, meeting with the want of experience of anie true wonders of that time, did concurre as the forme and priuation for the producing of infidelitie in mens minds already disposed to this euill by secular policie. And these were enough to carry our mindes below the lowest degree of any credulitie, or suspition of truth, in like reports: vnlesse the Scripture did forewarne vs of this guile and policie of Satan, which we may the better preuent, if we diligently obserue, first, the difference of times and places; secondly, how strange fables and lying wonders receiue being from notable and admirable decayed truths, as baser Creatures doe life, from the dissolution of more noble bodies.


CHAP. VII. Of the diuersitie of euents in different Ages.
1 THe diuerse Characters of different times rightly taken, giue vs as easie and perfect a crisis between the fictions of later, and the true annalls of former ages: as out of ordinarie discretion men vsually make between foolish trauellers reports of great wonders in Spaine, or France; and the iudicious records of vncouth sights, and strange euents, in the East or West-Indies. And we haue altogether as litle reason to enuy either the generall truth of strange euents recorded by the auncient, or the prototypos of poeticall inuentions in former times, for the want of like experience in later: as we haue to discredit Benzos martyrs, or other late nauigators obseruations of the East or West Indies,
 because many, who haue trauelled France, Spaine, and Italy, while they make true relatio^s of their trauels, relate no such euent, as the Indies afford many. And yet Gulles, when they flie abroad, will relate (amongst such as know them not) as strange matters of neare adioyning countries, as he that had compassed the vtmost endes of the world. Now it were a great folly to discredit all late nauigators, for the absurditie of some few Gulles: and as great madnesse it were to disparage all ancient stories, for the absurd and preposterous imitation of later writers, against all experience of later times. For diuersitie of times yeelds as great diuersitie of obseruations, as the diuersitie or distance of place; onely this is the difference; Daily obseruation yeeldes experiments of this diuersitie in place, whereas the word of God alone which indures for euer, giueth vs the sure rules and grounds of alterations in the euents of different ages. And yet in many remote places lately made known vnto the inhabitants of Europe, such strange euents as Antiquity hath told vs, were sometimes frequent in these Countries which wee now inhabite, are not at this day altogether vnusuall. And the face of Time is now there much-what such, as the ancient Registers of Times haue pourtrayed vnto vs: as if the affaires and fashion of this visible world, were framed according to some inuisible patterns or supercoelestiall Characters; which varying their aspect in reuolutions of time, did now (by reflecting that force vpon these remote countries, which they did on these neare adioyning in times past) produce the like shape and fashion of things there, as they haue done here. And those places shal, in time, com to the selfe same temper and disposition which we now enioy: and the posterity of such as now liue there, shal hereafter suspect the vndoubted stories of our times concerning their ancestors, as we do many ancient stories of Iewry, Syria, Asia, or our owne countries, for want of like moderne experiments in our land.
2 For the better rectifying of our assent, which must be by the right balancing of credulity and mistrust, it shall not be amisse to consider, that, besides these general diuersities of times and places, particular kingdomes and nations haue their seueral ages proportionable to infancie, youth, virilitie, and old age in men: nor is the period either of the whole age, or the seuerall parts thereof, one and the same in all, but varies in diuerse kingdomes, as the course of
 life, or seuerall ages do in diuerse men. Some kingdoms beare age well vnto a thousand; some to sixe hundred yeares: others breake and decay in halfe that time. Againe, as in the course of mans life diuersity of ages requires diuers manners or conditions: so, in the same people or nation, some euents are vsuall, as best befitting them in that degree of their growth which answeres to youth, or infancie, which seldome or neuer fall out in that part of their age which answeres vnto mature or old age in men, because not conuenient for their constitution then; and yet the want of like experience makes them as distrustfull and incredulous of what formerly had beene, as old men are forgetfull of their own disposition or temper in youth. Generally, when the fulnesse of any nations iniquitie (wherein their decrepit age consisteth,) is come, they grow more and more incredulous: so as they verifie the Latine prouerb concerning the disposition of old men: Nullus senex veneratur Iouem: more true of states;
As they grow old,Their zeale growes cold.
3 As the world was redeemed by Christ, so doe nations begin a new computation of their ages, from their admission to Christianitie. Some were come to youth, or virilitie in their profession, before others were borne in Christ: as Asia and Africa, for the most part, were Christians before Europe. Againe, the ancient inhabitants in some prouinces had beene Christians, long before other people that afterward subdued them and liued in their countries: as the Britaines in this Iland had beene long partakers of Gods mercy in Christ, before the Saxons; and the ancient Gaulles, before the Franks, which afterward seated themselues in their habitations. Generally, miracles were vsuall in the infancie of Christianitie, as we read in Ecclesiasticall stories: nor can it be certainly gathered when they did generally cease. To say they indured no longer than the Pimitiue Church, can giue no vniuersall satisfaction, saue only to such as thinke it enough for all the world to haue the light of the Gospell lockt vp in the Chancell of some one glorious Church: for some Churches were but in the Prime, or Change, when others were full of Christian knowledge. The vse of miracles at the same instant was befitting the one, not the other. For God vsually speakes to new-borne children in
 Christ, by miracles or sensible declarations of his power, mercy, or iustice: as parents deterre their children from euill, in tender yeres, by the rod, or other sensible signes of their displeasure; and assure them to goodnes with apples, or other like visible pledges of their loue: but, when they come to riper yeares, and are capable of discourse, or apprehensiue of wholesome admonitions, they seeke to rule the^ by reason. Proportionally to this course of parents doth God speak to his church: in her infancie, (wheresoeuer planted) by sensible documents of his power; in her maturitie, by the ordinarie preaching of his word, which is more apt to ripen and confirm true Christian faith than any miracles are, so men would submit their reason vnto the rules set down in Scripture, and vnpartially examine all euents of time by them, as elsewhere, God willing, we shall shew.
4 These grounds, well considered, will moue any sober spirit at the least to suspend his assent, and not suffer his mind to be hastily ouerswaied with absolute distrust of all such miracles, as either our writers report to haue bin wrought in this our land at the Saxons first comming hither, or the French Historiographers record in the first conuersion of the Franks, or in the prime of that Church.
5 And the Franks and Saxons before their conuersion to Christianity, were much-what of that temper, in respect of their present posteritie, as Greece was of in Homers, or Italy in the daies of Romulus, in respect of Ciceroes, or Plutarchs time: nor would I denie, but that admonitions by dreames were vsuall amongst them, as they had beene amongst the Easterne nations.
And, without preiudice to many noble Patriots and worthie members of Christ this day liuing in that famous Kingdome of France, I should interpret that dreame of Bassina, Queene vnto Childerick the first,Annonius in vita Childerici, lib. 1. of the present state of France: in which the last part of that threefold vision is more truly verified, than it was euer in the lineall succession of Childerick and Bassina, or any of the Merouingian, or Carlouingian families.
6 The vision was of three sorts of beasts; the first, Lyons and Leopards; the second, Beares and wolues; the third, of Dogs or lesser creatures, biting and deuouring one another. The interpretation which Bassina made of it, was registred certaine hundred yeares ago; That these troupes of vermine or lesser creatures, did signifie a
 people without feare or reuerence of their Princes, so pliable and deuoutly obsequious to follow the Peeres or Potentates of that Nation in their factious quarrels, that they should inuolue themselues in inextricable tumults to their owne destruction.
7 Had this vision beene painted, onely with this general notification; that it was to be emblematically vnderstood of some state in Europe: who is he that can discerne a picture by the knowne partie whom it represents, but could haue knowne as easily, that this was a mappe of those miseries that lately haue befallen France; whose bowels were almost rent and torne, with ciuill and domesticke broyles? God grant her closed wounds fall not to bleed a fresh againe, and that her people be not so eagerly set to bite and teare one another (like dogs or other testie creatures,) vntill all become a prey to Wolues and Beares, or other great rauenous beasts; which seeke not so much to teare or rent in heat of reuenge, as lie in waite continually to deuoure and swallow with vnsatiate greedinesse, the whole bodies of mightie Kingdomes, and to dye her Robes, that rides as Queene of Monsters vpon that many-headed beast, with streames of bloud that issue from the bodies squezed and crushed betweene their violent teeth; yea, euen with the royall bloud of Kings and Princes. Many such examples of admonitions by dreames and other extraordinary signes of future woe or calamities, both foretold and fulfilled many hundred yeares since Bassina and Childerickes daies, I could bring, which might confirme the historicall truth of the like mentioned in Scriptures to any ciuill heathen, as they haue inforced such as we most suspect for Atheists, to acknowledge a diuine power or prouidence in them. And I know not what reason any professor of truth can haue to denie the like presignifications in later times vpon extraordinarie occasions, or in some transmutations of Kingdomes; if he haue so much Religion as not to doubt of Nabuchadnezers vision. But of such signes, (whether good, or ominous) and of their lawfull vse elsewhere. Of the vse of prophecies amongst the heathen and barbarous people, and of that offence which some take at such as seem to giue any credit to them, as if this were against the truth of scriptures, we may perhaps take occasion to speake, when we come to vnfold the diuers kinds of prophecies amongst the Iewes, with their interpretations.
 Thus much may suffice for the remouall of that preiudice, which Atheists, Infidels, and other worldly-wise men haue, of their ancestors credulitie, or fabulositie, which were not incident to primarie antiquitie, but vnto ages in succession nearer to those times wherein wonders had beene plentifull: as commonly the braggadochian humour doth haunt the degenerate race of worthy ancestors, before their posteritie come to be sneaks or peasants, which in the race of priuate persons answeres in proportion to infidelity, the common symptome of decrepit age in kingdomes.


CHAP. VIII. Of the originall and right vse of Poetrie: with the manner of its corruption by later Poets.
1 THe positiue truth, which in the remoual of impedime^ts and offences hath bin made more tha^ probable in the former discourse, may yet be made more euident from more particular obseruations concerning the manner how monstrous fables haue descended from true wonders: which will best appeare by setting downe the original and right vse of Poetry.
2 A Poet being (as his name imports) a maker, according to the Latine prouerb, is not made by art, but framed to this diuine facultie by nature. Not that any amongst the Romans became Poets on a sodaine: but that many very fruitfull wits in all other kinds of learning, could not be forced by any industrie, art, or culture to such a temper, as was befitting this plant of Eden, which groweth not in any moderne breast without more tender care and greater cherishing, than any other slip or branch of the tree of knowledge; and yet when all is done seldome comes to any proofe, vnlesse it borrow grounds from the Ancient: as tender plants can hardly be remoued from a better foile to a worse, without some of the earth wherein they naturally grow. Were arts to begin a-new, Poetrie, which was the first and most common among the Ancient, in all probability, would spring the last, and grow the slowest amongst vs. Their wits of old were not naturally or generally better than ours:
 why then was the way to Pernassus, which vnto vs, vsing all help of art and imitation, is laborious and hard to ascend, so plaine and easie to them, without any guide or helpe; all other artificial learning being then either vnknown, or very scant? Such knowledge or obseruatio^s as they had or cared for, they knew not otherwise how to conuey vnto posterity, than by poetical numbers and resemblances. He is a Poet by nature (saith that excellent Poet and diuine Philosopher) That is apt to be rauished with the true and natiue beautie of such obiects as are represented to his senses, and can expresse his conceit by such pleasant resemblances, as ofte^ as he shal haue occasion to vtter his mind in writing or set speech. This inclination or disposition is as the ground or soile wheron Poetry doth naturally grow, whether in ancient or moderne breasts: but the ancient had this aduantage. The fashion of the world in their times was more apt to rauish their thoughts with admiration: wonderfull euents were then frequent: nor did their freque^cy abate, but rather increase wonderme^t, because their varietie was great, and the apprehension of inuisible or supernatural powers in them vsuall. So that admiration was then inforced vpon men, and the breasts of such as diligently obserued these euents, or were any way disposed by nature to the faculty, were inspired with liuely and sublimate affections, apt to vent themselues in such poetical phrase and resemblances, as we cannot reach vnto, vnlesse we raise our inuention by art and imitation, and stirre vp admiration by meditation and studie. And because neither our senses are moued with any extraordinary effects of Gods power, nor our minds bent to obserue the waies of his wisdome, so as we might be stricken with true admiration of them, we haue fewer good sacred poemes, than of any other kind. But as the Ancients chiefe learning did consist of Poetry: so the excellency of their Poetrie was chiefly seene in the power and natiue subiect of this faculty, that is, in matters of sacred vse or obseruation: whence the title of Vates did descend vnto secular or prophane Poets, which retained the number and manner of speech vsed by the former.
3 That such as were Vates indeed, were raught to this sublimity of speech by admiration of extraordinary euents, may be confirmed by the historicall narrations of the sacred story: wherin poeticall hymns or songs are the vsual consequents of strange or wonderful euents. As, Iud. 5. after the victory gotten ouer Sisera, Then sang


 Deborah, and Barach the son of Abinoam, the same day saying; Praise ye the Lord, etc. So likewise Hannah, after the Lord had heard her prayer, and taken away her barrennesse, burst out into the like Poeticall hymne, 1. Sam. 2. So did the blessed Virgin vpon her cosen Elizabeths salutation, and Iohn Baptist springing in her wombe, take vp her song, Luke. 1.46. My soule doth magnifie the Lord, etc. So doth Zacharie, Iohn Baptists father, take vp his prophecie, Luk. 1.68. and Simeon. Luke. 2.28. So likewise after the manifestation of Gods wonders in the red Sea, all his people (as if they had beene baptised in a sacred Helicon) presently turned Poets, Exod. 15.1. And againe, Numb. 21. after they had returned to Beer, the well which Moses had opened out of the hard rocke with his rod, Israel (as if they had washed their mouthes in Hippocrene) had their voyces tuned to an high straine of Poetrie: Then Israel sang this song: rise vp, well, sing ye vnto it, the Princes digged this well, the Captaines of the people digged it, euen with their staues.
4 That the frequent vse of Poetrie among the ancient heathen, did arise from like occasions, may be gathered from Strabo: who from antiquitie,Strabo. init. lib. 1 better knowne to him than vs, auoucheth it as vnquestionable, that all other set speech, whether historicall or rhetoricall, was but the progenie of Poetrie, falling in later times from its wonted state and dignitie; wheras the Ancients knew no other branch of artificial or set speech, but only Poetrie. Albeit to speake properly, it was (in respect of the efficient or impulsiue causes) rather super artificiall, than naturall or artificiall; and Rhetorick and Historie only artificiall. This opinion will not seeme strange, if we consider, that the wiser sort in those times did commend such matters only to writing, as might inflame posteritie with deuotion and loue of vertue. For Poetrie, as the same Author tels vs, was accounted by Antiquitie, prima quaedam Philosophia, a kind of sacred morall Philosophie, appropriated, as it seemes, at the first to the relation or representation of supernaturall euents or diuine matters only: of which the most ancient had best experience, and were impelled to communicate them to posteritie, eleuated (as is obserued before) by the excellency of the obiect to this celestiall kind of speech, which is most apt to rauish yonger wits, as it selfe was bred of admiration. This vse of Poetrie appeares in some fragments of most ancient Poets, in their kind proportionable to the booke of
 Psalmes, of Iob, and the songs of Moses, the only patternes of true Poesie: whose subiects, vsually, are the wonderfull works of God manifested vnto me^. Some degenerate footsteps of these holy men the heathen, about Homers time, did obserue: vsing their Poets and Musicians for planting modestie and chastitie amongst other vertues in their auditors. So Agamemnon left the musicall Poet as Gardian to Clytemnestra, who continued chaste and loyall vntill Aegistus got the Poet conueyed into an vninhabited Iland.(...). For this reason was PoetrieStrabo ibid. taught children first throughout the Grecian Cities, as Moses had commaunded the Israelites to teach their children his diuine Poeme, Deut. 31.19. and 32.46. And they much wrong that diuinePlat. lib. 10. de Repub. Philosopher,Hom. odys that think he was any farther an enemie vnto the sacred facultie, than only to seek the reformation of it by reducing it to its first naturall vse; which was not meere delight, as Eratosthenes dreamed, rightly taxed by Strabo for this error. That might perhaps be true of the Comicall Latine Poets;
Poeta quum primum animum ad scribendum appulit,Id sibi negoti credidit solum dari,Populo vt placerent quas fecisset fabulas.When first the Poet bent his wits to write,The onely marke he aym'd at, was delite.
Which not withstanding had neither beene the onely, nor chiefe vse; no end at al, but rather an adiunct of Poetrie amongst the Ancient: by the wiser and better sort of whom nothing was apprehended, at least approued as truly delightfull, which was not also honest and of profitable vse for bettering life and manners. The law of nature being then lesse defaced: they could read it without spelling, comprehend al the three elements of goodnesse, iointly vnder one entire conceit, as we do the product of diuers letters or syllables in one word, without examination of their seueral value apart. But when the vnion of this trinity wherin the nature of complet and perfect goodnes co^sist, was once dissolued in mens harts, and delight had found a peculiar issue without mixture of honesty or vtility: the desire of becomming popular Poets, did breed the bane of true Poesy, and those sacred numbers, which had bin as amulets against vice,
 became incentiues vnto lust. Or if we would but search the natiue vse of poetrie by that end which men, not led awry by hopes of applause, or gaine, or other externall respects, but directed rather by the internall impulsion of this facultie and secret working of their soules, do aime at: it principally serues for venting extraordinarie affections. No man almost so dul, but will be poetically affected in the subiect of his strongest passions. As we see by experience, that where the occasio^s either of ioy for the fortunate valour, or sorrow for the mishaps of their countrimen, or alliance, are most rife, this disposition is both most pregnant and most common. And as speech or articulation of voices in generall, was giuen to man for communicating his conceits or meaning vnto others: so Poetrie, the excelle^cy of speech, serues for the more liuely expressing of his choicer conceits, for beautifying his darling thoughts or fancies, which almost disdain to go abroad in other than this exactly proportioned attire, the soules wooing suits (if I may so speak) wherby she wins others to sympathize with her in abu^dance of griefe, or to co^sent with her in excessiue ioy, or finally to settle their admiratio^ or dislike where she doth hers. And the more strange or wonderful the matter conceiued, or to be represented, is, the more pleasant and admirable will the true and natural representation of it be: and the more he that conceiues it, is rauished with delight of its beauty or goodnes; the more will he long to communicate his conceit and liking of it to others. Whence, such as had seen the wonders of God and had bin fed with his hidden Mannah,Psal. 34.8. sought by their liuely and heartie representations to inuite others, as the Psalmist doth, to tast and see the goodnesse of the Lord, as birds and beasts, when they haue found pleasant food, call (on their fashion) vnto others of the same kind, to be partakers with the^ in their ioy: vntill Satan, who hunts after the life of man, as man doth after the life of birds, did inuent his counterfaite cals to allure our soules into his snare. For, when men had once taken a delight in the naturall representation of euents, delightfull in themselues: he stirred vp others to inuent the like, albeit there were no reall truth or stability in the things represented, and the manner of representation vsually so light and affected, as could argue no credence giuen by the Authors to their owne report, but rather a desire to please such as had neuer set their minds to any inquisition of solid truth, whose vnsetled
 fancies cannot choose but fall in loue with as many faire pictures of others pleasant imaginations as are presented to them. For, as to view the connexion of reall causes with their effects (most of all, if both bee rare, or the concurrents of circumstances vnusuall) doth much affect the iudicious minde or vnderstanding: so the quaint or curious contriuance of imaginarie rarities, set forth in splendent artificiall colours, doth captiuate the fancies of such as are not established in the loue of truth. But (as the Orator said of such as applauded the Tragedie of Pylades and Orestes) how would such mens soules be rauished, could they vpon sure grounds bee perswaded, that these stories were true, albeit deuoid of artificiall colours, or poeticall contriuances, neuer vsed by sacred Antiquitie? in whose expression of wonders, the phrase is vsually most poeticall, as naturally it will alwaies, where the minde is much affected; their inuention lesse artificiall or affected, than our historicall narrations of moderne affaires; the character of their stile (as was intimated before) doth argue that they sought only to set downe the true proportion of matters seene and heard, with such resemblances as were most incident to their kinde of life. And from the efficacie of such extraordinarie effects vpon their soules, is it, that the Prophets so often expresse the same thinges in diuers wordes, as if all they could say, could not equalize the sensible experiments, which did moue their hearts and fancies (as the musitians handes or breath doth his instruments) to sound out such patheticall Ditties. Nor had their Ditties any greater disproportion with their subiect, than our Songs of famous victories, haue with theirs; or other passionate Ditties, with their composers affections: albeit hee that hath experience of loue, or abundant griefe or ioy, will speake in an other dialect, than ordinarily hee vseth, without any touch of affectation.
5 Hence we may clearly discerne, whilest wonders decaied, and men sought as great delight in fained, as their forefathers had done in true representations: how the disproportion betwixt representations, and the reall euents, or experiments of the times, wherein the later Poets liued, became so monstrous and prodigious. This fell out iust so, as if the armorours of this age should not obserue the stature of men now liuing, but fashion their armour by old Guy of Warwicks harnes: or our painters, not looke
 vpon the bodies of moderne English-men, but take their proportions from some ancient pictures, which had beene truly taken about some thousand yeares agoe, in some other Countrie, that had yeelded men of more ample stature in that age, than this land of ours did in any. Such an error as this, which we haue mentioned in Poetrie, would quickly haue beene reformed in any other facultie that had concerned mens temporall profit or commodities, or whereof others had been as competent iudges as the professors: for so, when they had begunne to wander, or digresse a litle from their right end, they should presently haue beene called to this accompt; quid adrem? your worke may be pretie, but not to our purpose. But when such admirable euents, as were well worth Poeticall expression, decreased, and worldly cares did multiply, as men increased: the diuine art of Poetrie, which admits not many competent iudges in any age, was counted no better then a matter of meere delight, or recreation; and for this reason the prodigious representations of it, so monstrously disproportionable to the truth represented (because oft times more pleasant to men wearied with other studies or imploiments, than the bare narration of the truth) were neuer reformed. And so at length, that audacious licentiousnesse of fictions, for mouing delight, did in the iudgement of posteritie disparage the very patterns or prototypos of poeticall representations, whereunto later Poems had beene framed. As many tall fellowes in this present age, if they should see the true image or picture of some ancient Giants, would sweare that the painter had plaied the Poet: were it not that the dead bodies or limmes of some ancient people, lately digged out of the ground, did by their vnusuall bignesse teach vs to estimate (as we say) expede Herculem, how great others might haue been, whose big limmes and bones haue not come vnto this ages sight.
6 But most of these strange euents were such, as did continue no longer than while they were a doing, wherefore we must seeke out the true proportion of these heauenly bodies, by their shadowes, represented in the later prophane Poets. The original and manner of whose digression from the patterns of the ancient diuine Poets, or rather from diuine truth, the patterne of ancient poetrie it selfe, was partly as you haue heard, partly as followeth.
7 Gods wonderfull works haue been more plenteous in Asia,
 than in other parts of the world; more plentifull in Iudea, and the Regions about it, than in other parts of Asia; most plentifull in them, about the Israelites deliuerance out of Aegypt. In that time and in the ages before, or immediately succeeding it, artificiall learning was very scant; and characters, either not inuented, or their vse very rare in most places. The fresh memorie of such wonders presupposed; the liuely image either of such licentiousnes in coining fables, or confounding true histories with the mixture of false and vnnaturall circumstances, as these wants euery where in all time naturally breed, we may clearely behold in the moderne Turkes: who are as abundant in prodigious fables, as defectiue in good learning; and for want of printing, or neglect of writing, haue no perfect character of the worlds fashion in times past, nor any distinct order of former euents.Nullam habent Turcae temporum neque atatum rationem, mireque historias omnes miscent and confundunt: cum ijs in mentem veniet, non verebuntur affirmare Regis Salomonis magistra^ curiae fuisse lobum, cius exercitus praefectum Alexandrum Magnum, aut hijs etiam absurdiora. Busbequius, Epist. 1. It is but a pettie soloecisme among them, to affirme that Iob the Hussite was chiefe Iustice; and Alexander the Great, Lieutenant generall vnto King Salomon.
8 The like confusion of times and places might be more incident vnto the Asiatike Nations, before Alexanders time, because their ancestors had beene acquainted with more strange euents, latelier forepast than the moderne Turkes are. Now alwaies the more strange the euents be, the more ready they be to mount vppon the wings of fame; and once so mounted, the more apt to receiue increase in euery circumstance, and varie their shape, whilest they flie only from mouth to mouth in the open aire, not fashioned or limited at their first birth, by some visible character, or permanent stamp set vpon them.
9 From this vicinitie of true wonders in Iurie, or thereabouts, were the Medes, Persians, and Syrians, so much adicted to fabulous narrations, that their delight in such traditions did make their later writers ambitious in the skill of coining wonders; as Strabo tels vs in his 11. Booke. And Greece, as it receiued artificial learning first from Asia, so did it drinke in this humour with it. For the traditions of Gods miracles in Iurie, and the regions about it, hauing beene far spred, when Greece began first to tattle in artificiall learning, the Grecians (alwaies children in true antiquitie, as the Aegyptian Priest told one of their Philosophers) were apt to counterfait the forme of ancient truths, and misapply it to vnseemly
 matters, or foolish purposes; as children will bee doing that in homlier stuffe, which they see their elders doe in better. Finally, the same humour which yet raignes amongst men, might possesse most of the Heathen. There is no famous euent that falls out, (though it be but a notable iest) but in a short time, is ascribed to a great many more, than haue any affinitie with it. As many of Diogen*s conceipts haue beene fathered vpon Tarleton: and what the Christians say of S. George, the Turkes ascribe to Chederley. If it be any storie concerning way-faring men; euery Hostler, Tapster, or Chamberlaine, will tell you that it fell out in their Towne, or in the Countrie thereabouts. And though you heare it in twentie seuerall places, yet shall you haue alwaies some new tricks of addition put vpon it. In like manner did the reports of sundry euents, which either fell out, only in Iurie or vpon occasion of Gods people, flie about the world; sometime with cut and mangled, but most vsually with enlarged, artificiall wings, as if the same had been acted euery where, or the like inuented vpon euery occasion.


CHAP. IX. Of some particular fables resembling some true stories of the Bible.
1 TO draw some instances from the first fountaine, the Well of Beer,Numb. 21. mentioned before, did prefigure Christ, the rocke and fountaine, whence issue streames of waters vnto eternall life. And that sacred Poeticall spirit, which now possessed them, was as a praeludium to those hymnes and songs vttered by Christs Apostles, and his Disciples, when the spirit of God was powred vpon them, after Christs glorification. Neighbour-countries, amongst whom the fame of this euent was spred, might easily hence take occasion to ascribe the effect vnto the Well. And hence had Greece her Helicon, and others (by her) reputed sacred Wells, whose waters drunke did make men Poets on a sodaine; besides, that the opportunitie of such places, as Helicon and Pernassus were, did dispose mens mindes vnto this facultie. The Daemoniacall spirits, which for this reason would frequent the same, might inspire such with poeticall furie as did obserue their
 rites and ceremonies; counterfeiting the spirit of Diuine Prophecies, as they had done Gods voice in Oracles. Who can doubt if hee compare both stories, but that the fable of Hyppocrene or Aganippe in Boaetia, so called because digged by an horses foote, as Poets faigne, did take beginning from the storie of this sacred well which Moses digged with his rod: and as the Israelites haue a tradition, the Princes afterwards, with their staues? And the Phaenicians which followed Cadmus into Europe, are made such wanderers by the Poets, as the Israelites were in the wildernesse: and Cadmus himselfe, the founder of Hippocrene or Aganippe, amongst other of his inuentions is said to haue beene the first that taught Greece the vse of letters, or that wrote Histories in prose; and in one word, another Moses. The firie Serpents, which stung the Israelites murmuring for want of water,Numb. 21. v. 5. might grow in short time to be dragons; and hence, as it is most likely,Ouid Met. l. 3. fab. 2. Chap. 10. v. 13. are Cadmus companions said to bee slaine by a dragon, whilest they sought for water. The Sunne, as we read in the storie of Ioshuah, at Ioshuah his prayer once stood still in the vale of Gibeon. The occasion is in the same place specifyed; That Iosuah might haue a day of the Ammorites: such a day as was neuer before it, nor shal be after it. This strange miraculous euent, the heathen people of those times had noted, and deliuered it by tradition vnto their posteritie; who, after the manner of this world, sought to assigne some causes of it. The Poets in ages following, ascribe it (with some additions) vnto that vnnaturall prodigious murther, which Atreus had committed; and for ought we know, besids the reasons specified in sacred writ, God might vse this, partly as a meanes, to make Greece and other countries, that should heare of Atreus bloudie facte, stand amazed at such foule impietie, whereat the heauens did blush, and the sunne stood still. The times of Atreus his fact, and Iosuah his victorie, come neere to one point: if Statius the Poet be not farre out in his Chronologie. For he tels vs, that this horrible fact of Atreus was committed, about the time of the Thebane warre; for which reason the Mycenae amongst other good neighbours, did not aide King Adrastus, and his Argiues against the Thebanes.


Milite vicinae nullo iuuere Mycenae.


Funereae dum namque dapes, medijque recursus,


Solis; et hinc alij miscebant proelia fratres.


Mycene their neighbours onely send no ayde,
Their tragicke cheare had bred such bloudie broyles,
Whose direfull sight the blushing Sunne had staid,
Whilest fierce reuenge in heart of brothers boiles.

2 And some Chronologers, whose skil in this facultie, and other good literature, I especially reuerence, refer the siege of Troy to the time of Iudges, or age following Ioshuah; whereas the Thebane warre was in the age before: for Tydeus, father vnto Diomedes (who was one of the greatest sticklers against Troy) was one of the greatest Chieftaines in the Thebane warre.
3 From the fore-mentioned humour of seeking to play the Poets or Painters in adorning true stories; or of vaine curiositie in inuenting the like: wee may easily coniecture, what varietie of reports would in that temper of the world bee extant, of Samsons consecrated haire, wherein his inconquerable strength, as the sacred storie tels vs, did consist: Let Dalilah, Samsons wife, be but mistaken for his daughter,Iud. 16. v. 17.18 (as few reports of forraine or forepast matters, but varie as much in some circumstance or other) and for Samson and Dalilah you haue the famous Legend Nisus and Sylla. This mistake was very easie. For such as had heard of Dalilahs treacherie, without any particular certaintie of that circumstance, whether she were his daughter or wife, might iustly suspect that she was his daughter, one that wanted an husband, doting vpon some forrainer, whom she hoped to winne vnto her loue by this practise. Or perhaps Sylla had betrayed her father Nisus, vpon hope of satisfying her lust; and Ouid (with other Poets) hauing heard of like practize, did Stage-play-like put Samsons haire vpon Nisus his head; as vsually the Graecian Poets haue borrowed their best Stage-attire from the glorious wardrope of Israel. Other circumstances of this storie are verie like; saue onely that Ouid faines Nisus his vnuanquishable fortune, to haue beene seated in one haire,Ouid metamorp. l. 8. fab. 1 which was of the colour of his costly robes.

--Cai splendidus astro

Inter honoratos medio de vertice canos


Crinis inhaerebat, magni fiducia regni.

One skarlet bright, amids the ranks of white and reuerend haires,
He had, wheron did hang the hope, and hap of his affaires.


But Samsons strength was in his lockes, as he told Dalilah;Iudg. 17. v. 17. There neuer came rasor vpon my head, for I am a Nazarite vnto God from my mothers wombe: therefore if I be shauen, my strength will goe from mee, and I shalbe weake, and be like all other men. For the meanes and opportunities whereby Dalilah did, and Sylla is fained to haue compassed her intended treason, they are the very same. Dalilah, as it is said, made Samson sleepe vpon her knee, and shee called a man, and made him to shaue the seauen lockes of his head;Vers. 19. and so Ouid brings in Sylla, taking the like opportunitie of her fathers sleepe;
Prima quies aderat, qua curis fessa diurnisPectora somnus habet, thalamos taciturna paternosIntrat, and (heu facinus) fatali nata parentemCrine suum spoliat. --First sleep was come, and wearie limbs were at their sweet reposeWhen she vnto her fathers bed, in sliest silence goes:But let no silence cloake her shame, so detestable theft,Her father of his fatall haire the daughter hath bereft.
4 Not much greater varietie is there betweene the storie of Lots wifes transformation into a pillar of salte,Ouid Met. l. 6. fab. 3. and Niobes into a stone. The Poets faine that Niobe was transformed, vpon her griefe for death of her children: and the Iewes haue a Tradition, that Lots wife was ouertaken with that hydeous showre of fire and brimstone, whilest she stayed behind her husband to see what would become of her friends, and her kinsfolke, which remained in Sodom. And it is probable out of that Chapter, that Lots sonne in Law remained in Sodom, and likely their wiues too,Gen. 19. v. 14. Lots other daughters. For so it is said (not without Emphasis in the Original) Take thy wife and thy two daughters, which are found,Vers. 15. or (as the Chaldies paraphrase) which are found faithfull with thee, (that is, which are not corrupt by conuersing with others abroad) least thou be destroyed with others in the punishment of this citie. Whether this Tradition of the Iewes bee true or no, it makes little for my present purpose. Verie ancient it is, and whether true or false, might giue occasion to the former fable, as other stories of the Bible do, sometimes the rather, because the sence is mistaken. As the common
 opinion is, that Lots wife was transformed into a pillar of Salt, when as no circumstance of the text doth enforce so much, but rather leaues vs free, to thinke, what is more probable; that fearefull showers of Gods vengeance, wherewith Sodom was destroied, were heaped vpon her, so that her bodie was wrapt vp in that congealed matter, which was perhaps in forme like to some thunderstone, or the like, from which it could not be discerned, being as it were canded in it.
5 If such a transformation of Lots wife seeme strange; what wil the Atheist say vnto the destruction of Sodom,Haud procul inde campi, quos ferunt olim vberes magnisque vrbivus habitatos, fulminum iactu arsisse, and manere vestigia, terramque specie torridam vim frugiferam perd^disse; nam cuncta sponte ed^ta, aut manu sata, siue verba tenus aut s^ore, s^u s^litam in speciem adoleuere, atra, et inania velut in cinerem vanescunt. Ego sicut Indaicas quendam vrbes igne coelesti flagrasse concesserim, ita halitu lacus inficiterram, corrumpi superfulum spiritum, eoque faetus segetum and autumni p^trescere ^^or, sole, coeloque iuxta graui. Cornelius Tacitus in V^^pasi^num sua^um historiarum ab exessu N^^on^^ l b. 5. Strabo. l 16. and the fiue cities? or if this seeme more strange and incredulous, because their destruction vanisheth whilest they perished; What can he say to the salt sea? Doubtlesse, vnlesse God had left this as a lasting monument to confute the incredulitie of Philosophers, by an ocular and sensible demonstration, they would haue denyed the truth of this effect, as wel as they doubt of the cause, which the Scriptures assigne of it. Is the violence of that storme, which destroyed the fiue Cities, strange, and aboue the force of nature? so is the qualitie of that sea, and the soile about it, contrarie to the nature of all other seas, or in-land lakes. And let the most curious Philosopher in the world giue any naturall cause of it, and the disproportion betweene the cause, and the knowne effect, will be more prodigious in nature, than the cause, which Moses giues of it, is strange: some cause by their confession it must haue; and though the storme were raised by a supernaturall power, yet admitting the violence of it, to be such as the Sciptures tels vs, and the fall of so much durable matter, no cause can be conceiued, so probable in nature, as Moses giues; as out of the grounds of Philosophie, and diuerse experiments in nature, I could easily proue. But Strabo that great Philosopher, and no credulous antiquarie, hath cased mee of this labour. For albeit he held the Syrians for a fabulous people: yet the euident markes of Gods wrath, that had bin kindled in that place, (as concauities made by fire, distillation of pitch out of the seared rocks the noysome smell of the waters there abouts, with the reliques and ruines of auncient habitations,) made the Tradition of neighbour inhabitants seeme probable vnto him; That there had beene thirteene populous Cities in that soile, of which Sodome was the chiefe, whose circumference then remaining, was
 sixtie furlongs. But (as the custome is of secular Philosophers) he seekes to ascribe the cause of this desolation rather vnto Earth than Heauen, and thinkes the Lake was made by an Earthquake, which had caused the bursting out of hot waters, whose course was vpon Sulphure and Brimstone. And it is not vnlikely, that the earth did tremble, whilest the heauens did so terribly frowne, and the Almightie gaue his fearefull voice from out the clouds: and once hauing opened her mouth to swallow vp those wicked inhabitants, the exhalations of whose sinnes had bred these stormes, became afterwards a Panne or Receptacle of moysture, infecting all the waters which fell into it, with the loathsome qualities of those dregges of Gods wrath, which had first setled in it; as bad humors, when they settle in any part, plant (as it were) a new nature in the same, and turne all nutriment into their substance.


CHAP. X. Of Noahs and Deucalions Floud, with other Miscellane obseruations.
1 NOt any sonne so like his naturall father, as Deucalions Floud is like Noahs. Euery Schoole-boy, from the similitude of their substance, at the first sight can discerne the one to be the bastard brood of the other; albeit Ouid, from whom wee haue the picture of the one, hath left out, and added, diuerse circumstances at his pleasure; which assures me, that he had neuer read the sacred Storie (as some thinke he did) but tooke vp the confused tradition of it, which had passed through many hands before his time: For other Poets which had come toPlut. lib. Vira animantium plu^ radij habeant, terrestriane an aquatica. (...). Plutarchs reading, though not to ours, make mention of Deucalions Arke, his Doues returning to him againe before the waters fall, his prognostication of the waters decrease, by her perpetuall absence at her last setting out. This tradition was so commonly receiued in Greece, that some Etymologists thinke the famous hill Pernassus did take its name from the Arkes aboade vpon it, as if it had first been
 called Larnassus.(...) which word Plutarch vseth in that place. These are sure testimonies that such a floud had beene: but that in Deucalions time any such had beene, or that the Arke did stay in Greece, hath no shew of truth; Saint Augustine hath shewed the contrarie De ciuit. Dei, Lib. 18. cap. 10.
2 If Trogus Pompeius Works had come entire into our hands, or had they light vpon a more skilfull and sincere Anatomist than Iustin, we should haue found more euident prints of the storie of Noahs Floud, in that controuersie, betweene the Scythians and Egyptians; whether were the most auncient people? As Iustin relates it,Lib. 2. thus it was.
3 The Egyptians thought the heauens ouer them had beene in loue with their soyle, and that from the conjunction of the ones mildnesse with the others fertilitie, the first people of the world had beene brought forth in Egypt. The Scythians alledged, it was most probable, that their countrey was first inhabited, because if fire had shut vp the wombe of their mother earth, this element did forsake theirs first, as being the coldest countrey: or if water had couered the face of nature, and made it vnapt for conception by too much moisture, this veile was first put off in Scythia, as being the highest part of the inhabited land. Vnto these reasons of the Scythians the Egyptians yeelded, as Iustin reports. Both of them erred in the manner of mans Propagation; both againe held a generall truth, in thinking mankind had some late Propagation, and that Kingdomes had not beene so frequented with people in former generations, as now they were. The Scythians agreed herein with Scripture, That the higher parts of the World, which they inhabited, or parts neere vnto them, were first dried vp from the waters; for in the mountaines of Armenia the Arke stayed, and Noah went first on land in that countrey. The storie of whose preseruation in this Deluge, and the propagation of mankind from him, and his children, not being expressely recorded to the Scythians, they imagine that men had growne like Mushromes after raine, because they had beene so few, and now were come vnto such great multitudes. Nor did Noah onely goe first on land in Armenia, but his posteritie had their habitation in the mountainous Countries, vntill their multitude caused them to seeke more roome; as we may gather Gen. 11: vers. 1. and 2. Then the whole earth was of one Language, and one
 Speech; and as they went from the East (that is,Tres vero Noae filij Semas, Iaphetus, and Chamas cen^u^ annis ante diluvium nati, pr^mi relictis montibus planic^e^ habitare coeperunt, and aliis recenti etia^ tum cladis memoria pauid^s nec au^ d^ntibus a cc siore loco descendere idem faciendi autores and exemptum fuc^e. Joseph. l^^. 5. Ant. q. cap. 5. from Armenia) they found a Plaine in the Land of Shinar, and there they abode. Some broken traditions of this Truth might cause the auncient Scythians to stand vpon their pantofles, and plead prioritie of nature from superioritie of place. And this conceit of antiquitie being propagated to posteritie, they seeke to fortifie their title to it (called in question) by such reasons as were alledged before. A^d euen in these their reasons, though false in particular, there appeares a certaine generall glimpse of the diuine Truth: For in that they take it as graunted; that either fire or water had stopped the course of nature, this is an infallible argument, that they had heard of the dominion allotted by fate to those two elements ouer other bodies; albeit they did not rightly apprehend the manner of the worlds destruction by them, nor whethers course was first passed. This tradition of the Worlds destruction by fire and water, and the distinction of their courses (though not so plainely reuealed in the old Testament) had come more distinctly to Ouids hand; who bringeth in Iupiter,Met. 1.1. ^ab. 9. Iomque erat in totas sparsurus fulmina terras sed timuit ne sorte sacer tot ab ignibus aether concip^ret flammas totu^sque ardesceret axis. resoluing to plague the old World rather by water than fire, because it was to haue a fatall dissolution by fire:
Esse quoque in fatis reminiscitur affore tempusQuo mare, quo tellus, correptaque regia coeliArdeat, and mundi, moles operosa laboret;He cals to mind the day would come (for Fates had set the same)When sea and land, heauens, elements, and all this mundane FrameShould sweat with heat, and melt as wax before the fearefull flame.
4 The Egyptians likewise had many reasons why they might justly thinke themselues a very auncient people, and these not dissonant vnto Scripture; which witnesseth Egypt to haue beene a mightie Kingdome, euery way better replenished than any other Countrey that we can read of in times so auncient; first possest by Mizraim, the sonne of Cham, by whose name it is continually called by all the sacred Writers, as well the Prophets and late Historiographers, as by Moses; and in the Easterne Languages beares that name vntill this day, asCom. in Gen. cap 10. v 6. Vid. and Iosephu^, lib. 1. Antiq c. 7. Mercerus tels vs. This Mizraim also did propagate sundrie particular Nations in short time, as wee finde registred Gen. 10. vers. 13, 14. All which
 might make for the Egyptians conceit of their antiquitie. And albeit the old Canaanites were as auncient and populous a Nation (though not so vnited in a Kingdome) as the Egyptians; yet, before these altercations arose, or (at least) before any other people tooke notice of them, their posteritie was rooted out by the Israelites, who though they came in the others place, yet came not into competition with the Egyptians for antiquitie in the judgement of any Heathen Writer; because the Israelit^s were no people, till the time that Egypt was one of the mightiest Nations vpon earth; and the Heathen being ignorant (as making little reckoning of their originall) tooke them for a Colonie of the Egyptians, as appeares by Strabo,Lib. 16. who in recompence of this his error hath elsewhere acquainted vs, with another experiment, which may confirme the antiquitie of Moses storie concerning Sems posteritie.
Moses tels vs Gen. 10. vers. 22. that Aram, sonne to Shem, and brother to Ashur, had Vz, and Chul, and Mash vnto his sonnes. The Aramites no question had their name and propagation from Aram. Some thinke the Arabians, or other Countries about Idumaea, or both, had their originall from Vz: Others, that the Massiani in Arabia were so called of Mash: Iosephus, that the Armenians were the progenie of Chul. Consonant to all these opinions isSed Scripturam m^tare cum sit ve^ella, non e^t necesse; culpanda potias nominis mutatio quae frequen^ est and vsi^ata omnibus gentib^s; and videntur quid im^^terarum mutationibus ^^m^raru^ eam essi^^re. Optime omnium existimo Possidoni^m, hic quoque a genti^m cognatione and communitate interpretationem vocum ducere. Nam Armeniorum, Syrorum, and Arabum, multu^ cognationis pr^e se ferunt nationes, sermone, vita, corporum forma, maxime vb^ degunt in vi^i^ia. Idque ostendit Mesopotamia ex tribus his constata populis: Maxime enim in his simi^^tudo est ill istri^: quod si qua est varietas pro eo atque aliae partes alijs magis ad septentrione^, aut merid^e vergunt, ^^t ^^medio sunt sitae: nihilominus tamen communis affectio obtinet. Assyrij quoque Ariani and Armenij nter se atque isterum s^nt a^^^miles. Est que colligendum harum gentiu^ nomina esse affinia: Qui enim a nobis Syri, ij ab ipsis Syris Ar^m^i d^c^^tur, bisque cou^^n^unt Armenij and Arabes, and Erembi, Strab. l. 1. This opinion of Strabo confirmes ^^se^hus obseruation concerning the changing of nations names, lib. 1. Antiq. c. 6. Porro gentium quaedam adhuc seruant deriuatam a suis co^ditoribus appellatione^, quaeda^ etia^ muta^erunt, nonnullae in familiarem acco^^: and notiorem vo^em sunt verse, Graecis potissimum talis nomenclaturae autoribus. Hi enim posterioribus saeculis ^^ter^m lo^^^um ^loriam sibi vsurpanerunt, gentes nominibus sibi notis insigninut, dumque tanquam ad suum ius ^^t^^erent, ^^^es ^^^unc prop^io^ in illas i^^chunt. Strabo his obseruation of these people; whom the Grecians call Syrians, the Syrians themselues call Aramaeans; and his collection is, That the Armenians, and the Erembi (that is, the auncient Arabians) haue taken their denomination from the same name, a little varied (as the custome is) by continuance of time, and varietie of Dialect. That these three Nations did all proceed from one stocke, he gathers from the similitudes and perfect resemblances of their nature, customes, and manner of life.
5. But for the first habitation or antiquitie of Armenia or Scythia it skils not much. That mankind had a new propagation about the time assigned by Moses of the vniuersall Floud, and that the Nations were propagated from those Regions, which Moses tels vs were allotted to the sonnes of Noah, and inhabited by his nephewes, is apparant, from the suddaine encrease of Arts and Sciences: Which were in a good measure perfect in those Countries, in times as ancient as any prophane Historie can point vnto; yet seated onely in a narrow roome, whence they were deriued, as from a Centre, to more remote parts of the world. The ripenesse of Literature, ciuile discipline, and inuentions, amongst the Assyrians, Chaldaeans, and Egyptians, before the like did so much as bud forth in Greece, Italie, or other Countries, farre distant from the former, doth argue, that these were the stocke, and others but slippes or branches transplanted thence. Againe, the State and Pompe of these Easterne Countries, before Greece, or Italie, or any other Westerne People, did grow into the fashion of a Kingdome or ciuile Nation, demonstrates vnto vs, That the inhabitants of those places were the heires of the world, who had the Court, Kingdome, and Metropolis amongst them, and other Nations but as Colonies of men of meaner sort, not so neere allied vnto the first borne; or (as it were) of a yonger house, and farre ruder education. And it is most likely, or rather euident, that the sonnes of Iaphet did first inhabite Scythia, or the Northerne parts of Asia minor, and other parts neere adjoyning, before they came into Greece, or other Countries of Europe. And these were the sonnes of Noahs meanest posteritie, vntill the fulnesse of Sem and Chams iniquitie were accomplished. For as Gods promise vnto Abraham was not accomplished in his Person, but in his Posteritie, many generations after his death; so neither did his curse vpon Cham take place, till the same time. The execution of Gods curse vpon the one, was the collation of his blessing vpon the other: but the enlarging of Iaphets race came long after both. Thus the Egyptians were the first great Princes; the Assyrians, Medes, and Persians the next; the Grecians and Romanes after them; and in later times the race of Ismael hath beene the mightie People: for of him the Saracens lineally descend, and the Turkes, by adoption heires of the same promise. So truly doth the Scripture
 tell vs the truth of all antiquitie,Vid. Fagium in cap. 16 Genes. and Paraeum, ibid. and the true causes of Nations encrease; but of this elsewhere. To conclude this storie of Noah.
6 The former argument drawen from the suddaine increase and propagation of men, the scarcitie of Artes, ciuil discipline and inuentions, with other experiments better knowne to them than vs, enforced certaine of the ancient Philosophers to hold a perpetuall vicissitude, some of generall, some of particular deluges, whereby the workes of antiquitie, once come to perfection, had bin, and continually should be defaced; either generally throughout the world, or in sundrie countries according to the extent of the inundation. This opinion might seeme more safe, because not easie to be disproued in that old world, in which the wisest liuing (besides the people of God) had no distinct knowledge of any thing, that had happened an hundred yeere before his owne birth; much lesse what mutations should follow after his death: but vnto vs their Prognostication is like vnto some late Prophecies of doomes-day, confuted by a world of witnesses, euen by the continuance of euery thing after that time, which, by their prophecies, should haue imposed a fatall end to all things. We may truely vse the mockers wordes of these mockers of truth; since the olde Philosophers dyed, all things continue alike, seede-time and haruest haue beene still distinct, nor hath there beene any floud to destroy either the whole earth, or any entire nation thereof. For assurance of which promise, the Almightie hath set his bow in the cloude: whose naturall causes, though the Philosophers can in some sort assigne, and shew the manner how diuersities of coarise in it; yet the ancient Poets see more, than either they themselues haue left exprest, or later Philosophers sought to conceiue, when they faigned Iris to bee Thaumantis filia, the daughter, or (as wee of this age would say) the mother of wonderment, the messenger of the great God Iupiter and his Goddesse Iuno. The occasions of this fiction (had they bin well acquainted with them) might haue informed Philosophers, that the raine-bow had some better vse, than a bare speculation how it was made; some finall, besides the materiall and efficient cause, vnto whose search the admirable forme or composition of it did incite men naturally. And the auncient Philosophers (who were for the most part
 Poets, and endued with more liuely notions of the first, and supreme cause of all things) did vsually assigne a finall cause, (commonly) supernaturall, of such effects as proceeded from efficient and materiall naturall causes.Arist. 2. Poster. As the Pythagoraeans thought the thunder (whose matter, forme, and efficient they well knew) was made to terrifie such as were in hell; not erring in the generall, that it had some such like vse, though mistaken in the particulars, whom it was made to terrifie. Naturall Philosophie giues vs the materiall and sensible efficient causes, the Scripture onely the true and supernaturall end, which leades vs to the immortall, inuisible, and principall efficient cause of all naturall effects, euen of Nature it selfe. And Aristotle acknowledgeth the motions or dispositions of the matter to depend vpon the end or finall cause: albeit he giues no finall cause at all of maine principall, much lesse the supreme or principall finall cause of all naturall effects, but confounds the forme with the end, against his owne principles, and contrarie to the analogie betweene Nature and Art, which is the ground of all his Discourse, about the matter, forme, and efficient. For the artificiall forme is not the end of the Artists worke, but rather incites the spectator to view and admire his skill, from which his gaine or fame may redound. And these (one, or both) are the principall end of all his labours: so is the glorie of the first, and supreme efficient cause, the principall and vtmost end of all the workes of Nature; and Nature it selfe (if I may so speake) the art or skill of the first and supernaturall cause. But as Aristotles Philosophie is imperfect, because it leades vs not, either vnto the first cause, or last end of all things; so is it fully sufficient to confute such Diuines, as thinke there were Rainebowes before the Floud. Which opinion hath no pretence of Scripture to enforce it: and grounds in Nature it can haue none, vnlesse they will auouch this euident vntruth, That euerie disposition of the Aire, or euerie Cloud, is fitly disposed to bring forth the Raine-bow. And if other naturall causes, with their motions and dispositions, depend vpon the finall; such as acknowledge the truth of Scripture haue no reason to thinke, that eyther the Clouds or Aire had that peculiar disposition which is required vnto the production of the Raine-bow, before the Floud,
 when this wonderfull effect could haue no such vse or end, as it hath had euer since.Gen. 9. v. 12, 13, 14. For it was ordained, as the Scripture tels vs, to be a signe or witnesse of Gods couenant with the new world, a messenger to secure mankinde from destruction by deluges. Now if it had appeared before; the sight of it, after the floud, could haue beene but a silly comfort to Noahs timorous posteritie; whose mistrust, least the like inundation should happen againe, was greater, than could be taken away by any ordinarie or vsuall signe, if we may beleeue suchIoseph. hist. Noae. testimonies of antiquitie, as we haue no reason to suspect. I omit the discussion ofVid. Ammian. Marcell. lib. 20. Et quonia^ indiciu^ est per mutationis aurae (vt diximus) a sudo aere nubiu^ concitans globos, aut contra ex concreto immutans in serenam laetitiam coelum: ideo apud poetas legimus saepe Irim de coelo mitti, cu^ praesentiu^ rerum fit status mutatio. their opinion, who thinke the Raine-bow doth naturally argue such a temper of the aire, as is vnapt for the present to conceiue any excessiue moisture, either from these reasons in nature, then well knowne, or from the tenour of Gods forementioned couenant, communicated to the ancient Heathen people by Traditions, doth Iupiter in Homer make Iris the messenger of his peremptorie command vnto Neptune, to desist from aiding the Graecians;
Iliad. ^.(...),(...),(...),(...).From Ioue I come a messenger, to him that Neptune hight,His pleasure is, that thou henceforth ne come in field or fight:But hence to Heauen, or to wide Sea addresse thy speedie flight.
7 The true mythologie of which fiction I should, from the circumstance of the Storie, coniecture to be this. The swelling of waters and aboundance of moisture, did aduantage the Graecians, and annoy the Troians, for whom faire weather was best, as hauing greatest vse at that time of seruice by Horse. For this reason is Neptune by Iris commanded to get him into the Sea; which is as much as to say, the ouer-flow of waters and abundance of moisture was now to bee asswaged; and Apollo on the other side sent to encourage Hector, and his Troians; The meaning is, that Iupiter would now haue faire and drie weather.



(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).


Goe to, prepare the troupes of horse (for they must do the deed)
And charge thine enemies at their ships, but charge the^ with all speed;
Meane time I'le goe before, and smooth the way you follow must,
I'le turne the Graecian Chiefetaines backe, or lay them in the dust.


Such mysteries of Nature are oft enwrapt in Poeticall fictions, though many of them not so easie to be discerned in such distance of time: this kind of Diuinitie being now worne out of date. But we that haue this supernaturall Commentarie vpon the workes of nature, may see in the mixt colours of the Rain-bow, more cleerly than in any propheticall vision, the old worlds destruction by water: and this presents future consumption by fire, whose brightnes is praedominant in the waterish humour. The resolution of the cloude, by the heate of Sunne-beams reflected vpon it, praefigures vnto vs the melting of the Elements with fire, 2. Peter chapter 3. verse 12.
8 Scarce any thing in the frame of Nature, no not the vntruths of poeticall fables, or lying stories, but beare witnes of the Diuine truth reuealed in Scriptures; so men would not be praeposterous in their obseruations, like Iulian the Apostate: who sought to discredit the sacred storie of ^he tower of Babel, by the Poets fictions of the giants warre against heauen; as if there had beene no more probabilitie in the one than in the other. If he could haue shewed vs any Poeme of the same subiect, more auncient than that storie, he might haue had some peece of an excuse for his impietie; some pretence for accusing the Scripture of poeticall imitation: but if the Poets haue beene imitators of Moses, or other Writers of this storie, the blame must lie vpon them, either for wilfull corrupting of the truth, or (which is most likely) for taking the hyperbolicall phrase of Scriptures in a strict sense; as if they had meant to builde a Tower vp to heauen indeede, whenas the Phrase importeth no other intendement in them, than only to build an exceeding high Tower, which might secure them from inundation
 (as some thinke;) or else endure as a monument of their fame, or a refuge whereunto they might resott, and continue their combination.
9 But the later Graecians, hauing their consciences conuict with the euidence, not their affections conquered with the loue of truth, were driuen into more desperate impudence, to say that our Sauiour Christ had taken those Diuine Sentences, which they could not but admire, out of their diuine Plato; whereas Plato himselfe (as Saint Ambrose,August. lib. 2. de Doctrina Christ. and Saint Augustine, out of testimonies not now producible, gather) had his best Diuinitie from such as wrote of Christ, although the medley of their Diuinitie and his Philosophie, is but like the mingling of Iordans sweete streames with the salt Sea. That Plato had eyther read, or beene instructed by such as had read the Bookes of Moses, hee will easily beleeue, that shall reade that speech of Aristophanes in the Dialogue of Loue or Banquet-discourse. In the beginning (saieth hee) there were three sortes or sexes of men,Plato in Co^uiu. not these two onely which now are extant, male, and female, but a third common nature composed of these, whose name now onelie remayneth, without anie such reall Nature, as the word Androgyni importes.
10 This opinion (doubtlesse) was conceiued from a misconceit of Moses his meaning, in making diuerse mention of our first parents creation. Genesis 2. He makes first mention of Adams creation, then of Euahs, distinct from it. But Genesis chap. 2. verse 27. Genesis chap. 5. verse 1. and 2. He seemeth to relate both their Creations so ioyntly and briefely, that a man, not acquainted with the Hebrew Dialect, nor the mysteries of Matrimonie represented in that Storie, might thinke, that neyther distinct man or woman had beene there created, but Androgyni. Furthermore God said, Let vs make man in our likenesse according to our Image, and let them rule ouer the fish of the Sea, and ouer the foule of the Heauen, and ouer the beastes, and ouer all the Earth, and ouer euerie thing that creepeth or mooueth on the earth. Thus GOD created man in his Image, in the Image of GOD created hee him; hee created them male and female. And a secular Artist that affecteth artificiall, beeing ignorant of Moses his methode, might think that these were not repetitions of the same, but distinct stories of diuerse creations. From the like ignorance of the Graecians
 in the Easterne tongues, or some default in the written copies which they followed, did the riuer Perath enlarge its name by translation from one tongue to an other, as it doth its streames by passing from place to place. For if wee ioyne the Hebrewes Pronoune or Article with the Nowne, whereby this Riuer is named in Scripture, the compound is onely different in termination from the same riuers name in Grecke. Moses Genesis chap. 2. hauing mentioned three riuers of the Garden, addeth, And there was a fourth which is Perath [Which according vnto the Greeke termination is Euphrates, not Euphrathes, as of the Hebrew Beth is the Greeke Beta, not Betha. Hu Perath] or rather [Hu prath] which words conioyned are Huphrath. All these argue, that the sacred Antiquitie of Iewrie was, vnto other Nations, as Nilus to Aegypt, the maine streame or principall riuer, whence they drew most of their inuentions, either of necessitie or delight; albeit these Cuts or petty streames thence deriued, did quite alter their natiue qualitie in the conueyances, receiuing infection from the soyle through which they ranne, or putrifying in the cisterns wherein they setled.
11 For confirmation of all, we may adde this. The Greeke alphabet hath been taken from the Hebrew, as is euident to such as will compare both. The Graecians themselues acknowledge, that they had their very letters from the Phoenicians, who were next neighbors to Iudaea.
12 To re-collect the summe of all that hath bin said throughout this Discourse. As both the first Elements, and sundrie Primitiue wordes of the Greeke and Hebrew, scarce differ so much one from an other, as three from foure, or one digite number from the next vnto it, and yet after many deflections from the first rootes or themes of both, and new frames of wordes by artificiall composition, (a thing as naturall to the Greekes as spreading braunches to the Vine) the Languages themselues, or whole product of both elements, are much different: so are the principall or first heads of the Graecians iuue^tions, deriued for the most part from the Hebrews; although by successiue artificiall imitation their varietie grow greater, and their resemblance of diuine truth the lesse. So likewise were Logicall conceits first clothed, like Natures children, in termes not much abhorrent from common and ciuil vse; but after diuers reflections of Artists imaginations, and endlesse reu^lution of conceipt vpon conceipt, the Logicians
 dialect is become a distinct language from al others; so that a man may as well speake Greeke vnto a meere Latinist, as Logicke-Latine to a meere Humanitian. Thus much of the heathens digression from the historicall truth of Scriptures. It remaines that we compare the morall vse, and issue of their inuentions with the end, scope, and fruit of these Diuine writings.


CHAP. XI. Of sacred Writers sobrietie and discretion, in relating true miracles; compared especially with later heathens vanitie, in coyning fruitlesse wonders.
1 ALbeit the superstition of later Gentiles were most opposite to the most true, most ancient religion of the Israelites: yet if we trace the most ciuill sort of them backwards in their sinister waies, we shal find it, and the right path of the Israelites, like the two opposite branches of Pythagoras his letter iumping as it were in one truncke. Sundry fragments of Orpheus, Linus, Pythagoras, yea of Euripedes, much later than the former, with many sayings of other auncient Poets and Philosophers, doe witnesse that their Authors had many notions of good and euill, not much dissonant from the morall law of God, fully consonant (for their generall truth) vnto the good sentences of Iobs friends: albeit euen these were mingled with many particular errours of the Diuine Prouidence. Much more did the most of the heathen, since the diuision of the Iewes from other people, by their sacred Lawes, goe much euery day more than other awry from those good rules of life, which had beene naturally ingrafted, both in the Iewes and Gentiles hearts. These excellent sayings of the auncient heathen, and their posterities credulitie to beleeue all reports of their Gods, demonstrate that they had obserued many wonderfull Experiments, and euident Documents of a Diuine prouidence; and communicate the same vnto posterity, both in plaine literall morall Discourses and allegorical or mysticall fictio^s. In thus doing, perhaps not intending so much, that their successours should expect the same euents, or course of
 things to continue for euer: as that they should learn to reuerence these sacred powers, to glorifie them as diuine, who could alwaies alike effect what they intended, though by meanes most contrary. But vnto the heathen, destitute of Gods written word, the best obseruations of their auncestours became quickely like a Kalendar out of date; they could not discerne the workes of God, nor his inward secret calling, whe^ once the course of his proceedings, or manner of his speaking to them changed.Plut. de defect^ Oraculorum. Thus Planetiades in Plutarch ascribes the defect of oracles vnto the carelesnesse or malignacie of the Gods as if, these once taken away, they had no other meanes left for procuring the welfare of mankinde. But in Iewry the true doctrine of the Diuine power, or Prouidence, was well knowne. For God by Moses had both giuen them his written Oracles as an absolute Ephemerides of all things that had bin since the first moment of Time, by whose rules they were to discerne all other succeeding praedictions; and also continually raised them vp Prophets, like yearely Astronomers, to continue the Ephemerides, which Moses had made for the direction of mans life, and to instruct them as it were in a monthly Kalendar of euerie particular alteration or change, vnto which that great Law-giuer in his generall praedictions could not discend. From this reason it is, that the Pen-men of the sacred story doe not alwayes relate the same, or like euents, but assigne diuers maners of his working and speaking to seuerall ages. Some afford vs liuely monuments of his power; others paterns of his wisedom; some exa^ples of his iustice; others, of his mercie: yet al of them continually acknowledge him to be the only author of their good, albeit the maner of procuring it be diuers, yea contrary. Thus Ezra, Nehemiah, and other godlie men of that time, ascribe their redemption from Babylonish captiuitie, as immediatly to the wonderfull working of their God, as their fore-elders did their deliuerance from Aegyptian thraldom: although no such miracle of his power were seen in the later. The former deliuera^ce had confirmd his omnipotent abilitie of doing what he would, the later, his infinite wisedome in doing what hee could, by what meanes he would: and it was his good pleasure to be glorified in sundry ages, by diuers manifestations of his seuerall attributes.
2 But the heathen wanting his word for their direction, after
 they had once begun, knew not how to make an end. If God cease to shew his miracles in any one kind, which they had heard of before, eyther they sought to continue them by faigning the like, (more readie to play vpon former reports, than to obserue the course of Gods proceedings in their owne times:) or else from the varietie of wonderfull euents, whose cause they knew not, for they imagine a pluralitie of Gods. Others, from these mens superstition, and curiositie, were prone to suspect the truth of what had beene; after once such sensible euents, or experiments begunne to cease. This gaue the first occasion vnto Atheisme; which hath most abounded since the propagation of the Gospel, whose glorie hath quite extinguished those pettie lights, which purblinde Heathen onely vsed for their direction, beeing most conspicuous to the flesh or sense, as the Gospel is to the Spirite. For as dimme or weake sights can make some shift with star-light or candles, that shine a farre off, but are quite put out by looking vpon the bright Sunne: So hath the brightnesse of Christs glorie reuealed, put out the eies of corrupted nature, in such as loued darkenesse more than light, and would not seeke for any remedie at his hands, which giueth sight to the blind. Yet might this their disease be sooner cured, if they would compare other Countries vanitie in faigning wonders without occasion, with this religious sobriety of the later writers of the Bible, or other godly men, who haue written of Iews affairs; not one of them since Ezekiahs time relating such wonders, as their fathers had told the^. This sobrietie in them euidently shews, that the former miracles were no fictio^s of humane fancie: otherwise the Iews, liuing betweene Ezekiahs and Christs time, would haue bin copious in their inuentions of the like, as we see by experie^ce, that the learned Iews since our Sauiors time haue bin most ridiculously apish in coining, and the illiterate as grosse in beleeuing most absurd and filthy fables. That this people, during the whole time of the second temple, added no bookes to the Canon of the Bible, confirms their forefathers care, of admitting none in former times, but vpon euident and sure experiments of their diuine authority. Again, it was most miraculous, that this people which had Prophets, and sacred Writers in euery age, before the Babylonish captiuity, should after their redemptio^ thence lie so quiet, that not the most learned amo^g them did euer
 challenge the name of Prophets; though they had men of diuine spirits, and excellent obseruation in heauenly matters, as appeares by the Author of Ecclesiasticus, the booke of Wisedome, and other books of good vse amongst all religious men, though not canonicall amongst the Iews themselues. Answerable to this sobrietie of the learned was the disposition of the vnlearned among this people; which during the former period of time, wherin they wanted prophets, were generally most auerse from al idolatry, whereunto they were most prone, while Prophecies were most plentifull amongst them; and yet continued stil as far from Atheisme, as Idolatrie. The reason of all which I haue giuen before. God had inioyned a general silence throughout this land, that all might hearken more attentiuely vnto the Criers voice, appointed to prepare the wayes of the Lord: after whose message once fully accomplished, as it had beene after the ringing of a market-bell, euerie Mounte-banke throughout their coasts, sets to sale the dreames and fancies of his owne braine, for diuine prophecies.
3 Lastly, the Heathen in their most sacred traditions, and matters of greatest consequence, adde circumstances according to the occurrents of their owne Times, which suite no better with the substance, or essence of their auncestors obseruations, than a Pigmeies slipper with a Gyants foote. How shamefully doeth the wanton Poet faigne his Gods to long after such matters, as hee himselfe did most delight in? The best end and vse of his greatest Gods apparitions are oft times to accomplish beastly lust; Diuine truths are vsually transformed into the poets priuat affection. Ouids description of Iupiters comming to Semele,Aethera conscendit vultumque sequentia traxit nubila, quei^ nimbis immistaque fulgura (...) ^^tis addidit, and tonitrus and ineu^tabile fulmen libr. Metam. 2. ^ab. 5 is not much vnlike the maner of GODS passing by1. Ki 19.10, 11, 12. And behold, the Lord went by and a mighty strong wind rent the mountaines and brake the rock before the Lord, and after the wind an earthquake, and after the earthquake fire. Eliah vpon the mount; and therefore not altogether vnbeseeming the Maiestie of the great king, if al circumstances were answerable to the substance of the description: but it is brought to an absurd, profane, and foolish purpose. So likewiseDet pignus amoris si modo verus is est qua^tusque and qualis ab alta lunone excipitur, tantus talisque rogato Det tibi complexus suaque ante insignia sumat. Oui. Ibi. Semeles petition vnto Iupiter, is butEx 33, 12, 13, and 18. Then Moses said vnto the Lord; See, thou saiest vnto me, Leade this people forth, and thou hast not shewd me whom thou wilt send with me: Thou hast said moreouer, I know thee by name, and thou hast also found grace in my sight: Now therfore I pray thee, if I haue found fauour in thy sight, shew mee now the way that I may know thee, and that I may find grace in thy sight. Againe he said, I beseech thee shew me thy glorie. Moses his request vnto God, effeminate and transformed in sundry circumstances to the Poets humor. Moses Ex. 33.18. desired to see the
 glorie of the Lord: and the Lord answered him, Thou canst not see my Face: for there shall no man see my Face, and liue. Yet willing to confirme this his seruants faith, he condiscends thus far to his suite:Exod. 33. verse 20, 21, 22, 24. Whilst my glory passeth by I will put thee in a clift of the rocke and will couer thee with mine hand whilest I passe by, and thou shalt see my back-parts, but my face shal not be seene. Either from some mistaking of this place, or from experience of others sodain death, vpon such apparition of the Diuine maiestie, as Moses and Elias by peculiar dispensation had escaped, did that tradition spring which Manoah conceited so deeply, Iudg. 13.22. And Manoah said vnto his wife; we shall surely die, because we haue seene God; as Gedeon had done likewise, Iudg. 6.22. Alas my Lord God, for because I haue seene the Angell of the Lord face to face,Hence was that of Homer lib. 1. Odiss. --(...). Corpus mortale tumultus non tulit aethereos donisque iugalibus arsit. I shall die. This tradition had come to Ouids hands, who makes that maiestie, which hee had described to be so great, so improuident withall, as to grant her foolish request, on whom he doted, to her vtter ruine; and so impotent, that he could not protect her, albeit he stroue to couer her with his hand: and so finally neither the God could inioy his loue, nor his best beloued her life. Such are the consequences of later heathens greatest miracles; but in the sacred story, wherin are specified euents as stra^ge as Poets relate any, such causes are assigned of them, as are more weighty, and the manner of their relation more graue and serious than the euents are rare; if God at any time appeare, either in vision by night, or corporall shape by day, it is for some extraordinarie purpose. All the miracles or wonders wrought in Israel, were to bring that people vnto the knowledge of the true God, to relie continually vpon his prouidence; A matter more hard, if we consider the frailtie of our owne flesh, than the effecting of any miracles, reported to haue been wrought for the Iewes. Why his wonderfull workes should be most frequent amongst this people, this reason is as plaine as probable from the end. This people was placed as a light vnto all the nations of the world besides: they inioyed extraordinarie prosperitie, that others might be allured to reuerence them, and taste the goodnes of their God: their vnusuall iudgements and strange kind of afflictions were as so many proclamations vnto the world, to beware of like rebellion: seeing all the world was set on wickednesse, and God had appoynted a day, wherein he would iudge the world in righteousnesse, necessary it
 was, to set out a paterne of his mercie and iustice in some people; and without wrong to any other, it was his especial fauor, to make choice of Abrahams seed for this purpose, on whom hee showred his mercies in greatest abundance, whilest they were obedient and faithfull in the workes of Abraham; but when they rebelled,Isa. 63. v. 10. and vexed his holie spirit, then he turned to be their enemie, and he fought against them, making them continuall examples of his vnpartiall iudgements, as shal appeare in the next Section.



The third Section of the second generall part Lib. 1.
Containing experiments drawne from the reuolution of States, or Gods publique iudgements, but especially of the estate of the Iewes from time to time.
OF all externall experimentes, the most firme and solide, for assuring the trueth of these diuine oracles vnto our soules, are gathered from the reuolution of states, or Gods iudgements vpon seuerall lands and people. In the obseruation of which, the continuall storie of the Iewish nation doth best direct vs. The intercourse of their particular afflictions, before our Sauiours time; the maner of their recouerie from them, as from so many spices of some grieuous disease growing vpon them; the epidemicall disease, which through euery generation haunts theirs, since they desired our Sauiours bloud to bee vpon them and their children: are so many probata, or tried experiments, that these coelestial precepts containe the onely method of preseruing the publique or priuate welfare of mankind whose obseruations may cure, whose neglect will breed, all the miserie that can befall any people. And this methode I would wish euery Christian to follow; First diligently to consider the state of the Iewes from time to time; for it euidently confutes the Athiest, and confirmes the truth of the old Testament: and the truth of it established, doth most euidently confute the Iewe, and witnesse the truth of the Gospell vnto vs, as shall be proued (God willing) in due place.


CHAP. I.
Of the state of these Iewes in generall, before our Sauiours time, with Tullies obiection against them.
Enimuero tanta fuit autoritas Alphonsi, vt etiam victus conditiones dixerit, et victo res victi metu cesserint, quasi victoriam casu non virtute se consecutos arbitrati. Anton. Panormitanus l. 4. de dictis and fact. Alphonsi. August. (ex Seneca) lib. 6. de ciuitat. Dei cap. 11.1 IT is storied of Alphonsus the great, that being sometime prisoner to his enemies, he did so carie himselfe amongst them, and prescribe them such conditions for his release, as might argue, that they had ouercome him onely by chance. This was not so strange in a Prince, so famous and venerable for the integritie of his whole life, and so amiable in his cariage towards his enemies; a man, as it were, made to ouercome and quell all the spiteful malice, or base intendments, that could be deuised against him, by his heroicall open heart, and bountifull hand towards all, and indefatigable clemencie euen towards such, as sought to outuie it by ingratitude, and iust prouocation of his heauiest displeasure: But that the Iewes, a people whom others praeiudiciall conceipt of their peeuish selfe-conceited singularitie, (raised from their strict obseruation of lawes contrarie to the customs of other people) had made for the most part odious, ere knowne vnto the world, should victi victoribus legem dare, being captiues, giue Lawes vnto their Conquerours, euen vnto such as sought to triumph in their disgrace, as birds ouer an owle caught in a snare; did iustly minister occasion of wonderment to sundrie Heathen, and might haue taught the proudest and mightiest of their enemies that they had ouercome them onely by permission or chaunce, or (if these words seeme vnfit) for want of that good hap and fauour in their battels, which they after their ouerthrowes finding, became by it in a sort, conquerours of their enemies, euen whilst they were detained in captiuitie.
2 The full height and amplitude of those fortunes, whereof this people was only capable, would bring the natural man, could he fully comprehend them, within perfect ken of that incomprehensible omnipotent power, which was onely able to effect them. But because these cannot be taken by any ethnique obseruations, which reach not neere those ancient times, wherein their extraordinarie successe was most conspicuous; wee must gather them
 from the maner of their states declining, since it hath bin knowne to ethnique or other writers, not liable to suspition of partialitie on their behalfe. God in his prouidence (as Moses prophecies, compared with later, and the succession of their histories, testifie) had ordained, as the fulnesse of time and their iniquitie drew near, his fauours towards them should decrease by such an vniforme proportion, that their contraction in later might notifie their excessiue greatnesse in former times. The manner of their deliuerance from the Babylonish captiuitie (to such as rightly obserue the diuerse maner of Gods proceeding in different ages before specified) will giue the true estimate of wonders wrought for their forefathers: and Cyrus fauour towards them will appeare most credible, from the representation of like extraordinarie kindnesse shewed them in Aegypt by Ptolomaeus Philadelphus; who, though their supreme Lord by right of conquest, set at libertie a hundred thousand of their bodies, captiuated by his father, to submit himselfe vnto their lawes, which he (directed by the Diuine prouidence) caused to be translated into the most knowne tongue then on earth, through which the nation (as it were through a perspectiue glasse) might better discerne the new star of Iacob which was shortly to arise.
3 It is a point without the circumference of politique obseruation plainely arguing such a coelestiall prouidence, as can controll the purposes of greatest Princes, why Ierusalem so often ruinate, should still be repaired againe; or, the Temple continue in such beautie after it had bin so often fallen into the enemies hands; especially seeing the flourishing state of the one was apprehended by their Conquerours, as a great encouragement, and the fortification of the other, as a great opportunitie of this peoples rebellion; vpon which considerationEzra. 4. v. 17 1. Es dr. 2. v. 25. etc. Ios. l. 11. Antiq. cap. 3. Etsi Cambisem pro Artaxerxe habeat. Appianus de bellis Syriacis. Yet here is omitted the reedification by Hircanus in Iulius his time, their demolishing by Sossius. Iose. l. 14. Ant. cap. 16. and l. 15. c. 1. Reedified againe in Caius his time. Tacit. l. 5. Hist. Artaxerxes did inhibit the execution of Cyrus grant for the reedifying of Hierusalem. The Citie wals had beene razed since the time of the Babylonish captiuitie, (which was before any Heathen Historiographer of note,) first by Ptolomie the first; secondly by Pompey the great; and yet repaired before Vespasians time, who ouerthrew their strongest munitions, as Adrian afterwards did the same, once againe repaired.
4 The truth againe of that fauour which they found vnder the Aegyptians, (though otherwise knowne by vnpartiall writers)
 is more than credible in it selfe, from the extraordinarie fauour which they found among the nations, about the time of their co^quest by Pompey. Tullie tels vs in his Oration pro Flacco, that their was gold transported out of Italie it selfe, and all the rest of the Romane Prouinces, for garnishing the Temple of Hierusalem. The prohibition of this practise in Asia, enacted by Flaccus Gouernour of that Prouince,Ios. de Bello Iudaico l. 1. c. 5. was afterwards laid to his charge, though the like had beene decreed by the Romane Senate in the time of Tullies Consulship. It was no little preiudice vnto his cause, that Pompey in the conquest of that citie, did think so reuerently of the Iewes religion and Temple, that, albeit he viewed the golden table, candlesticke, and other vessels of like mettal, with many costly ornaments, and two thousand talents of their sacred treasure: yet he did not diminish so much as one iot of it, nor spoile Ierusalems temple of any orname^ts, to beautifie the Temples of his Romane Gods. This abstinence of Pompey Tullie in the forecited place acknowledgeth, albeit (for bettering the cause he had in hand) vnwilling to confesse, that Pompey did abstain for any religious respect of the Iewes or their lawes: for after many shiftes,Cicero pro Flacco. Sua cuique ciuitati religio Laeli est, nostra nobis. Stantibus Ierosolimis, pacatisque Iudaeis, tamen istorum religio sacrerum a splendore huius imperij, graui^ate nominis nostri, maiorum institutis abb^rrebat. Nunc vero hoc magis, quod illa gens, quid de imimperio nostro sentiret, ostendit armis, quam chara dijs immortalibus assetdocuit, quod est victa, quod clocat^, quod seruata? he takes this as the best argume^t to eleuate the Romanes conceipt of the Iewish religion; Whilst Ierusalem flourished and the Iewes were quiet, yet their sacred rites were altogether dissona^t vnto the splendor of the Romain Empire, the grauitie of that nation, and the institution of their Auncestors; much more (as he thought) should the Romains now make lesse account of that nation, which had giuen perfect proofe what good wil they had borne vnto the Romaines, by their late taking armes against them. And what good wil the immortal Gods did beare to them, their late fortunes did witnesse, in that they had beene vanquisht, made tributarie, and (as hee thought) were at the Romains disposition for their preseruation or destruction.
5 If these Iewes late subiection were any disparagement to their religion, much more might Pompeyes and Tullies ouerthrow discredit the Romaine Gods, which Pompeyes faction did reuerence more than Caesars; yea fortune it selfe, on whose fauorl^b. Epist. ad Attic. Epist 1. ad Octau. Tullie relied after he had fallen out with all the rest, could not be excused, if earthly calamitie were any iust presumption of impietie against heauen. But if Tullie would haue sought but the first fountaine of his countries wracke; want of reuerence to the Iewish Temple, and their
 religion was cause of Pompeius and Crassus ouerthrow, and their ouerthrow the ruine of the Romaine state.


CHAP. II.
Of Pompey his factions and other Romaines ill successe that had molested or wronged the Iewes.
1 I Know the secular Politician can espie many ouer-sights in Pompeys proceeding against Caesar,The originall causes of Pompeys fortunes sudd^ine alteration. and assigne other causes of his disaster: but he that had gone into the temple of the Lord, with more reuere^ce than Pompey did, might haue vnderstood that it was his vnhalowed progres into the most holy place, which had set an vntimely period to his greatnes growth. This was the main spring or head of all his other particular error^ obserued by secular politicians. Hitherto he had maruailously prospered in al his waies, fortune had bin his guide, and felicitie his atte^dant. Althogh his wisdome and experience would not suffer him to ouer-see any thing, that lay within the compasse of warlike skill: yet happie chance delighted to haue a finger in his proceedings, alwaies bringing somewhat to his aide, and furtherance, from beyond the haemisphaere of humane pollicie; so as the issue and product of all his enterprises were still discerned to bee greater, than could amount from the particular meanes forecast by him, or his Counsellers, for their atchieuement.Vide Ciceronem de lege Manilia, of his Affrican expedition: and of his piraticall warre. He had the helpe of winde, and weather, to prosecute his foes by Sea: the fauour ofAs in his conquest of Mithridate vid Flor de Gest. R^m. lib. 3 cap. 5 Nocturna ea diminutione fuit. etluna in partib. quippe quasi co^militans, cum a tergo hostilus, a facie Romanis se praebu^sser, Pontici per errorem longius cadentes umbras suas quasi hos^ium corpora petebant. vid Stadium, comment. in cum locum Moone and Starres to make him conquerour by Land. Thus fates had been his friend, vntill his ascending the holy Mount: but vpon his descent thence, fortune (to vse the Romaines language) beganne to turne her wheele vpon him. His wonted prouidence and forecastVid. Pl^tar in Pompe^e and Appianum l b 2 de Bello civil, and Dion^m, in initius lib. 42. di. for-sooke him; and hee that in his yonger daies (when his heart was as full of hopes as his bloud of spirits) had vsed greatest vigilancie to preuent all dangers in matters of smaller moment, whose losse might easily haue beene recouered: now in that age, whose vsuall symptomes are timiditie, and too much care, suffers those consultations on which his owne, his friends, his Countries fates, and fortunes wholly depended, on which the whole state of the world did in a manner hang, to passe away as in a dreame; yeelding his irreuocable consent to whatsoeuer any parasite should
 propose, in points wherein error and ouer-sight were incorrigible, and their consequence, if bad, remedilesse; with as great speede and little care, as a man would answere, yes, or yea, to some idle question proposed vnto him betwixt sleeping and waking. Answerable to this his sottish demeanour, Victorie, which before had wooed him, once in his last extremitie (like a wanton Minion disposed to flout her blind decrepit doting louer) seemes a little to make toward him,Such was Caesars ce^sure of them. either wanting eies to discerne her, or wit to giue her entertainment. But not Victorie her selfe could haue made him victorious, in whose death and ouerthrow the Almightie would haue his iudgements seene. For seeing it could not content him to haue vanquished so many Kings and Kingdomes, but he will prouoke the King of Kings in his owne house, by his vnmannerly intrusion into his most secret closet, reserued alone, of all places of the earth besides, (though all the earth besides were his) for his Holinesse presence and his Priests: it seemed iust to this Lord of heauen and earth, the supreme disposer of all successe, to giue the Kingdomes subdued by Pompey into his fatall enemies hand, not leauing him so much firme ground of all his conquests, as might decently couer his miserable corps. Since the foundations of the Earth and Sea were laid,Hic, post tres consulat^s and totid^m triumphos domitumque terra rum orbem, sanctissimi ac praestantissimi viri, in id euecti super quod ascendi non potest, duodesexagesimu^ annu^ agentis, pridie natale^ ipsius vitae fuit exitus: in tantu^ in illo viro a se discordante fortuna, vt cui modo ad victoria^ terra defucrat, deesset ad sepultucam. Vell^i. Pater. Histor. lib 2. neuer had so high a flow of all good fortunes, so sudden, so strange, so low and naked an ebbe, Vt cui modo defuerat terra ad victoriam, deesset ad sepulturam: that he, who, as the Romaine Orator saith, had conquered more Prouinces than almost any of his Countrie-men had seene; HeeQui mare vniuersum, quod Romanis parebat, pacauerat, in eo ipso perijt, qui olim mille nauibus (tot enim serunt) prefuerat, tunc in nauicula prope Aegyptum occisus est, idque ab eo Ptolomaeo quodammodo, cuius patrem ipse in eam regionem ac Regnum reduxerat. Dyon. Hist. Rom. lib. 42. and statim post. Sic Pompeius, inter Romanos habitus antea potentissimus, vt Agamem non etiam cognominaretur, quod mille nauibus and ipse cum Imperio praefuiss^t, tunc quasi vnus de extremae fortis Aegyptijs, ad montem Cassium interijt, ea ipsa d^^, qua qu^ndam de Mithr^date and Piratis triumphum duxerat: vt ne in his quidem extrema cum primis conuenerint. that had commanded a thousand ships, restored the vse of the Sea to the Nations againe, and freed all others from the violence of Pyrates, sole Lord of that element, and the coasts adioyning; should (vpon that very day, which in memorie of thisThe P^raticall was the most honourable Warre that euer any Romane vndertooke, and iustly deserued a glorious triumph: but Pompey triumphed in his sinne, whilest hee included Iuries conquest, as put of that daies glorie, which the Lord for this reason would haue defaced by his miserable death, as he had polluted the solemnitie of Gods Saboath in Ierusalem, for hee tooke it on the Saboath day. Vid. Ioseph. lib. 1. de Bello Iudaico, cap. 5. matchlesse victorie hee had celebrated some few yeares before at Rome
 with greatest triumph and solemnitie) become a prey to a beggarly Aegyptian boat, and fall into such base hucksters handes, as knew not the worth of so great a Prince, but (as if hee had beene some rauenous Sea-monster, that had liued by publique harmes, of whose death only some pettie commoditie might bee made) present his head to the chiefe Magistrate in hope of reward, leauing that body, whose goodly presence had ouer-charged the greatest Temples, like a pestiferous carrion, or some offensiue garbage, or forlorne spawne, rather hid than buried in a little heape of sand.
2(...). Vix caperet te^plum quem parua recondit arena. Epitaph. Pompeij apud Appian. l. 2 de Bello Ciuili. The strange stupiditie, and more strange destinie of this famous Prince, so wise by nature, so well experienced, and alwaies before this time most fortunate, did argue to the Heathens apprehension, that he wasAppian. ibid. (...), as we would say, taken in the braine by the hand of God, and his hopes blasted from aboue. But such is the preposterous dullnesse of humane sagacitie in diuine matters, that euen where the print of Gods waies is most sensible and perspicuous,The Roma^s preposterous and impious collections vpon Pompeis ouerthrow. the wisest of vs runne counter still vntill his word direct our foote-steps, and his spirit giue life vnto our senses. For the most religious amongst the Romaines, deeming Pompey such as they held themselues, one that had neuer giuen iust offence to any of their Gods; vpon his miscarriage, either altogitherHence were these and like complaints. Marmoreo Licinus tumulo iacet: at Cato paruo, Pompeius nullo, quis putet esse Deos? disclaime the diuine prouidence, or else exclaime against the ingratitude or malignitie of celestiall powers; as if there had beene no other God or Gods, but such as they and Pompey had well deserued of. Whereas his fatall ouerthrow, whom their gods they thought had most reason to fauour, should haue instructed them, that there was a God of gods in Iurie, which did beare rule ouer the ends of the world, who would not bee worshipped after their fashion, as Pompey dreamed. For the reason of his desire to see the most holy place, was to bee resolued whether the Romaines, which worshipped the gods of euery Nation subdued by them, had not that God alreadie, which the Iewes adored:Romanerum primus Cn. Pomp domuit te^plumque iure victoriae ingressus est. Inde vulgatum, Nulla Intus Deum effigie vacuam sedem and Inania Arcana. Tacitus lib. 5 Histor. Vide Florum. l. 3. c. 5. but finding no grauen Image, nor likenesse of any thing in heauen or earth, many Romaines, which till that time had liued in suspence and admiration who this God of these Iewes should be, held their concealed mysteries for meere gulleries, and thought it folly to worship they knew not whom, forIucanus. Incerti
 Iudaea Dei; yet were his iudgments vpon this great Peere of Rome, the first among that people that had to doe with the Iewes, most certaine, yet iudgements mixt with mercie and long suffering. Seeing Vzzah and Vzziah King of Iuda, for intermeddling in the Priests office, were smitten, the one with sudden death, the other with continuall leprosie vntill his dying day: who can expect that this aliant should escape vnpunisht for like presumption? Neuerthelesse, because he did approch the most holy place, though with an vnsanctified heart, yet with no sacrilegious handes, hee had a longer time of repentance than his next Peere in might amongst the Romaines, his predecessor in like miserable and disgracefull death, though his successor in like, but more shamefull sacrilegious base prophanenesse.
The causes of Crassus mishaps3 That sacrilege was one especiall cause of Crassus miscarriage in the Parthian Warres, the Heathens of that time had obserued; and it may be, Plutarch, from vnwritten Traditions the nurse of error, did mistake the storie. Sure it was not the Goddesse of(...). etc. Plutarch in Crasso. Hierapolis, but the God of the holy Citie, which made the yong and aged to stumble one against an other. Or if Crassus and his sonne had this first Omen of their ouerthrow at their egresse out of this Goddesse Temple; this doth not argue that it was either soly or principally for his offence therein committed; albeit euen sacrilegious wrongs against the Heathen Gods, did oft redound to the true-Gods dishonour, being not intended by worldly minded men, so much against them in particular, as in contempt of the Deitie or diuine power simply: Nor are such warnings vsually sent immediatelyAs the destruction of Hierusalem did not immediately follow vpon our Sauiours, but vpon his seruants, S. Iames vniust death. vpon the principall fact, but rather after continuance in the like. And the vicinitie of thisThis Hiera-polis was Bambyca or Edessa, where Di^ceto the great Syrian Goddesse was worshipped, as appeares from Strabo, in hs 16. Booke. (...). 't was beyond Euphrates: whereas Crassus had ominous signes of his destruction at his first passage ouer that Riuer. Plutarch. places name, (which was a second witnesse of Crassus sinnes) might haue put him in minde of his former misdeedes in Ierusalem, with whose sacred treasure he had dealt iust so, as Plutarch saith hee did with the treasurie of that Goddesse of Hierapolis.
 Which makes me suspect that Plutarch did mistake the storie.Vid. Ioseph. l. 12. Antiq. cap. 13. For as Iosephus tels vs, he tooke away the 2000. talents, which Pompey left vntoucht, and 8000. besides. But such was the Heathens preiudice of the Iewes, that the least iniurie offred to their Idol-Gods was more than the most grieuous sacrilege that could be deuised against the God of Israel. The worst that could be done against his Temple, was, in many of their opinions, but as reprochfull words, which can beare no action, because not easily appliable to any determinate person: with many of them it was all one, Non esse Deos, and non apparere, represented in some visible shape or image. Thus Polibius, otherwise an ingenuous writer, imputes the cause of Antiochus Epiphanes suddaine and fearefull death, vnto his intended pillage of the Goddesse Artemis Temple; when as this miscreant was guiltie of that actuall crime before, for ransacking the temple of Ierusalem. But as the plenarie cause of Crassus miserable and shamefull death, was his shamelesly miserable and sacrilegious minde in generall: so in the meanes, or manner of this end, the Almightie would haue his particular offences against his Priest and Temple to be most eminent, and conspicuous.Eleazarus cum videret Crassum totum esse in colligendo auro times omnibus Te^pli orname^tis, trabe^ ha^c redemptione^ pro omnibus ei dedit, cum prius ca^ iurciurando obstrinxisset, nihil aliud loco moturum, contentum eo quod ipse trader^t, estimatum plurimis aureoru^ millibus. Haec trabs inserta erat trabi cauae ligneae quod caeteris omnibus ignotu^, solus scieb^t Eleazarus Crassus tame and hanc pro reliquo te^pli auro accepit, and mox violato iureiurando totum quantum intuserat ^g^ssit. Ios. l 14. ant. c. 12 Eleazar the high Priest, seeing him wholly bent to make a golden Haruest of the Parthian expedition, feared least hee should rake all the sacred Treasure into his coffers. For preuenting of which mischiefe hee presents him with a golden beame, whereon the hangings of the Temple hung, hoping thereby to redeeme the rest of the sacred Treasure; but hee hauing gotten this into his handes, which otherwise he could not haue found (being couered with wood) contrarie to his oath, most agreeable to his humour, seazed vpon all the residue. Yet gold, which hee thus greedily sought, as (to his seeming) the only sure nerue of warre, by the Almighties disposition, became the indissoluble chaine of his dismall faults. As loue to it had made him periure himselfe to circumuent Gods Priest; so did it expose him to circumuention by a periuredMax ma^ aute^ calamitatis partem Angarus ipsis Os^^enus attulit. Is Romanis ant^a foedere iunct sub Pomp. barbaroru^ partes tum poti^res habuit. Quod idem Alchandonius quoque Arabs fecit, semper potent^orise solitus adiu^gere: Caetera^ hic quia manifesto defecerat a Romanis ca^eri facile p^tiat. Angarus aute^, quum Partho studeret, simulauit se Crassi amicu^, liberaliterque ei pecunia^ sua^ impende^s, et explorauit omnia eius co^silia, et Partho enu^ciauit. Dion. lib. 40. villaine; who hauing found out his appetite, prepared a fit bait for his bane. For by feeding this greedie thirst of gold, he insinuated himselfe into the societie of his secrets, which he disclosed vnto the Parthian. Had Crassus wits naturally beene so dull, or had he vsually shewed himselfe so grosse and sottish, as hee
 proued in this expedition: he had neuer borne any place amongst the Romaines, much lesse had they euer permitted him to manage any forraine Warres.Vid. Plutarch in Crosso. Dionem l. citato. Appian. de E^ll. Parth. But partly from his prodigious stupiditie, vncapable of any warning by so many ominous signes and tokens, as did obstupifie his whole Armie besides, partly from his more than brutish facilitie, in taking an vncouth way (as hee had beene a tame beast before the drouer) vntill he came to the very stand, where his enemies stood with their bowes bent, and their arrowes of death made readie vpon the string for his destruction, all the Romaine writers agree, that hee was lead awry by sinister fates. Now if they had but once read what God he was, that had blinded Absolon to disclaime2. Sam. c. 17. Achitophels good counsaile, and ratifie Hushars plot for his ouerthrow; they would easily haue granted that the same God, and no other,Tum Cassiani rursum agre ferebat, and om^sso Crosse, qui monitores audi^e gra^abatur, connicijs meessabant Angarum. Sceleratissime hominum, quis te ma^ut damen ad nos adduxit? qu^^us veneficijs quicus ^raeflig^s persuafisti Crasso vt per vastas solitud^nes ^ter faceret, Numadae latronu^ trincipi magis decorum quam Romano Imperato i^ ille versip^ll^ confortabaters b^a^: ditijs, and hortabatur? d^rarent paulisper ^milites vero subleuabat accurr^ns, and cum risu cauillabatur: Quid, per Campa^^m vos iter facere putatis, vt requiratis sontes ac riuos and vmbras, scilicet, balneasque and con^anita ^enae ^^er^^ia: non meminestis vos tranfire per Arabum and Assyriorum confinia? Jtatum A^ge^^ (...) ut quidam castigabat: and priusquam deprehenderetur in perfidia abequ t^^t, (...) C^s^^, finge^s se curaturum necessaria and turbaturum consiliae hostium. Ap^ian de Ecl^ ^^ra. (...) ^^od vti^^e coafilium Crassus caepisset, dehortatus hominem eft: sin damnosum, (...) rem confecit. Crassus Seleuciam contendere decreuerat, quo se t^to cum exer^^t^ (...) com^ae (...) E^^^^atem ac trans cundem peruenire posse cogitabat: a Seleucia (quam, vt a Grae^^s (...) p^rabat in suaem potestatem venturam) ad Ctesiphontem Vrbem haud difficulter se tre^^^^urum (...) tanquam multo tempore opus habiturum, vt repudiaret, ac potius aduersum Surene^ qu^ p^opt (...) manu esset, iret Abgarus persuasit. Quibus conflitutis cum Crassum, vt periret, Sur^^e^ (^um qui ^andi praetextu frequenter congrediebatur) vt superare posset parauisset, Romanos nihil souert^^, e^ (...) ad certam iam victoriam proficiscentes, eduxit: in eisque tum per infidias opprimendis Parthum ad^^t. vi^ Dionem lib. 40. As he came into this danger by Abgarus trecherie, so was he slaine after he had yeelded himselfe vnto Surenas, contrarie to his oath and promise, Vid. Appian. l. citato, and Strabon. l. 16 had infatuated Craessus heart to renounce Cassius, and other graue experienced Roman warriors holesome aduise, and betake himselfe wholly to the barbarous fugitiue Abgarus directions, suborned by the Parthian to betray him.
4 But Cassius, much wiser than his Generall in this one particular of mistrusting forainers, was afterwards as farre ouer-seene in the maine chance, and ouer-taken with that sinne which had caused Crassus blindnesse: First, polluted with likeSo saith S. Austine de Ciuit. Dei l. 18 c. 45. Postea (i. post. Pompeij victoriam de Iudae is) Cassius Templu^ spoliauit, Of his cruell exactions in Iudea, Vide Ioseph. antiq. l. 14. c. 18. sacrilege, and cruell oppression of these Iewes: then with his owne bloud,Of his grosse error in mistaking his victorious friend for his persecuting enemie. Vide Velleum Paterculum l. 2. and reliquos Rom. hist. autores. shed by his seruant at his commandement, vpon as grosse an ouer-sight as Crassus had committed So shall they all, sooner or later, bee infatuate, that robbe God of his honour, and put their
 trust in wrong or violence. And thus till this time did they perish all, as many as bare ill will to Sion; for Hierusalems houre was not yet come, because the day spring had not visited her from on high. The glorie of her glorious Temple was not as yet reuealed; vnto whom after her children had offered greater disgrace than the Romaines had done to their Temple, the staffe of her wonted stay begins to breake, the bones of her former peace vntwine, and only one part of her double fates remaine; if then shee fall, shee riseth not againe, shee hath no inclination left but to destruction; the burthen of the Fathers sinnes, and the yoke of captiuitie due thereto, growes heauier and heauier in the descent vpon posteritie, without all hope of recouerie, much lesse of reuenge, vpon such as offer her greatest violence; but rather happy shall that man be thought, and highest earthly honour shall bee the wages of his seruice, that rewards her children, as they had serued their Lord and Sauiour. But these times were not come in Crassus or Cassius daies, in which som reliques of her ancient hopes remained, to see the rods and scourges of her correction consume and wither, after once the Almightie had taken off his punishing hand. And if vnto these three aboue mentioned, we adde the like destinie of Antonie and Scipio; the ill successe of other Romaines, who had ought to do with these Iewes before our Sauiours time: we may conclude, that although the Romaines were then Lords of the earth, yet this people, whom they held as base, retained the priuilege of Gods roiall Priests. Although the soules of all flesh were the Lords, who for this cause reuenged the oppressed in euery Nation: yet,Ierem. 2. v. 3. Leuit. 22. v. 10. Israel only (as the Prophet speakes) was as a thing hallowed vnto the Lord, his first fruits; all such as deuoured them did offend, euill should come vpon them, although inflicted by their owne, or their seruants handes at their appointment. Lastly, if we call to minde the former distinction of Ages, and the diuers manner of Gods dealing with them, before and after the Babylonish captiuitie; the contraction or abridgment of their large priuiledges, in the long suceession of times foretold, by ancient, and acknowledged by their owne latter writers: wee can not mistrust the amplitude of their fundamentall charter, of their historicall narrations of what the Lord had done of old vnto Iabin, Sisera, and Sennacherib, would we (allowing some different condition of times) compare
 theirs with Pompeys and his Complices vnusuall Fates.Gods iudgements vpon Pompeys factio^, were most iust, because they had participated of his sinne Gods power was more immediately manifested in the one, his Wisedome more admirable in the other, his Iustice the same in both. Yet a Romaine would reply: If Pompey had so grieuously offended, why should he not haue borne the whole burden of his sins? So he should, had either he alone offended, or the Romains suffered him to haue liued a priuate life; but if they will associate themselues as members to their naturall head, and professe their seruice and alleageance vnto him, that stood as proscribed by the court of heauen: Gods quarrel with the whole faction is most iust, all of them are guiltie of their Generalls sinnes, all liable to the plagues and punishments due thereto. Yet, besides that Pompeys intolerable presumption and prophanenesse, according to the vsual course of Gods iustice, might propagate his destinie vnto such of his adherents, as had beene free from any actuall wrong done to the Iewes, or contempt of their God and religion in particular: a great many of his chief followers had polluted themselues with the like sinne in Ierusalem. For, asIudaeorum quidem 12. millia occubuerunt: Romanorum vero perpauci, sed plures sauciati sunt Nih^l autem grau^us in illa clade Iudoeorum genti visum est, quam sanctum illud arcanum, neq, cuiqu^m pr^us visum alienis esse detectu^. Denique Pompeius vna cum suis comitibus in templum ingressus, vbi neminem praeter pontifice^ adesse fas erat, quae intus erant candelabra cum ly^hnis and me^sis in quibus tibare atque adolere moris est, and vascula ex auro cuncta spectauit. Ioseph. de Bello Iudaico. l. 1. c. 5. Iosephus tels vs, Pompey went not into the most holy place alone, but accompanied with a multitude. All of them, no doubt, had sinned presumptuously against the admonitions and threatnings of Gods Priests; and this peoples curse (it seemes) did follow them, whither they themselues durst not; for as the same writer testifies, no other calamitie in that war did grieue the Nation so much, as this pollution of their Temple.
5 Whatsoeuer Tullies or other politique Romains conceipt of this people in his time was; many amongst the Romains, as well as in most other Nations, had (without question) either obserued the like fatal mischances of such as vexed them, or else had felt som good in obseruing their lawes, whose persons vnknowne they hated. In one, or both which respects, these Iewes stood vpon better termes with their Conquerors, than any other captiues did. And vnlesse it had been a receiued opinion amongst other Romaines, that this had been a people fauoured of the diuine powers; why should Tullie haue obiected their late conquest by Pompey to proue the contrarie? And (me thinks) it might haue moued him and others, so much deuoted to the Romaine Gods before, to haue thought these Iewes did serue a better God then they knew any, after they had seene their owne state vtterly ruined
 without all hope of recouerie, and their Gods either vnwilling, or vnable, (as Tullie doubtfully complaines) to redresse those miseries and calamities, of which they should at least haue giuen them warning, when as Hierusalems wals,Vide Ios. l. 14. Antiq. c. 14.15.16. which Pompey had demolished, were (according to this peoples hope, from which no power on earth could deiect them, being supported by the expresse promise of their God) reedified within twentie yeeres, and they graced with great Priuiledges for their good seruice performed to Caesar. For chiefly by their meanes became hee Lord of Aegypt, the first and surest ground of his good successe in Africke; as Iosephus out of the publike Decrees and testimonies of Romain Writers boldly auoucheth, challenging the heathen to disproue him or his testimonies, if they could, though this they easily might haue done, if hee had cited them amisse, because the Originals were then euery where extant.
6 The former testimonies alleaged out of Tullie (whose works we haue) so well agreeing with Iosephus, who it seemes had neuer read them, will not suffer any ingenious man to suspect the truth of that which the same Iosephus cites, out of Strabo the Cappadocian, whose workes are lost.Quatuor erant genera in Cyrenensium vrbe, ciues Agricolae, inquilini, and quarti Judaei, hoc^am in omnes vrbe^ subrepsit, necest facile inuenire locum in vrbo habitabili, quem recepta semel non obtineat, na^ and Aegyptus and Cyrene, vtpote eisdem solitae parere dominis, aliaeque multae regiones horum^itus admiserunt: alunique congregationes Iudaeorum maximas, tempore coalitas and vtentes institutis domesticis, per Aegyptum sane etiam coloniae sunt eius gentis, absque eo quod Alexandrinae vrbis magna pars ei assignata est. Habet etiam proprium magistratum, qui suae gentis res administret, controuersias ex iure dirimat, and contractus atque pacia rata habeat, non aliter quam fit in absoluta republica. Iosephus Antiq. Iud. lib 10. c. 12. The Iewes (saith he) haue crept into most Cities, nor can a man almost name any place in the inhabited world, where they once get footing, but they hold possession. Aegypt, Cyrene, and many other nations haue admitted their rites, and in lieu of them, nurse huge multitude of Iewes vsing their owne domestique lawe; besides that a great part of Alexandria is assigned to their vse, there be colonies of this nation throughout Aegypt which enioy magistrates of their owne, for determining all controuersies of right and wrong in such sort and forme as is vsed in absolute states.Seneca inter alias ciuilis theologiae superstitiones reprehendit Sacramenta Iudaeorum. Christianos tameniam tunc Iudaeis inimicissimos in neutram partem commemorare ousus est, ne vel laudaret contra suae patriae veterem consuctudinem, vel reprehenderet contra propriam forfitan voluntatem. De illis sanc Iudaeis, cum loqueretur ait, cum interim vsque eo sceleratissimae gentis consuetudo conualuit, vt per omnes iam te^ras recepta sit, victi victoribus legem dederunt. Mirabatur haec dicens, and quid diuinitus ageretur ignorans, subiecit plane sententiam, qua significaret, quid de illorum sacramentorum ratione senti^et. Ait enim: Illi tamen causas ritus sui nouerunt, and maior pars populi facit, quod cur faciat, ignorat August. l. 6. de ciu. D. c 11.4 Sequitur auri illa inuidia Iudaici. Hoc nimirum est illud, quod non longe a gradibus Aurelijs haec causa dicitur, ob hoc crimen hic locus, abs te Laeli at illa turba quaesi ta est. Scis quanta sit manus, quanta concordia, quantum val^t in concionibus etc. Cic. Orat. pro Flacco. Saint Augustine hath the same
 obseruation out of Senecaes books concerning superstition which this reuerend father had perused, though, with diuerse others of that famous Phylosophers workes, now lost.
7 What Strabo had obserued of these Iewes in Syllaes, and Seneca in his time, is intimated by Tullie in fewer words. You know well (saith hee vnto his aduersarie) what a great faction it is: how closely they band together, what sway they beare in assemblies. But how great soeuer the number of this people was at Rome, they durst not haue beene so bold in the Mistresse-citie of the world, vnlesse their patrons there had beene many. And it seemes by Tullies conclusion,Aurum in aerario est, furtum non reprehenditur, a iudicibus oratio auertitur, vox in coronam turbamque effunditur. Cic. Orat. pro Flacco. in the fore-mentioned place, that the bare vnkindnesse offered by Flaccus to this Nation, was worse taken at Rome, than the wrongs and violence, which he was accused to haue done to sundrie other people. The gold (saith he) for which Flaccus was accused, is in the treasurie: you charge him not with theft, but onely seeke to make him odious: your speech is turned from the iudges and directed to the companie.


CHAP. III.
Tacitus obiections against the Iewes refuted, by their palpable grosnesse, and more competent testimonie of other Heathen writers.
1 VNto this their powerfulnesse in perswading other Nations to renounce their owne, and imbrace their Lawes and religion,Hiritus quoqu^ modo inducti, antiquitate defendu^tur. Cetera instituta sinistra, foeda prauitate valuere. Nam pessimus quisque spreta relig onibus patrijs, tributa and stipes illuc congerebant. Tacit. Histor lib. 5. Tacitus ascribes the increase of these Iewes estate; albeit hee maliciously attributes this attractiue force vnto the impietie of their Lawes, as if by sympathie they had wrought most vpon wicked and depraued natures. But wherein did their impietie consist?Profana illic omn a, quae apud nos sacra. Rursum concessa apud illos, quae nobis incesta. Tacit. Hist. lib. 5. What wee Romanes esteeme sacred, they account prophane, what is polluted to vs, is lawfull to them. This argues that either the Romaine religion, or theirs, was superstitious and prophane: and hee, like a true patriot and right Romanist, loath to suspect that Religion wherein his
 forefathers had prospered so well, charges the contrarie orthodoxall with superstitious impietie. Most true it was, that the Iewes of his time were a wicked people, but euery way of the loosing hand: their strength, which had been long in gathering, was suddenly broke by Titus, and their wonted means of encrease, by addition of Proselytes, quite cut off. For after the Temples destruction, Nullus ad amissas ibat amicus opes: from the first day of our Sauiours Ministeriall Function, they woon not halfe so many Gentiles to Iudaisme, as our Sauiour and his Disciples did Iewes vnto Christianitie. Tacitus then spake not of such Iewes as liued in his time, when their strength and greatnesse was in the wane; but of their ancestors, during the time of the second Temple. Nor was it that, which was most wicked indeed in this people, or their predecessors (as their particular opposition, or contrarietie vnto diuine truths) but rather what was onely good in them, as their constancie in their Religion, and stedfast profession of Abrahams faith, common to them and the Christians; which was the ground of this Politikes hatefull censure,The grounds of worldly greatnesse hate against resolute professors of truth. Jnterim in ijs, qui ad me tanquam Christiani defer ebantur, hunc sum sequutus modum. Interroga^i ipsos, au essent Christiani: confit^ntes iterum ac tertio rogaui, suppliciu^ minatus, perseuerantes duci iussi. Neque enim dubitabam, qualecunque esset quod faterentur, peruitacia^ certe, and inflexibilem obstinationem debere pun^ri. Plin. Epist. li. 10. Epist. 100. for this reason a-like bitter against them and the Christians. That either should be so resolute in defence of their owne Religion, was, in his opinion, a pernicious superstition, lyable to any punishment that could be proposed, as another Romane Writer of his time was not ashamed to auouch. If wilfulnesse simply deserue punishment, the carnall minded make no scruple in what measure it be inflicted, seeing the more grieuous the torture is, the greater it alwayes argues their wilfulnesse or obstinacie to be, that will vndergoe it rather than obey their superiors, so as the crime seeme alwayes commensurable to the punishment, though it could be increased in infinitum. And Tacitus seemes well to approue of Antiochus sauage crueltie against the Iewes, as a medicine that would in time haue wrought a reformation, if the Parthian had permitted this cruell Surgeon to haue applyed his patients with change of such corroding playsters. So immoderate is the ambitious mens desires, that to be Lords of others bodies doth but whet their appetite, and stirre vp a longing to become Lords of their faith and consciences also. And to refuse absolute obedience in matters spirituall, as well as temporall, vnto such as are
 competent Iudges of the one, not of the other, is a sinne as hatefull as rebellion, the foulest crime that can be conceiued or fashioned in the Polititians braine.
2 Besides these generall motiues, which would minister enough of matter for superiours to condemne their inferiours: it did in particular exasperate Tacitus, and other politicks of his temper,Iudei (vt est ge^s ea irae, si semelea correpta fuerit, acerbiasimae) multa ac grauia mala quidem ij Romanis intulerant, longe tamen plura passisunt Dion. lib. 49. to see so many naturall Romaines renounce their name and countrie, forsake father and mother, friend and alliance, for maintenance of Iewish religion. And albeit that Nation had sustained incredible calamities by the Romaines, yet it vexed him to remember, that they should bee able to haue done the Romaines so much mischiefe, alwaies stirring when others were quiet; being, to his seeming, a base people in respect of many other subiect to the Romane Empire. Perhaps his hate to Christians was propagate from his inueterate malice against these Iewes, in whose region Christianitie (as he confesseth) did first spring. ButAffirmabant autem hanc esse summam, vel culpae sue erroris, quod essent solitistato die ante lucem conuenire, carmenque Christo quasi Deo dicere sec^m inuicem, seque sacramento non inscelus aliquod obstringere: sed ne furta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria committ^rent, ne fidem fallerent ne depesitum appellati abnegarent Quo magis necessariu^ credidi ex duabus ancill^s, quae ministrae dic^ba^tur, quid esse veri, et per tormenta quaerere Sed nihil aliud inueni, quam superstitionem praua^, and immodicam: ide^que d^lata cognitione ad consulendum te de cucurri. Plin. Epist. 100. l. 10. Plinies testimonie will sufficiently quit the Christians from those imputations, whichTransgressi in morem eorum idem vsurpant, nec quidquam prius imbauntur, quam contemnere Deos, eruere patriam: parentes, liberos, fratres, vilia habere. Tacit. Hist. l. 5. Tacitus vniustly layeth vpon them. As for that impietie, wherewith hee chiefly chargeth these Iewes religion, it implies an euident contradiction. Such as conforme themselues (saith he) to their customes are likewise transformed in minde. The fist precept, wherewith they are seasoned, is to contemne the Gods, to put off all naturall affection to their Countrie. If the Iewes did either forsake father, or mother, or other kindred, It was for the loue of their God, religion and Countrie. For, vnlesse the greatnesse of their loue to God drowned the other, no people in the world did euer match them in loue to their kinsfolkes, friends and countrimen. But if they perswaded the Romains to esteem the glorie of Rome as vile, in respect of Hierusalem; and account Romish rites and ceremonies, compared with theirs, as sacrilegious and prophane; they did that but vpon good and warrantable grounds, which any true Romane would haue done vpon farre worse; that is, they sought their countries good, by winning the good will of others to their estate and religion.
3 But what madnesse possessed Tacitus his minde, that hee should thinke, or rather write, for I doe not thinke that hee thought, or cared what he wrote, when he auouched, that the wickednesse of their lawes was a meanes of alluring wicked or lewde companions to their obseruance? I would their greatest enemies were admitted Iudges; whether such as indeed were, or such as any ciuill heathen would so account, not such as it pleased Tacitus only, out of meere pride and splene, to call wicked persons, would not in all likelihood, be more readie to subscribe vnto the rites of Venus or Bacchus, (whose seruice Tacitus so well likes,) or any other of the Romish Gods, than tie themselues vnto Iudaicall ceremonies; which, once subscribed vnto, were to be most strictly obserued by Aliens as well as Iewes; nor could they bee throughly acquainted with their lawes, or admitted to other mysteries, vntill they had communicate with them in that Sacrament of Circumcision, alwaies most loathsome and grieuous to flesh and bloud. What pleasures of the flesh, what dissolutenes or luxurie, or what, that can be properly called sinne or enormitie, did their lawes maintaine or nourish, or their rites or ceremonies any way insinuate? All that Tacitus (comparing their rites with those of Bacchus) could in conclusion say against them, was; ThatTiber Jestos loetosque ritus pos^t: Judocor^^mos absurdus sord^dusque. Tacit. Hist. lib. 5. Bacchus his rites were merrie and pleasant, theirs absurd and base.
4 Vnto these politicall surmises of Tacitus, altogether ignorant of forraine antiquities, I will oppose the iudgement of a lesse partiallStrabos testimonie of the Iewes religion Lib. 16. writer, and a professed antiquarie, liuing about our Sauiours time: from whom amongst o^hers we may gather, that the famous and conspicuous hill of Sion stood as a probleme to oppose the nations; and from admiration of her strange and vnobseruable fortunes and change, were so many opinions blazed abroad of those Iewes originall and state. Of all that were extant in his time, capable of any credit, this following went best for currant, and did sway the most, to wit; That these Iewes (as you heard before of his errour in this particular) were descended from the Egyptians: the cause of their departure out of Egypt, was to seeke a place, where they might worship God aright, perswaded hereunto by Moses, whom he takes for an Egyptian Priest, but one that condemned the Egyptians for painting beastes, the
 Africans and Grecians for vsing pictures of men to represent God; deeming it a madnesse to imagine, that he that contained all things, could be represented by any visible or sensible creature. Chastitie and holinesse were the dispositions of such as sought him, or could hope to know-his will: and for this purpose ordained sacrifice, neither chargeable to such as should vse them, nor otherwise offensiue by their vndecencie, lewdnesse or absurditie.(...). With these perswasions (saith he) Moses preuailed with the better sort, and such as feared God, to forsake Egypt: and seated once about Ierusalem, neighbour countries did associate themselues vnto them, allured by the equitie of their lawes, and the puritie of the religion which they professed, whence he erected a new kingdome, and that no meane one. And his successors for a time continued in his institutions, iust and rightly religious. But after they had (as Tacitus obserueth) ioyned the Priesthood to support their Kingdome, they grew moreYet was Strabo somewhat offended with Circumcision and their Sabboths, as being ignorant of their caus^s, as their Sabboths indeed were then superstitious. superstitious, tyrannicall to their owne, and noisome neighbours to other countries. d Yet was their Hold or Fort still had in honour: not detested as a nest of thieues or seat of tyrants, but reuerenced as a temple. Thus farre Strabo. Who, although he were mistaken in sundrie particulars of this peoples antiquitie, (as all beside themselues of necessitie were, by reason this sacred volumne was kept secret from all such as did not obserue their rites) yet from tradition he had learned as much, as could be knowne of them in generall: That Moses their first Law-giuer was a Prophet, and one that relyed not vpon pollicie, but the diuine Oracles; that this people in ancient times had bene much better, and had prospered accordingly.
13 With this Strabo the Geographer, that noble Historian Dion Cassius well accords, but more fully with Strabo the Cappadocian, whose works, now lost, Iosephus cited. This people (saith he) differ from others, as in many other points and daily practise of life, so especially in this that they worship no other Gods, but onely one of their owne, whom they hold to be inuisible and ineffable,(...). Strabo lib. 16 D^o^^ acquitall of these Iewes from Tacitus imputations. Diuersum a reliquis hominibus obtinent cum a^^s in veb^^, vsuque vitae quotidiano, tum eo praesertim quod n^llum ex coeteris diis colunt, vnum autem quendam s^mr^^ s^^dio venerantur. Nec vllum simulac^rum. Hierosolymis vnqu^m habuerunt; nimirum suum illum Deum (...) ^ilem and formae expertent, relig^oso eius cultu coeteros mortales superant. Dion. lib. 37. and for this cause admit
 not any Image of him: yet doe they worship him more deuoutly and religiously then any other people do their Gods. But who this god of theirs was, or bow he came at first to be thus worshipped, how greatly he was feared of this people, were points he listed not meddle withall, many other had written thereof before him.Regioipsa, Iudaea gens, Iudaei appellantur. Id cognome^ti vnde initium coeperit haud scio. Quinus and alii homines qui secundum eorum statuta viuant, id gerunt, quanquam alieniginoe Est^d genus hominum apud Romanos etiam, atque tametfi soepe in minutum sicerit, ita tamen auctum est, vt etiam condendi leges licentiam sibi vinaicarit. Or as some read, vt legum qucq^e potestatem vicerit. Dion. ibid. It seemes he gaue but little credence vnto Tacitus discourse of their originall, for he ingeniously professeth: That he knew not whence they had this name of Iewes, but others that followed their rites, although Aliens by birth and progenie, did brooke the same name or title, euen amongst the Romans themselues there were of this profession. Hee addeth; Although this people had beene often crushed and diminished: yet did they rise and increase againe aboue the controll of all other lawes, onely subiect to their owne. Thus hee spake of the Iewes liuing in Pompeys time, after which they had beene often crushed before Tacitus wrote, yet recouered strength againe.


CHAP. IIII.
The meanes of these Iewes thriuing in captiuitie. In what they exceeded other people, or were exceeded by them.
1 THese allegations, and many other, which out of Heathen writers I could bring, sufficiently proue, that albeit these Iewes tasted of as bitter calamities as any other did: yet had they this strange aduantage of all; that whereas all other were forsaken of their friendes in their aduersitie, and their Lawes vsually changed by their conquerours, oft-times abrogated or neglected by themselues vpon their ill successe: these Iewes still found most friends, and their lawes (neuer forsaken by them) most earnest fauourers, in the time of their captiuitie and distresse. This was quite contrarie to nature, politike obseruation, or custome of the world. Wherefore seeing nature and policie can affoord vs none, we must seeke resolution from their lawes. The reasons subordinate to the cause of causes (Gods
 prouidence) were these. In the time of their distresse, they did more faithfully practise their lawes themselues, and had better opportunitie, or greater necessitie of communicating them vnto others: they being of themselues alwaies most potent to allure sober and discreet mindes to their obseruance, made knowne and not preiudiced by the foolish or sinister practise of their professors. So their great Law-giuer had foretold, Deut 4. vers. 4.5.6. Behold I haue taught you ordinances and lawes, as the Lord my God commanded me, that ye should do euen so in the land, whither ye goe to possesse it. Keepe them therefore and doe them; for that is your wisedome and vnderstanding in the sight of the people, which shall heare of all these ordinances, and shall say; Onely this people is wise and of vnderstanding, and a great Nation. For what Nation is so great vnto whom the Gods come so neare vnto them, as the Lord our God is neare vnto vs in all that wee come vnto him for? And what Nation is so great that hath Ordinances and Lawes so righteous,God was more sauourable to these Iewes than to any other people. as all this law which I set before you this day? That they had not in later times so great prosperitie, as others had, was no argument that their God was not more neare to them, than the Gods of other Nations to their worshippers; for he was a God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, which did good to euery Nation; yea he made the Romanes so great a Nation, albeit they knew it not. That these Iewes were now in subiection, and the Romanes Lords, was no argument, that he was better to the Romanes than to them, or that they were a lesse Nation, if we make an equall comparison. For if God should often recouer a man from dangerous diseases, and propagate his life vnto two hundred yeares, in health and strength competent for old age; this were no argument to proue that he were not more fauourable to him, than to men of yonger yeares or middle age, whose strength is greater for the present, but they vnlikely to recouer health often impaired, or to renue life once lost in humane estimation, or to account halfe so many yeares.In what sense the Iews might truly be thoght a mightie na^^^^. In like sort was this peoples often recouerie from so many ouerthrowes and captiuities; their long continuance a distinct nation from others: more extraordinarie than the Romanes present strength or greatnesse. And albeit many other Empires and States were larger, than the Kingdome of Israel was at any time, yet no other people could be said so great a Nation
 as this. For others continued the same rather by identitie of soyle, or like forme of gouernment, then by any reall or materiall vnitie or identitie of people: their increase was meerely politicall, and their greatnesse rose by way of addition or accumulation; that is, by admitting such mixture of others, that from the first erection of the Kingdome, ere it came to its full greatnesse, the number of Aliens might ouerspreade and hide the naturall inhabitants, or progenies of such as laid the fundamentall Lawes thereof, which were seldome so continuate by direct succession, as they might be rightly distinguished from others. And as Theseus his ship was accounted one and the same, because it retayned the same forme, though not so much of the same Timber, whereof it was first built, as did goe to the making of halfe the keele: so the greatest States amongst the Heathens, retayned perhappes some few fundamentall lawes, or relikes of Ancient Families descending from their first founders, in which respect alone they might be taken for one Kingdome, but not so properly termed one People or Nation, to whom greatnesse could be truly attributed, seeing a great many of seuerall people were to share in this title. But these Iewes (besides the perpetuall vnitie, their particular, as well as fundamentall lawes, lesse varied eyther by change, addition or abrogation, than the Lawes of any other Nation) continued still one and the same people by a strict Vnion of succession, their grouth was naturall, after the manner of vitall augmentation. For albeit they admitted some mixture of strangers, they could notwithstanding alwaies distinguish the progenie of forraine stockes from their naturall branches, which they could still deriue from their seuerall stemmes, and these all from one and the same roote: so that after so many changes, and alterations of their State from better to worse, and backe againe; after so many glorious victories, as Scriptures mention gotten by them ouer others; and so many captiuities of their persons and desolations of their countries, as others had wrought, they remained still one and the same people, by such a kinde of vnitie, as a great Oake is said one and the same tree, from its first spring to its last fall, whether naked and bereft of leaues by blastes of Autumne or Winters frost, or spoyled of boughes by the
 loppers axe, or beautified with pleasant leafe, or farspreading branches. If the glorie of other kingdomes were more splendent for a flash, presently to bee extinguished, (as being greater than their corruptible nature was capable of:) this no way impeacheth Gods promise for making Abrahams seede a mightie Nation; seeing it was not at any time so great a people as at al times it might haue beene, had they obserued the meanes appointed for their grouth. How incomparable the height of Sions roofe, aboue other nations, might haue bin, we may gesse from the capacitie of her foundations. The known altitude and continuance of her wals, though neuer finished to her founders desire,The strength and cont^nuance of these Iewes diseased estate, argues how incomparable their strength might haue beene had they followed their Lawgiuers precepts for the preseruation of their health. yet such, as who so shall looke vpon with vnpartiall eye, must acknowledge ordained for extraordinarie strength and greatnesse. For take wee this Kingdome with it defectes; what wonder can reuolutions of time affoorde like to this late mentioned? That by such an vnitie of naturall propagation from one roote, (almost perished before it sprouted,) and distinct lineall succession neuer interrupted, Abrahams seede should continue one and the same Nation for two thousand yeares: sometimes the mightiest amongest coeuall Kingdomes, a scourge and terrour to all neighbour countries; and after many grieuous wounds and deadly, in their estimation that gaue them, receiued from others, still preserued aliue, to see the successiue rise and fall of three great and potent Monarchies, yet able in decrepit daies, to hold play with the fourth, the mightiest that euer was on earth, euen whilest it was in it best age, full strength and perfect health, free from any intestine broyles, secure of all externall assaultes. Much better were these Iewes able to encounter the Romane Empyre, in Tacitus his life time, than it, within three hundred yeares after his death, to defend the imperiall seate against barbarous, seelie, and foolish nations, vnhatched when the Romane Eagle winges were spread ouer the most famous Kingdomes of the earth. Suppose the Romane Empyre had receiued,The Romane Empyre had neuer the like push before it fell, as it had by the Iewes in Adrians time. at the same time, but halfe so terrible a blow in Italy, as these Iewes had done in Iurie and Hierusalem vnder Vespasian, and his sonne: how easily had the commotions of their relickes, in Traeians and Adrians times, shaken the Romane yoake from off the Nations neckes? Or if the other tenne Tribes returne had beene but halfe so entire and
 complete, as Iudahes and Beniamins were, the Romane Eagles had neuer come to prey vpon their carkases in the territories of Iudea. But it was their strong God, which before had scattered Israel amongst the nations, and at the time appointed shut these Iewes vp in Hierusalem, as in a prison.
2 Againe, other Kingdomes gained little by their greatnesse, saue onely magnificent names or swelling titles. No other people euioied so great prosperitie, so good cheape, as this sometimes did, and all times might haue done. No other had so good assurance or securitie of that prosperitie or peace they enioyed, as this people had, vnlesse themselues had made a wilfull forfeiture: nor was the publike health or welfare of any other state or Kingdome so fully communicated to euery particular and inferiour member. For vsually the titularie or abstract brightnesse of that glorie, wherewith other great states outwardly seemed most to shine, was maintained with the perpetuall harmes and internall secret mischiefes of many priuate persons, as great flames are not nourished without great store of fuell: whereas the prosperitie of Dauids throne, as in other points so in this, was established like the Moone: that whilest they turned vnto their God, their state was capable of greatest splendour, without consumption of their naturall partes or substance. And euen whilest other States did for their sinnes preuaile against theirs, yet such Peeres as had beene principall instruments of their woe, and tooke occasion to disgrace their Lawes or Religion, in their captiuitie and distresse, had for the most part, (as was obserued before) fearefull and disastrous ends: and might more iustly haue taken vp that complaint, after their spoyles of Iewrie, which Diomedes did after the destruction of Troy,
Quicunque Iliacos ferro violauimus agros,-- nefanda per orbemSupplicia scelerum poenas expendimus omnes.What did Troies fall, or Phrygian spoyles, the Graecians state aduance?Whom fearfull plagues haunt through the world: such was the victors chance.

Many of them (no doubt) before their dying day, had obserued as he did, that they had foughten against some God, whilest they wrong'd this people: and would haue beene as vnwilling to beare armes against them againe as hee was against the relickes of the Troians:
Nec mihi cum Teueris vllum post eruta bellumPergama: nec veterum memini loetoruc malorum.What Troy my splene to Troia^s ceas^t, her flames quench th'heat of warI little ioy of what is past. Rub not a bleeding scar.
3 For these and many like consequentes, this people in the issue and vpshot of their greatest calamities, had both reason to reioyce, and Psal. 126.6. the Heathens iust cause to say: The Lord had done great things for them, albeit hee often suffered them to bee conquered. For euen this sicklinesse of their State was a meanes of its long life, their scourges and phlebotomies a signe of Gods tender care ouer their health, vntill they grew proud of his fauour, and waxed obdurate by his often fatherly corrections, as one of their owne writers well obserues. The Lord doth not long waite for vs,2. Mott. 6.14. as for other Nations whom hee punisheth, when they are come to the fulnesse of their sinnes. But thus he dealeth with vs, that our sinnes should not be heaped vp to the full, so that afterward he should punish vs, and therefore he neuer withdrawes his mercie from vs, and though he punish with aduersitie, yet doth he neuer forsake his people.
4 Finally, their decay and increase was such as could not bee measured by the rules of policie. Hence was it that Tacitus was not tacitus, but a tatler, transported from himselfe, his wonted sagacitie and ingenuitie, as being quite out of his naturall element, while hee medled with their affayres. That contrarietie, which he obserues betwixt theirs and the Romans Religion, was as great betwixt their policies. What was good in the one, was nought in the other: that which Rome did thinke might preserue her in helth, was apprehe^ded, by the wisest amongst this people, as readie poison for their state. Those plots which would haue
 crushed any other people once brought vnder, did oft worke their aduancement, and their enemies fall. Whence both their rising and falling, and consequently, the successe of such as opposed themselues against them, were, in other Nations apprehension, sometime in their owne, meerely fatall, altogether incorrigible by worldly policie, especially in more auncient times. Hence did the wise men of Chaldee, vpon the first notice of the windes turning for them, read Haamans destinie, but too late:Esther 6.13. If Mordecai be of the seed of the Iewes, before whom thou hast begun to fall, thou shalt not preuaile against him, but shalt surely fall before him. Achion the Ammonites speech to Holofernes, whether truly vttered by him, or fained by the pen-man of that storie, was framed (no doubt) according to the knowne experience of those times, and containes such aduise, as a faithfull counsellor, well acquainted with their estate, vpon like occasion should haue giuen vnto his Lord, not so well acquainted with it. This hee was bound vnto by the rules of Poetrie,Vnto what time this Historie is to be referred, Vide Sulpit. Seuerum. which the author of that booke (vnlesse perhaps his memorie faile him in the circumstance of time, an escape incident to fictions, for their affinitie with lyes) very well obserues, if his worke be rather to be censured for a Poeme than an Historie; his aduise was this:Iudith 5.21. And whiles they sinned not before their God, they prospered, because the God that hated iniquitie was with them. But when they departed from the way which he appointed them, they were destroyed in many battailes after a wonderfull sort, and were led captiue into a land that was not theirs: and the Temple of their God was cast to the ground, and their Cities were taken by the enemies. But now they are turned to their God, and are come vp from the scattering wherein they were scattered, and haue possessed Hierusalem, where their Temple is, and dwell in the mountaines which were desolate. Now therefore my Lord and Gouernour, if there be any fault in this people, so that they haue sinned against their God, let vs consider that this shall be their ruine, and let vs goe vp, that we may ouercome them. But if there be none iniquitie in this people, let my Lord passe by, least their Lord defend them, and their God be for them, and we become a reproach before all the world. The first root of all such effects or knowne experiments, as in auncient time, yeelded matter to their neighbours of this or like obseruation, was Gods first promise vnto Abraham:Gen. 12.2, 3. And I will make of thee a great Nation, and will blesse thee, and make thy name great, and
 thou shalt be a blessing. I will also blesse them that blesse thee, and curse them that curse thee, and in thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed.The causes and gr^unds of the heath^ns insulting ouer the Iewes in their distresse. Which promise, as it doth concerne the temporall state of the Iewes, was to be limited according to the tenor of Achiors speech, and did then onely take effect, when they followed Abrahams footsteps, and liued in faithfull obedience to Gods Lawes, or hauing transgressed them, did turne againe with their whole heart to seeke the God of their Fathers. From experience of their good successe in such cases, partly (I thinke) were their neighbour countries so sauage and mercilesse towards them in their greatest distresse, alwayes crying, vpon like occasion, as the Edomites did in the day of Hierusalem, Downe with it, downe with it euen to the ground; because they could not hope for any reuenge, but by waiting the turning of their fates, and taking them in the ebbing of their fortunes: for when they begun to rise, they knew there was no meanes to stay them. TheIudea terra quali nunquam ante mo^u co^cussa, magnam, per totam ^am re^^nem iacturam fecit pecud^m: q un and haminu^ oppr^ssa sunt rui^s aediu^ circ^ter de^e millia, militaris tamen multitudo nihil detrimenti accepit, vtpote sub d^ oagu^s. H ec ^lades etia^ in maius aucta rum^^ibus, quos ^u^cij ge^tilium od o i^ non ignari dabant auribus Arabum, im^^ane quanin extulit host^um animos, quasi subuersi^ Iudaeorum vrbibus and extinctis hominabus, nulli iam superessent. Legatos itaque gentis, quir^bus afflictis pacem patuuri venerant comprehensos necauerunt, moxque magna alacritate preperaueru^t ad hosti e^ exercitum. Joseph. Antiq. Iud. l. 15. c. 7. Arabians immane and sauage practises vpon their Embassadors, seeking compassion to their lamentable estate, torne and ruinate by the mightie hand of their God, in a fearefull and prodigious Earthquake, doe argue a deepe rooted memorie of their ancestors strange ouerthrowes (mentioned in Scripture) by this peoples forefathers; and these later Arabians, long lying in wait to do these Iewes a mischiefe, if they had not beene restrained by the mightie hand of God; who now, as they suppose, being turned their enemie, they apprehend this opportunitie of working a full reuenge. Nor are their hard hearts mollified with their publike miseries, nor their inueterate malice so quenched with their embassadors bloud, shed in the 7. yeare of Herods raigne, but it burst out againe in Vespasians time. For these Arabians, though neuer (as aAmmia. Marcel. lib. 84. Romane Writer notes) any true friends, or well-willers to the Romane state, were the forwardest men to assist Titus in Hierusalems last and fatall siege; for the same reasons were the Nations round about them as earnestly bent to hinder the reedifying of Hierusalem, after the returne from captiuitie, as these were now to pull it downe, as fearing least this peoples good fortunes should rise againe with their Citie wals. But as Nehemia notes,Nehem. 6.16. after the enemies had heard that the wall was finished, they were afraid, and their courage fayled them, for they knew that this worke was wrought by God.
5 These and like obseruations make me thinke, it was neither skill in Astrologie, or profession of such Arts as the Magi vsed, (whereunto this of all people was least addicted) which first hatched that opinion of the Iewes descent from the Magi:Refert Diog laertius, in Prooemio. rather the later Heathen, ignorant of their originall, and not able to deriue that strange successe which did haunt them, or their demeanour answerable thereto, from ordinarie or naturall causes, referred all to Magicke spels, or some secret Art of diuination. So vnwilling is flesh and bloud to acknowledge such as they hate, for the beloued of the Lord; and so powerfull is the Prince of darkenesse, either to blind the hearts of the worldly wise, or to auert their eyes from beholding an vnpleasant truth, that if at any time the finger of God appeare in the deliuerance or good successe of his people, the infidell or naturall man ascribes such effects as Magicians (vnlesse vpon presumption of trauellers priuiledge amongst the ignorant) durst not arrogate to themselues, vnto Magicall or some other like Arts; because the corruption of their nature is more capable of such practises, than of true beleefe in God, and they more prone in distresse to flye vnto Sorceries or Magick charmes,^ege Xiphilinum in libro Dionis 71. than with true faith and firme constancie to expect the deliuerance of the Lord by such meanes as the faithfull Israelites did. So when the Christian Legion had, by their prayers, relieued Antonius armie, readie to swound for thirst, with plentie of water, in as miraculous sort as Elias did sometime the hoast of Israel; the Heathens, acknowledging the effect for supernaturall, ascribed it to Arnuphis, the Egyptian Sorcerer, his acquaintance with Mercurie, and other supposed Gods of the ayre. In like sort the moderne Iew, acknowledging many wonders wrought by our Sauiour, takes it for a sufficient argument,Vide Munsterum in secundum caput Matth. Heb. That all of them were wrought by Magicke skill, onely because the Euangelist sayth, he had beene in Egypt; so is he blinded with wilfull malice, that he cannot see how, by this obiection hee layes all the wonders which Moses wrought, open to the like exception of Atheists, Infidels, and Heathen. For both Moses, in whom he trusts, and Abraham in whom he glories, and all the Patriarches, from whome the Iewes descended, had beene in Egypt, in ripe age, where our Sauiour came not, but in his infancie. As for his myracles, the testimonie of Moses,
 and other Prophets, whose diuine authoritie is acknowledged by the Iew, shall euince them, wrought by the finger of God. In the meane time the estate of the Iewes since their death, sufficiently knowne to all the world, and foretold by them, shall manifest against the Atheist, that they all wrote by the spirit of God.


CHAP. V.
That all the Heathens obiections against, or doubts concerning the Iewes estate, are preuented or resolued by Iewish Writers.
1 OVt of that which hath beene hitherto premised, this conclusion stands firme, supported both by forraine Writers obseruation, and these Iewes owne confession, That they were a people remarkable, for their vnusuall prosperitie and calamitie. I am fully persuaded it would haue giuen full satisfaction to any ingenuous Roman or later Heathen, that this was a people beloued of God, had they knowne as much as we doe: that all they could obiect in contempt of the Iewes, or their Religion, had beene conceiued before by the Assyrian and Babylonian, but falsified in the euent, fully answered by Iudaicall Writers, and plainely foretold by their Prophets; least such euents as occasioned others to contemne them, might haue proued temptations to the godly amongst this people, as if they had beene forsaken of their God. The dayes had beene, wherein the Babylonians had taken themselues for men, and their Idols for gods, as good as Rome had any; and these Iewes for as base a people as the world yeelded: They had gathered captiuitie as the sand,Abac. 1.10. mocked the Kings, and made a scorne of the Princes, deriding euery strong Hold: and hence (as the Prophet foresaw) they were as readie as the Romanes to take a courage in transgressing and doing wickedly, imputing this their power vnto their God. But the Prophet is not herewith dismayed, nor tempted to thinke his Gods power was lesse than theirs; albeit, to shew himselfe a true Patriot of Israel, hee complaines of their intolerable presumption, which in due time he wel foresees should be abated. Art not thou of old, my Lord my God, mine holy one? We shall not die:
 O Lord, thou hast ordained them for iudgement, and O God thou hast established them for correction. Thou art of pure eyes, and canst not see euill, thou canst not behold wickednesse: wherefore doest thou looke vpon the transgressors, and holdest thy tongue when the wicked deuoureth the man, that is more righteous than he? and makest men as the fishes of the sea, and as the creeping things, that haue no ruler ouer them? They take vp all with the angle, they catch it in their net, and gather it in their yarne, whereof they reioyce and are glad. Therefore they sacrifice vnto their net, and burne incense vnto their yarne, because by them their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous. Shall they therefore stretch out their net, and not spare continually to slay the Nations? No: he knew their time was limited, and other Nations, as Ieremie saith, When his time was come, were to serue themselues of him; though God at that time had exposed the Princes of Iudah to his violence, for their violent oppression of their brethren, as Habacuc expressely notes in the beginning of his fore-mentioned Prophecie. These Iewes, before the euent did proue the contrarie, were as incredulous they should bee brought into captiuitie by the Babylonian, or such foolish Idolaters, as the Romans were of their great prosperitie vnder Dauid or Salomon. And for to beat downe this proud humor in them, the Prophet Ezechiel foretels, That for their extreame crueltie the Lord would punish them by the most wicked of the Heathen: Make a chaine: for the land is full of the iudgement of bloud,Ezech. 7.23. and the Citie is full of crueltie. Wherefore I will bring the most wicked of the Heathen, and they shall possesse their houses: I will also make the pompe of the mightie to cease, and their holy places shall be defiled. When destruction commeth, they shall seeke peace, and shall not haue it: Calamitie shall come vpon calamitie, and rumor shall be vpon rumor: then shall they seeke a vision of the Prophet, but the Law shall perish from the Priest, and counsell from the Ancient. And least any should maruaile, why God would so vse his chosen people, he giues the reason in the words immediatly following, because he was a God of iustice. The King shall mourne, and the Princes shall be clothed with desolation, and the hands of the people in the land shal be troubled: I will doe vnto them according to their wayes, and according to their iudgements will I iudge them, and they shall know that I am the Lord.
2 More particularly both Tullies obiection, concerning their ouerthrow and conquest, is directly answered; Strabo and Senecaes
 doubt, concerning their thriuing in captiuitie, fully resolued; and Tacitus false imputations of their increase, sufficiently cleared by the Psalmist:Psal. 106.39. They were stained with their owne workes, and went a whoring with their owne inuentions: therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people, and he abhorred his owne inheritance, and he gaue them into the hand of the Heathen: and they that hated them were Lords ouer them. Their enemies also oppressed them, and they were humbled vnder their hand. Many a time did he deliuer them, but they prouoked him by their counsels, therefore they were brought downe by their iniquities. Had Tullie read thus much, he might haue bin fully satisfied, that it was not loue or hate of his immortall gods, which made the Romanes conquerors, the Iewes captiuate: but it was their loue to sinne, onely hatefull to their God, which brought them in subjection vnto the Romanes; and made Caesar, whom Tullie and other Romans hated, Lord ouer them, as they had bin ouer the Iewes. And if Strabo, Seneca, Tacitus, or others, that either enuied or maruelled at these Iewes prosperitie, had read what followes in the same Psalme, they had rested better satisfied with the reason that the Psalmist there giues, than with such as blundering Politicians guesse at:vers. 44. For although they had bin brought downe by their iniquitie, yet their God, who had giuen them into their enemies hand, saw when they were in affliction, and heard their cry. And he remembred his couenant towards them, and repented according to the multitude of his mercies, and gaue them fauour in the sight of all them that led them away captiues. The Psalmist had better vnderstanding of Gods dealing with these people, than Tullie and Strabo had; and in confidence of Gods mercies, which they had often tasted, he concludes with this prayer:vers 47. Saue vs, O Lord, our God, and gather vs from among the Heathen, that we may praise thy holy name, and glorie in thy praises. Though this godly Psalmist saw this people in greater distresse than they were in Tullies time, yet hee attributes not their captiuitie and oppression vnto any want of good will in their God towards them, but vnto their ingratitude towards him: for if they had beene thankfull vnto him, the blowes that light on them should haue beene spent vpon their enemies. But as another Psalmist complaines in the person of his God, Psal. 81.11. But my people would not heare my voice,Psal. 81.11. vers. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. and Israel would haue none of me. So I gaue them ouer vnto the hardnesse of their hearts, and they haue walked
 in their owne counsels. O that my people would haue hearkened vnto me, and Israel had walked in my wayes, I would soone haue humbled their enemies, and turned my hand against their aduersaries: The haters of the Lord should haue beene subiect to them, and their time should haue endured for euer. I would haue fed them (saith the Lord) with the finest wheat, and with the honey out of the rocke would I haue satisfied thee.
3 This one place, to omit many other,Gods especiall fauors towards the Iewes, no way impeach his vnpartiall iudgements. abundantly proues the former assertion, That if this people had continued in well doing, all the Nations should continually haue wondered at their extraordinarie prosperitie. But here a Christian may as well doubt, as the Heathen wonder, Why Israel after so many transgressions, as the Author of the hundred and sixt Psalme complaines of, was not destroyed at once, as other great and mightie Nations had bin. For the more abundant fauours their fore-fathers had found, and the greater Gods blessings (layd vp for their posteritie) were, the greater was their ingratitude in rebelling, their rebellion it selfe so much more wilfully hainous; and alwaies the more wilfull or hainous any sinne is, the more grieuous, certaine, and more speedie punishment it deserues. How could that most just and holy one, which so often protesteth he respecteth no mens persons, spare this most vngratefull, stubborne, and rebellious people, longer than any other?
4 The full and necessarie consequence of these collections is thus much, and no more: The finall extirpation of these Iewes had bin accomplished many generations before it came to passe, had the Lord bin only iust, or respected onely their deserts, whom he so often preserued, when iustly he might haue destroyed them. But if wee looke farther into the waies of Gods prouidence, the true end and reason of destroying others, and preseruing them, wil appeare one and the same. For that suddaine execution of his justice vpon others, which did so much aduance his glorie, equally practised vpon them, had as greatly impeached it amongst the nations. This cause of their long preseruation the Lord himselfe assignes, Deut. 32.26.27. I haue said I would scatter them abroad, I would make their remembrance to cease from among men; saue that I feared the furie of the enemie, least their aduersaries should wax proud, and least they should say, Our high hand, and not the Lord, hath done all this. Againe, as the Lord was most iust, so was he most kind and mercifull towards all, euen towards the Gentiles, in these Iewes: for by their strange deliuerance and restauration
 the other might haue learned, that their God was a God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, most worthie to be honored of all the world, as he himselfe addeth in the fore-cited place:Vers. 36, 37, 38, and 39. For the Lord shall iudge his people, and repent towards his seruants, when he seeth that their power is gone, and none shut vp in Hold, nor left abroad: when men shall say, Where are their Gods, their mightie God in whom they trusted, which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and did drinke the wine of their drinke-offering? Let them rise vp and helpe you; let him be your refuge: Behold now, for I, I am he, and there is no gods with me. Thus, since these Iewes began first to be a Nation, as well the wane as the encrease of their estate; or (to vse our Apostles words) as well their diminution as abundance might haue yeelded the docile and well disposed greater riches, than the spoyles of their Cities and Countrey did the proud and mightie amongst the Gentiles. And albeit they oft times sinned more grieuously than others did, yet were there alwayes left some godly amongst this people, which in their distresse knew themselues, and could teach others the right way to repentance; of which the Heathen, one and other, were altogether ignorant. And this was an especiall cause, though subordinate to the former, of their long preseruation. For when they were not so extreame bad, as to continue in former sinnes, but vnfainedly called vpon the Lord in their distresse, he heard their prayers; and being once receiued to his, they found fauour at their enemies hands. So Salomon had obserued, When the wayes of a man please the Lord, he will make also his enemies at peace with him. The truth whereof we haue seene continually experienced in these Iewes, before our Sauiours time, though much degenerate from their auncestors. But their posteritie, as much degenerate from them as they from the other, goe as farre beyond the middle sort in punishment, as they came short of their first fore-fathers in all graces and fauours bestowed vpon them by their God. Though these (such I meane as liued since our Sauiours time) cry vnto the Lord, yet doth he not heare them, although their distresses haue beene more and more grieuous, many hundred yeares together, than their fore-fathers.P^o. 28. What is the reason? Because they haue turned their eares continually from hearing the Law, therefore their prayers are continually turned into sinne.
5 Thus though the alteration of the Iewish state be such, as all the world might wonder, and stand amazed at; such as would make the wisest heathen giddie, that should seeke to compasse the true causes thereof by politique search; yet vnto vs Christians, that haue the Oracles of our God, their estate cannot seeme strange; seeing nothing, good or bad, that hath befallen this people, from their first beginning to this present day, but is foretolde in the sacred storie, which hath continually proued it selfe as infallible a Prognostication for what is to come, as it is an authentike register of all things past.
6 The particular kalendars, wherin their good or dismall daies are distinguished, according to the diuersity of their ways, we may find Leuit. 26. and Deut. 28. After Moses had proposed extraordinary blessings, if they would walke in the Lawes which he had giuen them, hee threatneth them with plagues and calamities in their owne Land; as with bodily sickenesse, incursion of enemies, oppressions and spoyle of goods, strange ouerthrowes in battell, and fearefulnesse of heart. And if these would not reclaime them, then hee threatneth to punish them seauen times more according to their sinnes: as with barrennesse of soyle, prodigious famine, and scarcity of fruit. And yet if they hold on stil to work stubbornly against him, he threatneth to multiply the former plagues seuen times; by sending wild beasts among them, which should spoile them and destroy their cattell, and make them few in number, and your high-waies shal be desolate. The like multiplying of his plagues, for the increase of their stubbornenesse, hee reiterates twice againe ver. 23. to the 27. Yet, if by those you will not be reformed etc. hee increaseth all the former plagues seauen times againe, verse 28, 29, 31, 32, 33, and 36, 37, 38. The first and second degrees of the plagues threatned, were in part fulfilled in the dayes of Gedeon, Samson, Samuel, and Saul: The third likewise (by wilde beastes) wee see fulfilled in the dayes of Iehoram King of Israel, 2. Kings chap. 17. verse 25, 26. The fourth and fift likewise wee see in part fulfilled in the captiuitie of Israel in Iudah, in the dayes of Manasseh, Iehoiachim, and Tzedechiah; and in the time of Ptolomie the first, vnder Antiochus Epiphanes. Both their owne and other Stories, giue vs full Experiments of this Prophecie. As their stubbornenesse did increase, so Gods plagues here threatned did wax more grieuous:
 these later calamities being, at the least, seuen times greater (both for extent and duraunce) than the former persecutions, which they suffered by the Philistims, Moabites, Aramites, and Ammonites. But the fifth and last plague, which containeth all the rest more than seuen times, was not accomplished till after our Sauiours death: after which time, all the rest (in part fulfilled before) are more than seuen times multiplied vppon them. In their former ouerthrowes or captiuities, they suffered the violence of warre, and oftentimes felt the extremitie of hostile lawes: but after these storms were past, so they would submit themselues vnto their conquerors, they vsually found (as was shewed before) more than ordinary fauour at their hands. But since our Sauiors death, the memory of their former plagues hath bin but an inuitation of the like, or worse; their continuall bad vsage prescribing the lawfulnesse of their abuse. In the 28. of Deuteronomy, the extraordinary blessings, and plagues which were to ouertake this people, either in their life or death, are more exactly calculated. And albeit their blessings might haue beene more, and more admirable, than the curses that haue befallen them: yet Moses (it seemes) foreseeing, or fearing what would be, rather than hoping the best that might be, is almost foure times as long in calculating their plagues, as their blessings. So haue the miseries of these later Iewes beene foure times as long, as the prosperitie of their worthy auncestours; if wee would take an exact measure of the one, from the sacred histories before the Babylonish captiuity, of the later from experience and relation of Iewish or Heathen writers. And yet no plague, either knowne by experience, or related by any Writers, but is euidently foretold by Moses. His particular praedictions shall be inserted, as the euents shall giue the occasion throughout this Discourse. To beginne with that most horrible plague, Deut. 28.53. etc. And thou shalt eate the fruit of thy body, euen the flesh of thy sonnes and thy daughters, which the Lord thy God hath giuen thee, during the siege and straitnesse, wherein thy enemy shall inclose thee. So that the man that is tender and exceeding daintie among you, shall be grieued at his brother, and at his wife that lieth in his bosome, and at the remnant of his children, which he hath yet left. For feare of giuing vnto any of them of the flesh of his children, whome he shall eate, because he hath nothing left him in that siege and straitnes,
 wherein the enemy shall besiege thee in all thy Citties. The tender and dainty woman among you, which neuer could venture to set the soale of her foote on the ground (for her softnesse and tendernesse) shall be grieued at her husband that lieth in her bosome, and at her sonne, and at her daughter, and at her after birth, that shall come out from betweene her feet; and at her children which she shall beare. For when all things lacke she shall eate them secretly, during the siege and straitnes, wherein thine enemy shall besiege thee in thy Cities. This prophecie we see fulfilled, to an haires breadth, in Vespasians time.


CHAP. VI.
The fulfilling of Moses and others Prophecies touching the desolation of Iewry, and destruction of Ierusalem: and the signes of the time, witnessing Gods wonderfull hand therein.
1 SEeing that part of Tacitus is lost, whence we might haue knowne more, concerning their calamitie, than we can find now in heathen writers, we must take the conclusions, answerable to Moses praedictions, from Iosephus a Iew by birth, no way partiall for Christians. And his conclusions (to omit Moses his authority or other inducements) can not seeme improbable, from such premisses, as the Romane writers haue confirmed; though little intending such inferences, as we now make from them. Doe the calamities of those Iewes, related by Iosephus and Eusebius, seeme strange? They iustly may, if wee consider this people as naturall or ordinary men, not as paternes of GODS extraordinarie iudgements. Straunge might theyr iudgements seeme, and incredible to the Romanes or worldly-wise, vnlesse other circumstances of that Time, witnessed by the Romanes themselues, were as rare. But if, by the Romanes opinion, euerie vnusuall effect in Nature did portend some such strange euent in humane affaires: why should not the wisest of them in that Age, expect some extraordinary or miraculous matters of
 Vespasians time? yet, excepting what he did vnto those stubborne Iewes, his other acts were but ordinarie, and required no pompous or magnificent prologues: whereas many signes, either foreshewing his exaltation to the Empire, or confirming his right vnto it, or authority in managing it, were such as no heathen, I think, hath euer heard of before, but most consonant vnto Gods wonted signes in Israel, whilest their Kings did prosper. Seeing the wisedome of the wise, and vnderstanding of the prudent amongst this people, had beene long hid, as the Lord had threatned by his Prophet Esay chap. 29. and they themselues had complained, We see not our tokens, we haue not one Prophet more: Whence was it that Iosephus the Iew should become a prophet for Vespasians good, who had alreadie brought much, likely to bring more harme vpon his Country and him, now captiued, and imprisoned by him? SoEt vnus ex nobilibus captiuis Josephus, cum conijceretur in vincula, constantissime asseuerauit sore, vt ab eodem breui solueretur, veram iam imperatore. Sueton. in Vesp. It is not probable that eyther Suetonius, Tacitus, or Dion should take this testimony from Iosephus (though he relate it) but fro^ the Romanes that were eare witnesses of it: It is lesse probable againe that Ioseph should learne this from any prophecies concerning Christ, for he knew Vespasian was no Iew^ rather God made him as a mouth to those other dumbe signes which Roman writers relate, by his appoyntment foreshewing Vespasians exaltation; as Dion notes. For speaking of other signes he saith: S^d h^c quidem omnia egebat interpretatione. At Iosephus, natione Iudaeus ante abeo captus constrictusque vinculis rideus ait; Nunc quidem me vincies, post annum autem sol^es, quum fueris imperator factus. Igitur Vespasianus vt alij quid^m, ad principatum natus erat. Dion. hist. Rom. lib. 66. Vid. Josephum ipsum. Suetonius and Tacitus (no factious friends for Iews or Christians) tell vs, Iosephus did solace himselfe at his Commission with this; that Vespasian the Emperour should shortly release him. Though Vespasian at that that time was farre enough from such hopes, in the iudgement of the Romane state, which had appoynted him Generall in the Iewish warres, becauseSuetonius in Vespasia^, verba citantur prox. sequ. pag. his meane birth, and obscure familie, did minister least suspition of affecting the splendour and Dignitie of the Romane Empire, if hee should proue Conquerour. Did the rest of his vnruely Countrey-men, conceit any such matter of Vespasian, as Iosephus did; Then had they not continued stubborne as they did. But although Israell knew him not, and his people had no vnderstanding, yet the dumbePrandente eo quendam, tanis extrarius triclinio manum humanam intulit coenante ru^sus, bos arator d^cuss^iugo, triclinium ^rup^t, ac sugatis ministris, quasi defessus, procidit ad ipsos accumb^ns ped^s ceruicemque submisit. Apud Iudaeam Carmeli oraculum consulentem, ita confirmauere sortes, vt quicquid cogitaret animo volueretque quantumlibet magnum, id esse prouenturum pollicerentur. Sueton. in Vesp^siano. Oxe knew him to be his owner, and appoynted Lord of the earth, and in signe of his submission to him, hauing cast off his yoake, ranne furiously into the roome where hee sate at supper;
 where affrighting his attendances from him, he strait prostrates himselfe before his feet (as if he had bin wearie) offring his necke to his clemencie. Oracles had ceased in Iewry (at least from speaking any good vnto the Iewes) yet the Oracles of Carmel assure Vespasian of good successe in all that he should set his hand vnto.
2 As these, and many other praesignifications were more than naturall, so the means of his aduancement (if we respect only the purpose of men) were meerely casuall nor is it possible for the Atheist to imagine their concurrence contriued by policie.
3 But herein wee may cleerely see Gods couenant of exalting this people, and humbling their foes, quite inuerted; all the plagues threatned to such as bare ill will to Sion, lights on her friends and inhabitants, all the blessings promised to such as prayed for Ierusalems Peace, are heaped vpon them that worke her ruine. More particularly do they verifie that Prophecy of Moses, Deut. 28. v. 43. The stranger that is amongst you shall climbe vp on high, and thou shalt come downe beneath alow. For these children of the kingdom, taking violent but false hold vpon Gods truest promises, doe, by their vnseasonable desire of exalting themselues aboue the nations, hoise him vp to highest dignitie, that was ordaind to pluck them downe from their seate, and bring them below all other people. The maner of it was thus.
4Percrebiter at orient^ toto vetus and constans opinio: esse in satis, vt co ^^mpore Judaea profectirerum p^tirentur. Id de Imperatore Romano, quantuus cuentu p^stea patuit, praedictum, Iudaei ad se trahentes, rebella^unt: coesoq^^ Pr^posito, legatum insuper S^^tae consularem suppetias serentem rapta aquila sugauerunt. Ad hunc motum comprimendum cum exerc^^^ aux^^ ar^, and non instrenuo duce, cui tamen ^uto tanta res committeretur opus esset, ips^ potis^imum dilectus est, vt indu^^^^ expertae, nec metuendus vllo modo ob numilitatem generis ac nominis. Suetonius ^n Vespasiano. There was a constant opinion through the East, that Iewry about this time should bring forth the monarch of the world. In confidence of which prophecie, the Iews (as the Roman Writers obserue) did rebell. Vespasian (otherwise likely to haue liued in danger, died in obscuritie and disgrace, whereunto Nero had designed him) appointed, for reasons afore alleadged, to manage these wars, gets renowne f^r his good seruice, among the Romans, good wil of the Esterne nations; and vpon Neroes death and ciuil broiles thence insuing; partly by promise of assistance from the Parthian, partly by other vnexpected occurrents; had the Empire thrust vpo^ him, otherwiseNec tamen^ q^^dquam ante tentauit; promptiss^mis atque etiam instantibus suis, qu^m solicitatus quorundam and igroto^um and absentium fortuito fauore. Suet. ibidem. backward of himselfe to entertaine hopes, suggested to him from heauen by many wonderfull signes and tokens.

Yet after all this, being made Emperor on a suddaine, before hee could bethink himselfe what belonged to so high a place, he wanted (Sueton. paulo posteae. Antoritas and quasimaeiest^s quaedam, vt sc^^^^t inopinato and adhuc nouo principi decrat: h^c quoq^e acces^it. as the Historian notes) Authority and Maiesty to countenance his proceedings: and these againe are confirmed vnto him, at his first entrance into the Empire, by meanes more miraculous than the former. Since Rome beganne was it not heard, that any Romane had opened the eyes of the blinde; vnlesse this man had beene from God, he could haue done nothing. Why then do the Heathen rage, and the people murmure a vaine thing against God, and his annointed the Christ, as if hee had not healed him which was borne blind, with spittle? when as Vespasian, late elected Emperour, did cure one desperately blinde, by spitting vpon his eies; or whence came that vertue into this new Emperors feet, that he should heale a lame and witherd thigh, by treading vpon it?Ae^timari a medius iubet V^spasianus an ta^is coecitas ac d^bi^tas ope humani superabiles foret. Medici varie disserere. Hinc no^ exosam vim luminis and redituram sip^llerentur obstantiat illi elapsos in prauum artus, si salubris vis adhibeatur posse integrari Id fortasse corde Deis, and diuino ministerio principem electum: denique patrati remedij gloriam penes Caesarem; irriti ludibrium penes miseros sore Igitur Vespasianus cuncta fortunae suae parereratus, nec quid quam vltra incredibile, laeto ipse vultu, erecta quae astabat multitudine, iusta exequitor. Statim conuersa ad vsum manus, ac caeco reluxit dies. Vtrumque qui interfuere nunc quoque memorant, postquam nullum mendacio pretium. Tacitus h stor. lib. 4. Suetonius hath the same story with the same circumstances. Both these effects were well knowne vnto the most iudicious Romane Writers of those times, so constantly auouched by them, as can leaue no place for suspition in ages following.
5 What shall we Christians say to these things? Only this; In both these Cures there was the finger of God, pointing out Vespasian to the world, asSeeing they had reiected the true Son and heire of Dauid, the Lord raised vp Vespasian (as it were an adopted sonne and liuely patterne of olde Dauid both in meanenesse, manner of exaltation and humility) to rule them with an yron rodde, and feed them with the sword. Suetonius Character of his patience and disposition, hath a perfect pelish of Dauids Spirite. Mediocritatem pristinam neque dissimulauit vnquam ac frequenter etiam prae se tulit. Quin and conantem quosdum originem F aui^ generis ad Conditores Reat^ns cumitemque Herculis cuius monumentum exstat via Salaria referre irrisit vltro. Adeoque nihil ornamentorum ext^^^ se^us cupi^e appetiuit, vt triumph die fatigatus tarditate and toedio pompae non reticuerit: merito se plecti, qui triumphum quasi aut debitum maioribus suis ant speratum vnquam sibi, tam inepte senex concupisset. Sueton. in Vespasian. Christs right hand appoynted for some extraordinary and peculiar seruice, euen to inflict the plagues foretold by him, vpon these Iewes, which had reuiled, traduced, and crucified the Lord of glory for the like, and infinite other farre greater miracles wrought amongst them. These strange calamities, had they befallen in Neroes, or other like Emperours time, might haue beene attributed to their cruell disposition: but that Vespasian for his naturallNeque cade cuiusquam vnquam laetatus, quam iustis supplicijs illa chryma uit etiam and ingem^^t. Suetonius in Vespasiano. inclination an other Moses, scarce prouocable
 to reuenge practize of treason against his person in priuate men, should worke that strange desolation vppon a whole Land, hath this signification, that hee was Gods instrument onely in this businesse; what hee did, hee did impelled by him, not of his owne motion or inclination. And because hee hadConuenit inter omnes tam certum eum de sua suorumque genitura semper suisse: vt post assiduas in se coniurationes ausus sit affirmare Senatat, aut filios sibi successuros, aut neminem. Dicitur etiam vid^sse q^ndam per quietem stateram in m^dia parte vest^buli palatinae domus positam examine aequo: cum in altera parte ^la^d us and Nero starent: in altera ipse ac filij. Nec res fefell^t: quando totidem annis, parique temporis spatio vbique imperauervnt. Suetonius in fine Vespasian. dilige^tly executed that which was right in Gods eies, and had done vnto these Iewes, according to all things that were in Gods heart, he had (by what reuelation God best knoweth) Iehues blessing sealed vnto him, That his sonne should sit vpon his throne: so confident was hee in this perswasion, as after the discouerie of many, to scorne all Conspiracies, though daily intended against him; auouching still, either his sonnes, or none, must succeede him in the Empire, as both of them did. Though the later (much degenerate from so worthy a Father, most dislike vnto his noble brother) was most vnworthie, and vncapable of so high a place, but onelie from his Fathers deserts, which GOD had ordayned, should be rewarded with this honour. Had either of his sonnes rendered according to the reward bestowed vppon them, more Scepters had sprung from the Flauian stocke: but as it grew apace, so did it quickly fade; Titus, the fairest branch to all mens seeming, beeing plucked off, to his great hearts griefe, in the Blossome, for what secret sinne, GOD knoweth best, this one was grieuous enough, to haue deserued a more grieuous death, that apprehending his Fates approach, hee durst so confidently looke Heauen in the face, and expostulate his vntimely death as vniust, seeing hee neuer had offended the sacred Powers thereof but onelie once. The Signes of those Times were extraordinarie, could the Romanes haue rightly obserued them: but these great Conquerours were taken with their captiues errour in not discerning, or mis-applying them. As the Spring Sunne, which naturally reuiueth all other liuing Creatures, often times prepareth such humane bodies as are fullest of life and bloud, but most neglectiue of the opportunitie of taking Physicke, or vsing diet conuenient for that season, to
 hote and desperate diseases, neuer perceiued in their Summers growth, vntill they be ripe of death in the Autumne: so albeit the Sunne of Righteousnesse, whose comming into the world, was to giue life vnto it, did first arise in Iewrie; yet by her childrens confidence in their wonted temper, so whole and sound vnto their seeming, that of all other people, they onlie needed no Physition, the verie Beames of sauing Health did secretly dispose their euill disposed hearts to violent death, which burst out in the latter end or Autumne of that Age, wherein hee appeared. For that Generation with whome our Sauiour Christ Iesus conuersed on earth, was not fully past, vntill this people beganne to swell with insolent and prowde hopes of soueraignetie ouer others, and by their vntimely prouocation of the Romanes bring suddayne destruction vppon themselues; as stowt and full bodies, by violent and vnseasonable exercises, are soonest brought downe from the height of their strength, vnto the graue. The Romanes agayne, seeing these Iewes defeated, and themselues possessed of their hopes, (Vespasian beeing called to the Empire during these warres, which Titus his sonne did gloriously finish, to the vtter ruine of that Nation) thinke sure their Gods had beene more potent than the GOD of the Iewes, and apply the Prophecie,Suetonius in Vespasiano and Tacitus, hist. li. 5. Vid annot. ex Tacito infra paragr: 7. and ex Sueton. supra 4. meant of Christ, vnto Vespasian, as if hee had beene that Monarch of the World, which, according to the common receiued opinion throughout the East, was at this time to arise in Iewrie. So doeth the God of this World still blinde the eyes of the worldly-wise with faire shewes or earthly shadowes of heauenly things, that they can not, or care not to looke into the bodie or substance of Diuine mysteries, for whose representation onely those are giuen; otherwise vncapable of any cause eyther in Nature, Reason, or Policie. Vespasian the Emperour (indeede) was the second type or shadow of the Messiah, that great Monarch and Prince of Peace, whose endlesse Kingdome shall put downe all warres for euer. For seeing by the fall of these Iewes, as the Apostle Saint Paul saieth, Saluation is come vnto the Gentiles, it pleased the wisedome of our GOD, to haue their destruction solempnized with the selfe-same signes, that his birth had beene, which brought foorth life vnto the world.

For immediatly after their fatall ouerthrow by Titus, Ianus had his Temple shut, and Peace a Temple erected by Vespasian. Thus Diuine suggestions effect no more in most mens thoughts, than diurnall intention of minde doth in hard students broken sleepes; which vsually set the soule a working, seldome finding any distinct representation of what shee seekes, though contenting her selfe oft-times for that season with some pleasant phantasme, as much different from the true nature of that shee hunts after, as the cloudes, which Ixion imbraced, were from Iuno. Vespasians secret instinct in this deuotion did aime no doubt (as it was directed by all signes of the time) at the true Prince of peace, but was choaked and stifled in the issue or passage, and his intent blinded in the apprehension, by the palpable and grosse conceipts of Romish Idolatrie, wherein hee had beene nuzled; as mens in-bredde desire of true happinesse is vsually taken vp and blind-folded by such pleasant sensible obiectes, as they most accustome themselues vnto. And yet, God knowes, whether this vertuous Emperours last hopes were inwardly rooted in pride and presumption of heart; or rightly conceiued there, were onely brought foorth amisse. As if a man should first apprehend the state of blessednesse or regeneration in a dreame, the representation of it would bee grosse, though the apprehension sound. Quite contrarie to his sonnes disposition, when hee himselfe apprehends death comming vppon him, which the Physitians and Astronomers could not perswade him to beware of, hee solaced himselfe with this saying; Now shall I be a God: his inward hopes of a celestiall state after this life might (for ought that any man knowes) be true and sound, and the representation onely tainted with the Romanes grosse conceipt.
6 But whatsoeuer became of him in that other world; his entrance into this his continuance herein, and departure hence, were in all the worlds sight of vnusuall and extraordinarie obseruation. The disposition of the times, by the most irreligious amongst the Romanes, were referred to Fates or diuine powers, who had not graced the birth, life and death, or long flourishing raigne of Augustus with halfe so many tokens of their presence on earth, or prouidence ouer humane affaires. What effect,
 or issue, can the Romane assigne answerable vnto them? Rome could not inuite the nations to come and see, whether any prosperitie were like hers: for hers had beene farre greater and of longer continuance, than now vnder Vespasian; who was suddenly called away by aDion. comet from Heauen, and Augustus his Sepulchre opening of it own accord to welcome him to his graue. Wherat then did all these signes point? They should haue bin as a new starre to lead the wise-men of the West vnto Hierusalem; now crying out of the dust vnto the carelesse Romane; Haue yee no regard all yee that passe by?Lamen. 1. v. 12. Behold and see if there be any sorrow like vnto my sorrow which is done vnto me, wherewith the Lord hath afflicted me in the day of his fierce wrath. It was not Titus and Vespasian that had afflicted her, they were but his deputies, that was Lord of Sion, who had decreed what they effected.His de causis vterque imperatoris ^^ment obtinuit, neute^ tamen Iudaicus co nominatus est, licet alia mulla, vt par erat tam magna parta victoria, atque imprimis arcus triumphales eis decreti sunt. Dion li. 66. For this cause did neither the father nor the sonne take the name of Iudaicus, albeit the difficultie of the warre, begun by the father, and the famousnesse of the victorie atchieued by the sonne (according to the custome of the Romans obserued by them in their triumphs and other solemnities) did solicite them hereunto. For what victorie gotten by any Roman was like vnto this either for the multitude of the slaine, or the captiues? Nothing in this kinde could seeme strange vnto the politician, if it had proceeded from Tacitus pen. But Satan, it seemes, by Gods permission, hath called in that part of Tacitus as a booke too dangerous for his schollers to read; least; giuing credence vnto it, they might beleeue him lesse, and Christians, more in many other points; and yet praised bee the name of our gracious God, who enuies no man the truth, and hath left vs abundant records of this storie; all answerable to his sacred word, and prophecies of old concerning Hierusalem. From that part of Tacitus, which is left, wee may gather, how consonant his conclusions would haue beene vnto that faithfull, and most ingenious Historian Iosephus, with whom hee iumps in these particulars; That this people were of bodiesSo are they not now. healthfull and able, their CitieFons perennis aquae, cauati sub terra montes: et piscinae seruandis imbribus, praeuiderant conditores ex diuersitate morum, crebra bella, inde cuncta, quamuis aduersus longum obsidium; et a Pompeio expugnatis, metus atque vsus pleraque monstrauere. Atque per auaritiam Claudianorum temporum, empto iure muniendi, struxere muros in pace tanquam ad bellum: magna collunie, and caterarum v^bium clade aucti. Tacit. Hist lib. 5. The writers of the Sacred storie complaine of defect of water in Hierusalem since that time. Vid. Strab. lib. 16. Est ^^^^s saxosus aquis ipse quidem abundans. This barrennesse was onely about Hierusalem, for Tacitus acknowledgeth the fertilitie of Iudaea. exceeding strong, euery way well prouided against long siege
 Which assertion would haue ministred suspition to such as measure all Stories by rules of policie, vnlesse some Romane writer had auouched it, seeing Pompey had razed the Citie-walles, and Sossius had taken it by force in Augustus time; since continuing in subiection vnto the Romanes vntill the last and fatall rebellion. But Tacitus telleth vs, that these Iewes made their benefite of Claudius his couetousnesse, and purchased licence to fortifie the Citie in time of peace against warre: during which it grew more populous than before, by the reliques of other ruinated Cities resorting vnto it. And albeit hee differ from Iosephus in the number of the besieged; yet hee acknowledgeth sixe hundred thousand of all sorts; the women as resolute as the men; armour and munition enough for as many as could; and yet more in this people that durst vse and manage them, than could bee expected in such a number. Their seditious, and factious, their stubborne and desperate mindes against God and man, and their owne soules, neglectiue of fearefull signes from Heauen, and other prodigious tokens foretelling their desolation, are pathetically described by the same writer. The preparations likewise on Titus his part wee may gather from him, to bee as great as any Romane euer vsed. His armie, at the first approach into the Citie, thought skorne to expect the helpe of famine to make the besieged yeelde; and yet after one or two assaults made to like purpose, enforced to desist, vntill all the engines of batterie, either of auncient or moderne inuention, were made readie. All these circumstances wee haue fully set downe in this fragment of Tacitus which is left.
7 Were that register of Hierusalems tragicall funerals (to vse his words) now extant as entire, as hee intended it, what other conclusion from the former premises could wee expect, than such woe and miseries as Moses and Ieremie had foretold, and others haue related to vs? Iosephus (as if Ieremiahs spirit had directed his penne) saith their miserie did farre surpasse all plagues inflicted vpon any Nation, either by God or man. The multitude of Iurie dead in the warres, was equall to the number of liuing men in Israell vnder King Dauid,
 when Iacobs posteritie florished most, besides fiftie thousand taken captiues. The number (albeit he maketh it eleuen hundred thousand) cannot seeme strange, if wee consider the confluence of this people from all Nations almost vnder heauen vnto Hierusalem at their Passeouer. Dion telleth vs, that besides the naturall inhabitans of Iewrie, strangers, not onely of Iewish progenie, but such as obserued their rites and customes, did flock to the Cities defence, both from those parts of the Romane Empire, through which they were scattered, and from the Countries beyond Euphrates not subiect to the Romanes: consonant herein to Iosephus, where hee telleth vs that the greatest part of the slaine were strangers, but most of Iewish progenie. The whole Nation (to vse his words) was shut vp by fates, as in a prison, or to speake more significantly, foyled by the Romanes in the field: they were driuen into the Citie as into a slaughter house. And heere the Psalmists curse beginneth to seize vpon the nation, that which should haue beene for their good proues the occasion of their fall: the effect of Gods blessing vpon Abraham proues a plague to his seede: the huge number, wherewith God had multiplied them, which had late made them swell with hopes of victorie in the open field, brings grieuous famine suddenly vpon them once inclosed in the Citie: and famine no sooner got within the walles, but lets in her fellow-messengers of Gods wrath; first breeding the pestilence by the carkases of the famished, then disposing the bodies of the liuing to receiue this and such other loathsome infectious diseases, as hunger and the huge multitude of the besieged in such a strait place would quickly breed; and yet they so desperatly set to increase these miseries, as euen in their greatest penurie to receiue fugitiues from Titus Campe. For, as Dion storieth, diuerse of his souldiers fled to the besieged, being partly wearied of the difficult siege, partly animated thereto, by a rumour bruted throughout the Romane armie, that this citie could not be taken.
7 Thus all occasions conspire to worke them woe whom God will plague. The generall perswasion of the East, that Iewrie, about this time, should bring foorth the Monarch of the world, ministers matter for their false prophets to worke vpon: and from their trust in their Prophets, it was that neither the present
 aduersitie which they felt, nor prodigious signes from heauen could disswade or terrifie the seditious from their enterprise vnhappily vndertaken. God (no doubt) had so disposed, that the Romaine Souldiers should dispaire of victorie, to giue countenance to these false Prophets, and make these cast-a-waies, who still delighted most in lies, more confident in the waies of death. Though the signes, recorded byTacitus concurring with Iosephus in relation of those horrible signes addeth: Pauci in metum trahebant: pluribus ^e suasio inerat, antiquis Sacerdotum literis co^tin^ri, co^pso tempore fore, vt valesceret orient profectique Iudaea rerum potirentur, quae anibages Vespasianu^ ac Titu^ praedixerant. Sed vulgo Ier. 10.2. More humana capidinis, sibi tantam fatorum magnitudinem interpretati, ne aduersis quidem ad vera mutabantur. Tacit. Hist. lib. 5. Vnto all the former mischiefes these did accrew: Praelia, dolus, incendia inter ipsos, and magna vis frumenti ambusta. Tacit. Hist. lib. 5. Cumque vicina quaedam aedeficia succendissent, velut hac quoque via Romanos, etiamsi maxime circulo illo potirentur, ab vlteriori progressu reiecturi: simul and ipsum destruxere muru^ and inuiti munitionem, qua templum includebatur, exusserunt. Ita Romanis aditus ad Templum patefactus suit. Tacitus and Iosephus, might seeme fearefull, yet their interpretation was ambiguous: they might as well menace their enemies harme, as their destruction; howsoeuer to regard them much might argue Heathenish superstition; and in discreet auoidance of superstition, makes hypocriticall Professors of true religion preposterously stubborne in imitation of true confidence. They could pretend the Prophets admonition: Learne not the waies of the Heathen, and be not afraide for the signes of heauen, though the Heathen be afraide of such. For the customes of the people are vaine; and hence assume his resolution to themselues paueant illi, ne autem paueas tu; Let the idolatrous Heathen tremble and quake, but why should Israell bee afraid at these apparitions of their God? Or if a man would haue measured all by politike obseruations, it was more likely the Romaines should haue forsaken the siege, than the besieged haue fallen into their handes. But God was against them, and they could not be for themselues. For, as Dion notes, (which I thinke Iosephus omitteth) they themselues, by making way for their more commodious defence, did (against their will) demolish the chiefe muniment of the Temple; at which breach the Romaines entred, but not without some stay, amated only with reuerence of the place. Nor did the successe answere to their resolution in the assault (albeit they were farre more in number than the defendants) vntill Titus commanded part of the Temple to be set on fire. But then, as the same Author witnesseth, some offered their bodies for sheaths vnto the Romaines swords; some killed their fellowes, requited instantly with like kindnesse from them againe; some lept into the fire; all accompted it their happinesse to perish with the Temple.
8 The Lord had often professed his dislike vnto their solemne feasts, and his loathing of their sacrifices; both fully manifested
 in this their last calamitie, such as the stench of their dead was now to their polluted senses, such had the abhomination of their sweetest incense long beene to his holinesse, now to bee purged with the Priests owne bloud, sacrificed in the flames and ruines of the Temple: the Citie, as oft before, was now taken vpon the Sabaoth day. Other particular miseries, described by Iosephus and Eusebius, I leaue for this time to the Readers priuate meditations: desirous only in these generalities, to iustifie theirs or other Ecclesiasticall writers reports, against all suspitions cast vpon them by Atheists or Infidels, from the testimonie of such as Infidelitie it selfe cannot suspect for partiall. Both sorts afforde vs euident documents of the diuine truth of Scripture; and might afford vs more than we are a-ware off, were we better acquainted with the ancient manner of interpreting Scriptures amongst the Iewes, in our Sauiours and his Apostles time: of which hereafter. If now vpon occasions of these relations concerning Ierusalems last day, and the signes of the times ensuing, I interpret one or two places otherwise, than such as are most followed in our times doe, the Christian Reader, I hope, will grant me pardon, vpon promise of such satisfaction as shall befit one ingenuous Christian to expect of an other to be made; when I shall come to explicate the diuers kinds of prophecies amongst Gods people, with the right manner of their interpretations.


CHAP. VII.
The fulfilling of our Sauiours prophecie, Mat. 24. with others, concerning the times ensuing Ierusalems destruction.
1 REading Iosephus, I cannot but acknowledge Hieremiahs lamentation, as well for a prophecie of these late times vnder Vespasian, and Titus, as an historie or elegie of the miseries that had befallen Ierusalem by Nebuchadnezzar. The Lord, I know, had then done that which he had purposed: but now more properly he hath fulfilled his word that he had determined of old time;Lament. 2.17. and sequ. he hath throwne downe and not spared, he hath caused thine enemies to reioyce ouer thee, and set vp the horne of thine aduersaries. Arise, crie
 in the night in the beginning of the watches: powre out thine heart like vnto water before the face of the Lord, lift vp thine hand towards him for the life of thy yong children, that famish for hunger in all the corners of the streets. These wordes perhaps were meant, in diuers measures, of both calamities; but the complaint following, of the later only vnder Titus: Behold, O Lord,Lament. 2. and consider to whom thou hast done thus. Shall the women eate their fruit, and children of a span long: shall the Priest and the Prophet be slaine in the Sanctuarie of the Lord; the yong and the old lie on the ground? My Virgins, and my yong-men are fallen by the sword: thou hast slaine them in the day of thy wrath: thou hast hilled and not spared. Thou hast called as in a solemne day my terrors round about; so that in the day of the Lords wrath none escaped or remained. Those that I haue nourished and brought vp hath mine enemie consumed.
2 Many particulars, here set downe by Ieremie, are not so much as once intimated by the sacred storie, which describes the siege by Nebuchadnezzar. But no calamitie either intimated by any historicall relations of those times, or prefigured in Ieremies co^plaint, but in this later siege by Titus, is most exactly fulfilled: as if the Lord had but sowne the seedes of destruction and desolation by Nebuchadnezzar; which now come to their ful growth and ripenesse, this people must reape according to the full measure of their iniquitie. They are as drie stubble, and the Romans as a consuming fire. Nebuchadnezzars Host perhaps slew some, but had no occasion to make a generall massacre in the Temple, destitute of defendants ere it was taken the King and his greatest Commanders being first fled into the wildernesse; nor was it destroied vntill the heate of warre was past, and most of the people led into captiuitie. But whilest in this later destruction by Titus, it fell by the furious heate and brunt of Warre, the number of such, as were either willing or forced to end their daies with it, was of all sorts exceeding great: and which was most miserable, many who had taken their farewell of life and had bid death welcome, reuiued againe to renew their more than deadly sorrowes, and to reiterate their bitter complaints, which this lamentable accide^t could only teach them to act aright, and vtter with such tragicall and hideous accent, as was be fitting a calamitie so strange and fearefull as neuer had been knowne before. Euen such as famine had caused to faint, hauing
 their vocall instruments clung together, and their eies more than halfe closed vp with death, vpon sight or noise of the Temples crackling in its last and fatall fire, rowsed vp their spirits and resumed their wonted strength, to proclaime vnto all neighbour-Regions in shrill and lowdest out-cries; That there was neuer any sorrow like vnto this sorrow wherewith the Lord had afflicted them in the day of his fierce wrath, and yet they blow the fire which it had kindled, ventilating and inlarging the deuouring flame (whose extinction the abundance of their bloud did otherwise seeme to threaten) by violent breathing out their last breath vnto it. The gastly confusion of this fearefull spectacle and hideous noise are so liuely expressed by Iosephus, and others, that they may well serue the Christian Reader, as a mappe of hellish miserie. I only prosecute the fullfilling of Ieremies prophecie,Joseph. lib. 7. c. 8. De bello Iudaic. in particulars related by Iosephus: as of the womans eating her child, a thingSo the circumstance of his relation plainly showes neuer heard of in that or any Nation before: of the Priests slaughter both in the Temple, and after the destruction of it. For Titus, otherwise inclined to mercie, seeing it consumed by fire, which he sought by all meanes to saue, commanded such of the Priests, as had escaped the flame, in a by-roome adioyning, to be executed, telling them, it was fit they should perish with the Temple, for whose sake, might it haue stood, hee willingly would haue saued their liues. Againe, the massacre of the promiscuous multitude of women and children, vnfit for Warre, are particularly described with all the circumstances by Iosephus in the eleuenth Chapter of his seuenth Booke:Cap. 11. lib. 7. of sixe thousand perswaded by a false Prophet to repaire vnto the Temple, there to expect signes from God of their deliuerance, not one Man, Woman, or Child escaped.
3 Thus Moses fore-showes the grieuous plagues, which hung ouer this Nations head, but then a-farre off: Ieremie after points out the very place where they shall fall; our Sauiour Christ only knew the distinct period of time,Mat. 24. Luke 21. wherein both the former prophecies should be accomplished. I will not trouble the Reader with rehearsall of particular calamities fore-told by him; their obseruation is alreadie made vnto his hand by Eusebius, and will apply themselues, being compared with Iosephus; so perhaps will not some places of Scripture following, though
 as much concerning the same times. For the better vnderstanding of which we must call to mind, what was obserued before; That Hierusalem was the Lords owne seate, and the Iewes a people set a-part by him, and distinguished of purpose from others, to exemplifie his mercie and iustice in their prosperitie and distresse. Consequent hereunto his pleasure was, that in the desolation of Iurie, and destruction of the Temple, other Nations should bee put in minde of their mortalitie, and not thinke in their hearts that these were greater sinners than any other Nation; but rather that he who plagued them was Lord of the whole earth, as well as Iewrie; that the like and more fearefull iudgements did hang ouer their heads, vnlesse they would learne by the knowne calamities of this people, to auoide them. So saith the Lord to all the earth without exception:Iere 25.29. For loe I beginne to plague the Citie where my name is called vpon, and should you goe free? yee shall not goe quit: for I will call for a sword vpon all the inhabitants of the earth, saith the Lord of Hosts. Therefore prophecie thou against them all these wordes, and say vnto them; The Lord shall roare from aboue, and thrust out his voice from his holy habitation: he shall roare vpon his habitation, and crie aloude, as they that presse the grapes, against all the inhabitants of the earth. The sound shall come to the ends of the earth: for the Lord hath a controuersie with the Nations, and will enter into iudgement with all flesh, and he will giue them, that are wicked, to the sword. And thus saith the Lord God of Hosts; behold a plague shall goe forth from Nation to Nation, and a great whirle-winde shall bee raised from the coasts of the earth, and the flame of the Lord shall be at that day, from one end of the earth euen vnto the other end of the earth; they shall not be mourned, neither gathered nor buried, but shall bee as the dung vpon the ground. Howle yee sheep-heards and crie, and wallow your selues in the ashes, yee principall of the flocke: for your daies of slaughter are accomplished, and of your dispersion, and yee shall fall like precious vessels. And the flight shall faile from the sheep-heards, and the escaping from the principall of the flocke. Thus when the Citie and Temple was first destroied by Nebuchadnezzar, all the Nations round about them were enforced to taste of the same cup. Babylon herselfe that begunne the carouse, which shee meant not to pledge; hoping to make her selfe sport to see others drunke with the
 bloud of their slaine, was compelled at length to drinke so deepe of the dregges, till (as my Prophet speaketh) all her strongmen did fall, and her Princes slept their euerlasting sleepe. This prophecie notwithstanding concernes the second destruction of Hierusalem, as literally as the former: and sundrie plagues here mentioned, for ought that can bee gathered from any Historie sacred or prophane, were not in any degree verified of the Nations, in the daies of Nebuchadnezzer, or his Sonne. But scarce any Nation was free from such calamities as are here described in the time of Titus and his Successors; as shall bee declared anon. Rome her selfe, which had reioyced at Iudas miserie, and triumphed in Israels woe, troden Hierusalem vnder her feete, and giuen her dust and ashes for a couering to her nakednesse, was shortly after pinched at the heart with like sorrowes; howsoeuer her outward robes of maiestie did couer her secret wounds from their eies that liued after, or beheld her estate only a-farre off, not acquainted with her inward gripes or smothered out-cries. All is not sound within that is faire without, nor they furthest from danger who feele least paine for the present: such as since haue liued securest, neither regardfull of Hierusalems miserie, nor the calamities of other Nations that ensued them, altogether vnacquainted with any like sorrowes of their owne times, shall haue their deepest share in the horrors of that dreadfull day, whereof these were but shadowes and maps, to represent vnto vs in some proportion the inconceiueable affrightments that shall then appeare. But as no man knowes of that day and houre, so neither did the Prophets themselues distinctly conceiue the manner of it: they did see it only in these adumbrations, which in processe of time grew still more liuely. The second destruction of Hierusalem, and the signes following it, exceeds the former in the distinct prefiguration of the later day, as much as the map of a particular Countrie taken at large, doth the representation of the same in a generall map of the whole earth of like quantitie. And as maps haue a distinct quantitie of their owne, easie to bee knowne by sense, but which no man measures so much for it selfe, as for to know the capacitie of the Countrie which it represents: so haue most prophecies of the
 old Testam^nt a distinct, peculiar, naturall, or literall sense verified in the time ^f the law, which is not so much to bee expected as the mysteri^ of the Gospell; or matters of the world to come prefigured b^ these euents past: euen the most secret of these mysteries, af^^^ some one or few circumstances be reuealed, may bee distinc^^y knowne. For the proportion of one circumstance or euent with an other, is all one in the later, and in the former; so that by the distinct knowledge of the former, wee may discerne the later, after it bee parallelled in any one part: as by the measure of a map, wee finde out the quantitie of the ground represented. For this reason hath our Sauiour Christ pictured vs out the last day by the calamities of Hierusalem only. For, vnder correction, I should thinke, that no one part of his prophecie, Matth. 24. from the fifteenth to the thirtie-sixth Verse, but is litterally meant, and hath beene verified of Hierusalems fatall day, and the times ensuing. For so our Sauiour concludes; Verily I say vnto you, this generation shall not passe, till all these thinges be done. All what? All he had spoken of before. What, did the signe of the Sonne of man appeare? did he send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpet, to gather the Elect from the foure winds? No. Christ is not yet come: the Elect are not thus gathered. Yet vpon Hierusalems destruction they had the watch-word giuen: the Nations had then a glimpse of his last comming in glorie: then it sounded the first time vnto iudgement; and the Sunne and Moone were seene in tragicall attire, that all the whole world might take notice of such a wofull Tragedie towardes, as wee expect: wherein the whole frame of nature, euen the earth it selfe, this stage of mortalitie, shall be actors; and all mankinde were then set to learne their parts. Our Sauiours comming with power and great glorie, mentioned in the ninth Verse, must bee vnderstood in such a sense, as hee is said to haue come in his Kingdome, or with power, at his Transfiguration. And that first Verse of the ninth of Marke will best interpret the place aboue cited, Matthew 24.34. Sundrie learned Interpreters, I know, expound both places otherwise.Some interpret these wordes of the Gospels promulgation, which is called the power of God: but it is vsuall in prophecies, to attribute that vnto the Type of Pledge which is proper to the substance. And CHRITS Transfiguration was both a liuely type and pledge of his future appearance in power and great glorie. But, to omit the former for this present, the continuation of our Sauiours speech doth enforce
 this my interpretation of S. Matthew. For ha^ing spoken of the calamities that were shortly to fall out in Iudah ^n^ Hierusalem, (as all agree) in the former verses he addeth, Vers. 2^. And immediately after the tribulations of those daies, shall the Sunn^ be darkened, and the Moone shall not giue her light, and the Stars shall fall ^^^m heauen, and the powers of heauen shall be shaken. And then shall app^^e the signe of the Sonne of man in heauen; and then shall all the kinreds of the earth mourne; and they shall see the Sonne of man come in the cloudes of heauen, with power and great glorie: and he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the foure windes, and from the one end of the heauen to the other. Now learne the parable of the fig-tree; when her bough is yet tender, and it bringeth forth leaues, yee know that Sommer is neare: so likewise when yee see all these thinges, know that the Kingdome of God is neare, euen at the dores. Verily I say vnto you, this generation shall not passe, till all these thinges be done. Some referre these wordes [immediatly after] to the troubles of the Church; as if their meaning were this: And immediately after God hath made an end of the troubles of his Church, these signes shall follow. But who knowes when that shall be? whereas our Sauiours wordes must be referred to those daies whereof he had spoken, which were comprised within determinate and set bounds, and would shortly manifest themselues; so as all men might be certaine when to expect those signes, which he promised to all the world for the confirmation of his doctrine and their faith. The full and naturall meaning of the place is, as if he had said: When you haue seene Hierusalems fatall day, then looke for such signes in the Sun and Moone as I haue told, for the one doth prognosticate the others approch, as certainly, as the budding of the fig-tree doth Sommer. The like connexion of these fearefull signes with Hierusalems desolation we haue in S. Luke cap. 21.24. Hauing spoken before only of the tribulation of Hierusalem, hee continueth his speech: Then there shall be signes in the Sunne, and in the Moone, and in the Starres, and vpon the earth, trouble amongst the Nations with perplexitie, the Sea and the Waters shall roare, and mens hearts shall faile them for feare, and for looking after those thinges which shall come on the world. For the powers of heauen shall be shaken; and then shall they see the Sonne of man come in a cloude with power and great glorie. And
 when these thinges beginne to come passe, then looke vp and lift vp your heads, for your redemption draweth neere. And hee spake to them a parable; Behold the figge tree and all trees, when they now shoot forth, yee seeing them, know of your owne selues that Summer is then neere: so likewise ye, when yee see these thinges come to passe, know yee that the Kingdome of God is neere. Verily I say vnto you; this generation shall not passe, till all these things be done. As wee are bound by Christian faith to beleeue that this prophecie is not yet, but shall bee fully accomplished at the last day: so in trueth I should suspect my heart of infidelitie, if I did not acknowledge it truely verified (in such a sense as I haue intimated) immediatly after the destruction of Hierusalem. The former distinction of our Sauiours comming in power, or to present the terrors of the last day, and his last comming vnto iudgment indeede, hee himselfe hath intimated: for hee gaue his Disciples infallible signes, when they might certainly expect the former, verse 33. Heauen and earth shall passe etc. but of that day and houre (to wit the last of iudgment) no man, no not the Angels of Heauen, but my father onely knoweth. As if he had said; This last day shal not come with such obseruation, as the former will: the signes here described shall not prognosticate, but accompanie it: In the former, there were signes in the Sunne and Moone; but in the later both Sunne and Moone shall cease to bee: In the former, the powers of Heauen were shaken, the earth did tremble, and the Sea did roare; in the later, The Heauens shall be gathered like a scrole, and passe away with a noyse, the2. Pet. 3 12.13. elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the workes that are therein shall bee burnt,Reuel. 21.1. the Sea shall be no more: the whole frame of Nature shall bee dissolued on a sodaine, and such as vntill that time minde earthly matters, confining their thoughts within this spheare of mortalitie, shall bee intrapped in the ruines of it, and prest downe to Hell with the weight; onely such as being in this world, are not of it, but haue their conuersation in Heauen, where their Redeemer sits at the right hand of GOD, shall escape these suddaine and fearefull daungers, as birds that are without the compasse of the trappe when it begins to fall. Seeing it will bee too late for men to b gin their beliefe then: too late to flye from death, when destruction hath surprised them; or to cry for mercie first, when Gods iudgements beginne to seize vpon the
 world: the Atheist or carelesse worldling may gather both the terrors and calamitie of that day, from the often-mentioned liuely representation of it vnder Titus: for euen in his time the Heauens and the earth did threaten to passe away, that all the world might know Christs wordes should not passe away. The fire of Gods wrath, which Moses had foretold should eate the foundations of the mountaines in Iewrie; and such as Iosephus tels vs had beene kindled in the holy mount, did deuoure the foundations of the mountVid Plin. lib. 6. Epist. 15. Vesuuius in Campania. The consequences thereof, with other prodigious concomitants, were so strange and fearefull, that if we compare the ingenious Heathen Historiographers description of them, with the fore cited place of S. Luke, his relation doth as fully answere our Sauiours prediction, as the historicall narrations of euents past, contained in Scripture, doe the prophecies that had gone of them before.
Repente ita graues terraemotus facti, vt and omnis ea planieres seruida esset, and culmina montium subsiderent. Ad haec, so^itus tum subterranci tanquam ^^nitrua, tum super terram mugitibus similes extiterunt, Dein ma^e simul fremere, omne coelum vna sonere, ingensque and repentinus fragor quasi mo^tes conciderent exa^diri: Tum exilire primum immensi lapides and ad summos vertiees peruenire, deinde m^gnatepia ignis fumique ita vt omnem, acrem obscuraret, occultauitque solem non aliter quam fi defecisset: Igitur ex (...) nox, and tenebrae ex luce factae erant, putantibus nonnullis Gigantes seditionem inter se facere, quod multae ^^agines corum in fumo conspie erentur, quodque ciangor tubarum audiretur. Alij estistimabant aut mundum in ^hao^^ digi aut igni consumi, ob camque causam properabant alij ex aedibus in vias, alij de vijs in aedes consugere, (...) continentem and ex continenti in mare se recipere.4 The sodaine earthquakes were so grieuous, that all that valley was sultring hotte, and the tops of the mountaines sunke downe; vnder the ground were noyses like thunder, answered with like bellowings aboue. The Sea roared, and the Heauens resounded like noyse; huge and great crashings were heard as if the mountaines had fallen together: great stones leaped out of their places, as high as tops of hils; and after them issued abundance of fire and smoke, in so much that it darkned the ayre and obscured the Sun, as if it had beene eclypsed, so that night was turned into day, and day into night. Many were perswaded, that the Giants had raysed some ciuill broyles amongst themselues, because they did see their shapes in the smoke, and heard a noyse of trumpets: others thought the world should be resolued into old Chaos, or consumed with fire; some ran out of their houses into the streets; others from the streets or highwaies into their houses; others from Sea to Land; some againe from the Land to the Sea.
5. These questionlesse were the signes of the sonne of man, that made all the kinreds of the earth thus mourne. For the calamitie was publike: the abundance of ashes and dust was such that
 it ouer spread Egypt, Africke and Syria, choaking not onely men, but beastes and birds, poysoning fishes, and spoyling the grounds where it came. The inhabitants of Rome (whither this infection came a few daies after the fire kindled in Campania) thought that the frame of the world had beene out of ioynt: that the Sun did fall down to the earth, and the earth ascend vp to heauen. And albeit the ashes and dust did not such present harme there,Ios. l. 7. de bol. Iudaico lib. Dion. as it had done euery where else: yet it bred a most grieuous pestilence, breaking out not long after: and in the yeare following, whilest Titus went to view the calamities of Campania, a great part of Rome was burnt by fire issuing out of the ground. Amongst other harmes, these following were most remarkable: It consumed the Temple of Serapis, of Isis, of Neptune, the Pantheon, the Diribitorium, the Temple of Iupiter Capitolinus, vnto which the Iewes were not long before enioyned to pay that tribute, which they formerly had done to the Temple of Hierusalem. Thus though the Arke be taken, yet will it be the downfall of Dagon their chiefe God that tooke it: and though Hierusalem lay buried in her ruines, for her peoples grieuous sinnes; yet shall hers, as all sacred pensions sacrilegiously employed, deuoure the seates of their possessors. But what can we more say, than this noble Historiographer hath said of this euent: Id malum diuinum potius quam humanum fuit: this was a calamitie more than humane, in which the finger of God was euidently seene. And as it was a type of the last day: so may it, and the like following, confirme the truth of Sodomes destruction. Nor did God speake onely once in this language to the Romane (to omit other wonderful works of God in these times, to be recounted in their proper place,) the like fearfull earthquakes, with other prodigious concomitants, fell out in Traians time at Antiochia: but the harmes not terminate within her territories, or the Cities about her herewith destroyed. For abundance of soldiers and multitudes of other people did repaire from all quarters to the Emperour wintring there; some in Embassages, some for suites, some vpon other businesses, some to see Playes and Pageants. Whence the dammage, as this Author saith, did redounde to all that were subiect to the Romane Empyre. This out of question was the Lords doing,
 that all the world might heare and feare his wondrous workes; and wondring enquire after the true causes and meaning of them. Thus Antioch, as well as Edom and Babylon, is ouertaken with the Psalmists curse, for reioycing in the day of Hierusalem. Besides the massacres of the Iewes there committed when Titus came vnto that citie: the inhabitants after their insinuating gratulations,Ios. lib. 7. de bel. Iud. c. 21. petitioned with all humilitie and pollicie, that the reliques of this people (for whom there was no place left in their owne land) might be extirpate thence, comprising the Christians, no doubt, vnder this name.
6 Many particulars, then known, are not registred by such heathen writers as now are extant; and many signes of those times not regarded by any heathen: all which might witnes the truth of our Sauiours predictions, and expound their meaning, were they as well knowne to vs as to the faithfull then liuing; whose meditations, it seemes, were so wholly taken vp with these contemplations, that they had no leysure to leaue their comments in writing to posteritie. That dreadfull woe directed against the women of Hierusalem, with child and giuing sucke, did take these Antiochians at the rebound. Women in such cases could not die, but a double death, and yet how many such were slaine none can tell. Of an infinite companie of all sorts, starued by their close imprisonment in houses, whose foundations were shrunke, the roofe remaining, onely one woman was found aliue, which had sustained herselfe and her childe by her milke; another childe found in the like concauitie aliue, sucking his deceased mothers dugges. In fine (saith the Author) there was no kinde of violent disaster, which did not at this time befall men. For the earthquakes being caused by the Diuine power, mens wits were not their owne, nor knewe they what medicine to seeke for these mishappes. Such as were on the house-tops had not list to descend to fetch any thing out; such as were in the field, had no minde to returne backe to fetch their clothes; Traiane himselfe was drawne out at a window by no mortall creature (as this writer thinkes) so astonished with this disastrous sight, that for many daies after the earthquake had ceased, he durst not come in any house.
7 Neither of these strange signes of the sonne of man fell out in any corner of the world, but the one in the chiefe, the other in the second Citie of the Empire, at that time the Emperors court: so as the whole world representatiue (as we may so speake) was in danger, and all men, at least, men of all sorts, at their wits end; and by their terrors all mankind had publike warning to prepare themselues against that terrible and dreadfull day: These being such types of it, as the first destruction of the holy Citie and Temple by Nabuchadnezzar, was of the second by Titus; so as that which is truly said of the one, may in an higher degree be rruly auouched of the other.
8 Of these times againe was that of the Prophet meant; I will poure out my spirit vpon all flesh,Ioel 2.28. Vide Zach. 14. v. 7. and your sonnes and your daughters shall prophecie. And I will shew wonders in the heauens and in the earth, bloud and fire, and pillars of smoake: the Sunne shall be turned into darkenesse, and the Moone into bloud, before the great and terrible day of the Lord come. But whosoeuer shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saued. If we rightly obserue the Prophets methode in this place, it will both justifie and illustrate the former interpretations of Ieremie, and our Sauiors prophecie. First he speakes (none can denie) of Christs comming in the flesh, and effusion of the holy Ghost vpon all people; I will poure out my Spirit vpon all flesh. By the spirit the Gospell was to be communicate to all Nations: and this (as the Euangelist witnesseth) at the first descending of the holy Ghost vpon the Apostles,Act. 2.5. there were resident at Hierusalem men that feared God of euerie Nation vnder heauen: and all these at their Baptisme receiued the gift of the holy Ghost,Act. 2.38. whereby they might manifest the power and vertue of the Gospell vnto the Countries where they liued. If wee compare the generalitie of Saint Lukes speech in that fifth verse, with our Sauiours Matth. 24. vers. 14. And this Gospell of the Kingdome shall be preached throughout the whole world, for a witnesse vnto all Nations, and then shall the end come: Wee cannot doubt but our Sauiors prophecie was verified before the destruction of Hierusalem, which was the end he meant should come. But why should the Prophet Ioel, immediately after his description of the time of Grace, adde in the second place; I will shew wonders in the Heauens, and in the Earth; bloud and fire, and pillars of smoake? Doth he call the
 people of God againe vnto Mount Sinai, vnto burning fire, to blacknesse and darknesse, and tempest, vnto the sound of Trumpets, the voice of words, which they that once had heard, should not desire to heare any more? No: but he would haue the world vnderstand, That after the Gospell was once proclaimed throughout it, the Lord would shew himselfe as terrible a Iudge to all such as did not embrace the glad tidings thereof, as he had done before to the Israelites at the promulgation of the Law. Both that fearefull sight in Mount Sinai, and those other prodigious apparitions in Italie and Syria, were types and representations of that dreadfull day. The former was seene and testified by the Israelites onely, because the Law was onely reuealed to them: the horrors of the later are registred by Heathen Writers, knowne and felt by the principall Nations of the world, and from them diffused to all others (as Earthquakes, which begin at the centre, leaue their effects vpon the whole surface of the Earth) because the Gospell was at that time communicate to all the inhabited or frequented parts of the world. Those prodigious signes then which the Prophet Ioel describes, and the Heathen witnesse to haue beene so frequent among the Nations, presently after Ierusalems destruction, and the extirpation of the Iewes, were added as so many seales, to assure the truth of the Prophets and Gospell; and to testifie both to Iew and Gentile, That if either the one did follow his Iewish sacrifice, or the other his wonted Iolatrie, after the truth of Gods new couenant with mankind was sealed and proclaimed, there remained no more sacrifice for sinnes, but a fearefull looking of iudgement and violent fire: that there was no other name vnder heauen able to saue them from such euerlasting flames, as they now had seene some flashes of, but onely the name of Iesus, whom the Iew had crucified. So the Prophet Ioel concludes, Whosoeuer shall call on the Name of the Lord, that is, of Iesus (for now all Israel might know for a suretie, that God had made that Iesus whom they had crucified, both Lord and Christ) he shall be saued. The fruits of calling vpon the name of the Lord, and that distinction betwixt the state of the elect and reprobate, intimated by the Prophet in the last verse of that Chapter, shall be most fully manifested in the day of judgement: For such as haue watched and prayed continually, alwayes expecting their masters comming, shall vpon
 the first apprehension of his approach, lift vp their heads, as knowing that their redemption draweth neere. But for the riotous or carelesse liuer, he shall not be able to stand before the sonne of man: in stead of calling vpon his name, he shall crie vnto the hils, Couer me, and to the mountaines, Fall yee vpon me. Yet was the same distinction, betweene the reprobate and the elect, truely notified by the confident carriage of the Christians, in those fearefull times lately mentioned (which did so much affright the Heathen) as wee may gather from Antoninus the Emperours Decree, inhibiting the Christians persecution by the Commons of Asia. It seemes the other had accused the Christians as hurtfull persons, and offensiue to the Gods; vnto which the Emperour makes reply in this manner:Euseb. l. 4. c. 13. I know the Gods are carefull to disclose hurtfull persons; for they punish such as will not worship them more grieuously than you doe those whom you bring in trouble, confirming that opinion which they conceiue of you, to be wicked and vngodly men. It shall seeme requisite to admonish you of the Earthquakes, which haue and doe happen amongst vs; that being therewith moued, yee may compare our estate with theirs: they haue more confidence to Godwards than you haue. I will shut vp this discourse for the present with that saying of our Sauiour; Remember Lots wife: and his exhortation,Luk. 21.34. Take heede to your selues, least at any time your hearts be oppressed with surfetting and drunkennesse, and cares of this life; and least that day come on you at vnawares: for as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole earth. So did the former calamities in Titus and Traians time, which were as the day of Noah; They ate and they drunke, and rose vp to play: and when they said, Pax and tuta omnia, suddaine destruction came as an vnexpected actor vpon the stage. For, as you heard before, one cause of the great concourse vnto Antiochia at that direfull season, was to see Playes and Prizes: and in the former vnder Titus,Duas integras vrbes, Herculaneum and Pompeios, populo sedente in Theatro, penitus obruit. Dion. li. 66. two whole Cities were ouerwhelmed with the tempest of Gods wrath, whilest the Citizens were sitting in the Theatre. So must all such fruitlesse spectacles, or pleasant (but vnseasonable) Comedies, be concluded with their spectators Tragedie in the catastrophe of this great and spacious Amphitheatre.
9 Thus much of the Prophecies concerning Hierusalems destruction, and the signes of those times. Ere we returne to suruey the Iewes estate since, it shall not be amisse to note, how vpon the expiration of their interest in Gods promises, confirmed vnto their father Isaack, the seed of Ismael began to enter vpon the other moitie of his promise made to Abraham.


CHAP. VIII.
That the Saracens are the true sonnes of Ismael: Of their conditions and manners answerable to Moses Prophecie.
1 THat the sonnes of Isaack and Ismael (for more than three thousand yeares after their fathers death, in Countries almost as many miles distant from their originall Seat, whither scarce any other Asiatickes come) should kithe each other with as little scruple as if they were full cousin germanes, to me hath seemed an argument, That the Lord had appointed both for continuall signes vnto the Nations: the more, whiles I consider with what difficultie of search, varietie of conjectures, and vncertaintie of resolution the best Antiquaries amongst the naturall inhabitants of those Countries assigne either their first planters there, or the Regions whence they came.
2 But howsoeuer such as wee call Saracens, are best knowne to the moderne Iewes of Spaine by the name of Ismaelites; yet in these later dayes (disposed to quarrell with former ages) some beginne to suspect, others to contradict the common receiued opinion, as well concerning the Saracens naturall descent from Hagar and Ismael, as their pretended originall from Sarah, Abrahams lawfull wife. Vnto which bold assertion, or needlesse scruple, though vtterly deuoid of all ground, either of reason or authoritie, we are thus farre beholden; it hath occasioned vs to seeke the ground of the contrarie out of antiquitie, as well Secular as Ecclesiastique: Whose pregnant consonancie with the sacred Oracles is pertinent to this present, necessarie for subsequent
 discourse, in it selfe neither vnpleasant, nor vnprofitable to the judicious Christian Reader.
3 Of Abrahams base seede, some (in Scripture) are denominate from their mother, knowne by the name of Hagarens; others from her sonne, their father, are calledSo these two are distinguished 1. Chro 27. v 30. and 31. Ismaelites: some take their names from his sonnes, as Kedar, Duma, Naphish,1. Chro. 5. v. 19. Ietur, etc. Not any people in Scripture (to my remembrance) take their name from Nabaioth their eldest sonne: Which addes probabilitie toGoropius Becanus in Hispanicis their opinion, who thinke such as the Heathen called Nabathaei, were in Scriptures tearmed Ismaelites, as sole heires to their first progenitors name: Their seat was in the best part of Arabia Petraea, neere vnto the Midianites, as is probable from the storie of Ioseph; who in one place is said to be sold vnto the Ismaelites, and in another to the Midianites, these being neere neighbours, as it seemes, and copartners in traffique. As the Nabathaeans are not mentioned in Scripture, so neyther doe I finde the name of Ismael in any auncient Heathen Writer: All of them I thinke being of Strabo his minde,Strabo, lib. 16. who professeth, That he omits the auncient name of the Arabians, partly because in his time they were out of vse, partly for the harshnesse of their pronunciation; vnto which exception the name of Ismael was most obnoxious.
4 The Seat of such as the Scripture calls Hagarens, was in the desart Arabia, betwixt Gilead and Euphrates, as wee may gather from the first of Chronicles, the fift chapter, the ninth and tenth verses. This people was called by the Heathen(...). Agraei, (a name more consonant to their name in(...) Hebrew, than the Latine Hagareni) rightly placed by Ptolomie in the Desart Arabia, and byLib. 16. Strabo in thatTo wit, next vnto the Chaulotaeans, or inhabitants of Hauilah. verie place which the Scripture makes the Easterne bounds of Ismaels posteritie; their Metropolis or chiefe Citie in later times wasThis name of [Atraeni] it seemes was peculiar to the inhabitants of Atra, the chief Citie of the Aagrens or Agraeans: as Petrae was the Metropolis of the Nabathaeans, so that the Atreni and Agareni differ as the Petraeni and Nabathaei. Atra, or Atrae, and the inhabitants thereof Atraeni, vnlesse both Dion and Herodian either mistooke, or haue beene mistaken to haue written Atraeni for Agreni. But to omit the particular denomination of Ismaels seede, they were best knowne to auncient Heathens from the manner of their inhabitation in tents: and Scenitae Arabes was a name generall, and (I thinke) equiualent to his race, vnlesse
 perhaps the Midianites or Idumaeans might share with them in this name, as they were partakers of their qualitie: which is not so to be appropriated vnto either, as if they had neyther house or towne; for the Tents of Kedar are most famous in Scripture, yet sayth the Prophet, Let the Wildernesse and the Cities thereof lift vp their voice, the Townes that Kedar doth inhabite:Jsay 42. v. 11. Nor did hee meane as many Tents as would make a Towne; for euen in Moses time they had their places of defence, as appeares from the fiue and twentieth of Genesis, the sixteenth verse, These bee the sonnes of Ismael, and these be their names, by their Townes and by their Castles, twelue Princes of their Nations, or rather twelue heads of so many seuerall Houses, Tribes, or Clans; which kinde of Regiment they continued, till foure hundred yeares after Christ. And the Heathen Writers, both Greeke and Latine, better expresse Moses wordes in the fore-cited place, [(...)] than sundry moderne Interpreters doe; who call them Dukes or Princes, being to theStrab. lib. 16. in descriptione Syriae, and lib. 2. Grecians (...), to the Latines Phylarchi Arabum, or to the later Writers Saracenorum, albeitAmmian. Marcell. lib. 23. vide annotat. ad Num. 5. cap. 9. some Latine Writers call them Reguli Saracenorum.
5 The proofe of our intended conclusion depends vpon these two premisses; the first, That the Saraceni were the same people whom the Auncients call the Scenitae Arabes; as is expressely auouched byLib. 22. and 23. Scenitae Arabes quos Saracenos posteritas appellauit. Ammianus Marcellinus in sundrie places, and euerie one will acknowledge, that compares theWhom the auncient Writers call Phylarchi Arabum, the later call Phylarchi Saracenorum, as appeares by Sextus Rufus and Jornandes, Montes Armeniae, primum per Lucullum Romana arma videruut; per quem and Osroene and Saracenorum Phylarchi devicti Romanis se dediderunt. Jornandes lib. 1. So he calles them by anticipation as in Scripture; places are oft times called by those names which were best knowne in the Writers time; not by the names which they bare in those auncient times of which they write. So likewise, Sextus Rufus in his Breuiarie of the Romane storie, speaking of the Consuls time, mentioneth the Saracens; albeit no mention is made of them or their Phylarchi, by any Romane that liued within two hundred yeares of Pompeyes Conquests. auncient and later Romaines, writing the same stories. The second, That the Scenitae Arabes were the seede of Ismael; which doth appeare by the identitie of their habitation, condition, and qualitie.
6 First, it is euident out of Plinie andLib. 2. (...). Et lib. 10. ^^^a orientem versus te^minatur E^phrate and Arabibus Scenitis. Strabo, That the Scenitae Arabes were seated Eastward about the riuer Euphrates, noysome neighbours to Chaldaea and Mesopotamia; some part whereof in Strabo his time they inhabited: on the West part they bordered vpon Aegypt and Aethiopia: So Ammianus Marcellinus in his two and twentieth booke describing the situation of Aegypt, sayth,Aegyptia Gens, qua crientem e regione prospicit, Elephantinam and Meroen vrbes Aethiopum, and cata-dupos rubrumque Pelagus and Scenitus praetenditur Arabas, quos Saracenos nunc appellamus. Amm. Marcell. lib. 22. it bordered on the East vpon the Cataracts of Nilus, and the Scenitae Arabes, whom now wee call Saracens. And in his fourteenth booke, describing the situation of the Saracens, he makes Assyria their border on the East, and the confines of Blemmiae and the Cataracts of Nylus on the West. And Moses in the twentie fiue of Genesis sayth, The sonnes of Ismaels dwelling was from Shur, which is towards Aegypt vnto Hauilah, which is toward Ashur, in the way from Aegypt thither. This land of Hauilah, or (according to the orthographie of the Hebrew) Chauilah, famous in Scripture for gold, retained the same name inLib. 16. initio descr^^ Arabiae. Strabo his time; the inhabitants called by him Chaulotaeans, next neighbours to the Hagarens, or Agraei, whose countrey Seuerus suspected to haue had good store of gold.
7The description of the Saracenes situation and conditions out of Ammianus Marcellinus, in his foureteenth booke, compared with Moses characters of Ismael, and his prophecie of his posteritie, Genesis 25. v. 18. and Genes. 16. v 6. and 12. Saraceni nec amici nobis vnquam nec habendi [alij legunt: nec Hostes optandi] vltro citroque discursantes, quicquid inueniri poterat, momento temporis parui vastabant, miluorum rapaci vitae similes: qui si praedam despexerint celsius volatu rapiunt celeri, aut si impetrarint non immorantur. Super quorum moribus licet in actibus principis Marci, and postea aliquotios meminerim retulisse, tamen nunc quoque pauca de ijsdem expediam carptim. Apud has gentes, quarum exordiens initium ab Assyrijs ad Nili cataractas porrigitur and confinia Blemyarum, omnes pari sorte sunt bellatores, seminudi, coloratis Sagulis pube tenus amicti, equorum adiumento pernicium, gracilium que camelorum per diuersa reptantes in tranquillis vel turbidis rebus: Nec eorum quisquam aliquando stiuam apprehendit, vel arborem colit, aut arua subigendo quaeritant victum, sed errant semper per spatia longe latcque distenta, sine lare, fine sedibus fixis aut legibus, perferunt diutius coelum. Haud trectus vnius soli illis vnquam placet, vita est illis semper in fuga, vxoresque Mercenariae conductae ad tempus ex pacto: atque vt sit species matrimonij, dotis nomine futura coniunx traetam and tabernaculum offert marito, post statum diem s^id el^gerit d^scessura: and incredibile est, quo ardore apud eos in venerem vterque sexus soluitur. Ita autem quoad vixerint, late palantur, it alibi mulier nubat, in loco pariat alio, liberosque procul deducat, nulla cop^a quiescendi permissa. Victus vniuersis caro ferina est, lactisque abundans copia, qua sustentantur, and herbae multiplices, and si quae alites capi per aucupium possunt. Et plerosque nos vidimus frumenti vsum and vini penitus ignorantes. If Amm. Marcellinus had but knowne how fully Moses had preuented him in his obseruations of these Saracenes,
 gathered from his experience of their behauiour, many hundred yeares before the Romanes had heard of such a people; nay ere they themselues were any Nation; it would perhaps haue moued him to haue thought better of Moses writings, and worse of his master Iulian for oppugning them. And if neither loue, nor feare of God, or true Religion, mee thinkes, naturall ciuile modestie should enforce men to beleeue his report of thinges past, that can so clearely point out the nature of men many hundred yeares before they come into the world. For so wee must esteeme Moses words of Ismael and Hagar, though historically verified in their persons, yet withall a typicall prophecie of their posterities conditions.As that prophecie Gen. 25. v. 23. And it is a demonstratiue Argument, That their wildnesse was foretold by his spirit, that onely can commaund Nature, and prescribe limits to the free thoughts of man, in that this Progenie (throughout so many hundred generations) varie no more from their first Progenitors agrest and fierce qualities, than the wilde Plants of the Forest, neuer accustomed to humane culture, doe from the Trees whence they are propagate.
8 Ismael, as Moses tels vs, was begotten of Hagar an Egyptian hyreling: The matrimonie of Saracens women in Ammianus his time was mercenarie, and vpon compact for a time. Hagar conceiued Ismael in Abrahams house, but readie to bring him forth in the Wildernesse, whither he and she were sent againe, after her returne vnto her mistresse: The Saracene women of Ammianus his time marrie in one place, beare children in another, and bring them vp in a third farre distant; neuer permitted to liue in rest: and in shew of matrimonie, they bring a Speare and a Tent for their dowrie, being indeed a perfect Embleme of their mercenarie rouing life: for these they may by couenant take with them at the end of their seruice, and be packing from their masters to seeke their food in the Wildernesse, as their mother Hagar taught them. Who would thinke, but that it were more likely one should die rather of hunger than thirst in the Wildernesse? Or who could imagine, that Abraham (vnlesse directed by some secret instinct, praesaging that rude and sharking life, whereunto, this wilde slippes progenie was ordained) could suffer Ismael and Hagar to goe to the Wildernesse out of his house,
 which God had blest with all manner of store, onely furnished with a little bread, and a bottle of water, so quickly spent, that the child had almost died for thirst, before God did prouide him more. This did portend, that his Posteritie should be pinched with like penurie, scant of water (their best drinke) straitned their territories (as(...). Strabo lib. 16. in desc. Syriae. Strabo telles vs) in Arabia; and after they had enlarged the bounds which Moses let them,(...). Id. lib. 10. euen in Mesopotamia it selfe, they are confined to drie and barren places; nor could theIsaiah. 13. vers. 20. From which place we may gath^r that such as the ancient w^^^ers of sacred storie would haue termed Hagarines or Ismaelites were called by later, Arabians: not ^s it vsuall after Iehosophats time (if at all) to mention the Ismaelites or Hagarens, the name of the Arabians being then equiualent to the Ismaelite if wee take them generally, as may be gathered l^kewise from Iosephus in sundrie places amongst others from his 13. chapter of his f^rst booke of Antiquities. Tumultuantibus ijs qui a Saracenis victi fuerunt, and d centibus, ^^num non ce^imus, cr^^^^^te inquit, illi qui vos vincunt aquam bibunt. Vide Aelium Spartian. in Pessemnio N^gro. The Sa^acens which haue beene famous for their Artillerie throughout all their generations. Prophet better expresse the future barrennesse of Babylon, and the regions about, then by by intimating it such, as the sonnes of desolation, which sought their foode out of flint, should not be able to inhabite. That water, many yeares after Straboes time, was the Scenite Arabians best, or onely drinke, appeares from Pessemnius Nigers replie vnto his Souldiers, pretending lacke of wine as cause of their lacke of courage, or faint seruice, you may be ashamed, (saith he) of this excuse, whereas they that foyle you are but water-drinkers. And Ammianus saith, he knew very many of them in his time, that neyther knew vse of wine nor corne. Moses describing the manner of Ismaels life, said he was an archer in the wildernesse. None of the Saracens, if we may beleeue Ammianus, did euer set his hand to the plough, but got their liuing for the most part by their bow. For as were they, such was their meate, wilde flesh or venison, hearbes or milke, or such wilde foule as the wildernesse did affoord, and they could catch. For their owne wildenesse hee compares them to Kites, readie to spie a prey, but so vntame withall, that they would not stay by it, as Crowes or other rauenous birds doe by carion, but presently fled with what they caught vnto their nestes. So notoriously was their wildenesse incorporated into their nature, that the


 more tame they grew, the lesse right they seemed to haue vnto their names, as Strabo intimates.
9 Yet did they not more fully resemble Ismael and Hagars conditi^ns, then preposterously imitate Abrahams Rites, or Religion. Their Father Ismael, was about thirteene yeare old when God established his couenant with Abraham: and for this reason notI^a^tum 8. m^^ ^^e cir^umci^ant qui mos adhuc Iudaeis durat, v^ post te^^dem ^^es ^^^cum^^sionem celebre^t. Arabe^ vero post d^cimum tertiam ^nnum^d fa^iunt. Ismael enim g^ntis ^orit autor Abrahamo e^on^ ^bi^anatus p^st tantum temporis est circu^c^sus. Io^ephus. A^tiq. Iudaic. l. ^. c. 13. Th^ custome was c^ntinued ^y the Saracens of Spaine and Aff^^cke. Vid La^ Iouic. circumcised vntill that age: the SaracensVide Ludouicum Viuam de vert. till this day circumcise not their children before that time; when as they might with as good reason deferre it till about the hundreth yeare of their age, because Abraham, was thereabouts when hee first receiued this seale of Gods couenant. Abraham erected Altars, and Iacob annointed the stone, in the place where God had appeared to him: the Saracens from these or like traditio^s, celebrate their sacrificesThe Turkes I know not whether vpon ignorance of Ismaels age a th^ time of his circum ision, or vpon other occasions, perhaps mistaking yeares for daies circum^i^e th^ir children at e ght yeares old Ph lip. ^eonice^ tom 1. part. 2. cap. 24. vnto stone with apish and childish solemnities. God commaunded Moses (ignorant belike of that religious and decent custome which his forefathers in like cases vsed) to put of his shoes, when hee was to treade on holy ground; Which R^te, was afterwardes obserued by the Iewes in their more solemne vowes, and the Saracens to this day haue their Nudipedalia sacrificia. Abraham, if we may beleeueSaraceni autem (q^ ^^ q^^dem and i^^i, de eare a^iquid d^cere ve le vide^t^r) suff ciat quod ^n eremo apidi inanimato sacrificia faci^ t a^^^^me^^q e ha^c vocem Chobar, quod a pat i^us acceptum per puerilia m^st^ria and festa peragant. Sen^e^tia ^^nol^ N^^enae se^u^dae actione quarta in Episc G^rmani Ep^^^ ad Tom. Ep^st. Claudiapolius. The Iewe^ ^^d S^ra^en^ had obiected worshipping of Images to the Christians of that age, and this Synode ^^th this Apology better bese^ming a scolding butter queane then such as should be reue^er^n^ Fathers: heir testimonies notwithstanding we may admi^ without preiudice to that controue^sie betwixt vs and them. Nunc quoque Mau^i and Saraceni, e^usmud que gen^s hominum templa in qu bus sa^ra ^actu^^ sunt non ingrediuntu^ n^si calce^s depositis Gyraldus de Sym. Pythag. Iosephus from his sober contemplation of the Heauen and Starres, beganne to detest the Idolatrie of the Heathen, and to adore that diuine prouidence, by which these supposed Gods were guided: the Saracens falling backe to Heathenisme, adore Lucifer or the morning Starre; and from their forefathers no doubt the Israelites learned this idolatrie in the wildernesse. And as I should coniecture their habitation inJos^ph l b. ^. A^ q. (...). Vide H^^ron. in vita H^darion^s and R^^^am innonum Amosi. numero 7^. O ^h^ occasions of these Sarace. is idolatrie, and preposte^ous imitation of the Patria^kes, vide. Sozomen. lib. (...) c. 38.
 tents, and wandering life was not continued, throughout so many generations, so much vpon necessitie, as in imitation of Abrahams vsing tents, necessarie in that time for him, that would iourney throughout so many Countries as hee was enforced to doe.


CHAP. IX.
The beginning and progresse of Ismaels greatnesse.
1 THe chiefe strength of Ismaels sonnes in ancient time did consist in artillerie, as we may gather from the Prophet Esay. Yet a yeare according to the yeares of an hireling, and all the glory of Kedar shall faile, and the residue of the number of the strong Archers of the sonnes of Kedar shall be few: for the Lord God of Israel hath spoken it. Though the plague heere threatned by the Assyrians, did ouertake them: yet as Saint Ierome notes, they escaped the rod of Gods wrath, better then most of their neighbours, by reason of their speedie remouall from place to place, most of them such as were neuer out of their dwelling, whilest they had tents, and Cammels, and wastes to range in. Afterwards they continued troublesome neighbours vnto Syria, vntill it was annext to the Romane Empyre,Strabo. lib. 16. by whose valour the strength of their Archers, was againe diminished, and the raigne of their Phylarchi cut shorr. But their countrey first brought into the forme of a Prouince by Traiane, in whose time the Hagarens, (so soone are thy wearie of ciuill subiection,) begunne to reuolt, and for ought I finde, neuer brought againe to performe perfect obedience vnto the Romane or any other people.
2 Their Citie, saithPerlege historia apud Dion. l. c ^. Dion, was neither great nor rich, yet had it Zoars priuiledge. Hee that preserued the one from the stormes of fire and brimstone, which deuoured farre greater neighbour-Cities, did guard the other against the violence of
 two most potent Emperours, who had ouer-runne the mightiest Kingdomes of the earth. The Heathens thought the Sunne, to whom their Citie was consecrated, did protect it. But can they shew vs any prophecie of old, giuen by Phoebus for this peoples good? we can shew them the expresse promise of Abrahams God, more than two thousand yeeres before, for making them and their brethren a mightie Nation. Let the Atheist iudge, whether their Gods arme were shortned, or whether his miracles, which the Scripture tels vs were wrought for the sonnes of the free-woman, whilest they followed their fathers steps, can seeme incredible, being compared with the wonderfull deliuerance of the Agarens, the sonnes of the bond-woman, from Traiane and Seuerus, both besieging them in person. The soyle about their Citie was barren, and when Traiane besieged it verie hote; so that the violence of the siege could not bee long. These signes the politicians could assigne of Traianes ill successe. But whence was it, that as oft as the Citie was assaulted, the soldiers were annoyed with lightnings, thunders, whirlewindes, and hayle? affrighted or dezcled with the apparition of rainebowes? whence was it that flyes should corrupt and spoile their meate, whilest they eate it? by these and the like meanes, wonderfull euen in the Heathens sight, was Traiane forced to giue ouer the siege; which hee had followed, not without great daunger of his life, by comming within these strong Archers shot in viewing the Citie, shortly after, (as if hee had fought before with men, but now against God) falling into a disease, whereof he died.
3 About some fourescore yeeres after, the EmperourDion. lib. 71. Seuerus, disdaining (as Traiane had done) that these Hagarens should stand out still against the Romanes, when all the rest about them had yeelded, beeing once repulsed with losse of men and munition, made great preparation for the second assault, in which (after great losse of his souldiers) hauing ouerthrowne part of the Citie-wall, he caused the retreite to bee sounded in policie, hoping the besieged would haue come to intreat for peace and libertie, which he was not minded to graunt, but vpon condition they would bewray the hidden treasure supposed to bee consecrated
 to the Sunne. But they continued resolute a whole day, giuing no intimation of any treatie for peace. The souldiers in the meane time were so discontented, that on the morrow following the Europaeans, before most resolute, would not enter at the breach: and the Syrians, enforced to vndertake the seruice, had a grieuous repulse. So, saith Dion, God deliuered the Citie, recalling the Souldiers by Seuerus, when they might haue entered, and restraining Seuerus the second day by the Souldiers backewardnesse. This conquest after this breach, was in martiall esteeme so easie, that one of his companions confidently vndertooke to effect it, without the hazard of any other mans life besides, so he might haue but fiue hundred and fif^ie Europaean Souldiers assigned him. To which faire proffer the Emperour (as perish as they had beene peeuish,) in a distracted chafe replied: But where shall I finde so many Souldiers? and so departed into Palestina. Thus are the proud assaults of greatest Monarches, in their height of strength, but like the billowes of a swelling tide, which breake ouer the bankes, and immediately fall againe. The Almightie hath set bounds to both, which they must not passe; and vnder his protection may Ismael rest, as secure from the Romane forces, to whom hee had giuen all the R^gions round about them, as Edom did from the Israelites, when they slew mighty Kings, and cast out farre greater neighbour-nations. It is probable that these Hagarens, after their good successe against Traiane and Seuerus, did propagate their name to all the sonnes of Ismael; as whole nations in like cases take new denominations from the ring-leaders vnto reuolt.Lib. 6. c^p. ^8. Sozomen and SaintCommost. in 21. Isa. Hierome, both liuing shortly after this people was generally knowne by the name of Saracens, auouch without question, (what they could haue giuen reason for, had they fore-seene posterities in credulitie) that vsurped the name of Sarah, in hope to extinguish that note of bastardie, imported in their former name of Hagarens: as great mens bastardes in few descents, will attempt the changing of their ignominious coate. And in all Ecclesiasticke writers, the names of Saracens or Hagarens, are vsed promiscuously as equiualent; which argues that the name of Hagarens had somtimes beene common to all the race of Ismael,
 not appropriate to the Agraei or such as the Scripture calles Hagarites.
4 It is euident out of Ammianus, that the name of Saracens was not ancient. The first certaine mention of it is in Ptolomie: who describes a Region called Saracene in the West part of Ismaels territories, as they are described by Moses, and a people, called Saraceni in the wealthie Arabia, neere vnto the mountaines, which the Scenitae inhabite. Whether the fertilitie of the soyle, might make them scorne their former name, as it would cause them loath their aunciente seat: or whether giuen, or taken vpon other occasions: the whole progenie aswell in the desert Arabia as elsewhere, was willing to make the benefite of it, as an argument to perswade the world they were free borne, and true heires of that promise whence the Iewes were fallen. For Mahomet, as all writers agree, vsed this plausible Etymologie as a faire colour to countenance his foule blasphemies: and aIbi ab saracenenis coepta est Orati^ quae commiserat^onem e^slagitaret commun^m esse Deum quem vtr^que ^olerent, ritum di^er^um. Ill s Ab^aham esse ge^^eris principium, quod a Sara ge^^t^ Saraceni ^^cantur, fratres esse comm^ni praeditos b ma^itate, sub vn^ pat^e Deo, ^^mamarum rerum varietate iam se victos saepe ante victores. Albert. Krantzij rer. Germ. hist. d. Reg. aquil. Dan. Suec Noru Chro. Saxon. l. 7. c. 12. graue relator of truth, not accustomed to make speeeches for dead men to vtter, brings in the later Saracens in the siege of Torutum (which was a mile from Tyre) vsing their name deriued from Sarah, as an argument to perswade their true descent from Abraham, for whose sake they hoped for fauour at Christians hands. But they could not so easily change their nature, as their name: the greater they grow in might, the more exactly they fulfill that prophecie of Ismael, and he shall be a wild man, his hand shall be against euerie man, and euery mans hands against him, For a long time they continued, like forward but poore gamesters, not able to set at more then one at once, and that for no great stake, without some to beare their part; vntill at length by their treacherous shuffling from side to side, and banding somtimes with one, somtimes another against some third, they grow so flush, that they dare set at all, and take Asia, Europe, and Affricke to taske at once.
5 Sometimes they tooke part with Mithridate, and other Easterne nations, against Lucullus and Pompey, and yet readie to ioyne with Pompey against the Iewes. Some of them againe were for the Parthians against the Romanes, others for the Romanes against the Parthians, some now for the one, then for the other as Achlaudonius andOs^oenus Dio: m a ^ Ar abs qu^nquam and Osroen^ Ar^b s ori^ine, M^^opotamiae incolae. Angarus before mentioned. Some againe
 for Pesseninus Niger against Seuerus, others against Pesseninus, afterwards one whi^e for Persian, and another while for the Romanes, as in the times of Constantiu^ and Iulianus.Cum armigera grad^en manu in flatione quada^ sub pelabus mansit, vbi Saracenorum regul^ gent^m gen^ous supplices ^ixia^us. ^blata au^i corona tanquam mun^^, suarumque geut^^ dom^n^m adorarunt, us^ pti g ta^^^ v^ po^e a^ ^^^ta (...) li^ u^ a^p^^ti. Am^^an. Mar^el. l. 33. The later of whom they reuerenced most of any Romane, and yet at length, not sati^fied in their expectations,Ho. Saraceros id^o pat^ebamur infestos, q^od salaria inunetaque plurima tul^an^ ad similitudinem praeteriti temporis accipere vetit^, quaest que apud eum, solum and erat Imperatorem bell^^o^um and vigilantem, ferrum habere non auram. Amm. an lib 25. reuolting from him. Afterwards, they serue vnder the Romans againstVide facimus po^tento^um Saracem cu^u^dam contra Got^os apud Ammianu^ sub finem lib. v^^^^st. the Gothe^: and yet while the Gothes and other barbarous people, claspe with the Romane Eagle in the West; These foule Harpies plucke off her traine in the East; and not therewith content take their fl ght toward the West to snatch the mea^e out of the other ba^tards mouth, and beate them one after another from the prey which they had seized on in Spayne and Affricke; attempting the like in France, Greece, and Germanie; dis-pluming the breastes, and ofttimes readie to deuoure the verie heart, euen Italie and Rome it selfe.
6 Finally, as Ismael began first to giue proofe of his might, when Isaacs strength begun to fayle, so can wee scarce name any place where Isaacs seede haue beene scattered, whither the the dread of Ismaels ha^h not followed them: that such Christians, as would not suffer the miserable estate of the one to sinke into their soules, nor learne to feare Gods iudgements shewed vpon them, might apprehend the other, as present executioners of like woe and vengeance vpon themselues. It is well obserued by the Author of the triparti^e worke, touching the sacred warre (annexed to the Councell of Lateran) that the persecution of Christians by the Saracen, hath beene euerie way greater and more grieuous without interruption, then all the persecutions vnder the Roman Emperours, or any forraine enemies. These prouocations by this foolish Nation, witnesse the truth of Gods threatninges to the ancient Iewes, and that our pride of heart hath beene like the^rs: for the asswaging whereof his pleasure hath beene, To bring the most wicked of the heathen to possesse our houses, and to d fi^e the holy places. A^cording to their iudgement hath he iudged the most part of Christendome: such seruilitie as the Iewes suffered vnder the Greeks and Asiaticks haue they endured vnder the Saracen: and the Turke who is but a Prosylite of Ismael, and heire by adoptio^ of that promise. Gen. 17.20. I will
 multiplie him exceedingly, and I will make a great nation of him Besides his participation with him in the couenant of Circumcision, the best pledge and ground of Ismaels gteatnesse, the manners and conditions of the Turkes and Saracens haue great affinitie; the Turke also is a wild man, yea this is the signification of his name (asVterque in limine suae historiae. Arabs likewise is as much as homo agrestis, or incultus. And Arabia, as much as terra agrestis and inculta: in which all things grow promiscuously. And if I mistake not, only the desolate barren parts of that countrie, which we call Arabia, is so called in sacred storie. Chalcocondilus and Louicer expound it.) But though both Turkes and Saracens by Christians continuance in their fathers sinnes haue beene perpetuall scourges of Christendome; yet hath God at sundrie times giuen vs manifest signes of helpe laid vp in store, so that wee would turne to him with our whole heartes. The strange and almost incredible, though most vndoubted victories, which Christians sometimes had ouer them, doe liuely represent the miraculous victories of the Iewes ouer the Heathen, related in Scriptures. To omit others, It might be remembred as an irrefragable witnesse as well of the multitude of Gods mercies towards vs, as of Ismaels posteritie, that three hundred and eighty thousand of them should be slaine all in one day by one Christian Generall. Vnlesse the Lord had raised vs vp a Gedeon then, hee onely knowes how quickly these parts of Christendome might haue beene rebaptized in their bloud, and borne the name of Saracens euer after. And, as a Germane writer well obserues, the French Kings might well brooke that title of Christianissimi, from that admirable exploit of Carolus Martellus, the next meanes vnder Gods prouidence, that other parts of Europe had not Saracen tyrants in steed of Christian Princes. Of such particular experiments, as the Histories of Turkes and Saracens affoorde, answerable to the Prophecies in Scripture concerning them, wee shall haue fitter occasion to speake heereafter.



CHAP. X.
The persecutions of the Iewes by Traian: and the desolation of their countrie by Adrian: their scattering through other nations, fore-told by Moses.
1 THough the greatnesse of their former plagues vnder Vespasia^ had made their nu^ber lesse throughout their owne land: yet Aegypt, Cyrene, and Cyprus, had too many of these snakes within their bowels, vntill their deadly stings, procuring others, did prouoke their own destructio^. In the later end of Traians reigne, the manner of their outragious massacres, practised vpon both Greeks and Romans in the foreme^tioned countries, was as hainous, as the facts the^selues; though these hainous beyond all credence, if not related by most credible, most vnpartial writers.Dion lib. 6^. Besides the particular butcheries co^mitted throughout Aegypt, about Cyrene were slaine by them two hundred thousand, in Cyprus two hundred and fiftie thousand. The Lord (no doubt) had smitte^ them, as he had threatned Deu. 28. v. 28. with this madnesse and blindnesse of heart, that they might hereby prouoke this puisant Emperors indignation; which otherwise would haue slept, but now pursues them throughout his dominions, not as enemies, or rebels of the Empire, but as noxious creatures to humane societie, with reue^ge suting to their former outrages.Dion ibidem. Partly for the Cyprians better securitie in time to come, partly in memorie of their former miserie, and these Iewes infamie: It is publickly inacted, that no Iew, though driuen by tempest thither, should presume to set foot within their coast, vpon paine of present execution, as alreadie condemned by his verie appearance on that soile, which had bin tainted with the deadly venome of his countrimen.
2 But least posteritie, litle respectiue of Iewish affaires (through negligence of the Romane writers) should forget, or, from the inconsiderate frailty of humane nature, lesse obserue these two most grieuous persecutions of the Iewes than was behouefull for testification of Moses, or Christes prophecies, and confirmation of Christian faith: In Adrians time, (like traitours that had fainted vpon the racke before their full confession taken) they are recouered to greater torture. And least the Nations in that,
 or ages following, should not acknowledge them to haue beene such a mightie people, as the sacred storie makes them: they are made a spectacle to the world againe, to showe their naturall strength by their grieuous lingring paines in dying. This was that which Moses had said Deut. 28. vers. 59. The Lord will make thy plagues wonderfull, and the plagues of thy seede great plagues, and of long continuance, and sore diseases, and of long durance. Yet their destruction now, as at both times (alwaies) before, was from their owne procurement. For Adrian, causing new AElia built by him where Hierusalem stood, to bee inhabited by others, Christians as well as Iewes, and permitting the vse of their countrie-religion to all: the Iewes began first to repine while Adrian was neere, afterwardes to mutinie vpon his departure out of these Easterne Prouinces.
3 The fresh memorie of their former desolation made their strength seeme litle, and the apprehension of their weaknes made the Romanes care for preuenting new dangers, lesse than otherwise it might, and in reason should haue beene. But as men enuironed with darknesse, haue great aduantage of such as stand in the light; and presumption of good-casting in the beginning bring such, as intend the after-game well, to better possibilitie of winning the stake: so these Iewes, partly through the Romanes confidence of their strength, partly through their own secrecie in meeting, securitie of harbour in caues and dens purposely digged in the earth, and diligent prouiding necessaries for war; from litle and contemptible beginnings gather such strength and resolution, that they can be content to set the whole stocke vpon it, offring battel vnto the choysest warriours of the empire, toHadrianus optimos quosque duces aduersum eos mittit, quorum primus fuit Iulius Seuerus qui ex Britannia cui praeerat, contra Iudaeos missus est, etc. Dion Hist. Rom. li. 69. Iulius Seuerus that noble General himselfe, called to this seruice (such was the daunger) out of this Iland of Britaine. And albeit the Romaines in the end had the victorie without controuersie,Periere quo^ ex Romanis complures in eo bello. Quamobrem Hadrianus, cum scriberet ad senatum, non est vsus illo exord o, quo vti Jmperatores consueuerunt: Si vos liberique vestri valetis bene est, ego quidem et exercitus valemus. Dion ibidem. yet would they not haue wished many triumphes at the same price. This peoples last conflict with death, and destruction now seazing vpon them, may witnesse to the world, that they had beene a principall part of it now so generally and deepely affected
 with their last pangs. For as this iudicious and vnpartiall writer saith; The whole world, in a manner, was shaken with this commotion of the Iewes.
4 But as the Preacher obserueth, that riehes are oftentimes reserued to the owners for their euill. So these Iewes extraordinarie strength was giuen them for like destruction. The greater danger their mutinie had occasioned to the Empire, the greater was the Emperours seueritie in punishing their rebellion past, the greater, his care to preuent the like in time to come. In battels and skirmishes was slaine of this people fiftie thousand, beside an infinite number, consumed with famine and diseases, during the time of this lingring war, protracted of purpose by the Romanes, not willing to trie it out in open field with such a forlorne desperate multitude. Now asDeut. 28. v. 62 Moses had expresly foretold, andIulius Seuerus nulla ex parte ausus est aperte cum hostibus co^gredi, multitudine ipsorum atque desperatione cognita, sed eos singulatim militum legatorum que numero aliquo adoriens, and commeatis prohibens, atque includens serius quidem, sed minore cu^ periculo, ita and adterere and exhaurire, and exscindere potuit vt pauci adm^du^ euaserint, and quinquaginta eoru^ arces munitissimae, vicique celeberrimi atque nobilissimi non ginti octoginta quinque funditus euersi sint. Caesa sunt in excursionibus praelijsque hominum quingenta octoginta millia: eoru^ aute^ qui fame, morbo, and igni interierunt, iudagari multitudo non potuit, ita vt omnis poene Iudaea deserta relicta fuerit. Dion Hist. Rom. lib 69. Dion (liuing not long after this time) emphatically notes, they were left fewe in number, their land laid waste, fiue hundred of their strongest munitions vtterly razed, nine hundred of their chiefe and most populous townes sackt and consumed by fire.
5 This mightie destruction of these Iewes, had generall desolation of their countrie by Romans, and their tributaries of these western countries,Adrian and Traian were both Spaniards by birth, Iulius Seuerus was called to their destruction out of this Island, wherein Vespasian had giuen best proofe of his good seruices. Their ensignes (being Eagles) were as emblemes of their swiftnesse to execute Gods wrath vpon this people: and Moses in this place by diuine inspiration, alludes vnto the Romane eagles. a people strange and perhaps vnheard of to their ancestors: are euerlasting monuments of the truth of Moses his prophecie, Deut. 28. v. 49. The Lord shall bring a nation vpon thee from far, euen from the end of the world, flying swift as an eagle; a nation whose tongue thou shalt not vnderstand: a nation of a fierce countenance, which will not regard the person of the old, nor haue compassion of the young. The same shall eate the fruit of thy cattell, and the fruite of thy land, vntill thou bee destroyed; and hee shall leaue thee neither wheate, wine, or oyle, neither the increase of thy kine, nor the flockes of thy sheepe, vntill hee haue brought thee to naught. And hee shall besiege thee in all thy Cities, vntill thy high and strong walles fall downe, wherein thou trustest, in all the land: and hee shall besiege thee in all thy cities throughout thy land, which the Lord thy God, hath giuen thee. Thus at length Iudah as wel as Israel, hath ceased to bee a
 Nation not without manifest signesSignes foreshowing Iuries desolation by Adrian, recorded by Dion and others. foreshewing their fatall expiration. Salomons sepulchre, which they held in greatest honor a litle before this warre, did fall asunder of its owne accord; as if it would haue signified vnto them, that Gods couenant, made with Salomon for Iudahs peace and restauration, was now vtterly void, and finally cancelled by its rupture and fall. Wolues and Hyenaes did howle throughout their streets, and deuoure this people in the fields: these are the Lords messengers of woe and vengeance to this vngratious seed, whose fathers had kild and stoned his prophets, sent vnto them for their good. Yet is not the wrath of the Lord ceased, but his hand is stretched out against them still. For Adrian, after this strange desolation, by publique decree ratified with the Senates consent,Iernandes. prohibits any Iew to come within the view of Iurie. This he did only in a publique respect, least the sight of their natiue soyle might inspire this people with some fresh desperate resolutions, but herein made, though vnwillingly, Gods Angel to keepe, by his powerfull sword, this wicked progenie of those rebellious and vngratious husbandmen,Euseb. 4. c. 6. ex Aristone Pe^^^. that had kild their Lords first borne, out of that paradice, which he had set them to dresse and keepe. The same mightie Lord, hauing now (as it were) disparked the place which he had walled and fenced about, and graced with many charters of greatest priuiledges, doth by his arme, stretched out against them stil, scatter the reliques of this rascall heard throughout all the Nations vnder heauen.Deut. 28. v. 62. So as this remnant (left by Adrian) and their race, haue beene as the game, which Gods iudgements haue held in perpetual chace for this fifteene hundred yeeres.
6 Thus are Gods iudgements executed vpon this people; according to the order and course of Moses his sentence, pronounced against them almost two thousand yeeres before. For after he had foretold that paucitie, wherunto this last war had brought them; he ads immediatly v. 63. As the Lord hath reioyced ouer you to do you good, and to multiply you; so he will reioyce ouer you to destroy, and bring you to naught: and ye shalbe rooted out of the land, whither thou goest to possesse it: and the Lord shall scatter thee amongst all people, from the one end of the world vnto the other.Quos vero Hadrianus in eo bello Iudaeos cepit, in Hispania^ exulatum misit, p^rro ex eo tempore, ad foelicissima vsque tempora Catholicoru^ regum Ferdinandi and Isabelle, atque etiam Emanuelis inuicti Portugaliae regis publica in Hispania Iudae eorum Synagogae fuere. Io. Vasaeus Chr. His. pa^. 137. vide Pet. Ant. Beut. l. 10. c. 19. Such as were captiuate in this warre, were transplanted by Adrian into Spaine, his natiue countrie: where they had their Synagogues since his, vntill Ferdinando
 and Isabels time. Of their ill rest there, and in other of these Westerne Nations, (foretold by Moses in the very next wordes) wee are now to entreate: but first to aduertise the Reader,So the continuer of the Historie of the sacred Warre complaines. Nulli mirum erat, nos rerum per Judaeam gestarum notitia destitui, ob Romanorum tum in Iudaeos inuidiam, quorum quidem te^pore, and deuotionem and pietatem superstitiosam quandam persuasionem credebant. Nulla igitur eorum ratione habita, nec mentionem de bis habere dignati sunt. Adde quod qui Syria praefectus erat, hanc quoque viribus, opibus, armis, militibus, exutam regebat. Cumque Christiana res pace qua^ bello magis accresceret, tumultis nunquam inclaruit Iudaea, neminem Imperatorum seditione. Iohan. Herold lib. 1. de contin. bel. sacri. cap. 15. Why Romaine Writers make no mention of our Sauiour Christ or his acts. That the state of these Iewes, from this time vntill the expiration of the Romaine Empire, can not easily be gathered from any Romaine Writers; who seldome vouchsafe the Iewes or Christians any mention, vnlesse enforced thereunto by some such famous Warre or mutinie, as fell out in Vespasians, Traians, or Adrians time; or by some other euent redounding to the Romaines glorie; whereas Iurie after this time, was not famous for any tumult, till Romes captiuitie; the Iewes wanted strength, and Christians willing mindes, to erect any Emperours praise by their seditions. So that, whatsoeuer calamitie, either suffered by the Romaines, was past ouer by Romaine Writers, as priuate wrongs not worthy of registring in their Annalls.
7 No meruaile then, if they tooke no notice of our Sauiour, or his acts, all tending to peace and loialtie. For as Tacitus notes,Tacit. lib 5. Histor. Ergo abolendo rumori Nero subdidit reos, and quae stissimis paenis affecit, quos per flagitia inuisos, vulgus Christianos appellabat. Auctor nominis eius Christus, qui, Tiberi^ imperante, per procuratorem Pontium Pilatum supplicio affectus erat. Tacit. Annal. lib. 15. Iudaea was most quiet in Tiberius time; which was the best newes the Romaines cared to heare thence: only Tacitus spleene to Christians (it seemes) had made him inquisitiue of their first originall, whose Author hee acknowledgeth to haue beene one Christ, put to death by Pontius Pilate, in the raigne of Tiberius.
8 The estate of these Iewes in generall, betweene Adrians and Honorius time, may be gathered out of the reuerend Fathers of the Primitiue Church; who vsually stopt the Heathens or blasphemous Atheists mouthes, by proposing their condition, then knowne vnto all the world, for such as our Sauiour had foretold. But these reuerend Fathers obseruations, and such scattered testimonies of their estate and qualitie, as can bee gathered out of Romaine writers, during that flourishing age of Fathers, and continuance of the Romaine Empire, will come in more fitly in the article of our Sauiours passion.



CHAP. XI.
Of the Iewes estate after the dissolution of the Romane Empire, generally throughout Europe, vntill their comming into England.
AFter the dissolution of the Romane Empire, they had some hopes of taking roote vnder the shelter ofTunc temporis Galliarum Episcopi, sacros ordines non nisi pretio, and quaestu conserebant; vti ne hodie quidem faciunt: and Iudaei genus homiuum coelo quoque ipsi inuisum Christiana mancipia possidebant Gregorio vtcunque non placebat, etc. Papirius Masson. lib. 1. Annal. Francorum. Theodebart and Theodorick, Kings of a great part of France, and other Prouinces, then annexed to that Kingdome. And whilest the Bishops of those Countries made merchandice of sacred Orders, these Iewes purchased Christians for their bond-slaues; vntill Gregorie the Great, hy his fatherly admonitions and reproofe, wrought a reformation of these two foule enormities, and open scandalls of Christianitie. Their number after was much increased throughout most parts in France, by their suddaine decrease in Spaine, caused by Sisibutus King of the Gothes, andVide Crantzium, lib. 4. Sueciae, cap. 13. Lord of that Countrie; who had vrged them to profession of Christian Religion, or perpetuall exile from his Dominions. Such as made choise of banishment, before Baptisme, fled in troupes into France: where in short time, they and their Countrimen, there residing before, had as hard entertainement vnder Dagobert, though peaceably admitted at the first.Paul. Aemil. in Dagoberto. Some thinke the fame, and honour, which the Goth had purchased amongst Christians by his late fact, did enflame the Franck with a zealous desire of like glorie: others from more particular information of ancient Writers, aswellHeraclius cum literis abunde esset instructus, ad vltimum Astr^logus ^fficitur: Agno^cens itaque in si^nis syderum imp^rium ^uum a circumcisa g^nte vastandum, and autumans id de Iudaeis fuisse praemonstratum, per inter-nuntios Dagebertum ro^^u^t, Regem ^ranco^um, vt cu^ct^s Iudaicae stirpis qui in Prouincijs illi subiectis manebant Christianos fieri prae^^^^ret, eos vero qu^ ^ollent aut exilio aut morte damnari. Quod Dagobertus volens effecit, omnes qui noluer^nt ba^t^sma suscipere procul a finibus elim^nant Franciae. Porro Heraclio non de Iudaeis sed de Saracenis fuerat praeostensum. Auoinus si^e Annonius, lib 4. cap. 22. French asVide Hispan. histor. in Sisibuto. Spanish, referre the originall of both persecutions vnto Heraclius the Emperour; who seeking his fates in the Starres, pulls downe Gods iudgements from heauen vpon these Iewes, scattered from the East to West. By this meanes, he had learned (whether by meere skill in Astrologie, or otherwise, is not now to be disputed) that the winges of his Empire should bee clipped by a circumcised people. This fore-knowledge,
 howsoeuer gotten, was not giuen him for his good (for his feares came vpon him, when hee least suspected;) but for these Iewes mischiefe, whom he deeming as the likeliest, or only men that could bring his fates vpon him, inserts the former persecution as a condition of peace, then concluded betweene him and Sisibutus; afterwards preuailes with Dagobert, for enforcing all the Iewes throughout his Dominions, either to renounce circumcision, France, or their liues. And no doubt, but hee, that could preuaile thus farre with these westerne Kings, did also deale effectually with other Soueraignties of Europe, nearer vnto his Imperiall seate, for disinabling of this Nation from effecting what he feared: much more would hee seeke their extirpation, or conuersion, throughout his owne proper Dominions. And so I finde his persecution of the Iewes recorded, by such as wrote his life,Judaeos etiam inuitos ad baptismum compulit^, matheseos studijs operam d^d^t, haraspicijs and praestig js daemonum fidem adhibuit. Append Aur. Vict. as one of the chiefe memorables in his raigne: which confirmes their report, though otherwise authentique, who referre the two former persecutions, vnder the Goth and Franck, vnto the occasions aboue mentioned.
2 Shortly after, the progenie of such as had beene enforced to baptisme byHoc tempore Iudaei perfidi non solum tunicam sacri baptismatis, quam susceperant, macularunt: Sed etiam contra Regem regnumque conso rare ausi sunt, in quos haec poena statuta, vt omnibus suis rebus nudati, tam ^psi perfi^ii, quam vxores eorum and filij, ac reliqua posteritas per cunctas Hispaniarum Prouincias, seruituti s^ ^^^^erent perpetuae, manerentque vsquequaque dispersa. Praeterea quicunque eosdem Iudaeos in seruitutem reci^^re^^, in nullo eos permitterent rituum suorum ceremonias celebrare aut colere. Filij vero eorum a 7. aetat^s ^n^^, nullam cum parentibus suis habitationem, aut societatem habere permitterentur, sed fidelissimis C^s nutriendi traderentur, and fil^ae eorum ac filij Christianis in matrimontum darentur, ne insidelium patrum s^o^^m semitas quibuslibet occasionibus itera^e possent. Vasoeus in Chron. anno 694. Sisibutus, for their reuolt from Christ, and conspiracie against Aegica (his anointed) and his Kingdome, were adiudged to perpetuall seruitude, throughout all the Prouinces belonging to Spaine: prohibited the vse of their rites and ceremonies, not permitted to inhabite together; but, as if the Lord had vsed the Land of Iurie as a marle-pit, to fat the soile of this Nation where his vine was planted; after hee had lead forth the Iewes thither in heapes, hee scatters their heapes ouer the whole sur-face of the Land. All Parents not suffered to commerce with their children at all, after the seuenth yeare of their age, committed by publique decree to the education of Christians, appointed in riper yeares to bee giuen in marriage vnto their Sonnes and Daughters; that so the succession of infidelitie might bee abolished.
 But Christian Princes consultations preuaile as little for their good, as Pharaohs policie for their forefathers harme: they must multiply, that Gods plagues may be multiplied vpon them. This last here mentioned, in their estimation not the least, though otherwise intended by the state of Spaine, was by the disposition of the diuine prouidence brought to passe, that another prophecie of Moses might bee fulfilled: Thy Sonnes and thy Daughters shall bee giuen vnto an other people; and thine eies shall still looke for them, euen till they fall out; and there shall bee no power in thy hand.
3 Of their estate from this accident, till three hundred yeares after, nothing memorable hath come vnto my reading: dishonourable it was, in that their name, throughout this time, seemes quite put out; miserable wee may presume it, in that their wonted curse is not expired, but rather increased in ages following, in which we haue expresse, distinct, vndoubted, records.
4 About the yeare one thousand, they were so vexed throughout most parts of Europe, that, as Moses had foretold, andJudaei ea tempestate in pluribus Europiae locis grauiter vexati, quid agerent, aut quo se verterent nesciebant. etc. Rapir. Masson. ex Glabre. my Author (little thinking of Moses speeches) expresly notes, they could finde no rest. A companie of them, seated about Orleans, out of their Diuelish policie, addresse an embassage to the Prince of Babylon, aduertising him, that the Christians in these Westerne parts were ioyning forces to assault him, hoping hereby to make him inuade Christendome, by whose broiles they expected, either better securitie from wonted dangers, or fitter opportunitie of fishing for gaine in troubled streames. But the tenour of their embassage being either knowne, or suspected by the Christians, the Embassadour vpon his returne was called in question, conuict, and sentenced to the fagot. Nor could the hainousnesse of the fact be expiated by his death; the rest of his Countrie-men (generally presumed to bee as treacherous, when occasion serued) were made away, without any formall course of law, by Fire, Water, Sword, or what instrument of death came next to hand; This furie of Christians raging against them, as farre as the same of their villanie was spred, which was quickly blazed throughout Europe.
5 Ere this time Ismael was come to his ful growth, and his posteritie hauing prosecuted their old broken title to the Land of Promise, through their diuision had left the possession of it to the Turke: and so far is Isaacs seed from all hope of possessing the good things thereof, that the very loue which Christians, the true seede of Abraham, bare vnto these louely dwellings of Iacob, breedes his vngratious posterities wo, vnto whom the inheritance belonged. For no expedition, either made, or intended by Christians for recouering Iewry from the Turke and Saracens, but bringeth one plague or other vpon the Iew; so prouident is this people, to procure their owne mischiefe, and as it were to anticipate Gods iudgements vpon themselues, by such deuises as their former embassage, whose effect was to hasten the sacred war: which in the Age following, vndertaken vpon other occasions, more than doubles all their wonted miseries. For it beeing intended against the Turke and Saracen, these other Infidels were apprehended as a fit subiect for such souldiers, as were indeede bent for Asia and the Holy Land, to practize licentious hostile outrages vppon by the way. Others againe made a shew of setting forward against the Turkes or Saracens of Asia, intending indeed onely to spoile the Iewes of Europe; Vnto which purpose that worthy Edict of the Claremont Councell ministred this occasion.
6 Auentinus Boiorum Annalium libro quin. Ex Germanis caelitus voce edita ita praedicant Deus vult, Gallijs, Hispanijs, Britanijs, Italia, Sicilia, innumerablis hominum vis duces praefecti, Tetrarchae Dinastae, episcopi sacrificuli, Monachi, foeminae sacratae, ciues, opisices, agricolae, viri, mulierculae cum cunis, pastores cum pecore, relictis regno, vrbibus, castellis, sacerdotijs t^mplo, contubernijs, vxonibus, liberis, p^^di^s, aratro, in Asiam gregatim migrant, sub specie religionis (itasunt humano) ^efanda scel^ra impune perp^trant. Anscr^m praeferunt spiritum sanctum esse. Carolum Magnum reuixisse praedi^ant. The ioynt consent of Bishops, and others there assembled, testified aloude in these tearmes, Deus vult, Deus vult, hauing found (as it seemes) some lauish commendations, as if it had beene the voyce of God, and not of men, brought forth a rumor of a voyce from heauen, calling Europaeans into Asia: The report was not so vaine, as the people of those times credulous. For beside such as were appointed, or would haue beene approoued by the Councell, huge multitudes of all sorts, conditions and sexes, runne like hounds to the false hallow; some pretending the Holie ghosts presence in visible shape. Amongst the rest oneEmicho quoque Dinasta cum Rh^nta colis, vnde oriundus erat, ad Pannoniam pro^essit, Iique omnes ^^daeos sub i^go reli^ion^^ no^trae m^ttere ^^^n^^, p^ losophiam nostram recipere recusantes compell^t, bonis on nil^^ sp^li^nt, exto^r^s vrbibus agu^i, ^^m^u^ eliminant ^^que contrucidant. Duodecim tum millia Iudaeorum in nostra regione coesa fuisse in annales relatum est. Henr. Muscus. Emicho,
 with a great band of his Country men gathered from the bankes of Rheine, hauing ranged as farre as Hungarie, and there either despairing of his hoped prey in Asia, or onely vsing this expedition, generally countenanced by Christian Princes, as a faire pretence to catch some bootie nearer home, falleth vppon the Iewes about that Countrey, compelling them either to liue Christians, or die. Besides the spoile of their goods, twelue thousand of their persons were slaine by Emicho, and his complices, as the Annales of these Countries doe testifie. The like had beene practized a little before by one Godes Culus a Dutch Priest; who had perswaded the King of Hungarie, that it was a charitable deede to kill these vncharitable Iewes, vntill his beastly life did discredite his doctrine, and Christians begunne to feele the harmes of such licentious Pilgrimages, after the Iewes being exhausted, could not satisfie his, and hss followers greedie appetites.
7 About the same Age,Per id tempus Iudaei in Gallia and Germania rerum suarum sedem ac domicilium non pauci habebant; Petrus Cluniacensis literas ad Ludouicum scripsit quae extant; ijs laudat consilium regis de bello pro Ch^istianis aduersus Arabes Persasque suscipiende, deinde exposita Judaeorum perfidia atque improbitate. Auferatur ait vel maxiusa ex parte imminuatur Iudaicorum diu^tiarum maleparta pi^guedo: and Christianus exercitus, qui vt Saracenos expugnet, pecunijs, vel terris proprijs Christi domini sui amore non pare^t, Iudaerum thesauris tam pessime acquisitis non parcat, reseruetur eis vita, auferatur pecunia. Seruiant populis Christianis etiam ipsis inuitis diuitijs Indaeorum. Crudelior in eos Rudolphus V^tis Monachus fuit etc. Papirius Massonius libro tertio in Ludouico c. 7. Why the Lord would not haue the Iewes vtterly destroyed. Petrus Cluniacensis directeth a paraeneticall discourse vnto Lewes the French King, for furtherance of his intended expedition against the Saracens; shewing him withall a readie meanes of maintaining his army, making the perfidious Iewes purchase their liues with losse of their goods. But more vehement, if not more Iewish, was Rodulphus Vilis the Germaine Monke, deliuering it in Sermons as found Doctrine, throughout both Germanies, that for the better supplie of the sacred warre, (which Christians he thought were bound in conscience to vndertake,) the Iewes, being as great enemies to Christianitie as the Saracens were, might not onelie bee robbed of all their goodes, but ought to bee put to death by Christians; as a good Omen to their future successe against the Saracens. And vnlesse Saint Bernard, with other graue Diuines of that Age, had sounded a counter-blast to this furious doctrine, both by mouth and pen; this Monkes prescript had beene practized generally throughout Germanie, readie enough to holde on as shee had begunne to euacuate her selfe of Iewish bloud, alwayes apprehended by that people as the worst humour in their
 body politike: Many such generall massacres haue been intended against them in diuers Countries; but God still raised vp one or other to sollicite their cause, because hee hath an eare continually vnto the Psalmists petition, not so much for theirs as Christians good; Slay them not lest my people forget it, but scatter them abroad by thy power. Psal. 59.11. Vnlesse God had giuen them such trembling hearts, and sorrowfull mindes (as Moses had fore-tolde) through Germany, France, and other Countries, they had not beene scattered so soone through this Iland; whither they were first brought from Fraunce, by him that brought many grieuances thence vnto this Nation. But the euill which hee intended, hath God turned to our good. For Gods Israel planted here vntil this day, may heare and feare his heauy iudgement, manifested vpon these Iewes in the time of our forefathers; albeit at their first comming they found some breathing from their wonted persecutions. But so prodigious is all appearance of prosperitie, in such as God hath cursed, that these Iewes hopes of ease and welfare, are an infallible symptome of great distemper in the publike state wherein they liue. Twice only I find in all the Legend of their wandering, they had obtained some freedome, and hopes of flourishing in the Landes where they were scattered: once in France, in the time of Theodebarte and Theodericke, when sacred orders (as you heard before) were set to sale; Once in England, vnder William Rufus, whose conditions were such, that whosoeuer would giue enough, might haue whatsoeuer lay in his power to grant. Their estate in England, during other three kings raigne vntill Richard the first,Nulli Iudaei intra vrbem habitant, exclusi enim ab illis sunt brachio aquarum, atque inter illud and Sophiae m^ris brachium aliud con^lusi, neque in vrbemire pepmittuntur nisi nauigio, idque negotij and commercij causa: suntque Iudaei circiter bis mille, qui cum magistris congregantur, hoc est sapientum discipulis, inter quos primas obtinent Abtalion magnus and Abdias and Aaron Cuspus, and Josephus Sarginus, and Eliak m gubernator ex vno quidam sunt artifices vestium sericarium quam plurimum quinque mercatores sunt, ijque dit^ssimi. Nullique Iudaeo illum equo vehi licet, praeter Salomonem Aegyptium Medicum regium, cuius officio Iudaei recreantur, suamque captiuitatem solantur, quam grauem sentiunt: oppido enim inuisi sunt Gsaecis Iudaei omnes nullo bonorum ac malorum discrimine; propter cortarios quidem pelles conficiunt, impuram aquam in plateas ante suas ipsorum portas effundunt: ideoque omnes graui iugo pariter premuntur atque in plataeis vapulant and coguntur violenter inse^u^re. Verum Iudaei ipsi divites vt dixi, sunt virique boni ac misericordes, praeceptorumque obseruatores: qui captiuitatis miseriam aequo serunt animo. yeelds little matter of obseruation: this peoples hate had not as yet broken out against them, but was all this time in gathering; and after their first planting here they were to haue a time to bring forth fruite for others to eate, a time to gather wealth for others to spend, as Moses had foretolde.
8 Most miserable in the meane time was their estate throughout the Easterne Empire, as one of their owne Writers, (who went on pilgrimage to visite his Country-men, wheresoeuer dispersed throughout the world) complaineth of their generall hard vsage amongst the Graecians, instancing in such as were seated about Constantinople, within whose walls they might not come, but vpon occasion of publique commerce or businesse; in which case they were allowed passage, onelie by boate, hauing theyr habitation, as it were, in an Iland. Amongest two thousand of this seruile Congregation there residing, not one permitted to come on horse-backe, saue onelie Salomon the Emperours Physition; whose exaltation (perhappes not foureteene handfulles aboue ground) was held as a publique grace of the whole Nation, the chiefe solace of that miserable and seruile vsage, which all the rest, without difference, good or bad, did sustaine, daiely beat and scourged in the open streetes. Yet must wee beleeue this Relator; That these Iewes were wealthie, good and mercifull men, obseruant of the Lawe, such as could patiently endure this miserable captiuitie. But patience perforce, according to the Prouerbe, is no patience. If GOD had graunted them abilitie, or opportunitie, they had quickely shewed theyr Iewish mindes by Iewish actions. And why, hee keepeth them continually vnder, vnwilling to heare theyr crie, though they can not,The fulfilling of Samuels prophecie in the Iewes liuing vntill our Sauiours death. 1 Samu 8.18. wee Christians may easily perceiue the cause. For so his Prophet Samuel had fore-tolde; And yee shall crie out at that day, because of your King whome yee haue chosen you; and the Lord will not heare you at that day. Which wordes,Iohan. Baptista de confut. Jud. parte tertia. as a learned conuert Iew rightly obserueth, were not fulfilled in Samuels time; whose opinion may be fortified by these reasons.
9 Samuels authoritie ouer that people, was not so strictly lincked with GODS, but that they might reiect the one for their present Iudge, still retayning the other for their supreame Lord: and who can deny, that the God of their Fathers did rule ouer them in Dauids, Salomons, Iehosaphats and Ezekiahs times? Sinne no doubt they did in abandoning Gods Priest and Prophet, to follow the fashions of other Nations, in submitting themselues vnto a King. And Samuel, like a good Physitian, forewarneth them of that incurable disease which this new-s^^ (...)
 temperate act did euen then prognosticate: whose fatall Crisis notwithstanding did not insue, vntill they (ouergrowne with desperate, wilfull, and intemperate malice) had reiected him with open mouth, who was both Priest and Prophet, and their lawfull King; whose kingdome was not of this world, whose soueraigntie was so vnited with the diuine Maiestie, thatGods wordes in that seuenth verse are as if he had said. Let it not grieue thy righteous Spirite, that they grow weary of thee, but let them haue their wil, for so wil they serue thy Lord and thy Remer. Sunt verba proculdubio opinor, filij Dei seu secund. personae trinitatis. 1. Sam. 8.7. in casting him away they could not but cast off God, that he should not raigne ouer them.
10 Againe, before that time, God alwayes heard their crie, and redeemed them from all forraine bondage; and such as Samuel there describeth, was neither generall, nor perpetuall vnder their owne Kings: neyther did the best of such vse anie, nor the worst all, or most part of the naturall Israelites, in such sort as he there threatneth; yet all the miseries there threatned, 1. Sam. chap. 8. verse 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. haue beene since accomplished in full measure, if I may so speake, in length, breadth, and profunditie. First, this seruilitie hath beene extended ouer all the Nation, without exception. Secondly, the continuance of it hath beene exceeding long and perpetuall without interruption; and so must continue vntill they confesse their forefathers rebellion, and acknowledge him for their King, whom reiecting, they reiected God; for hee that will not so honour the Sonne cannot honour the Father as King. Lastly, those markes of seruilitie, set forth by Samuel, haue beene so deepely imprinted in this generation reiect of GOD, that his Prophecie, compared with moderne Histories concerning them, will seeme but as painted wounded men in a cloth of Arrasse, to the bleeding relickes of a scattered, vanquished armie. For neyther vnder anie Caesar, (though they made choice of Caesar for theyr King) nor vnder anie other Kings or States, haue they liued as Free-dennizens, capable of publique office or honour: the best of them are but as slaues, prohibited to vse the meanest of Christians so: The most of them, as Samuel fore-told, are admitted in Common-wealths, for manuall seruices or other handie-crafts imployments; Captaines I thinke none of them haue beene; vnlesse perhappes in some desperate seruices: many of them in greater Cities are suffered to follow Ma^chandize, that they may serue the State as Spu^ges; alw^y^^ surer to be sq^^^z^d for the moysture th^y
 haue sucked, than to bee nourished by it: Sundrie of them are curious Artificers, and professe ingenious Trades; like seelie Silke wormes, permitted to exercise their skill in precious stuffe, to fill Princes Coffers, and finde their Courtiers cloathing.Ex Narbonae proficiscitur lex in omnes nationes; vbi sapientes sunt and magni and suspiciendi Theodori bonae memoriae ex semine Dauid recta genealogia, qui praedia and sundos habet a principibus regionis nullius hominis vim aut imp^tum metuentia. Beniamin: fil. Ionae in itin. 1. Sam. 8.14, 15 16. Est vrbs enim ipsa Th^mia magna and frequens. Horum regio inter montes qui septentrionales dicuntur, sedecim dierum itinere protenditur, vrbibus magnis and munitissimis exculta nulloque externe gentis iugo subdita. Vnde prodeuntes incolae finit^mas and remotiores etiam gentes dirip^unt omnes quotquot sunt vsque ad Ara^es qui cum ipsis fidem habent Idem.
11 The possession of fields and Vineyards, hath not beene so vsuall amongst this people, as their spoile amongst such as possessed any: so this Iew relateth it as a speciall prerogatiue of Calinomus, the sonne of Theodorus (both in their life-times) chiefe of the Synagogue in Narbona, and lineally descended (as hee pretendeth) from Dauid, that hee might quietly possesse the fruits of his grounds. The Princes, it seemeth, of that and like places, did take other Iewes fields and vineyardes, and best Oliue trees, and gaue them vnto their seruants, rather tything than taking the tenth of their seede and Vineyards; for that vsually was the Iewes part, the other nine (as Samuel fore-tolde) fell vnto Princes Officers lot.
12 But the greater these dispersed sonnes of Isaac seruilitie was, the more it commendeth the fidelitie of Gods word concerning the sonnes of Rechab, who, as this Author relateth, liue vnited in forme of a Kingdome or Nation, not subiect to any forraine yoake; rather able to offend their neighbours, than likely to receiue harmes from them. Their estate to this Authors dayes continued such, as they themselues acknowledged vnto Ieremie; Only experience (it seemeth) had taught them to build Citties, for their better securitie against the incursion of forrainers, which was not against their oath, in case of necessitie, as appeareth from the eleuenth verse of the fiue and thirtieth of Ieremie; Because in other points, they haue obeyed the commaundement of Ionadab their Father, and kept his precepts, and done according to all that hee had commaunded them; therefore Ionadab hath not wanted a man to stand before him vntill this day; that is, their estate hath continued, such as their Father left them, much better than the estate of Abrahams Sonnes by Sarah; Though this Iew at his returne to Paris, then flourishing with all maner of Arts and Sciences, found his Countrey-men maruellous great Students in Diuinitie, and in much better state than might be expected to continue anie long time.Iere. 35 9, 10.
13 Lewes the seuenth,The persecution of the Iews in France vnder Ph lppus Augustus Papyrius Massouius lib. 3. Annalium Franc in mitio Phil. Aug. albeit instigated thereto (as was said before) had not shorne them so neare vpon his expedition to the Holie Land, but that they might beare fleece againe for his sonne to plucke off. Their Synagogues had remayned still beautified; and their priuate wealth, either before his death much increased, or in his time not much impayred. But Almightie GOD, who in testimony of his reioycing to doe them good, had raised vp Cyrus to Balthazars Throne, to release their Nation from that Captiuitie, which Nabuchad-nezzar had brought vppon them; to giue the world as perfect a proofeDeut 28.63. of his reioycing ouer them to destroy them, and bring them to nought,An. 1179. Kalen. Octob. Ludouici patris consensu Philippus apud Rhemos regium ornatum nomenque sumpsit, praesente Hen^ico regis Angliae filio, and caeteris regni proceribus. Quamprimum honorem illum adeptus est, Iudaeorum Synagogas donarijs omnique suppellectili spoliari ma^dauit: cumque eos audisset christianis molestos esse, pr mum debita omnibus remisit, deinde fundos eorum and res^nan mouentes, fisco addixit, Loco citato. Pap. Mas. did aduaunce Philippus Augustus, sonne vnto the former Lewes, vnto the Crowne of France, to defeate the Iewes throughout that Kingdome, in an instant, of all their former hopes; no sooner was enthroned King, but presently hee giueth forth his Edict; That their Synagogues should bee spoyled of all donatiues and ornaments belonging to them: and, enformed of the grieuances which Christians sustained by them, graunteth a generall release of all debts due vnto them from Christians, confiscating all their lands and immoueable goods. This was done that Moses his prophecie might be fulfilled in part, Deuteronomie chap. 28. vers. 30, 31, 33. Thou shalt builde an house, and not dwell therein; thou shalt plant a Vineyard, but shalt not eate the fruite thereof. Thine Oxe shall bee flaine before thine eyes, but thou shalt not eate thereof: Thine Asie shall bee violently taken away before thy face, and shall not bee restored vnto thee: Thy sheepe shall bee giuen vnto thine enemies, and no man shall rescue them for thee: the fruite of thy Land, and and all thy labours shall a people which thou knowest not, eate; And thou shalt neuer but suffer wrong and violence alwayes.



CHAP. XII.
Of the fulfilling of other particular Prophecies of Moses in the Iewes persecutions, in England, Germanie, France and Spaine.
1 THat they should not once or twice, in this or that Age, in some one or few Kingdomes onely, but alwayes, in euery place, where they haue come since their rooting out of their owne Land, suffer such wrong and violence; must needes bee thought to haue proceeded, rather from diuine Iustice, than mans iniustice, which could not but haue varied with the diuersitie of times and places, and the seuerall dispositions of parties, amongst whom in this their long pilgrimage they haue liued. And yet this briefe enumeration (following) of their particular spoyles, and hard vsages, since Philippus Augustus time, throughout the most ciuil and b^st gouerned States of Europe, will aboundantly confirme the truth of Moses generall Induction, in the place now cited. Thou shalt neuer but suffer wrong and violence alwayes. To beginne with their persecutions in this Land.
2 Had Henry (the eldest sonne of Henry the second) (who wasPapyrius Massonius: loco citato. The lamentaable massacre of these vpon K. Richard the first his Coronation day. present at the fore-named French Kings Coronation, acquainted with these seuere Edicts against the Iewes) liued to enioy the Crowne of England after his Father, as hee was entituled King with him: the grieuous wrongs and violence, immediately after befalling these Iewes throughout this kingdome, had beene ascribed to this politicke imitation of the French King his brother; at the least men would haue thought, they had been done by his subiects, by his sufferance and conniuence. But God had taken him away, and yet these Iewes intreatie continues much worse vnder Richard the first, who neuer intended them like harme; only vpon his Coronation day, (with his raigne beginnes their woe, which ends not till their finall extirpation hence) not willing to be beholden vnto them for their presents, or (as some thinke) partly afraid lest admitted to his presence, they might practize some sorcerie
 vpon his bodie, he gaue command that no Iew should come either within the Church, where he was crowned, or the Palace where hee was to dine. But they desirous to present him with some gift in hope to haue their Charters, and other Priuiledges, granted by other Kings, confirmed by him, presse in at the Palace gate amongst others, making (perhaps) more hast but worse speed, one of them receiuing a blow for his forwardnesse by one of the Kinges seruants, who might well iustifie the fact by the Kinges command to keepe them out. The people about the gate apprehend the matter so, as if this Iew had beene beat by the Kings commandement, and so they thought might all the rest of that crew: and hence fall vpon them with such weapons as they could finde, as it was easie to finde bats to beate these doggish Iewes, come to their kennells; where they found but silly shelter: For albeit their houses were strong, yet the rage of the people was too great against them. With the multitude the former rumour was enlarged, that it was the Kings pleasure to haue all the Iewes destroyed: And, as the axiome is, mens owne desires are quickly beleeued. So farre more apt they were to apprehend this rumour as true, than to examine whether it were true or no, that the Lord chiefe Iustice and other Officers, sent from the King to appease the tumult, were more likely to catch harme themselues, than to free these Iewes from present danger: some of whose houses now flaming gaue the people light to spoile and rifle others in the darke. For so violently were they set to wrong them, and eate their labours, that they could not bee satisfied from dinner time on the one day, to two a clock on the other: many of these Iewes in the meane time being rosted, or smouldred with their goods; others leaping out of the fire fell vpon their enemies weapons. Although the outrage was such, as in a peaceable state might seeme intollerable; yet was the hainousnesse of the offence quite swallowed vp by the multitude of the offenders. But as the English escapt vnpunished: so the Iewes were not amended, by their correction. Their stubbornnesse, as the Scripture tells mee, did first procure their blindnesse, and their blindnesse becomming hereditarie hath confirmed their stubbornnesse to posteritie.
3 The former violence which they suffered,The bruitish stupiditie of the Iewes. would haue beene a sufficient caueat to any people in the world besides, to
 haue carried themselues with more moderation in a strange land: but not the flies so stupid and senselesse indiscerning the causes of their smart, as this people is. Their perfidiousnesse and daily sucking of Christians bloud, had made them most odious in this, as in other Landes; and though a number of them be massacred to day for like attempts; yet the rest are as ready againe to morrow to seaze vpon euery sore, either to exhaust the reliques of life from such as are shrunke in their estate, by cruell exactions, and damned vsurie; or else to intrude themselues, as wedges or instruments of diuisions, into euery breach that shall appeare amongst Christians, or betweene them and others. In which practize they haue beene continually crusht. Finally, their generall carriage is so odious and preposterous, that albeit the CHRISTIAN Magistrates conspire together for their good, they themselues will certainly prouoke their owne miserie.
Their massacre in Linne.4 The lamentable death of those Iewes in London had purchased pitie, and compassion towards the rest, (as the Kings Proclamation for their peace and securitie did witnesse) but their Bretheren of Linne can not abstaine from offering that violence, from which the King had priuiledged them, to one of their owne linage, for becomming a Christian; attempting forcible entrance into the Church, whither hee had fled for Sanctuarie. Vnlesse they had thus riotously violated the Kings peace, the Christians had not assembled together, and the Inhabitants were afraide at all to meddle with them. But so God had prouided, that a great companie of forraigne Marriners should repaire vnto this mutinie; who, moued with indignitie of the attempt, could not content themselues with the rescue of the Conuert (at the first perhaps onely intended) but assault these mutinous Iewes, through feare repairing to their houses; which the other first rifle, then burne together with their owners, departing vnpunished with spoile.
5 The end of the Kings Proclamation being once frustrate, by this strange accident, though not purposely or directly violated by the inhabitants of this place; his subiects elsewhere are willing enough to imitate the fact, without any occasion of like wrongs, offered by the Iewes, only vpon opportunitie of doing
 violence by the Kings absence, and the present mustering of Souldiers for the holy Land; vpon whom, transported hence, their partners, in euill here at home remaining, might post ouer the whole blame of the fact, of part whereof no doubt his Souldiers had beene guiltie. The like massacres of these Iewes ensued at Stamford, at Lincolne, and S. Edmundsburie shortly after; but of all others, most memorable and lamentable was that, which in the same Lent befell them at Yorke.
6 The Iewes there dwelling had heard by this time, what had beene done vnto their bretheren in London, and Linne; and see now the like or greater violence intended against themselues: so that as Moses in the fore-cited place, Deut. 28. vers. 33. addeth; They became madde for the sight of their wrongs and violence,The horrible conspiracie of the Iewes against their owne soules in Yorke. which their eies did see. One of their learned Rabbines perswades foure hundred of his companie, besieged with him in a strong Tower by a furious multitude, to proue themselues (such as the world had long taken them, and were now persecuted for) right cut-throats indeede, rather then fall into their enemies handes; himselfe confirming his doctrine by his example, in cutting his wifes throat first, then his childrens, and lastly by killing himselfe. The residue of the foure hundred, which hee had perswaded vnto this vnnaturall and Iewish act, not only willing to imitate him herein, would before their death haue enforced many others, that would not yeeld vnto this Rabbines aduice, to a more violent death, had they not conueied themselues into a strong Turret, within the manie Tower, which defended them from the flames that consumed their goods. And yet these poore soules, that had scaped their fellowes violence, were borne to suffer the like of their Christian enemies; to their shame, who had promised them life, vpon condition they would yeeld themselues, and become Christians; which whether they meant in heart or no, as they promised, hee that trieth the secrets of all hearts doth know. Sure I am, their professed Christian enemies did turne Iewes in heart, that treacherously killed them before any triall made of their sinceritie towards Christ.
7 All these wrongs and violences were committed only by the people, much against the Magistrates mindes; but hereafter the supreme Magistrates, Kings themselues (as if they had learned
 wit of their subiects) tooke the monopolie of wronging the Iewes into their owne handes. To omit what Richard the first had done vnto them, their hard vsage vnder King Iohn, Henrie the third, and Edward the first,Yet were it worth enquirie Whether such as haue beene transported out of Spaine or other Cou^tries of Europe w^re not sent into Aegypt; or what entertainment they find there. They came out of Aegypt without Ships for the Sea gaue them passage. Deut 28 v 68. The report of their persecutions about this time in Spaine made them more readie to redeeme their peace. Vide Matthew. Paris. makes me thinke, that Moses, in the last words of his often mentioned prophecie Deut. 28. spake in his language that said, Patria est vbicunque bene est: so as England, and euery place in Europe, wherein their condition of life hath beene more hard and burdensome, than their forefathers had been in Aegypt, may bee said to bee that Aegypt, whereunto the Lord had threatned to bring them againe by ships. King Iohns exactions were so grieuous, that they had rather suffer than doe what he commanded, many of them being imprisoned and tortured before they would yeeld what hee demanded. What an intollerable thing was it, for a priuate man in those times to pay tenne thousand markes,Mat. Paris. Vide orationem Pontifici Iudeorum, suorum calamitates deplorantes apud Mat. Paris. The French King persecuted them at the same time as miserably, as M^tth^w Paris intimates. Matth. Paris. for refusall of which that poore Iew of Bristow was so pittifully vsed? But with God it was iust, to punish him by his owne greedinesse of gaine; for vnlesse his money had beene as deare to him, as meate to such as make their belly their God, he would haue let his hold goe, before he had lost seuen teeth of nine.
8 King Henrie the third, first demands the third part of all their moueables for his supplies; then punisht them grieuously by the purse, for a murther secretly committed by them; and thirdly makes them buy their miserable peace by the third part of what was left: Finally, hee brought them to such extreme pouertie, that his brother, to whom he let them out to farme, could (it seemes) make nothing of them; and so they were freed from this brutish seruitude (as Moses in the fore-cited place had foretold) for want of a buier. The King surely did not so much pittie them, as he did himselfe and his posteritie, who should haue gotten nothing of them, if the bargaine with his brother had gone forward: whereas his Successor, Edward the first, accounted their goods as his owne, and for Non-paiment of what hee demanded, the whole generation scattered throughout this Land, were shut vp in one night, where they enioyed no day, vntill they had fined at the Kings pleasure; who yet perhaps did recouer but as much as he and his subiects were endamaged, by two hundred and odde of their Countrimen, all condemned some eight yeares before for
 circumcising, counterfeiting, and washing his coyne. This King, albeit their wealth vnder him was much diminished, had this aduantage of his praedecessours; The English, desirous to haue them banished, and they, as willing to spite the English by their staying here, were both forward to purchase their contrarie desires by large offers to the King, vntill the English at last did outuie them, by a fifteenth, which the Parliament granted for their vtter auoidance of this land; so much welcommer was their roome than companie.
9 All their immoueable goods, with their Obligations and Bils of debt were confiscated: Thus (as Moses sayth) they had builded houses, but could not dwell therein, Vineyards they had planted which they could not carrie with them, neuer to returne hither againe, they nor their seede to eat of their fruit: yea, euen the gold and coyne, with other riches which they were permitted to transport, were reserued to many of their owners euill. The sea which gaue their forefathers passage from Aegypt, did swallow vp a great number of those wealthiest Iewes at their departure out of this Land. And, howsoeuer both his fact that exposed them to danger was most impious, and his speeches scurrilous, in turning them off to pray to Moses, when he might haue saued them, yet if wee consider the concourse of circumstances, and opportunitie tempting him, otherwise ill disposed vnto this fact, his prophane jeasting at their miserable death was a sensible document of the Almighties reioycing to destroy them and bring them to naught.
10 During this time of their abode here (which was two hundred and odde yeares) their generall persecutions throughout Germanie (that haue come vnto my reading) were not so rife, as in the ages following.Of these Iewes massacres in Germanie after their banishment out England or about that time. Auent. Boior. Annalium. lib. 7. In the yeare 1286 (in which they had beene generally imprisoned throughout this land) they had stabbed a child, throughout his whole bodie, with needles, at Munchen in Bauere, taking his bloud in a bason; to vse it, as the suspition was then, in sacrifice, for stanching that issue of bloud, wherewith this people (Christians know why) is continually pestered. These butchers were detected by the ^rouer, an olde Hagge taken in the verse manner, while she was stealing a second for the same purpose. The bodie of the former being found out
 by her directions, the fresh print of infinit wounds filled with gore, imploring vengeance, as it were with so manie watrie and blubberd eyes, did so enrage the multitude, that they could not expect the Iudges sentence, but fall immediatly vpon these Iewes, notwithstanding the Princes seruants, and their chiefe Magistrates earnest endeauours to appease the tumult, conueying as manie Iewes as they could into their Synagogue, which the people burning with furie, set on fire, and with it burned an hundred and eightie Iewes.
11. Yet this was but as a little flash in the fire-panne to that generall furie, which the people of this and other Countries of Germanie did discharge vpon this cursed seede about ten yeares after.Auentinus lib. 7. Boior. Annalium. The alarum to this bloudie fact was a rumour, true or false, by Gods disposition a meanes to bring destruction vpon them whom hee reioyced to destroy; as soone condemned by the multitude, as accused for stealing away the consecrated hoast, as they tearme it, and amongst other indignities for braying it in a Mortar, vntill it bled againe. One Rindeflaish, of what spirit God knowes, by profession a Husbandman (whether one of the raisers of this rumour, or onely taking opportunitie vpon it blazed abroad by others) proclaimes that he was sent from heauen to destroy the Iewes, wheresoeuer scattered vpon the face of the earth: and with that coniuring acclamation, as many as bare any loue to Christ, or wished the safetie and welfare of Christendome, let them follow him, gets so manie followers, that through eight or nine Cities, named by mine Authour, and manie others omitted, they robbe, spoile and kill these Iewes, now become as obstinate and stubborne as the others were violent. For after they had gathered their goods and house-hold stuffe together, least the Christians should be any better by it, or they themselues by Christians, that would haue enforced them to baptisme, the men with their Wiues and Children cast themselues into the fire, and so perish with their ill gotten goods. The signes of the time with which in particular wee are not acquainted, did fully perswade both Priest and People, that all was done by Gods speciall appointment: and Auentinus himselfe saith, Iram diuinam fuisse necesse est; because the Emperour, most desirous to reuenge their wrongs, was enforced to giue place to
 this persuasion, and dissemble his griefe. The magistrates of Regineburgh (the auncient Metropolis of Bevere) with much adoe persuaded their people to forbeare execution of their wrath, and expect more certaine warrants from heauen for their proceedings.
12.Superest vltimus Philippi annus: illo leprosos, Iudaeosque in Gallia vexatos constat, propter suspicionem veneni in puteos sparsi, Autores sceleris Judaei a morosis and miseris hominibus esse dicebantur; quare in vtrosque saeuitum, plebe nulla expectata Iudicij forma igni illos cremante. Papyrius Massouius l. 3. Fran. A^rel in Philippo longo. Not manie yeares after this their generall calamitie throughout Bevere, and olde Fraunce, they and the Leapers conspire to poyson the Fountaines throughout the French Kingdome, and are both made away on heapes by the people, dying for the most part by the contrarie element, without any conuiction or arraignement, which fortie of themIdem Ibidem. imprisoned at Vitree in Champaine, did wisely preuent, by killing themselues all in one Gaole. So cunningly doth the Almightie plot their ouerthrow, euer since hee became their enemie, that it is oft times hard to say, Whether mans purposes for their good, or euill, bring greater plagues vpon them. Not fifteene yeares before this time,Vno die Iudaei ^ota Francia cap^i, bonis e^ru^ fisco addictis, regni finibus excedere iussisunt. Papyrius Masson. lib. 3. Annalium Franco^um. Philip the Faire had apprehended all the Iewes throughout his dominions in one day, robbed them of their goods, and rid his Land of them. About tenne yeares after this their banishment by publike Edict (not fiue yeares before the late mentioned persecution)Ide Papyr. in vita Ludouici ^uztini. Lewes the tenth, sonne to this Philip, intending their good, reuokes his fathers Edict for their perpetuall banishment, and brought them backe againe into Fraunce; where these malefactours were, by the appointment of God, to suffer just punishment for their villanies there committed by their fathers and them, and their bodies seruing for fuell to the flame, prepared by God to purge the ayre, which their blasphemous mouthes had polluted.
13.Auentinus lib. septimo Annal u^ Boior. The like plagues, but farre more generall, from like prouocation, did befall them, about the yeare one thousand three hundred thirtie seuen, and the times ensuing, till one thousand three hundred fortie eight.The like plague befell them at Prage: about the year 1389 for the like contumely offered by their children to the hoast (as they tearme it) Incensis domibus, foeminae cum p^ruul s se sua sponte inieceru^t incendio, ne probris Christianoru^ exposi^ae ad extremu^ necare^tur. Krantius Wandaloru^ hist. 9. c. 23. They hoped Christian religion should haue died in the warres betweene the Emperour and the Pope; the state of Christendome, they saw deepely endangered in these ciuile broyles: and they, according to their Iewish
 policie, seeke to thrust it ouer head and eares in bloud, poysoning the Fountaines throughout Germanie, offering like violence to the Sacraments as they had done before; and by this just prouocation were so dealt withall by one Hartmannus and his complices, as they had beene vsed some fortie yeares agoe by Rindeflaish. The rehearsall of all particular outrages committed against them, during the time of the Pope and Emperours variance, would take vp more roome in this Discourse, than all the rest hitherto reckoned.Vide Mutium and Bertulsium Constantiensem. Most memorable is that of the Iewes, inhabiting Wormes; who, persecuted by the people, implore the Bishops intercession for their safetie: the conditions of their peace, procured by him, were to bee washed from their sinnes; and hauing respite giuen to deliberate vpon the point, they pollute themselues with their owne bloud, without returning any further answere to the Bishop that had interceded for them.
14. This and the like barbarous impietie, committed by others of this cursed race at Vitrie, almost fortie, at Yorke, aboue an hundred yeares before cannot be ascribed to the reuolutions of the Heauens, or successiue reigne of some vnruly starres; all of them were from his will, in whom there is no shadow of change. In these last massacres, as in the former, the Magistrates in many places had mindes willing ynough to saue them, but durst not venture their bodily presence for their rescue. Albeit the manner of the Christians proceeding against them be vsually such, as none but Iewes would justifie; yet this is an euident Argument, that the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings hath ordained them to suffer wrong, whome the greatest powers, in such ciuile States as Germanie, Fraunce, and England are, cannot right. For although the Palsgraue, with some others inclining vnto them, had taken their protection vpon them in these last Persecutions; yet euen this pitie, whether true or pretended, did cause their further wrongs, by grieuous exactions for maintaining the warre begun in their defence. So strangely doth the wisedome of God bring that to passe, which his seruant Moses had foretold, Deut. 28. verse 29. Thou shalt not prosper in thy wayes, thou shalt neuer but bee oppressed with wrong, and bee polled euermore, and no man shall
 succour thee. Euen succour it selfe by their distempered appetites is turned into sorrow. Though all Christan Kings and States should conspire together for their weale; yet (as I said before) they will conceiue mischiefe, and bring forth their owne destruction, by bursting out into such shamefull actes, as deserue grieuous punishment in sight of God and man. So in theKrantzius. lib. 10 Wandal. cap 18. yeare one thousand foure hundred and ten, they go about their wonted practise of crucifying a Christian childe in contumelie of our Sauiour Christ; but their intent being known before they had opportunitie of acting it, the Marquesse of Misna, and Land-graue of Turing find roome enough for their coyne in their coffers, but leaue none for them, stript naked of all they had within any part of their dominions. Or if they doe sometimes that which in it selfe is good, they doe it with such malitious mindes, that God giues them but the reward of wickednesse:Krantzius. lib. 11. Saxo. cap. 7. So in the yeare one thousand foure hundred twentie one, for furnishing the poore Christians of Bohemia with monie and munition against their Antichristian persecutors, they were generally emprisoned throughout Beuere, quite bereft of all their monie and coyne, and lastly banished all the dominions belonging to Fredericke Duke of that Prouince. Nor doth their in-bred spight to Christians, or their plagues due therunto weare out in that age. For, in the yeare one thousand, foure hundred ninetie seuen, they were burnt atKrantzius Wand. lib. 14. cap. 17. The like facts and like massacres of the Iewes, at Ch^raco, and related by the same Krantz^us li. 8. Wandaliae cap. 8. a. 133.Of these Iewes estate in Spain and Portugall about the year one thousand fiue hundred.Osorius lib 10. d^ gefl^s Emanuelis. Stenneberge in the Prouince of Stargardia, for there wonted violence, and indignities offered to the blessed Eucharist.
15 Thus much of their estate in England, France, and Germanie, vntill the yeare one thousand fiue hundred. Of their estate in Germanie since, if God permit elsewhere, because it yeelds matter of distinct obseruation from the former. Now briefly to acquaint the Reader with so much of their affaires in Spaine, as may testifie some other parts of Moses his prophecie in the forementioned place. In the yeare one thousand foure hundred eightie two, the measure of their iniquitie was growne so full, that this land could not beare it: and they themselues become so abhominable to Ferdinand, and Isabel his Queene, that none of this seede must stay within their dominions, vnlesse they will become Christians, as sundrie of larger possessions amongst them in outward profession did, the rest were scattered thence into other countries
 most into Portugall, welcome for their monie to soiourne there a certaine time: after which as many as were found in Portugall, were there to remaine as slaues vnto the King, such as would were to be transported at his costes and charges. The King himselfe (vnlesse Orosius be partiall for him) was carefull to performe his promise, to secure them of peace during their abode, and of safe passage at the time appointed. But the Marriners hauing once gotten them aboard, did make their ships as so many prisons, or houses of torture, to wrest their wealth out of their hands, lengthning the time by circular and vnnecessarie turnings, backe and forth, vntill the Iewes had quite spent all their prouision, afterwards enforced to buy their foode, and other necessaries of the Marriners, at what rate they pleased. And, not content with spoyle of their goods, they abuse the bodies of their wiues and daughters to their lust, not pleasant enough, vnlesse sauced with other contumelies, and indignities practized vpon their Fathers, and husbands. Finally by these marriners, too much thinking that their passengers were Iewes, and might be vsed accordingly, they forget that they themselues were Christians, and staine that sacred profession with all manner base villanie and impieties. Partly through this delay in shipping ouer the first companie, partly, through the abuses done vnto them, so shamefull, that the fame thereof was brought vnto their fellowes eares by the wind, which serued the Marriners backe to Portugall: the later sort remayning in expectation of safe passage, eyther could not, or would not be transported at the day appointed, and so by their staying become captiues to Iohn then King of Portugall. But Emanuel his successour, not long after sets them free, vsing all other faire meanes to bring them vnto Christ, vntill Ferdinand and Isabel his confederates, solicite these ill-thriuing plants eiection out of Portugall,The Iewes eiected out of Portugall and their miserable vsage vnder Emanuel Vide Osorium. lib. 1. de gestis Emanuelis. as vnfit to settle in any Christian soyle. After long debatement with his counsellers for their exile or stay, the fresh examples of their expulsion by so many other Christian Kinges and Princes did moue Emanuel to their imitation. So that eyther they must auoide his dominions by a certaine day, or else remaine there eyther free-men in Christ, or slaues and Captiues vnto him: as many of them did against their willes, not able to prouide themselues of shipping, hauing but one port at last allowed
 them for their passage: whereas at the first promulgation of the Kings edict against them, they had choyce of three. The greatnesse of their number, best appearing by their confluence about the day appointed for their passage, moued the good King with compassion, to see so many thousand soules should desperately runne the waies of death; and seeing no hope of diseasoning the old and withered stockes, fit fewell for euerlasting flames, he was the more desirous to recouer some of their young and tender graftes, by watering them with the water of grace: and for this purpose giues strict commaundement, that all their children vnder foureteene yeares of age should bee taken from their Iewish parentes, and trayned vp in the Schoole of Christ. This sodaine and vnexpected diuorce, though intended in compassion of the children, brought greater miserie on the Parents, than if their owne flesh had beene torne from their bones. There a man (so his heart would haue serued him) might haue seene silly infants haled from their mothers breasts, more willing to embrace death, than part with them; And yet for pitie, (least their hands by holding fast, might proue their childrens rackes) suffering them to bee drawne out of their tender embracements, with farre more griefe and sorrow of heart, than they had beene brought out of the wombe; Fathers enclasping their sonnes and daughters, willing to die in their armes, had these beat off, (as hoopes from vessels which they enuiron) from their childrens bodies, and eyther broken or benummed with blowes. A voyce was heard through Portugall, surpassing that in Ramah, nothing but mourning, and weeping, and lamentation, many a Leah blearing her eyes with weeping for her children, and would not be comforted; Men and women filling the heauens with more hideous outcries than the Egyptians did at their forefathers departure out of Egypt: when the first borne of euery family, throughout the land, was slaine at midnight. But these were bereft at once of all their louing children, in the open Sunne. Many of them, not able eyther to rescue or dispatch their owne bowels, become madde with the sight that their eyes had seene, and killed themselues: Others, hauing better opportunitie, account it a part of their happinesse, to be able to preuent
 their childrens washing in the sacred font, by drowning them in draw-welles and ditches. In both these calamities, at the two fore-mentioned transportations, we may see those Prophecies of Moses exactly fulfilled, Deut. 28. vers. 30. Thou shalt betroth a wife, and an other man shall lie with her. And again, vers. 32. Thy sons and thy daughters shall be giuen vnto an other people, and thine eyes shall faile at the sight euery day, and there shall be no power in thy hand. Many Moores, professing Mahometisme, were transported from Portugall the same time, but had no such violence offered them: what was the reason? God would haue a manifest distinction betweene this and other people. The barbarous Moores had some power in their hands, and the Portugals abstaine from like vsage of them: least the report comming to the African Mahumetans eares, might haue moued them to auenge their wrongs vpon poore Christians, liuing amongst them. But these Iewes no where had any Nation, none to auenge their grieuous wrong, which the Lord God of their forefathers had ordained they should suffer, at all times, in all places wheresoeuer they haue come, without redresse.
The lame^table massacre of these Iewes at Lisbon: and the naturall consequence of monkish deuotio^ towards Christs image therein represented. Osor. lib. 4. de rebus gestis Emanuelis.16 Nor doe their fates change their name or profession. For what violence was euer offered to any of this race like to that which these late conuerts christned Hebrewes, (but still Iewes in misfortunes) suffered in Lisbon, in the yeare one thousand fiue hundred and sixe. Two thousand massacred in three daies space, many not suffered to die of deadly wounds, were dragged by their mangled limmes into the market-place, where the bodies of the liuing and slaine, with others halfe aliue halfe dead, were burnt together on heapes. The spectacle^ was so horrible, that it quite astonied the rest of this miserable progenie, at other times as desperately set to suffer as Monkes furiously to inflicte any torture. Parentes durst not mourne for children, nor children sigh for their parents, though each halled in others sight at the place of torments, least these significations of their griefe and sorrow might bewray them to bee of the tormented kinred, with whom the least suspicion of alliance, was sufficient to make them inherite like plagues, ere the breath was out of their predecessors bodies.

Jngens eoiam die s^upor adeo mis^rrimae gen^is sensus oppresserat, vt ne lamentari quidem cladem illam, and deplorare mseriam suam possent, qui se occultabant, quamuis filios aeut parentes sues ad supplicium abripi viderent, ne lugubri gemitu prodi^etur, vocem emittere non audebant. Sic. a, eos metus exanimauerat vt viui non multum a mortuorum s militudine d^starent. Osorius de rebus gest. Emanuelis lib. 4. Osorius description of these distressed soules perplexitie, shewed their gesture and cariage during this massacre, may serue, albeit he meant nothing lesse, as a paraphrase vpon the last words of Moses often-mentioned prophecie. There (that is in the vtmost parts of the earth,) the Lord shall giue thee a trembling heart, and a sorrowfull mind, and thy life shall hang before thee. The disposition of the diuine prouidence in affording opportunity to this licentious outrage was much what like to that, described before in Linne. A great part of these tragicall actors were Germane and French marriners, which had repaired to Lisbon for other trafficke, but returned home vnpunished, burdened with the spoile of these Hebrewes goods, but more heauily laden with guilt of their bloud: albeit their soules were not so deepely died therewith as the Lisbone monks, who had instigated them and others to this butcherie, inflamed themselues with this furious zeale only by an vnseasonable speech of one poore Hebrew apprehended by the other as derogatorie to our Sauiour. For whilest the others, by long gazing vpon the picture of his wounded side, through a glasse, cast the reflexe of light, thence cast vpon their dazeled eyes, for a miracle, the sillie Hebrew, whether openly to contradict, or vnawares vttering to some by-standers what hee thought, bewrayed his incredulitie, how a piece of drie wood should worke miracles.
17 Whilest I reade so many christned soules, thus butchered like beastes for ones deniall of diuine honour to a liuelesse Image, I could not but pause with my selfe; and now I must commend it to the Christian Readers consideration, whether that part of Moses prophecie, and there thou shalt serue other Gods, which thou hast not knowne, nor thy Fathers, wood and stone,Deut. 28. vers. 64 v. 36. may not be vnderstood of the conuert Iewes throughout the Popes dominions, thus oft times vrged to commit Idolatrie with stockes and stones, vpon more tyrannicall tearmes, if they gainesay, than their forefathers were eyther by the Assyrian, Chaldaean, Egyptian, Romaine, or any whosoeuer had led them captiue out of their land. If the monkish Apologizer replie: There is a great difference betweene the Heathen Idoll, and their Image worship: I grant the Idolatrie is of a diuers kinde: and
 so it seemes Moses meant when he threatned this people, that after their finall transplantation by Adrian, and their scattering through Spaine, and these Westerne countries, they should serue such Gods as their fathers had not knowne. For this peoples forefathers, before Moses time and after, had knowne the Heathen Gods too well. If the Romanist yet reioyne, that in worshipping Christs Image they worship Christ: I will not denie, but he may thinke so: for so the Iewes thought they honoured Moses, be cause they honoured the letter of his law. But, to omit other reasons, this and other like outragious facts, committed vpon as light occasions, shall conuince their nice schoole-distinctions of foule errour, and turne their lies with such violence into their throat, that (as Saint Augustine interpretes the Psalmist of these Iewes) It shall euen breake their teeth in their mouthes.Psalm. 58. v. 6. For if the zeale these monkes of Lisbone bare vnto this Image, had beene directed vnto Christ, they had in some good measure beene transformed into the similitude of his gentle, meeke, and mercifull disposition. It was wood-worship doubtlesse which had made them so madde and furious: It was their continuall adoring of stones, which had turned their hearts of flesh into hearts more full of fire than the flint, and harder than the hardest Adamant. But of the effects of monkish pitie towards Christ or the Crucifixe, as also of the Iesuites doctrine concerning Image-worship, elsewhere if God permit. Thus much of these Iewes estate from time to time, may suffice for our intended purpose, to be further collected in the Chapter following.


CHAP. XIII.
Generall collections out of the particular histories before mentioned: the strange dispositions of the Iewes: and Gods iudgements vpon them.
1 I Cannot but approueLibro vndecimo, Saxon. cap. 7. Crantzius his iudgement of these Iews, That they are a perfidious and wicked people, worthie to be spewed out of the confines of Christendome, as many Princes haue expelled them their dominions. But as the same author
 obserueth, howsoeuer Christian gouernours (as the world now counts Christians) are most opposite in outward shew to the Religion which they professe: yet they agree too well with them in their loue vnto this worlds God, by whose meanes these Iewes, after they haue beene expelled one countrey, finde admission into some other, or else into the same againe; as they did into France whence they were expelled by the father, and brought in againe by the sonne; and intoAbierunt hoc anno ex hac parte Iudaei, Pij 5. secundi Pontificis max. iussu, qui acerrimo diplomate exterminari illos ex ecclesiasticae ditionis Ciuitatibus mandauerat. Quanquam enim ill^s tolerabat Ecclesia miserata illorum vic^m vt Christianis frequenti illorum aspectu, Christi Dei mors, versaretur ob oculos, and Iudaei Christianorum exemplis, ac doctrinae, ad amplectendam Christianae fidei veritatem, quam reliquias Israel iuxta diuini vatis oraculum, accepturas constat, incitar^ntur ^a qua si ablegarentur ad alienos longius multo abessent. Tamen cum and vsuris grauibus exigendis and latronibus furibusque etiam rerum Ecclesiasticarum recipiendis, magicis artibus ac l^nocinij^ mulierum exercendis illorum impietas iam eo processisset, vt pro communi omnium incolumitate expediret, tanti vim morbi celeri remedio coercere, omnino eos reijciendos ex ciuitatibus decreuit Hieronnius Rubeus. lib. 11. hist. Rauen. Rauenna, whence banished (for their combination with thieues and robbers, and sacrilegious persons, for sorceries or magicall charmes, in winning women to their owne or others lust) by Pius Quintus in the yeare one thousand fiue hundred sixtie eight, they were recalled by Sixtus Quintus in the yeare one thousand fiue hundred eightie seuen. As if the former of these Kings and Popes had cast their hookes into another mans liberties, and their successors had drawne them, when they had caught the prey. For so in truth these Iewes are like rouing hounds or spaniels, which catch a prey wheresoeuer they come, and carrie it vnto any Prince, or Potentate, that will giue them harbour. They neuer stand vpon better tearmes with any Prince or people, than notorious or cunning malefactors do with graue Iudges, or great States-men. Who oft times winke at such villanies as they hate, for some further purpose. Nor could these Iewes euer hitherto purchase their ease and quiet, as they haue often done their admission into diuers countries. Since their rooting out of their owne land, they haue continued as hares hunted from their seate; no sooner finde they any place of habitation in these ends of the world, but the crie of Gods iudgements streight pursues them. If for a time they may seeme to gather strength, or to recouer themselues from that faintnesse of heart: it is but to take their feeze with greater force to their breake-necke. In the pittes, which they digge for Christians, are their owne feete alwaies taken. The best aduantages which they can espie and entertaine with greediness for their good, are but baites, laide by the Almighties handeJdem. ibid.
 to entrappe them: and whilest his iudgements huntes them one way, and they take another to escape, that in the verie places, wherunto they flie for refuge, as Foxes chaced doe to their holes, is the fatall ginne set for their soules; as appeares out of the Histories heere set downe, which are but so many experiments of Moses his rule. Deut. 28. vers. 65.66.67. Also among these Nations, thou shalt finde no rest, neyther shall the sole of thy foote haue rest: for the Lord shall giue thee there a trembling heart, sinking eyes, and a sorrowfull minde. And thy life shalt hang before thee, and thou shalt feare both day and night, and shall haue no assurance of thy life. In the morning thou shalt say, would God it were euening, and at euening thou shalt say would God it were morning. For the feare of thine heart which thou shalt feare, and for the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see.
Of the loathsome conceit which most nations haue of the Iewes foretold by Moses and the Prophets.29 But as no monie could hitherto purchase their peace, and securitie from calamities: so neither could their calamities, though continually most grieuous, redeeme their estimatio^ in the world, nor all the bloud of their slain (though their massacres haue bin number-lesse) til these times, allay, much lesse extinguish that hateful and loathsom conceit, which most men haue entertained of them. To ascribe all this to their forefathers sinnes against our Sauiour is true, but too generall to giue satisfaction in all particular doubts which their estate might minister. For why the children should inherit their fathers curse, without co^tinuance in like sins, is a point which admits no resolution. Againe, why this people aboue all other creatures should continue their diuellish temper stil, hauing tried such change of aire, diuersity of soiles, conuersing among so many seuerally-disposed people, seems yet more strange. I haue read of trees, leauing their poyson with their natiue soyle, by transplantation bringing forth edible and wholsome fruite, Wolues in few generations wil become as kinde as dogs; Lions and Beares by often presence of men, grow more tame; generally beasts of most wild nature by often housing will come neere the nature of domesticke creatures, rude idiots by frequent entercourse with men of better fashion, in time will take some tincture of ciuilitie and discretion. Of all sensible creatures onely the Iewe, in so many descentes, after so many grieuous corrections, for his owne, and his forefathers sinnes, can wee
 no more leaue his Iewish disposition, than the Leopard can his spots. It further encreased my admiration, why the whole Progenie being vtterly banished this Land aboue three hundred yeares agoe, their memorie should still remaine for a paterne of mischieuous mindes, eyther apt to doe, or fit to suffer anie violence: The verie name of a Iew seruing this people as a perfect measure, eyther to notifie the height of impietie in the Agent, or to sound the depth and bottome of an abject, worthlesse, forlorne condition in any patient. Better wee cannot expresse most cut-throat dealing than thus, None but a Iew would haue done so: Lower we cannot prize any abject condition, than by comparing him to a Iew. For so in common speech wee exaggerate enormious wrongs, done to the most odious or despised amongst vs, This had beene ynough for a Iew to suffer, or I would not haue done so to a Iew. All these plagues are come vpon them, for continuing in their fore-fathers steppes; and to make their Creator the author of their villanous mindes, were impietie: His word endures for euer, Perditio tua ex te, O Israel. Yet, is it possible that any people, endued with the light of reason, should continue so obstinate and obdurate, as willingly to deserue all mens hate they haue to deale with? I know not better how to resolue this doubt, than our Apostle did his, of their fore-fathers vnbeleefe, after so manie miracles wrought amongst them:Such speeches do not import an absolute cause of the thing, but of our instruction or persuasion concerning it. Therefore (sayth he) could they not beleeue, because Esayas sayth, He hath blinded their eyes, etc. Iohn 12. vers. 39. and 40. Therefore must I say, they could not but continue hatefull and opprobrious amongst all people with whome they haue conuersed, because Moses had said, Deuteronomie 28. vers. 37. Thou shalt be a wonder, a prouerbe, and a common talke among all people, whither the Lord shall carrie thee. So likewise had Hieremie 24. vers. 9. I will giue them for a terrible plague to all the Kingdomes of the earth; for a reproach, and for a prouerbe, for a common talke, and for a curse, in all places where I shall cast them. If anie man then further aske, Why Israel is cut off from the Land which God had giuen him, and made a prouerbe, and a common talke among all people; God himselfe hath taught vs how to answere, Because they haue
 forsaken the Lord their God, which brought their fathers out of the Land of Aegypt etc. This the Lord himselfe foretold, and gaue them warning of, euen when hee specified the articles of his Couenant, made with Salomon for their peace, 1. Kings, cap. 9. vers. 69. These authorities may suffice, to stay all such doubts as might arise from curious inquiring after the causes of these peoples incessant miserie; which cannot seeme strange, because fore-told; nor vnjust, in that they were borne to more extraordinarie prosperitie: from which being fallen, by following their owne vngracious wayes, they are now reserued, as Pharoah after manie admonitions was, for Markes or Buttes, against whom the arrowes of Gods wrath and vengeance must bee shot, to the terrour of others, and manifestation of his power.
3. These grounds supposed, the consideration of their manie and cruell massacres, their often spoyling and robbing, and other outrages, which, according to the fore-cited Prophecies of them, they continually suffer, would the Atheist but lay it to his heart, would wring thence, what the Diuine Oracles haue vttered; that this had beene a people appointed to destruction, neuer suffered to multiplie vnto a Nation; as if God had vsed them as men doe wilde beasts, nursing onely so manie of them, as may make sporte by their destruction. So likewise their continuall wandring vp and downe in the world, without any rest, doth aboundantly witnesse; that albeit they beare the shape and nature of men, yet are they no naturall part of the World; but haue the same proportion in the ciuill bodie, or societie of mankind, that bad humours haue in our naturall and materiall bodies; Which by course of nature should bee expelled her confines, but, being retained, runne from ioint to ioint, and lastly breede some grieuous swellings in the extreame parts. And, amongst other most tried and demonstratiue experiments of Moses often-mentioned Prophecie, this is not the least; that Spaine and Portugall, for these later yeares, haue bin the chiefe receptacle of these Iewes: as if Hercules pillars, accounted by the Ancients the vtmosts ends of the World, were not the full period of their peregrination West-ward, whome the Lord had threatned,
 Deutronomie 28. verse 64. to scatter amongst all people, from the one end of the World vnto the other. There they haue beene in greatest abundance, for manie yeares, as it were expecting a wind for their passage to some place more distant from their natiue Countrie. And who knowes whether that Prophecie, Deutronomie 28. verse 41. Thou shalt beget Sonnes and Daughters, but shalt not haue them; for they shall goe into captiuitie: hath not beene fulfilled, in the Iewes inhabiting that Kingdome? Whether manie of their Stocke, whome Emanuel detained in Portugall, haue not beene transported since into America? or whether manie of the Spanish Colonies, haue not a mixture of Iewish Progenie in them? Nay, who knowes, whether the West Indies were not discouered, partly, or especially for this purpose, that the sound of these Preachers, vnto whome God hath appointed no set Diocesse, might goe out into all Lands with the Sunne, and their wordes vnto the ends of the world, vntill they returne vnto the place whence they were scattered? But these conjectures I leaue to be confuted or confirmed by future times, desirous to prosecute briefely some obseruations of their fore-passed miseries, not yet ended.
4. As Gods judgements vpon this people haue had no end, so neyther haue the grounds or motiues of Christian beleefe any limits; euerie degree of their fall is a steppe vnto our rising: ynough it were to condemne the whole Christian world of infidelitie, if it should not bee rapt with admiration of Gods mercie towards vs, as it is manifested onely in his seueritie towards them. But if, vnto their perpetuall grieuous calamities here recounted, wee adde their like continuall stubbornenesse of heart, wee shall proue our selues more stiffe-necked than this people it selfe, vnlesse wee take vp Christs yoake and follow him; vnder which onely wee shall finde that ease and rest vnto our Soules, which they haue wanted euer since his death, and without repentance, must want euerlastingly. Angels, Men, and Diuels, yea all the world may clearely see, that the God of their Fathers hath cast them off; that they haue borne no Signes or Badges of his auncient wonted fauours,
 whilest innumerable grieuous markes and skares of his fearefull indignation against their fathers still remaine vnhealed in the children, after more generations, than their auncestors Seat of prosperitie had beene in the promised Land: and yet euen these later, as all the former, since their scattering thence, continue their boastings of their prerogatiues, as if they were his onely chosen people. A grieuous distemper of bodie and minde hath runne in their bloud for almost sixteene hundred yeares; the children still infected with their fathers disease; all rauing and talking, like men in a phrenzie, as if they were Wisedomes first borne, and heires of happinesse. Thus their vnrelenting stubbornenesse is an irrefragable Argument,A comparison of the modern Iewes stubbornenesse with the stedfastnesse of Abrahams faith That they are the degenerate seede of faithfull Abraham; for stubbornenesse is but a strong hope malignified, or (as we say) growne wilde and out of kinde. If the Scripture had not described his nature and qualitie with his name, wee might haue knowne by these moderne Iewes, that their first progenitour had beene a man of strong hopes, against all hopes in the sight of men: for these goe further, continuing stiffe in their persuasions of Gods fauour towards them, contrarie vnto the grounds of hopes, eyther in the sight of God or man, insolent in confidence, euen whilest they are at the verie brinke of deepest despaire. Abraham looked for a Sonne after the chiefest strength of his bodie was decayed, and Sarah his wife by course of Nature past all possibilitie of conceiuing: but his hopes were assuredly grounded vpon his faithfulnesse which had promised the same: These hope for a Messiah, after the fulnesse of time is past and gone, and their Countrey, being the Land of his Natiuitie, couered with barrennesse and desolation; without all grounds of hope, quite contrarie to the praedictions of GODS Prophets, whome they beleeue in grosse; after whose meaning they groape as palpably now in the Sunne-shine of their Messiahs glorie, alreadie reuealed, as if it were in Aegyptian darkenesse: Yet euen the fulnesse of that joy, which most of them doe looke for in the dayes of their Messiah (were their hopes of his comming as probable as they are impossible) could
 not in reason support any other mens nature, to sustaine that perpetuall violence, disgrace, and torture, which they indure throughout so many successions, in this wearisome time of their expectation. Abraham was approued of God, for his readinesse to sacrifice his sonne Isaac at his command: These his degenerate Sonnes haue crucified the sonne of Abrahams God; and for their infidelitie and disobedience, haue beene cast out of that good Land, which was giuen to Abraham and his righteous seede; and for their stubbornnesse in like practizes, their posteritie continue exiles, and Vagabonds from the same, not to this day willing to offer vp the Sacrifice of a contrite heart, for their disobedience past,Deut. 29. vers. 19. but rather (adding thirst to drunkennesse) blesse themselues, when they heare the wordes of that curse, promising peace vnto themselues, although they walke on according to the stubbornnesse of their fore-fathers hearts. Their owne desires they will not breake: butvide Socratem lib. 7. cap. 16. Krantzium lib. 10. Wandalorum c. 18. Papyrium Masson. lib. 3. ex Villaneo. Vide Hollinsheed anno 20. Hen. 3. and alibi. At Prage in the yeare 1240. (or thereabout) they crucified a Christian by Sacra Parasceu. Krantius lib 7. Wandaloru^ c. 40. Ioh. 8. v. 44. Christian children they can bee well content to Sacrifice, kill, and mangle, throughout all ages, wheresoeuer they come, as their often practizes in England, France, and Germanie witnesse; and the Iewes of Lincolne, executed at London for this crime, did confesse to bee a solemne practize, as oft as they could conueniently come by their prey. Thus out of the mouthes of Infants and Children, will God haue his praise erected still: their bloud hath sealed, and their cries proclaimed the truth of our Sauiours wordes, that these Iewes are of their Father the Diuell, and the lusts of their Father they will doe. He was a murtherer from the beginning, and alwaies delighted much in such sacrifices, as were most displeasing vnto God.
5 If Christian sobrietie did not teach vs to acknowledge Gods iudgements alwaies iust; although the manner of his iustice can not be apprehended, much lesse exemplified to ordinarie capacities, by the wisest of the Sonnes of men: the consideration of these Iewes perpetuall temper would halfe perswade vs, that the soules of such, as had either procured, consented vnto, or approued our Sauiours and his Apostles death, had beene sent from hell by course, into the bodies of these Iewes here scattered in these Westerne parts, as so many Messengers from
 the dead, to shew the malignant heate of those euerlasting flames, by their vnquenchable thirst of innocent bloud. But neither doth Scripture warrant, nor naturall reason enforce such suppositions, either for acquiting Gods seueritie vpon this people from iniustice, or his goodnesse from suspition of being the Authour of their villainous mindes, though hee bee the sole Creatour, as well of theirs as their godly forefathers soules. For these their wicked posterities plagues are iust, because their soules, which hee hath made, will not receiue correction by their owne, or their fathers plagues, continually inflicted vpon them since our Sauiours death; but still, as it were, hunt out Gods iudgements, which lie perpetually in wait for them, by treading in their vngratious predecessours steps. In one word, though the God of their Fathers haue made their soules; yet they make pride of heart, inueterate custome, examples of their progenitors, their God. For vs Christians, let vs admire the wisedome of our gratious God, that so disposeth our enemies mischieuous mindes vnto our good; rather then enquire, how their villanies can stand with his iustice. This their vnsatiable desire of crucifying them, vnto whom the Kingdome of heauen belongs, doth confirme our faith, in that maine article of their Fathers crucifying the Lord of glorie. And (no doubt) but God, in his all-seeing wisedome, hath permitted the like hellish temper to remaine in all generations of these Iewes, that the former most horrible, and otherwise almost incredible act, with the actors Diuelish spite and malice, might bee more liuely and sensibly represented to all posterities, which had not seene or knowne them by experience. And Gods iudgements vpon these moderne Iewes, for their forefathers sinnes, hereby may appeare most iust, in that they make them their owne by imitation; plainely testifying vnto the world, that they would doe as their forefathers had done, if the same Tragedie of Christs Passion were to bee acted againe; yea, in as much as they practize the like vpon his liuing members, they are guiltie, aswell as their forefathers, of his death.
6 Generally, the outward carriage, and inward temper of these moderne Iewes are such, as all that haue any experience of them, may perceiue the excellent qualities of their worthie Progenitours, and the extraordinarie prerogatiues whence they are fallen, as sensibly and vndoubtedly, as wee can know by the lees, or corrupt remainder of any liquor, what the vertue and strength thereof was in it prime. The present depression of this people, below all others amongst whom they li^e, rightly taken, doth giue vs the true excesse of their exaltation, in former times aboue the Nations, as perfectly as the eleuation of the pole which wee see, doth giue vs the degrees of the others occultation. Finally, if wee compare the estate of such as liued in Tullies times, with these moderne Iewes estate lately mentioned; the great prosperitie of their Ancestors vnder Iosuah, Iudges, Dauid, and Salomon, may bee gathered from these differences as exactly, and as clearely, as the third proportionable number out of two others alreadie knowne. This is that golden rule, whose practize I would commend to all yong Students. For, from the knowne differences of their estate from time to time, wee may bee ledde vnto the perfect knowledge of Gods power, and prouidence, of his mercie and bountie to such as loue him, of his iudgements vpon such as hate him, and transgresse his Lawes. Finally, nothing in Scripture can seeme incredible, if men would consider the wonderfull exaltation, and depression of this people.
7 This admirable difference betweene the true Israelites of old, and these moderne perfidious Iewes,Vide Ezech. 6. is most liuely represented vnto vs in that parable of diuers Figges, which Ieremiah saw, Ierem. 24. vers. 1.2. The Lord shewed mee, and behold two baskets of Figges were set before the Temple of the Lord: one basket very good Figges, like the Figges that are first ripe, and the other very naughtie Figges, which could not bee eaten, they were so euill. No man, I hope, will challenge mee, for extending this Text beyond it litterall sense. One part of which, by the Prophets owne exposition, is to be vnderstood of such as were ledde captiue by Nebuchadnezzar, signified by the good figges: the other of Zedechiah, with the residue of Hierusalem, and them that dwelt
 in the Land of Aegypt, represented by the badde figges. My Prophet indeede applies it only vnto them of his owne time; of whom I confesse it was litterally meant: but not only of them; but more principally, more fully and directly, of the Iewes, about, or since our Sauiours time, and his Apostles, or their followers. The parable, with the consequence thereof, is true of both; in as much as both are particulars, contained vnder that generall diuision, whichVide supra cap. 5. paraph. 6. Moses had made of Blessings and Cursings to befall this people in diuers measures, according to their constancie in good, or stubbornnesse in euill. Vnto this generall prediction the Prophets doe still frame their prophecies, as corollaries or appendices; and so must they be applied by vs, not only to the present times wherein they wrote, but to the times of the Messiah, in which both Moses his generall, and the Prophets particular prophecies were more fully accomplished, than in any age before. That which Ieremie in the third Verse of that same Chapter said of the figges, was true of this people in all ages: The good amongst them were very good, the naughtie alwaies very naughtie: but the difference greater betwixt the better sort of the ancient, and the worse of later, than betwixt the best and worst of such as liued in the middle age; greatest of all betwixt the good and badde, in our Sauiours time, or immediately after. These wordes againe of the Prophet, verse 6. and 7. are altogether as litterally, more peculiarly meant of Christs Apostles, and Disciples, than of Nehemiah and Zerubbabel, and the rest which returned from the captiuitie of Babylon: For I will set mine eies vpon them for good, and I will bring them againe to this Land, and I will build them, and I will plant them, and not roote them out, and I will giue them a heart to know mee, that I am the Lord, and they shall bee my people: And I will bee their God; for they shall returne vnto mee with their whole heart. So is that curse, Verse 9.10. more fully verified of the Iewes, about, or after our Sauiour Christs time, than of Zedechiah, and his complices: I will euen giue them for a terrible plague to all the Kingdomes of the Earth, and for a reproch, and for a prouerbe, for a common talke, and for a curse in all places, where I shall cast them. And I will send the sword, the famine, and the pestilence among them, till
 till they be consumed out of the Land that I gaue vnto them and to their Fathers. In like sort I must needes with all orthodoxall antiquitie, not contradicted for more than a thousand yeares, acknowledge the Psalmists prayer, Psalme 59. to haue beene more directly meant, at least more notably fulfilled, in the Iewes of later times, than of his enemies amongest whome hee liued; Slay them not, O God, lest my people forget it; but scatter them abroad by thy power, and put them downe O Lord our shield, for the sinne of their mouth, and the words of their lippes; and let them be taken in their pride, euen for their periury and lies which they speake. The infallible grounds of thus interpreting these two places, and the like, shall be fortified, (GOD willing) when I come vnto the prophecies concerning Christs incarnation, passion, or exaltation; My warrant at this time for the later heere alleadged, shall be the end of the Psalmists wish, verse 13. Consume them in thy wrath, consume them, that they be no more: and let them know that God ruleth in Iacob vnto the ends of the world. Their strange massacres in these ends of the world, whither they haue beene scattered, doth better confirme our faith of Gods prouidence, and mercie towards vs, then Dauids enemies exile, and scattering, did his people, of Gods fauour towards him and them. And it is to bee obserued, that he saith not, Let them know in Iacob, that God ruleth vnto the ends of the world. For we the adopted sonnes of Abraham, though liuing in these extreame parts of the world, which he neuer knew, are the true Iacob; and the naturall sonnes of Abraham according to the flesh, though liuing in the Promised Land, haue no inheritance in Iacob; all are Iewes. So doth he, which sits vpon the circles of the heauens, weigh all the Kingdomes of the earth as in a ballance, debasing some, and aduauncing others at his pleasure:Gods fauours to the ancient Israelites paralelled by like blessings vpon the Gentiles. and so doth the light of his gratious countenance towards any Land or People, change or set, in reuolution of times, as the aspect of starres doth vnto such as compasse the earth. And yet, as the same obseruation of the Sunnes motion from contrary tropicks to the Line, serueth our English in Summer, and the Nauigators of opposite Climes in Winter: So is the same light of Gods countenance, which shone vpon the Iews, before, turned to the Gentiles, after the fulnes of time. Abraham had the Promise of Canaan often renewed vnto him; but neyther hee, nor his posteritie possessed
 it, vntill the fulnesse of the Canaanites iniquitie were accomplished: wee Gentiles had the promises of being engrafted into Israel, as it were, conueighed vnto vs in the building of the second Temple, and afterwards renewed in the translation of these sacred writings (the instruments of our inheritance) into the Greek tongue, but were not partakers of the blessings of Iacob, vntill the iniquitie of Abrahams posteritie, according to the flesh, was full. Againe, as the Canaanites were not vtterly destroyed, albeit the Israelites were commaunded so to doe: but some relickes were reserued in the promised Land to a good purpose, by the wisedome of God: so neyther were these Iewes vtterly extinguished, but a remnant was scattered abroad amongst the Gentiles, that they might know Gods mercie towards them by his iudgements vppon the other: and though Christian Princes haue oft receiued them, vpon as vniust respects, as the Israelites did permit the Canaanites to dwell amongst them, yet God hath still rectified their errour, and turned their euill imaginations to the great good of his chosen. Gods fauours towards them of olde, and vs of late, might bee thus paralelled in many points: and, as Moses made nothing about the Arke,Exod 25 40. Heb. 8.5. but according to the fashion that was shewed him in the mountaine: so is there no euent or alteration of moment vnder the Gospel, but had a patterne in the Lawe and Prophets. The celestiall obseruations which were taken for these Israelites good, might continually serue for the direction of the Gentile, if hee would obserue the seuerall signes of diuerse Ages, as Mariners vse diuers Constellations in diuers latitudes, and gaze not alwayes vpon the same pole. TheMatth. 16.3. Luke 12.54. ignorance in discerning the signes of Times, was a Symptome of the Iewes hypocrisie, and cause of his continuall ship-wracke in faith. For suffering the fulnesse of time (where hee and the Gentiles should haue met as at the Aequator) to passe away without correction of his course or due obseruation of the sodaine change of heauens aspect; hee lost the sight of his wonted signes, and since wanders vp and downe, as Marriners destitute of theyr Carde,The Iewes blindnes is an especi^ll light v^^^ the Gentile. depriued of all sight, either of Sunne, Moone, or Stars: or rather, like blinde men groaping their way without any ocular direction: yet euen this their blindenesse, is, or may be a better light, and direction vnto vs, than their wonted sight and skill in
 Scriptures could afford vs. First, this might teach the wisest amongest vs, not to be high minded, but feare; seeing wisedome hath perished from the wisest of mankind, euen from Gods owne chosen people. Secondly, this palpable blind obstinacie, which hath befallen Israel, might persuade vs Christians (were not we blind also) to vse that methode, which God himselfe did think most fit, for planting true faith in tender hearts: Christian parents, whether bodily or spirituall, should be as carefull to instruct their children what the Lord had done vnto these Iewes, as the Israelites should haue b^ene, to tell their sonnes, what God had done vnto Pharaoh. His hardnesse of heart, was nothing to their stubbornenesse, Aegyptian darknesse was as noone-tide to their blindnesse; all the plagues and soares of Egypt, were but flea-bitings to Gods fearefull marks vpon these Iews: yet is al this come vpon them, that the fulnes of the Gentiles might come in.Rom. 11.25. With a more mightie hand hath God brought vs out of the shadow of death, and dominions of Sathan; than he brought the Israelites out of Egypt, out of the house of bondage: with a more powerfull, and harder stretched out arme, hath he scattered these Iewes among all people, from the one end of the world to the other, than he brought the frogs, flies, and caterpillers into Egypt.Ex. 13.9, 14, 1^. And it should be as a token in our hands, and as frontlets between our childrens eies, that the Lord hath redeemed vs through a mightie hand. When Israel departed out of Egypt, the Egyptian did not furnish him with weapons for his defence, or Apologies for his departure. These Iewes scattered abroad, are made such Messengers as Vriah was of their owne destruction, bearing records against themselues, but sealed vp from their sight; holding Moses their chiefe accuser, in greatest honour; or to follow that faithfull follower of Christ, S. August. in his similitude to this purpose: although these Iewes be desperately blinde themselues, yet they carry those looking glasses before them, which long since put out their eyes by their too much gazing on them, so as now they can hold them onely in their hands, or turne their faces towards them, not able to discerne their misshapen visages in them; but we Gentiles which come after them, do herein go before them, that we may cleerly see their deformitie, and hideous blindnes, first caused by the glorious beames of the diuine maiestie shining in these sacred fountaines, whilest they
 vsed them (as Narcissus did his Well, or little Babes doe Bookes with faire Pictures) onely to solace themselues with representation of their godly forefathers beautie, set out in them in freshest colours; not as looking glasses to discouer, much lesse to reforme what was amisse in themselues, whom they in the pride of their hearts still presumed to be in all points like their worthie Auncestours.
8 If vnto all their miseries throughout so many Ages, wee adde their perpetuall stupiditie and deadnesse of heart to all works of the Spirite; if to this againe wee adde their incomparable zeale and courage, in preseruing the letter of the Law; and lay all vnto our hearts: what is it we can imagine, the Lord could haue done vnto his vineyard,Esay 5.46. that he hath not done to it? He hath commanded the cloudes not to raine vpon the naturall branches, that the aboundant fatnesse of the roote might be wholly communicate to vs Gentiles, by nature wilde grafts. He hath laied his Vineyard in Israel waste, and left the hill of Sion his wonted ioy, more desolate then the mountaines of Gilboah, that the deaw of all his heauenly blessings might descend vpon the valleis of the Nations. Let vs not therefore tempt the Lord our God, in asking further signes for confirmation of our faith: for no signe can be giuen vs, aequiualent to this desolation of the Iewes. Such as the dayes of Ierusalem were in her distresse, such we know (but how farre more grieuous, wee can not conceiue) the day of iudgement shall be; euen a day of wrath, and a day of vengeance; an end of dayes, and an end of comfort; a beginning of an endlesse night of sorrow, troubles, woe, and miseries to the wicked.The desolation of the Iews the most effectuall signe for confirming christian faith. Leuit. 26.44. Such as the condition of these Iewes hath beene, for more than fifteene hundred yeares; such shall the state of vnbeleeuers bee without end, without all rest or securitie from daunger, disgrace, and torture, tenne thousand times more dreadfull and insufferable, than what the others at any times haue feared or felt. What else hath beene verified of them, as in the type; must bee fulfilled in vnbeleeuers, as in the bodie or substance. These shall feare both night and day, and shall haue no assurance of their life; but in steade thereof, an ineuitable perpetuitie of most grieuous death. In the morning they shall say, Would God it were euening; and at euening they shall say, Would GOD it were
 morning, and wish that Time might bee no more, or that no dayes of ioy had euer beene; that all their mirth had beene exchanged for sorrow, euen whilest it was first conceiued within their breast, that so no memorie of sweete delights or pleasures past, might adde gall vnto the bitternesse of their present griefe, nor minister oyle vnto that vnquencheable flame wherein they frie. Thus much of Gods extraordinarie mercies and iudgements towards these Iewes, and of the experiments which their estate from time to time hath afforded for the establishing of our assent to Scriptures.
9 Particular iudgements vpon any Land or People, as remarkeable and perspicuous to common sense, as heeretofore haue beene, wee are not in this Age to expect. The approach of this generall and fearefull iudgement, wee may iustly thinke, doth swallow vp the most of them, as great plagues vsually drinke vp all other diseases. The conuersion of these Iewes wee may probably expect, as the chiefe signe of later times; onely this last part of Moses prophecie, Leuiticus chapter 26. verse 44. hath not beene as yet fulfilled, but must bee in due time, for so he saith, Yet notwithstanding this (euen all the plagues and curses which hee had threatned, and wee haue seene fulfilled in these Iewes) when they shall be in the land of their enemies, I will not cast them away, neyther will I abhorre them, to destroy them vtterly, and to breake my couenant with them: For I am the Lord their GOD: But I will remember for them, the couenant of old when I brought them out of the land of Egypt, that I might be their God: I am the Lord. And the continuation of their former plagues seemeth much interrupted, the plagues themselues much mitigated, in this last Age (since the Gospel hath beene againe reuealed) as if their miserie were almost expired, and the day of their redemption drawing nigh. Yet would I request such as with me holde their generall conuersion, before the end of all things, as a truth probably grounded on GODS word; not to put that euill day farre from them, as if it could not take them vnawares, vntill GODS promise to this people bee accomplished. For, (were that the point now in hand) I could (mee thinkes) as probably gather out of scriptures, that their conuersion shalbe sodaine,
 as at all, and such as many parts of the world shall not so soone heare of, by authenticke r^ports or vncontroulable relation, as sensibly see at our generall meeting before our Iudge.
10 Like experiments might bee drawne from the reuolutions or alterations of other states, oft times wrought by such causes, as are without the reach of policie, but most co^sonant to the rules of scriptures; or from the verification of such rules, in Gods iudgements vpon priuate persons. But these obseruations can not bee made so euident to ordinary Readers, before the doctrine of Gods prouidence be vnfolded. Wherefore I must referre them partly to that place, partly to others of my Labours, which haue been most plentifull in this Argument. Onely that mutation in our deliuerance from the seruitude of the Romish church, may not be omitted.A paralell of the Israelites deliuerance from Egyptian and ours from Babylonish thraldome. For, if we compare it with the Israelites departure out of Egypt: the maner of Gods prouidence exemplified at large by Moses in the former, is as a perfect rule to discerne the same power in the later; and the fresh experiment of the later confirmes vnto our consciences the truth of the Historie concerning the former. God from the spoyles of the Egyptians furnished the Israelites with all things necessary for their iourney; the same God had reuiued the study of tongues, and reuealed the Arte of Printing, alittle before our fore-fathers departed out of Babylon, that they should not come away empty, but well furnished to wage warre with their enemies, whom they had robbed of their chiefe iewels, leauing small store of polite literature, or skill in Scriptures amongst them; though they haue increased their faculties that way since. If wee diligently view the disposition of Gods prouidence before those times, we can not but acknowledge, that it was the same power that first caused light to shine out of darkenes, which then renewed the face of the earth againe, and brought the light of ingenious and sacred literature, foorth of the chaos of barbaritie, obscuritie, and fruitlesse curiositie, wherein it had beene long inclosed. It is (me thinks) a pleasant contemplation to obserue how the Worthies of the age praecedent did bestirre themselues in gathering and dressing armour, not vsed for many hundred yeares before, no man knowing for what purpose, vntil the great Commander of heauen and earth giues out his commission to the captaines
 of his hoste, for inuading his enemy, the man of sinne. Little did that noble, religious, and learned King Alphonsus, or Laurentius de Medicis, with such like, thinke of Luther, Zuinglius, Caluin, Bucer, Melancthon, or other champions departure from the Romish Church, when they gaue such countenance to polite learning and learned men, from whom these had their skill: yea these men themselues, and their fellowes did little thinke of such proiects, as God by them after effected, when they first beganne to vse those weapons, by which they finally foiled their mightie aduersaries. Againe, wee haue as it were, a fresh print of Gods dealing with Pharaoh in his like proceedings against the Pope. Pharaoh being deliuered ouer to the stubbornenesse of his owne heart, had it so hardened at last, that hee desperately looseth both life and kingdome, whilest hee wrangles with the Israelites for their cattell. The Popes heart likewise was so farre hardened for his former pride, and so strangely besotted with the sweetnesse of his owne Cup, that he cannot forgoe the very dregges, but will haue all swallowed downe, euen Indulgences themselues; that so the Lords name might be glorified in his shameful ouerthrow. Vnlesse it had bin for such a notorious and palpable blindnesse of heart, in retayning that more than heathenish and idolatrous abhomination; the iust causes of Luthers reuolt had not bin so manifest to the world, nor others departure from the Romish church so generall. All this, as it was the Lords doing, so ought it to seem wonderfull in our eyes. For in this our deliuerance was manifested the selfe same power, wisedome, and prouidence, for the stedfast acknowledgement of which, all the former miracles in Egypt had bin wrought: then necessarie to the Israelites, but not to our forefathers, who had belieued the truth of Moses miracles; instructed by the rules of Gods prouidence in them manifested, to discerne the same infinite power and wisedome in their owne deliuerance: the maner of which was truely miraculous, as theInterim si pontificij omnino cu^ Judaeis signum habere velint, acci^iant hoc, quod nos summi miraculi loco habemus, va^cu^ vir^m ^u^^ue mise^um Mona^^ (...) ^e oni^^ m^^^ (...) vi, Romanorum Pont^ficum tyrannidem, quae tot seculis non tantum potentissimis Regibus, sed and tet. (...) sormidabilis fuit, oppugnasse, superass^, prostrauisse, iuxta elegantissimos versiculos: Harm. Eua^get. l^b. 3. cap. 59. Lutherane wel answered the Papist Iewish like requiring signes or miracles for Luthers doctrine, which had the same signes to confirme it, that Christianitie it selfe first had.



Vir sine vi ferri, vi verbi, and inermibus armis;


Vir sine re, sine spe, contulit orbis opes.

Sans dint of sword, by strength of word,
And armelesse harmelesse paines;
A wealthlesse wight, hopelesse in sight,
Hath crash'd Romes golden vaines.

11 Luthers successe was apprehended by the worldly wisemen of those times as impossible, as the praedictions of Pharaohs ouerthrow by Moses, would haue beene to such in that Age, as knew not the will or power of God. And AlbertusDolebat sanctissimo viro non solum vitam eorum, quibus religionis confessio mandata erat, nefarijs sceleribus inquinari, sed serpere etiam in religione^ maximos errores. Ideo de illis euer^endis plurimum laborabat: Sed quod tandem videret papae authoritatem, quousque processisset, and diffideret, ne vnus homo tanto negotio par esset, de seipso spem abiecit, and optauit, vt omnes docti viri couiunctis studijs papam in ordine^ redigerent. Idem dixit, quam paulo ante mortem, infirmus, Lutheri propositiones de indulgentijs vidisset, Lutheram in bonam causam ingressum esse, sed vnius homuncionis vires nihil valere ad tantam pontificis potentiam infringendam, quae nimium inualuisset. Et l^cti^ and approbatis propositionibus Lutheri, exclamasse fertur, Trater etc. Iohan. Wolf. in praefat. ad Krantzij opera. Krantius, a man, as of an excellent Spirit, so of farre greater place and authoritie in Germanie than Luther was, and one, that from as earnest detestation of the Romish Churches pride and insolencies, notified as great a desire of reformation, as Luther had; yet thought he should but haue lost his labour in oppugning that greatnesse whereto it was growne. The same Bishop, a little before his death, beeing made acquainted with Luthers purpose; after approbation of his good intents to reforme the abuse of Indulgences, burst out into these despairing speeches of his good successe: Frater, frater, abi in cellam, and dic; Miserere mei, Deus. Brother, brother, get into thy cell, and take vp a Psalme of mercie.
12 Would God the incredulitie and carelesse carriage of the Israelites after their mightie deliuerance, had not been too liuely represented by the like in most reformed Churches. When that generationIudg. 2.10. Rom. 2.22, 23. was gathered to their fathers, would God another had not risen after them, which neither knew the Lord nor the workes which he had done for Israel: A generation as much addicted vnto sacrilege, as abhorring Idoles: dishonouring GOD by polluting that law of Libertie, wherein they gloried.




Lib. 1. SECT. 4. Pars. 2.
Of experiments in our selues, and the right framing of beleefe, as well vnto the seuerall parts as vnto the whole Canon of Scriptures.
THough these we now treat of be the surest pledges of diuine truths, without which all obseruations of former experiments, are but like assurances well drawne, but neuer sealed: yet are they least of all communicable vnto others. Hee that hath tried them may reioyce in them, as of that good treasure hid in the field, which he that hath found, can be content to sell all that hee hath, and buy the field wherein it is: that is, (to moralize that parable for good Students vse) he can be content to addict himselfe wholly or principally vnto this studie, suffering others to discourse of such matters as they most delight and glorie in, sealing his owne mouth with that Hebrew prouerbe, secretum meum mihi. It shall suffice then, to set downe some generall admonitions, for the finding of this hidden Mannah: albeit thus much can not bee so well performed in this place, seeing the search hereof is not so easie or certaine without the doctrine of Gods prouidence; and the matter or subiect of the most or best experiments in this kinde, belong vnto particular articles of this Creede, to bee prosecuted in their proper place, according to the methode vsed in these generall introductions, by comparing diuine Oracles with the experiments answerable vnto them.

CHAP. I.
Shewing the facilitie and vse of the proposed methode by instance in some, whose beleefe vnto diuine Oracles hath beene confirmed by experiments answerable vnto them.
1 THe methode is such as the simplest Christian may easily learne,S. Peters beleef of knowne Oracles confirmed by experiment. and the greatest professors need not to contemne. For St. Peter himselfe, that great Doctor of the circumcision, did profit much by this practize. He had often heard, that God was
 no accepter of persons. This truth was acknowledged by Elihu, who had neuer heard,Iob. 34. vers. 19. nor read the written law of God: He accepteth not the person of Princes, and regardeth not the rich more than the poore: for they bee all the worke of his handes. The like hath the Wise man from the same reason:Wisd. 6. vers. 7. He that is Lord ouer all, will spare no person, neither shall he feare any greatnesse: for he hath made the small and great, and careth for all a-like. The same in substance is often repeated in the booke of life: and no man could denie it, that had heard it but once proposed, if hee did acknowledge God for the Creatour of all. Notwithstanding, the fresh experiment of Gods calling Cornelius to Christian faith, confirmed St. Peter in the right beleefe of diuine oracles to this effect: and as it seemes, taught him the true meaning of that place, Deut. 10. vers. 16. Circumcise therefore the fore-skin of your heart (as if he had said, Glorie not in the circumcision of the flesh) and harden your necks no more: for the Lord your God is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, mightie, and terrible, which accepteth no persons. From this place alone, the proude Iewes might haue learned, that the Lord was God of the Gentiles as well as of them: and, from the abundance of his inward faith, enlarged by the forementioned experiment, St. Peter burst out into these speeches:Act. 10. v. 34.35 Of a truth, I perceiue that God is no accepter of persons: but in euery Nation, he that feareth him, is accepted with him.
2 The same methode the Lord himselfe hath commended vnto vs in many places of Scripture, wondering oft times at the dulnesse of his peoples hearts, that could not from the experiments of his power, might, and maiestie, shewed in them, or for them, acknowledge those principles of faith which Moses commended vnto them in writing: O (saith he) that they were wise, then would they vnderstand this; they would consider their later end: how should one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight; except their strong God had sold them, and the Lord had shut them vp. And againe,Deut 32. v. 39. Behold now, for I am he, and there is no Gods with mee. Why should they beleeue this? They were to take none for gods, but such as could doe the works of God. What were these? Such as God auoucheth of himselfe in the next wordes: I kill, and I giue life; I wound, and I make whole; neither is there any that can deliuer out of my hand. These, and like effects, specified in the former
 place, often manifested amongst this people, might haue taught them the truth of the former Oracle, albeit Moses had beene silent. For so the finger of God,Naaman without the written word by experiment confirmed in the truth of what was written in the word. 2. Kings 5.14.15 manifested in Naamans the Syrian Generalls cure (which was but one part of the former effects appropriated vnto God,) did write this diuine Oracle as distinctly in his heart, as Moses had done it in the booke of the Law. For after he was cleansed (from his leprosie,) hee turned againe to the man of God, hee and all his companie, and came and stood before him, and said; Behold, now I know there is no God in all the world, but in Israel: And againe, thy seruant will henceforth offer neither burnt sacrifice, nor offering, vnto any other God, saue vnto the Lord. This was as much, as if hee had said: Behold now, for the Lord is hee,Vers. 17. and there is no other Gods with him: hee woundeth, and hee maketh whole.
3 If the cure of leprosie, contrarie to humane expectation, could so distinctly write this diuine Oracle in an vncircumcised Aramites heart, without any patterne or written copie, whence to take it out: how much more may the Lord expect, that the like experiments in our selues should imprint his Oracles alreadie written, by Moses and other his seruants of old, in our hearts and consciences, that haue these patternes of Naaman and others registred to our handes, admonishing vs to bee obseruant in this kinde? But alas, wee are all by nature sicke of a more dangerous leprosie, than Naaman knew: and yet the most of vs farre sicker of Naamans pride, than of his leprosie. If Gods Ministers shall admonish the curious Artists, or Athenian wits of our times, as Elishah his Prophet did Naaman: they reply with Naaman in their hearts: Wee looked they should haue called vpon the name of the Lord, their God, and made vs new men in an instant: and now they bidde vs wash our selues againe and againe in the water of life, and be cleane. Are not the ancient Fountaines of Greece (that nurse of Arts, and Mother of eloquence) and the pleasant Riuers of Italie (the Schoole of delicate moderne witts) better than all the waters of Israel? Are not Tullie and Aristotle as learned as Moses, and the Prophets? Thus they depart from vs in displeasure.
4 But if the Lord should command vs greater thinges for
 our temporall preferment, or for the auoidance of corporall death or torture: would wee not doe them? How much rather then, when he saith vnto vs, Wash your selues often in the holy fountaine, the Well of life, and yee shall bee cleane, euen from those sores, which otherwise will torment both body and soule eternally? Yea, but many reade the Scriptures againe and againe, and daily heare the word Preached publikely, and yet proue no purer in life and action than their Neighbours. The reason is, because they heare or reade them negligently; not comparing their rules with experiments daily incident to their course of life: their preparation and resolution are not proportionable to the waight and consequence of this sacred businesse; their industrie and alacritie in obseruing and practizing the prescripts commended to their Meditations by their Pastors, doe in no wise so farre exceede their care and diligence in worldly matters, as the dignitie of these heauenly mysteries surpasseth the pleasures or commodities of this brittle earthly life: and not thus prepared to heare, or reade the Scriptures, to heare is to contemne, to reade is to prophane them: euen the often repetition of the wordes of life, without due reuerence and attention, breedes an insensibilitie or deadnesse in mens soules. Yet should not such mens want of sense breede infidelitie in others: rather this experience of so much hearing, and little doing Gods will, may confirme the truth of his word, concerning such Teachers and Hearers. Many in our times, not Monkes and Friars only, but of their sterne opposites,2. Tim. 3. v. 5.6.7 not a Iew, Hauing a shew of godlinesse, but denying the power thereof, crept into houses, and lead captiue simple Women, laden with sinnes, and leade with diuers lusts, euer hearing, and neuer able to come to the knowledge of the truth. And as the Philosopher said of his morall Auditors indocilitie, that it skilled not whether hee were yong or of youthfull affections: so is it not the difference of sexe but resolution, that makes a good Scholler or non proficient in the Schoole of our Sauiour IESVS CHRIST. Many men haue weake and womanish, and many women, manly, and heroick resolutions, towards God and godlinesse.Better effects of experiments lesse wonderfull in Anna.
5. The infirmitie which vexed the religious Hanna, was not so
 grieuous as that of Naamans: she was, in our corrupt language, as many honest women at this day are, by nature barren; or, if wee would speake as the Prophet did in the right language of Canaan, the Lord had made her barren: wearie shee was of her owne; and, according to the ordinarie course of nature, shee saw no hope of being the author of life to others. Yet in this her distresse shee prayed vnto the Lord her God, and he graunted her desire. From this experiment of Gods power, though not altogether so remarkable in ordinarie estimation as Naamans cure, she fully conceiues not onely the truth of the former Oracle, acknowledged by Naaman (but more emphatically expressed by her,1. Sam. 2. v. 2. There is none holy as the Lord; yea, there is none besides thee, and there is no God like our God;) nor that other attribute of wounding, or making whole (so liuely vttered, vers. 6. The Lord killeth, and maketh aliue; bringeth downe to the graue, and rayseth vp:) but Gods Word, planted in her heart by her fresh experience, growes vp like a graine of Mustard-seede, and brauncheth it selfe into a faithfull acknowledgement of most of his attributes: The Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him enterprises are established; the bow and the mightie men are broken, and the weake haue girded themselues with strength: they that were full, are hired forth for bread, and the hungrie are no more hired, so that the barren hath borne seuen, and shee that hath borne many children, is feeble: the Lord maketh poore, and maketh rich; bringeth low, and exalteth: he raiseth vp the poore out of the dust, and lifteth vp the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among Princes, and to make them inherite the seat of glorie: for the pillars of the earth are the Lords, and he hath set the world vpon them; he will keepe the feet of his Saints, and the wicked shall keepe silence in darknesse; for in his owne might shall no man be strong. Nor doth it containe it selfe within the bounds of ordinarie beleefe, but workes in her heart like new wine, filling it not onely with Songs of joy and triumph ouer her enuious enemies, Mine heart reioyceth in the Lord, my mouth is enlarged ouer my enemies, because I reioyce in thy saluation;De Prophetia Hannae vide Augustinum, lib. 17. de Ciu. Dei, c. 4. Vers. 10. but also with the diuine spirit of * Prophecie: The Lords aduersaries shall be destroyed, and out of Heauen shall he thunder vpon them; the Lord shall iudge the ends of the world, and shall giue power vnto his King, and exalt the horne of his annointed.
Different operations of like experiments in diuerse parties, with their causes.6 The like docilitie was in the blessed Virgine, of whom perhaps Annah was the type: both of them verified that saying, Verbum sapienti sat est, One experiment taught them more than fiue hundred would doe most of vs: The reason was, because their hearts were so much better prepared. For, as heat in some bodies, by reason of the indisposition of the matter, causeth heat and nothing else; in some scarce that; in others brings forth life, and fashioneth all the organes and instruments thereof: so experiments of Gods power, in some mens hearts, breedes onely a persuasion of his might or operation in that particular, as in those foolish2. King. 20. vers. 23. Aramites, who, vanquished in battell by the Israelites whom he fauoured, question whether he were a God, aswell of the valleyes as of the mountaines; in others, the same or lesse apprehension of his power or presence, begetteth life, and fashioneth this image in their hearts, which thence will shew it selfe vnto others in such ample and entire confession of his attributes, as Hannah and the blessed Virgine vttered. Some againe are so ill disposed and indocile, that the whole Morall Law of God might sooner be engrauen in hardest Marble or Flint, than any one precept imprinted in their hearts by such wonderfull documents of his power, as would teach the godly in an instant both the Law and Prophets. Imagine some men in our dayes had beene cured by like meanes of such a maladie as Naaman was; or some woman blessed from aboue with fruit of their wombes, after so long sterilitie, as Hannah endured. Who could expect, that one of tenne in eyther sex should returne to giue like thankes to God in the presence of his Priests or Prophets? Were Elishah now liuing, he must be warie to worke his cure by his bare word (and so perhaps he should be censured for a Sorcerer) in any case, hee might not vse the waters of Iordan, or other like second causes: otherwise curious wits would finde out some hidden or secret vertue caused in them (at least for the time being) by some vnusuall, but benigne aspect of some Planet or Constellation, in whose right they should be entitled either full owners, or coparteners of that glorie, which Naaman ascribed wholly vnto God. And poore H^nnah, in this politique age, should not be so much praysed for her deuotion or good skill in diuine Poesie, as pitied for a good honest well-meaning sillie soule, that did attribute more to
 God than was his due, vpon ignorance of alterations wrought in her bodie by naturall causes. For it is not the custome of our Times to marke so much the ordering or disposition, as the particular or present operation of such Agents. If any thing fall out amisse, wee bid a plague vpon ill fortune, or curse mischance: if ought aright, wee applaud our owne or others wits that haue beene employed in the businesse, or perhaps thanke God for fashion sake, that we had good lucke. He is to vs, in our good successe, as a friend that liues farre off; who, wee presume, wisheth well to such projects as he knowes in generall we are about, being vnacquainted with the particular meanes that must effect them, or no principall Agent in their contriuance. Hence doe not I maruell (though many doe) if such men in our times as reape the fruits of the fields which God hath blest, in greatest abundance, make no conscience of returning the tenth part to him that gaue the whole; when as not one of a thousand, eyther in heart or deede, or out of any distinct or cleare apprehension of his power or efficacie, or true resolution of all effects into the first fountaine whence they flow, doth attribute so much as the tenth, nay as the hundreth part to Gods doing in any euent, wherein the industrie of man or operation of second causes are apparant. We speake like Christians of matters past, recorded in Scripture; but in our discourses of moderne affaires, our Paganismes and more than Heathenish Solaecismes bewray the infidelitie of our thoughts and resolutions. And albeit wee all disclaime Manes heresie, that held one Creator of the matter, and another of more pure and better substances; yet are we infected, for the most part, with a spice of his madnesse, in making materiall Agents the authors of some effects; and the diuine power, of others. Nor can I herein excuse the Schoole-diuines themselues, auncient or moderne, domestique or foraine; the best of them (in my judgement) either greatly erred in assigning the subordination of second causes to the first; or else are much defectiue, in deriuing their actions or operations immediatly from him, who is the first and last in euerie action that is not euill, the onely cause of all good vnto men: as shall appeare (God willing) in the Article of his prouidence, and some other Treatises pertinent vnto it, wherein I shall, by his assistance, make good these two assertions: The
 one, that moderne euents, and dispositions of present times, are as apt to confirme mens faith now liuing, as the miracles of former would be, were they now in vse, or as they were to instruct that age wherein they were wrought; the second, that the infidelitie of such in this age, as are strongly persuaded they loue Christ with their heart, and yet giue no more than most men doe vnto his fathers prouidence, may be greater than theirs that neuer heard of either, or equall vnto the Iewes that did persecute him.
Generall directions for the right taking of experiments in our selues.7. Vntill the Article of the diuine Prouidence, and that other of the Godhead be vnfolded, these generall directions for experiments in this kinde must suffice. First, that euerie man diligently obserue his course of life, and suruey the circumstances praecedent or consequent to euerie action of greater importance that hee vndertakes, or euents of moment that befall him. Secondly, that he search whether the whole frame or composition of occurrents be not such, as cannot be attributed to any naturall, but vnto some secret and inuisible cause; or whether some cause or occasions praecedent be not such, as the Scripture hath alreadie allotted the like euents vnto. Would men apply their mindes vnto this studie, experience would teach them (what from enumeration of particulars may be prooued by discourse) That there is no estate on earth, nor businesse in Christendome this day on foot, but haue a ruled case in Scripture for their issue and successe. Nor is there anie praescript of our Sauiours, his Euangelists, or Apostles, but his people might haue a Probatum of it, eyther in themselues or others; so they would referre themselues wholly into his hands, and relye as fully vpon his praescripts, as becomes such distressed Patients vpon so admirable a Physitian.
The causes why so many in our dayes haue little or no experience of the truth of diuine Oracles8. But manie who like well of Christ for their Physitian, loath his medicines for the Ministers his Apothecaries sake, and say of vs as Nathaniel said of him; Can there any good thing come from these sillie Galilaens? They will not with Nathaniel come neere and see, but keepe aloofe. And what maruell, if spirituall diseases abound, where there bee spirituall medicines plentie, when the flocke, be they neuer so soule-sicke, come onely in such sort to their Pastours, as if a sicke man should goe to a Physicke
 Lecture for the recouerie of his health, where the Professour, it may be, reades learnedly of the nature of Consumptions, when the Patient is desperately sicke of a Pleurisie; or discourses accurately of the Plethaera or Athleticall constitution, when his Auditor (poore soule) languisheth of an Atrophie? Most are ashamed to consult vs (as good patients in bodily maladies alwayes doe their Physitians) in any particulars, concerning the nature of their peculiar griefes: so as we can apply no medicine to any but what may as well be fit euery disease. Whereas, were we throughly acquainted with their seuerall maladies, or the dispositions of their mindes, the praescript might be such, or so applyed, as euerie man might thinke the medicine had beene made of purpose for his soule; and, finding his secret thought with the originall causes of his maladie discouered, the Crisis truely prognosticated, hee could not but acknowledge, that hee who gaue this praescript, and taught this art, did search the verie secrets of mens hearts and reines, and knew the inward temper of his soule better than Hippocrates or Galene did the constitution of mens bodies. Finally, would men learne to be true patients, that is, would they take vp Christs yoake, and become humble and meeke, and obserue but for a while such a gentle and moderate diet, as from our Sauiours practise and doctrine might be praescribed by their spirituall Physitions vpon better notice of their seuerall dispositions, they would in short time, out of their inward experience of that vncouth rest and ease, which by thus doing their soules should finde, beleeue with their hearts, and with their mouthes confesse, that these were rules of life, which could not possibly haue come from any other, but from that Diuine Aesculapius himselfe, the onely Sonne, yea the wisedome of the onely wise, inuisible, and immortall God. The more vnlikely the meanes of recouering spirituall health may seeme to naturall reason, before men trie them, the more forcible would their good successe and issue be, for establishing true and liuely faith. But such as can, from these or like experiments, subscribe vnto maine particular truthes contained in Scripture, and acknowledge them as diuine, may be vncertaine of their number, or extent; doubt they may of the number of bookes wherein the like are to bee sought: and againe, in those bookes which are acknowledged to
 containe many diuine Reuelations and Dictates of the holy Spirit, they may doubt whether many other praescripts, neyther of like vse, nor authoritie, haue not beene inserted by men.


CHAP. II.
Containing a briefe resolution of doubts concerning the extent of the generall Canon, or the number of it integrall parts.
1 THe full resolution of the former doubt or rather controuersie, concerning the number of Canonicall bookes, exceedes the limits of this present Treatise, and depends as much as anie question this day controuersed, vpon the testimonies of Antiquitie. The order of Iesuits shalbe confounded, and Reynoldes raised to life againe, ere his learned Workes, lately come foorth vpon this Argument (albeit vnfinished to his minde, whilest hee was liuing) be confuted by the Romanists: Or, if any of the Iesuitish Societie, or that other late vpstart Congregation, will be so desperate as to aduenture their honour in Bellarmine, or other of their foyled Champions rescue, they shall be expected in the Lists before they be prepared to entertaine the Challenge, by one of that deceased Worthies Shield-bearers in his life time: whose judgement in all good learning I know for sound; his obseruation in this kind, choise; his industrie great; his resolution to encounter all Antagonists, such as will not relent. For satisfaction of the ordinarie Reader I briefely answere.
2. First, that this is no controuersie of Faith, nor need it to trouble anie Christian mans conscience, that we and the Papists differ about the authoritie of some bookes; it rather ought to confirme his faith, that men disagreeing so much in many opinions, so opposite in their affections, should so well agree about the number of no fewer than two and twentie Canonicall Bookes of the olde Testament. Had their authoritie onely beene humane, or left to the choice of men, whether they should be allowed or rejected, manie that now admit them, would re^ect them, because opposite Religions did embrace them. That
 all sorts of Protestants, Papists, andThe testimonies of the antient Israelites and moderne Iewes for the canon of the old Testament is most authentike. For euen those ancient Fathers which our aduersaries alleadge to acknowlege some more bookes for canonicall than our Church doth; did it only vpon this errour that they thought there had bin more in the canon of the Hebrews, vpon whose testimonies they relied; as will be made cleare against the Papists. Iewes do receiue them, is an infallible Argument, that hee who is Lord of all, did commend them to all. Nor doth our Church so disclaime all which the Romanes aboue these two and twenty admit, as if it were a point of faith to holde there were no more: it onely admits no more into the same rancke and order with the former, because wee haue no such warrant of faith, or sure experiments so to doe. Many of them discouer themselues to be apocryphall: and albeit some of them can very hardly, or not at all, be discerned for such by their stile, character, or dissonancie to Canonicall Scriptures; yet, that none of them indeede are, or can be admitted for Canonicall, without manifest tempting of God, is euident from what hath beene obserued before, concerning Gods vnspeakeable prouidence in making the blinded and perfidious Iewes, his sonnes, and our bitterest enemies, such trusty feoffees for making ouer the assurances of life vnto vs. For, seeing by them he commended vnto vs, onely so many Bookes of the Olde Testament, as our Church acknowledgeth: this is an infallible Argument, that his will was, wee should admit no more; Had any more beene written, before the reedifying of the Temple by Zerubbabel, no doubt the Iewes would haue admitted them into their canon. For all such as should be written after; the Prophet Malachie, who is the last of their Canon, had left this caueat in the last words of his prophecie for not admitting them; Remember the lawe of Moses my seruant, which I commaunded to him in Horeb, in all Israel, with the statutes and iudgements: as if hee had saide, You must content your selues with his writings, and such as you haue already, consonant to his; for any others of equall authoritie you may not expect, vntill the expectation of the Gentiles come. For no Prophet shall ariseVerse 5.6. Consonant hereto is that, Matth. 11.13. Lex est propheta ad Iohannem etc. That is, their writings were the compleate rule of faith and infallible meanes of saluation vntill Iohn. Yet can it not be proued that any booke held by our Church for Apocryphall is contained either vnder the law or prophets as the historicall bookes of the Hebrew canon are. Euident it is that the books of Judith and Machabees were writ since Malachies time: from whom till Iohn no Prophet was to be expected, but Moses law (illlustrated by euents recorded in histories and propheticall commentaries til Malachies time inclusiue) was to be the immediate medium for discerning the great prophet, Vide libr. 2. sect. 2. cap. 6. num. 3. and 4. lib. 1. part. 2. sect. 2. cap. vlt. vntill that time, as he intimates in the last words, Behold, I will send you Eliah the Prophet, before the comming of the great and fearefull day of the Lord: and he shall turne the hearts of the fathers vnto the children, and the hearts of the children to their fathers,
 lest I come and smite the earth with cursing. The ministery of others for conuerting soules, he supposed should be but ordinarie, by the exposition of the law and prophets: and the authority of such (writ they asmuch as they listed) could not be authentike or canonicall.
3 Some others againe of reformed churches in these our times, haue from the example of antiquity, doubted of the authority of some bookes in the new Testament: as ofThe diuine authoritie of some Books in the Testame^t, especially the Apocalypse, doubted of by the Ancient, brought to light in latet times, Iude, of Iames, the second of Peter, and some others. Which doubt is now diminished by their continuance in the sacred Canon so long time, without manifest documents of GODS prouidence in preseruing them, whose pleasure (it may seeme) was to haue these Bookes, of whom the Ancients most doubted, fenced and guarded on the one side, by Saint Pauls Epistles, and other canonicall Scriptures (neuer called in question by any, but absurd and foolish heretiques, whose humorous opinions herein died with themselues;) and on the other, by the booke of the Apocalypse: of whose authoritie though many of the Ancient for the time being, doubted; yet He that was before all times did fore-see, that it should in latter times manifest it selfe to be his worke, by euents answerable to the prophecies contained in it. And, albeit many Apocryphall bookes haue beene stamped with diuine titles, and obtruded vpon the Church as Canonicall, whilest shee was in her infancie, and the sacred Canon newly constitute: yet the diuine Spirite, by which it was written, hath wrought them out, as new wine doth such filth or grossenesse as mingle with it whilest the grapes are troden. S. Iohns adiuration in the conclusion of that booke hath not only terrified all for adding vnto, or diminishing it selfe: but hath beene as it were a Seale vnto the rest of this sacred volume of the new Testament, as Malachies prophecie was to the olde; the whole canon it selfe, consisting both of the old and new, continues still as the Arke of God, and all other counterfeits as Dagon.
4 Were not our Roman aduersaries doctrine concerning the general principles of faith, an inuention deuised of purpose by Sathan to obliterate all print or impression of Gods prouidence in gouerning his church, out of mens harts: how were it possible for any man endued with reason, to be so far ouer-growne with frensie, as not to conceiue their owne follie and madnes, in auouching we cannot know what books are canonicall, what not, but by the
 infallible testimony of the present Romish Church. But of these impieties at large hereafter. I will now only inferre part of their conclusion, which they stil labor, but neuer shalbe able to proue, from premises which they neuer dreamt of.Wherein the testimony of the Romish Church in discerning some Canonicall bookes is most auaileable. For I professe among others, this is not the least reason I haue to hold the Apocalypse for canonical scripture, because the Romish church doth so esteem it. Nor could reformed churches belief of its authoritie be so strong, vnles that church had not denied, but openly acknowledged it for canonical scripture. As the same beams of the Sun reach fro^ heauen to earth, and from one end of the world to another; so do the same raies of Gods power extend themselues from generation to generation, alwaies alike conspicuous to such as are illuminate by his spirit: for who, thus illuminate, can acknowledge his prouide^ce in making the Iews so careful to preserue the old testament; and not as clearly discerne the same in constraining the Romish church to giue her supposed infallible testimony of the Apocal. Doubtlesse, if that book had bin the work of man, it had bin more violently vsed by that church of late, than euer the new testament hath bin by the Iewish synagogue, or any heretike by the Romanists, seeing it hath said far more against them, than any whom they account for such, euer did. But God, who made Pharaohs daughter a seco^d mother vnto Moses, whom he had appointed to bring destruction afterwards vpon her fathers house and kingdome, hath made the Romish church of old, a dry nurse to preserue this book (whose meaning she knew not) that it might bring desolation vpon her selfe and her children, in time to come. For by the breath of the Lord shal she be destroied; her doom is already read by S. Iohn; and the Lord of late hath intangled her in her owne snare, whilest she was drawing it to catch others. Her childrens brags of their mothers infallibilitie, wherewith they hale most seely soules to them, were too far spread before the Trent councel, too co^modious to be called in on a sodaine. Had they then begun to deny the authority of this book (thogh the^ pronou^cing their mothers wo more openly than any prophecies of olde had done the ensuing desolations of the Iewes) euery child could haue caught hold on this string, that this Church (as they suppose) alwayes the same, neuer obnoxious to any errour, had in former time acknowledged it for authentike and diuine: albeit (no question,) but many of them since haue wish'd
 from their hearts that their forefathers had vsed the same, as Sheraiah did Ieremiahs bookes which he wrote against Babylon, that both it, and all memorie of it, had bin drowned in the bottome of the deepest sea, and a milstone throwne vpon it by Gods Angel, that it neuer might rise vp again to interrupt their whorish mothers beastly pleasures, by discouering her filthy nakednesse daily more and more. For conclusion of this point for this present. That this and other canonicall books had bin long preserued, or rather imprisoned by the Romish church in darkenes and ignorance, vntill the Almightie gaue his voyce, and caused them to speake in euery tongue, throughout these parts of the world; doth no more argue her to haue bin the true and Catholike church, than Moses educatio^ in Pharaohs Court, during the time of his infancie or nonage, doth argue the Aegyptian Courtiers to haue bin Gods chosen people.


CHAP. III.
A briefe direction for preuenting scruples and resoluing doubts, concerning particular sentences or passages in the Canon of Scripture.
1 VNto the second demand, [How we know this or that sentence in any booke of Canonicall Scripture, to haue beene from God, not inserted by man,] some perhaps would say this must bee knowne by the spirit. Which indeede is the briefest answere that can be giuen: but such as would require a long Apologie for its truth, or at least a large explication in what sense it were true, if any man durst be so bold as to reply vpon it.How our firme assent to some principal matters reuealed in Scriptures, tieth our faith vnto their whole Canon. Consequently, to our former principles, we may answere, that our full and vndoubted assent vnto some principall parts, doth binde vs vnto the whole frame of Scriptures. But you will say, wee beleeue such speciall parts, from vndoubted experience of their truth in our hearts, and without these our beleefe of them could not bee so stedfast: how then shall we stedfastly beleeue those parts, of whose diuine truth we haue no such experiments; for of euery sentence in Scripture, we suppose few or none can haue any? yet euen vnto those parts whereof we haue no experiments in particular, we doe adhere by our former faith, because our soules and consciences are as it were
 tied and fastned vnto other parts wherewith they are conioyned, as the pinning and nailing of two plaine bodies in some few parts, doth make them stick close together in all, so as the one can not be pulled from the other in any part, whilest their fastning holds. It will bee replied, that this similitude would hold together, if one part of Canonicall Scripture were so firmly or naturally vnited to another, as the diuers portions of one and the same continuate or solid body are: but seeing it is euident that so they are not, who can warrant the contrarie, but that a sentence or period, perhaps a whole page, might haue beene foisted into the Canon by some Scribe or other? Here we must retire vnto our first hold or principles of faith. For if we stedfastly beleeue from experiments or otherwise, that some principall parts of Scripture haue come from God, and that the same are sure pledges for mans good, the only meanes of his saluation: this doctrine or experience of Gods prouidence once fully established, will establish our faith and assent vnto other parts of his word, whereof (should we take them alone) we could haue no such experiments. For he that knoweth God, or his prouidence a-right; knowes this withall, that hee will not suffer vs to be tempted aboue our strength. And once hauing had experience of his mercies past, we can not, without iniurie to his diuine Maiestie, but in confidence of it, beleeue and hope, that his all-seeing wisdome and almightie power will still (maugre the spite of Death, Hell, and Sathan, and their Agents) preserue his sacred word sincere without admixture of any prophane, false, or humane inuentions that might ouerthrow, or peruert our faith begun. Hereto we may referre all former documents of his care and prouidence in preseruing the Canon of our faith from the tyrannie of such, as sought vtterly to deface it; and the treacherie of others, who sought to corrupt it. And it ought to be no little motiue vnto vs, thus to thinke: when we see Austine, Gregorie, and other of the ancient writers, either maimed, or mangled, or purged of their best bloud, where they make against the Romish Church; or else her vntruths fathered vpon them, by her shamelesse sonnes, in places where they are silent for her: and yet this sacred volume vntouched and vncorrupt, by any violence offered to it by that Church; only it hath lost it naturall beautie and complexion, by long durance in that homely and vulgar prison, wherunto they haue confined it.
2 But as from these and like documents of Gods care and prouidence in preseruing it, and of his loue and fauour towards vs, we conceiue faith and sure hope, that he will not suffer vs to bee tempted with doubts of this nature, aboue our strength: so must we be as farre from tempting him, by these or like vnnecessarie, vnseasonable curious demands. How should we know this or that clause or sentence (if we should find them alone) to be Gods word? Why might not an Heretike of malice haue forged, or a Scribe through negligence altered them? It should suffice that they haue beene commended to vs not alone, but accompanied with such Oracles as we haue already entertained for diuine. And if any doubt shall happen to arise, we must relie vpon that Oracle, of whose truth euery true Christian hath, and all that would be such, may haue sure triall. Deus cum tentatione simul vires dabit: God with the temptation will giue issue; yea ioyfull issue to such temptations as he suffers to be suggested by others, not vnto such as we thrust our selues into by our needlesse curiositie. When we are called vnto the search of truth by Sathan or his instruments obiections against it, the Lord will giue vs better reasons for our owne or others satisfactions, than yet we know of, or should be able to find: but by the conduct of his vntempted prouidence.


CHAP. IIII.
Concluding the first booke with some briefe admonition to the Reader.
1 TO conclude this Treatise, as it was begun. The greater the reward proposed to the faithfull practise, or the punishme^t threatned to the neglect of these diuine Oracles: the greater is the madnesse of many men in our time, who in conte^platiue studies whose principall end is delight, can vndergo long toyle, and great paines, neuer attaining to exact knowledge, but by beleeuing their instructors and taking many theoremes and conclusions vpon trust, before they can make infallible triall of their truth: and yet in matters of their saluation, which cannot be exactly knowne, but onely beleeued in this life, and whose beliefe must be got by
 practise, not by discourse, demand euidence of truth, and infallible demonstration, before they will vouchsafe to beleeue or aduenture their paines on their practise, and finally, so demeane themselues in speech and resolution, as if God Almightie should thinke himselfe highly graced, and our Sauiour, his sonne, much beholden to them, that they would deigne to be his schollers, sooner than Mahomets, or Machiauels. But we that are his messengers must not debase his word, nor disparage our calling by wooing them vpon such termes, or professing to shew the^ the truth before they be willing to learne it: One first principle whereof is this, That such as will seeke, may finde starting holes enough to runne out of Christs fold, and escape his mercies profered in his Church. And as many reasons are daily brought, sufficient to perswade a right disposed vnderstanding of the truth of Scriptures: so no argument can be found of force enough to conuince a froward will, or perswade peruerse affection. These are they which make a many altogether vncapable of any moral, most of all of any diuine truth, and must be laid aside at the first entrance into the schole of Christ, and continually kept vnder by the rod of his iudgements and terrours of that dreadfull day. Vnto such as account these consequents lesse dreadfull or their dread lesse probable, than that they should (for a time at least) lay aside all peruersitie of will, or humour of contradiction, to make sure triall of those diuine Oracles for their good; we can apply no other medicine, but that of Saint Iohn: He that is filthie, let him be filthie still.
2 Thus much of generall inducements to beliefe. In the obseruation and vse of all these and others of what kinde soeuer, we must implore the assistance of Gods Spirit, who onely worketh true and liuely faith, but (ordinarily) by these or like meanes. These Scriptures are as the rule or methode prescribing vs our diet and order of life: these experiments ioyned with it are as nutriment: and the Spirit of God digesteth all to our health and strength. Without it all other means or matters, of best obseruation, are but as good meate to weake or corrupt stomacks: With it, euery experiment of our owne or others estate, taken according to the rules of Scriptures, doth nourish and strengthen faith, and preserue our spirituall health. Many in our daies vncessantly blame their brethrens backwardnesse to entertaine the spirit, or relie vpon it only, more blame-worthie themselues for being too forward in beleeuing
 euery spirit, and seeking toThis is that circle which the Aduersarie opposeth as a countermine to vs whilest we seeke to ouerthrow their circular beliefe. The obiection may iustly be retorted vpon the En^husiast, but not on our Church as shal appeare in the second Section of the fourth booke. discerne Canonicall from Apocryphall Scriptures by the spirit, and againe to trie true from false spirits by the Scriptures, without serious obseruation and setled examination of experime^ts answerable vnto sacred rules. Such mens feruent zeale vnto the letter of the Gospel is like an hot stomach accustomed to sleight meats, which increase appetite more than strength, and fil the body rather with bad humors than good bloud.
3 The spirit no doubt speaks often vnto vs when we attend not, but we must not presume to vnderstand his suggestions by his immediat voice or presence; only by his fruits, and the inward testimony of an appeased conscience (which he alone can work) must we know him. He that seeks (asProsicientibus (vt admonet P. noster Ignat. in L. exercit. de dignos. spir.) Spiritus malus se dure, implacide and violenter, quasi cum srepitu quodam, vt imber in saxa decidens, in fundit, bonus vero ijsdem leniter, pl^cide and suau tor, sicut a qua irrorat spongiam. Ill^s vero qui^n deterius proficiunt, exper entia docet, contrarium euenire. Delrius disqu^si. Magic. lib. 4. cap. 1. q. 3. sect. 6. Ignatius Loyola taught his sons) to discerne him without more ado by his manner of breathing, may in steed of him be troubled with an vnwelcome guest alwaies readie to inuite himself where he sees preparation made for his better, and one (I am persuaded) that hath learned more kindes of salutations than Loyola knew of, able to fil empty breasts or shallow heads vnsetled in truth, with such pleasant, mild and gentle blasts, as are apt to breed strong perswasions of more than Angelical inspirations.
4 God grant the carriage of ensuing times may argue these admonitio^s needlesse which further to prosecure, in respect of times late past and now present, could not be vnseasonable; but thus much by the way must now suffice me, purposed hereafter (if god permit) to intreat of the triall of spirits, and certain apprehension of inherent faith: about the generall means of whose production, and establishment, the question, most controuersed in these daies, is; Whether beside the testification of Gods spirit, which (as all agree) must (by these late mentioned or other means) work faith in our harts: the testimonie or authority of others besides our selues be necessarie, either for ascertaining our apprehensio^ of the spirit thus working, or for assuring the truth of experime^ts wrought by it in our souls? or if no other besides the testimony of Gods spirit and our owne conscience be necessary, either after their sentence giuen, or whilst they giue it? How farre the authority or ministerie of men are necessarie or behoueful, eyther for bringing vs acquainted with the spirit of God, or for the assistance and direction of our conscience in giving right sentence of the truth or true meaning of Gods word? Of these questions and others subordinate to them, we are to dispute at large in the bookes following.






HOW FARRE THE MINISTERIE OF MEN IS NECESSARIE FOR PLANTING TRVE CHRISTIAN faith, and retaining the Vnitie of it PLANTED. THE SECOND BOOKE.
AS in the first intention, so after some prosecution of this long worke, my purpose was to referre the full examination of the Romish Churches pretended authoritie in matters spirituall, vnto the Article of the Catholicke Church: Which (with those three others of the Holy Ghost, Communion of Saints, and forgiuenesse of Sinnes,) for more exact methodes sake, and continuation of matters, in nature and sacred writ, most vnited, I haue reserued for the last place in this frame of Christian beliefe: annexing the Articles of the bodies resurrection, and euerlasting life, vnto that of finall iudgement, whereon these two haue most immediate, most direct dependance.
2 But after the platforme was cast, and matter for structure prepared: vpon euident discouerie of the Iesuites treacherie, in setting vp the Pope as a secret competitour with the blessed Trinitie,
 for absolute soueraigntie ouer mens soules; (and for this purpose continually plotting, to haue the doctrine of their Churches infallibilitie planted as low and deepe as the verie first and fundamentall principles of beliefe:) albeit in laying the former foundations, I had come to ground firme enough (if free from vndermining) to beare all I meant to build vpon it: I was, notwithstanding, in this place constrained to bare the whole foundation, and all about it, vnto the verie rocke, on whose strength it stands; least this late dismall inuention (concerning the Popes infallibilitie) might proue as a powder-plot to blow vp the whole edifice of Christian faith; as it certainly will, if men suffer it to be once planted in their hearts and consciences. The Iesuites speculatiue positions of their Churches transcendent authoritie, are as the traine, the Popes Thunderbolts as the match, to set the whole world on combustion, vnlesse his Lordly designes, (though in matters of faith, and greatest moment) be put in execution, without question or demurre: as shal (God prospering these proceedings) most clearely appeare in the sequele of this discourse: Wherein are to be discussed
1 Their obiections against vs; the points of difference betwixt vs; with the positiue grounds of truth maintained by vs.2 The inconueniences of their positions: Erection of triple blasphemie by the ouerthrow of Christianitie.3 The original causes of their error in this; and such erroneous perswasions, as held by them in other points, not descried by vs, proue secret temptations for others to follow them, or serue as praeu^all dispositions, for their Agents to work vpon.4 The possible meanes and particular manner, how Orthodoxall may be distinguished from hereticall doctrine, or the life-working sense of Scriptures from artificiall glosses.
These points discussed, and the positiue grounds of Christian faith cleared, as wel against the open assaults of professed Atheists, as the secret attempts of vndermining Papists: wee may with better securitie proceed to raise the foundation, laid in the first generall part of the first booke, to the height intended.


SECT. I.
What obedience is due to Gods word, what to his Messengers.
THE whole Scripture (saith the Apostle) is giuen by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach,2. Tim. 3.16.17 to improue to correct, and to instruct in righteousnes, that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect vnto al good works. What, or whom, he meanes by the Man of God, is not agreed vpon by all that acknowledge his words in the sense he meant them, most infallible and authenticke. Some hereby vnderstand onely such men as Timothie was, Ministers of Gods word, or Prophets of the new Testament; and so briefly elude all arguments hence drawne to proue the sufficiency of Scriptures, for being the absolute rule of faith, at least to all, as well vnlearned as learned. Yet should they in all reason (might Gods word rule their reason) grant them to be such, vnto all such as Timothie was, publike teachers, men conuersant in, or consecrated vnto, sacred studies; but euen this they denie as well as the former, though the former in their opinion be more absurd for vs to affirme, especially holding the Hebrew text onely authenticke. Briefly, they charge vs with debasing Peter for aduancing Paul, or rather for colouring or adorning our pretended sense of Paules words, that is, for giuing too little to Peters successors, or the Church: too much to Scriptures: too little to spirituall, too much to lay-men.
2 These are plausible pretences, and sweet baites to stop the mouths, and muffle the pens of Clergy-men in reformed Churches, vnto most of whom, (as they obiect) besides the spirituall sword, litle or nothing is left for their iust defence against the insole^cies of rude, illiterate, prophane Laicks. And yet, who more earnest than they in this cause, against the Church, against themselues? yet certaine it is, that no man can be truly for himselfe, vnlesse he be first of all for truth it selfe, of which he that gaines the greatest share, (what other detriment or disparagement soeuer in the meane time he sustain) in the end speeds alwaies best And seeing to lie or teach amisse, is a matter altogether impossible to omnipote^cy it selfe: to
 be able and willing withal to defend a falshood, or set faire colours on foule causes, is rather impotencie then abilitie: Hence was that quicquid possumus pro veritate possumus. Seeing by truth we liue our spirituall life: to weaken it for strengthening our temporall hopes, can neuer rightly bee accounted any true effect of power, but an infallible argument of great and desperate imbecillitie.
3 For these reasons; since I consecrate my labours to the search of diuine truth, my minde hath beene most set to finde it out in this present controuersie: whereon most others of moment chiefly depend. And, as vnto the Romanist it is (though falsely) termed the Catholicke, so should it be vnto vs, to all that loue the name of Christ, the very Christian cause: a cause, with which the aduersaries fortunes, our faith: their temporall, our spirituall estate and hopes must stand or fall: a cause whose truth and strength on our part, will euidently appeare. We first examine what the Antichristian aduersarie can oppose against it.

CHAP. I.
The summe of the Romanists exceptions against the Scriptures.
1 THeir obiections against Scriptures spring from this double roote: The one, that they are no sufficient rule of faith, but many things are to be beleeued which are not taught in them. The second, that albeit they were the compleat rule of faith; yet could they not be knowne of vs, but by the authoritie of the Church, so that all the former directions for establishing our assent vnto the Scriptures, as vnto the words of God himselfe, were vaine, seeing this cannot be attained vnto but by relying vpon Christs visible Church.
The former of these two fountaines, or roots of errour, I am not here to meddle with: elsewhere we shal. That the Scriptures teach all points of faith set downe in this Creede, they cannot denie, or if they would it shall appeare in their seuerall explications: so that the Scripture, rightly vnderstood, is a competent rule for the Articles heerein contained. Let vs then see whether the sense or meaning
 of these Scriptures, which both they and we hold for Canonicall, may not be knowne, vnderstood, and fully assented vnto, immediately, and in themselues, without relying vpon any visible Church or Congregation of men, from whose doctrine we must frame our beliefe without distrust of errour, or examination of their decrees, with any intention to reforme them, or swarue from them.
2 That the Scripture is not the rule whereon priuate men, especially vnlearned, ought to relie in matters of faith; from these generall reasons, or Topicks, they seeke to perswade vs. First, admitting the Scriptures to be infallible in themselues, and so consequently to all such as can pe^fectly vnderstand them in the language wherein they were written: yet to such as vnderstand not that language, they can be no infallible rule, because they are to them a rule onely as they are translated: but no vnlearned man can be sure that they are translated aright, according to the true intent and meaning of the holy Ghost for if any man do infallibly beleeue this, and build his faith hereupon, then is his faith grounded vpon the infallibility of this or that mans skil in translating, wherof he that is vnlearned can haue no sufficient argument, neither out of Scripture, nor from reason. Nay reason teacheth vs that in matters of ordinarie capacitie most men are obnoxious to errour: and the most skilfull may haue his escapes in a long worke, for, In opere longo fas est obrepere somnum, Aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus: A man may sometimes take Homer napping euen in that Art whereof he was Master and Prince: much more may the greatest Linguist liuing in a worke of so great difficultie as the translation of the Bible, not another mans (though that more easie to erre in than a mans owne) but the worke or dictates of the holy Ghost, proue an Homers, but a blinde guide vnto the blind: many things he cannot see, and many things he may ouersee. And how then can any man assure himselfe, that in those places whereon wee should build our faith, he hath not gone besides the line: vnlesse we will admit an infallible authoritie in the Church, to assure vs that such a translation doth not erre.
3 Againe, in those very translations wherein they agree; Luther gathers one sense, Caluin another;Answ. sect. 3. euerie heretique may pretend a secret meaning of his priuate spirit. Who shall either secure
 the people distracted by dissensions amongst the learned, or the learned thus dissenting, vnlesse the infallible authoritie of the Church.Retorted and answ. sect. 4. Finally, without such an infallible authoritie, controuersies will daily grow: and vnlesse it be established, they can neuer be composed, seeing euery man will draw in the Scriptures, as a party, to countenance or abet his opinion, how bad soeuer.Answ. sect. 2. The ground of all which inconueniences, though the sectaries cannot see it, is the naturall obscuritie and difficultie of the Scriptures. These are the maine springs, or first fountaines, whence the aduersaries eloquence in this argument flowes. And it will be but one labour to stop vp these, and his mouth. Or granting them passage, we may draw his inuention against vs drie, by turning their course vpon himselfe.


CHAP. II.
The former Obiection, as farre as it concernes illiterate and Lay men retorted and answered.
1 IF to suppose such an authoritie, were sufficient to confirme any translation, or secure the world of sincere translations, or to allay all controuersies arising about the true sense and meaning of Scriptures: we were verie impious to denie it. But, if we haue iust cause to suspect, that such as contend for it, haue but put this infallible authoritie, as the Astronomers haue supposed; some, Epicycles and Eccentricks; some, the motion of the earth; to salue their Phoenomena which otherwise might seeme irregular: we may, I trust, examine: first, whether the supposall of this infallible authoritie, in the Church, doe salue the former inconueniences: secondly, whether greater inconueniences wil not follow vpon the putting of it,That the illiterate may as well know the true sense of Scriptures, as the right meaning of the Popes decrees. than are the supposed mischiefes, for the auoydance of which this infallible principle was inuented, and is by the fauourites of this art, sought to be established and perswaded.
2 a That this supposed infallible authority of the Church visible doth no way salue the inconueniences obiected against our positions, is hence euident. As the Scriptures themselues were written
 in a tongue not common, nor vnderstood of all nations, but of some few: so likewise the decrees of this visible Church, concerning the authoritie of translations, are written in a tongue neither common to all, nor proper at this day to any vnlearned multitude, but to the learned onely. Sometime they were written in Greeke: but, in later yeares, all in Latine, or some other tongue (at the least) not common to all Christians: for no such can this day be found. Nor is the Pope, (or his Ca^d nals,) able to speake properly and truly euery language in the Christian world, of which he challengeth the supremacie. He would be the vniuersall head indeed: but he hath not, nor dare he professe he hath, an vniuersall tongue,Tot vero translationes, mutationes, sine graeuissimo pericul^ and incommodo non fierent. Nam non semper inueniuntur idonei interpretes: atque ita multi errores committerentur qui non possint postea facile tolli. Cum neque pontifices, neque concilia de tot linguis iudicare possint. Bellarm. lib. 2. de verbo Dei. cap. 15. whereby he may fully instruct euery person throughout the Christian world, in his owne naturall, knowne mother tongue. For Bellarmine brings this as an argument why the Bible should not be translated into moderne tongues, because if into one, why not into another: and the Pope (as he confesseth) cannot vnderstand all.
3 Tell me then, you that seeke to bring the vnlearned lay sort of men to seeke a shelter vnder the infallible authoritie of the Romish Church: how can you assure them what is the verie true meaning of that Church? They vnderstand not the language wherein her decisions were written. What then? must they infallibly, and vnder paine of damnation, beleeue that you do not erre in your translations of them? or must they stedfastly beleeue, that you interprete their decrees aright? Nay euen those decrees, which you hold infallible, condemne all priuate interpretation of them: and your greatest Clearks daily dissent about the meaning of the Trent-Councell in sundrie points. Yet, vnlesse the Lay people can stedfastly beleeue, that you interprete the Churches sentence aright: your supposed rule of the Churches infallibilitie in confirming translations or senses of Scripture can neither be a rule infallible, nor any way profitable vnto them. For it hath no other effect vpon their soules, saue onely beleefe:Were thei^ obiections against vs pertinent: not the Popes infallibilitie, but the Priests and Iesuites honestia or fidelitie, should be the rule of most lay Papis^ faith. and they haue no other meanes to know that this which they must beleeue is the Churches sentence, but your report: then can they not be any more certaine of the Churches minde in this or that point, than they are of your skill or fidelitie; neither of which can be to them the infallible rule of faith. For, if they should be thus infallibly
 perswaded of your skil or fidelity: then were their good perswasion of you, the ground and rule of their faith; and so they must beleeue that you neither d^d, nor could erre in this relation; Whereas your owne doctrine is, That euen the learnedst among you may erre: and you cannot denie, but that it is possible for the honestest Iesuite, either to lie, or equiuocate. Otherwise, your infallibilitie in not erring, were greater than your Popes or Churches: for they both may erre vnlesse they speake ex Cathedra. Now, whether the Pope speak this or that ex Cathedra, or whether he speake or write at all or no, is not known to any of the co^mon people in these Northern countries, but onely by your report: which if it be not infallible, and as free from errour as the Pope himselfe, the people must still stagger in faith. Nor doe I see any possible remedie: vnlesse euery man should take a pilgrimage to Rome, or vnlesse you would bring the Pope throughout these countries, as men vse monsters or strange sightes. Yet, how should they be certaine that this is the Pope, rather than some counterfeit? or how should they know Rome, but by others? Or can you hope to salue this inconuenience by an implicite or hypotheticall faith? as, that it were enough for the lay people to beleeue absolutely and stedfastly, that the Pope, or Church cannot erre: but to beleeue your report or informations of his sentence in doubtfull cases, onely conditionally; if it be the Popes minde: if otherwise, we will be free to recall our present beliefe. This is all which I can imagine any of you can say for your selues. And may not we, I pray you, say as much, if thus much would serue for vs? Might not we by the selfe same reason teach the people to admit of translations, but onely conditionally, as farre forth as they shall be perswaded that this was the meaning of the Scripture or the word of God? For questionlesse, it is more certaine that God cannot erre, than that the Pope cannot. And it is more necessarie vnto Christian beliefe to hold, that God the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost neither can, nor will speake a lie: than that the Pope cannot, or will not teach vs amisse. That the Pope and his Cardinals doe arrogate thus much vnto themselues, is more than the lay and vnlearned people can tell, but onely by yours and others relation: But that the God of heauen neither can, nor will teach amisse, is a principle not controuersed by any that thinkes there is a God.
4 Let it then first be granted, That God is freer from errour, from deceiuing, or being deceiued in points of faith, or matters of mans saluation, than the Pope is, although he speake ex Cathedra. From this position it followes most directly, and most immediately, that if the lay vnlearned people of this land haue as good means and better, to know that these bookes of Scripture are Gods owne words, than they can haue to know that this or that Canon in any Councel was confirmed by the Popes teaching ex Cathedra: then must the same people beleeue the one more stedfastly than the other; to wit, Gods word, as it is read vnto them in our Church, more stedfastly than the Popes interpretations, iniunctions, or decrees. Let vs compare the meanes of knowing both. First, if the Popes decrees be a certaine meanes of knowing any truth: they are as certaine a meanes of knowing those Scriptures which our Church admits, to be Gods word, as of any thing else; for the Pope and his CouncellConcil. Trident. sessione quarta. haue auoucht them for such, although they adde some more than we acknowledge.
5 If the worst then should fall out that can be imagined; as if we had reason to despaire of all other translations saue only of the Vulgar, yet that it were the word of God we might know, if by no other meanes, yet by consent of the Romish Church; and all the people of this land might be as certaine of this decree, as of any the Pope can giue. But take the same Scripture as it is translated into our English, the people may be as certaine that it is the word of God, as they can be that the Trent-Councell was lawfully called, or by the Pope confirmed, yea much more certaine. The Iesuites may tell them, that these very words (being first englished) were spoken in the Trent-Councell, and confirmed by the Pope. Why should they beleeue it? because they auouch it seriously whom they thinke able to vnderstand Latine? Suppose not onely one, or two, or three, but the whole assembly of our Cleargie tels the same people, that these (reciting the points of our saluation) are the verie words of God himselfe; and are for substance all one in the Hebrew, Greeke, Latine, and English. What difference can you heere imagine? That the Trent-Councell decreed thus, the moderne Iesuites haue it but from tradition of this age: That God spake thus, we haue the consent of all ages. Yea, but it is easier to render the Trent-Councels meaning out of Latine,
 than the meaning of Gods word out of Hebrew or Greeke? Whether it be so or no, the vnlearned people cannot tell, but by hearesay: yet, if we would take the vulgar Latine, this foolish obiection were none: for it is as easie to be rendred, as the Trent-Councell; and if the Trent Councell be true, it is the word of God. All then is equall concerning the difficulties, that may arise from the skill, or ignorance of the translators of the one or other; the Popes decrees, or scripture. Our ministers know to render the meaning of Scripture as well as yours doe the meaning of the Councels. Let vs now see whether it be as likely, that our ministers fidelitie in telling them as they are perswaded, and as they beleeue themselues, be not to be presumed as great. To call this in question were extreme impudencie and vnciuilitie, especially seeing we teach, that the people should be throughly instructed in the truth: where as you hold it for good Christian pollicie, to hold the^ in ignorance. Our permitting the free vse of Scriptures to all doth free vs from all suspition of imposture or guile: of which in the Iesuite or learned Papist the deniall of like libertie, is a foule presumption. Further, let vs examine, whether from the matter or manner of the Popes decrees, there can be any argument drawne to perswade the people that these are his decrees and no other mans: more then can be gathered from the matter and manner of Scripture phrase, to perswade a man that these are Gods, and can be no mans words.Granting the Pope to be as infallible as God himselfe: yet were not his decr^es related by his messengers to be so much beleeued, as Gods written word, receiued by vs and the^, because it is freer from suspition of forgerie, then they can be, harder to be counterfeit then they are. And heere certainly we haue infinite aduantage of you. For no man of sense or reason, but must needs suffer himselfe to be perswaded, that it is a farre easier matter to counterfaite the Decrees of the Laterane or Trent-councell, or the Popes writs, interpretations, or determinations: than artificial y to imitate the inuincible and maiesticall word of God, either for the matter or the manner.
6 The sequele is this, that if the Scriptures receiued by vs be obnoxious to any the least suspition of being forged: then from the same reasons, much more lyable to the same suspition are those which we account the Popes decrees, and therefore in respect of vs, much lesse to be beleeued; although otherwise we should grant the Popes decrees (which without controuersie were his decrees indeed) to be as infallible as the eternall and immutable decrees of the Almightie. Gods word oft-times vnto
 Atheists hath discouerd it selfe by the maiestie of stile and sublimitie of matter, to be more than humane, and therefore diuine, not able to be imitated by any lying Spirit. If any Iesuite will denie this: let him make triall of imitation in the prophecie of Isaias, the beginning of S. Iohns Gospell, the relation of Ioseph and his brethrens dialogues, the booke of Iob, etc. The maiestie of speech and other excellencies which appeares in them (especially if we consider the time, wherein most of them were written,) doth argue a diuine spirit: in whose imitation the most accurate writers of later ages, (albeit no man writes excellently but from some beame of diuine illumination in the facultie) are* but apish, if we read the same Scriptures in the tongue wherein they were written, or in sundrie moderne tongues capable of the diuine splendor which shines in the originall; with which the Latine (especially in prose) hath greatest disproportion of all learned or copious tongues. As for the Popes Decrees they bewray themselues both for the matter and manner, to be onely humane, and therefore easie to be imitated by the Spirit of man, subiect to many errors. Nor doth the Pope challenge to himselfe the gift of prophecie, but onely of legall decisions: which are no otherwise written, than many write, and containe no deeper nor more supernaturall matter, than many may inuent: most of them vsually penned in a base and barbarous Logicke phrase: his stile at the best is not peculiar, his character easie to be counterfaite by any man that can pen a proclamation, or frame an instrument in ciuill Courts.
7 To recollect what hath beene said. First, seeing God is more to be beleeued than men; secondly, seeing we haue better arguments to perswade the people that these Scriptures daily read in our Church, are Gods owne words, than the Priests and Iesuits haue; that the tidings which they bring from beyond Sea are the Popes or Churches decrees or sentence: we may and ought teach them to relie immediately vpon Gods word preached or read vnto them, as the surest and most infallible rule of faith, the most liuely, most effectuall, and most forcible meanes of their saluation. Or if the Iesuites will teach them to beleeue the Popes decrees giuen ex Cathedra; or the Churches opinion indefinitely taken, fide diuina, by infallible faith; but the Iesuites, or Priests expositions or
 translations of them, only conditionally, and with this limitation, [If so they be the Pope or Churches decrees]: we may in like sort with farre greater reason, teach the people to beleeue the Scriptures or the word of God absolutely, and our translations or expositions of it, but conditionally or with limitation, so farre as they are consonant to the word of God. Seeing it is as probable, that we may expound Gods word as rightly and sincerely, as the other can the Church or Popes edicts: we haue better reason to exact this conditionall obedience and assent, in the vertue and authoritie of Gods word, which we make the rule of faith; than they can haue to exact the like obedience by vertue of the Pope or Churches edicts, which is to them the mistresse of faith. For it is more certaine to any man liuing, that Gods word is most infallibly true, than that the Pope cannot erre. Wherefore, if the absolute beleefe of the Popes infallibilitie, and conditionall beliefe of the Iesuites or Priests his messengers fidelitie or skill, be sufficient to saluation: much more may the absolute beliefe or assent vnto the infallibilitie of Gods word, and such conditionall and limited beliefe of his ministers fidelitie, be sufficient for the saluation of his people: who as hath bin proued, cannot be more certaine that the Romish Church saith this or that, than we can be of Gods word. For they neuer heare the Church or Pope speak, but in Iesuits or Priests mouthes. And although they knew he said iust so as those say: yet may a man doubt in modestie, whether the Popes words be alwaies infallible; but of the infallibilitie of Gods word, can no man doubt.
8 And heere I cannot but much wonder at the preposterous courses of these Romanists, who holding an implicite faith of beleeuing as the Church beleeues, (in many points,) to be sufficient vnto saluation: will yet fasten this implicite faith vpon the present Church of Rome, and not referre it rather vnto that Church as it was vnder S. Peters iurisdiction and gouernment. For if vniuersalitie be (as they contend) a sure note of vndoubted truth: then must it needs be more vndoubtedly true, that S. Peter could not erre in matters of faith, than that this present Romish Pope and his Cardinals cannot so erre. For all Papists hold this as true of S. Peter, as of this present Pope: and all Protestants hold it true of S. Peter, not in the present Pope: and so did all the fathers without controuersie hold it most true, that S. Peter did not teach amisse in his Apostolicall
 writings. So that vniuersalitie is much greater for Saint Peter, then for this Pope that now is, or the next that shall be.
9 For these reasons (fully consonant to their owne positions) all Papists me thinkes, in reason, should make the same difference in their estimate of S. Peter and later Popes, which a French Cardinall (as the tradition is at Durham) once made betwixt Saint Cuthbert and venerable Bede. Albeit S. Cuthbert was accounted the greater Saint amongst them, whose greater benefactour he had beene, (in which respect they brought the Cardinall first vnto Saint Cuthberts tombe:) yet, because he knew him not so well, but onely by their report, he praies very warily; Sancte Cuthberte, si Sanctus es, ora pro me. But, afterwards brought vnto Bedes tombe then in the consistorie; because he had beene famous in forraine Nations, from the commendations of lesse partiall antiquity: he fell to his praiers without ifs or ands; Venerabilis Beda, qui a tu Sanctus es, ora pro me.
10 Proportionall to this caution in this French mans prayer, should euery moderne Papist limit his beleefe of the present Popes infallibilitie in respect of S. Peters; And say thus in his heart: As for S. Peter, I know he beleeued and taught aright; and I beseech God I may beleeue as he beleeued, and that my soule may come whither his is gone: as for this present Pope, if he beleeue as S. Peter did, and be likely to follow him in life and death, I pray God I may beleeue as he beleeues, and do as he teacheth; but otherwise (beleeue me) I would be very loth to pin my beliefe vpon his sleeue, least happily he runne headlong to hell with that which should haue drawne me vp to heauen: for in this life I walke by faith, and by faith I must ascend thither, if euer I come there, and therefore I dare not fasten my beleefe vpon any man, whom I would be loath to follow in his course of life. But most surely might this implicite faith be fastned vpon Gods written word, contained in the writings of Moses, the Prophets, Apostles and Euangelists. We know, O Lord, that thou hast taught them all truth that is necessarie for thy Church to know. And our aduersaries confesse, that thy word vttered by them, (righly vnderstood) is the most sure rule of faith: for by this they seeke to establish the infallibilitie of the Church and Pope. They themselues speake aright, by their owne confession, where they speake consonantly vnto it. Wherefore the safest course for vs must be, to search out the true sense and meaning
 of it: which is as easie for vs, as them to finde, as in the processe of these meditations, God willing, shall appeare.
11A briefe answere to the obiection concerning the illiterate. In what sense the Scripture or writte^ word may be said to be the rule of their faith see the last chapter of this Section. Parag. 3. and 4.How farre such are to relie vpon their instructors authoritie, see the eight chapter of this sect. Vnto the maine obiection, concerning the meanes of knowing Scripture to be Scripture, we haue partly answered (or rather preuented it) in the first treatise: and throughout this whole intended discourse we shal (God willing) explicate the former generall meanes or motiues, as also bring other peculiar inducements for the establishing of true faith, vnto the particular articles in this Creede contained. For the present difficultie, concerning the rule of illiterate lay mens faith, as such as vnderstand not those languages in which the holy Ghost did write: we answere briefly, That the language, tongue, or dialect, is but the vesture of truth; the truth it selfe for substance, is one and the same in all languages. And the holySect. 2. cap. 5. parag. 4. Spirit, who instructed the first messengers of the Gospell with the true sense and knowledge of the truthes therein reuealed, and furnished them with diuersitie of tongues to vtter them to the capacitie of diuers nations: can, and doth, throughout all succeeding ages, continue his gifts, whether of tongues or others whatsoeuer are necessarie, for conueying the true sense and meaning of sauing truth alreadie taught, immediatly to the hearts of all such, in euery nation, as are not,The want of skill in sacred tongues in former ages was for their ingratitude towards God, and louing of darknes more then light. For the like reasons were the Scrip^ures to the Iewes (as to our forefathers they had for a long time beene) as a sealed booke. Vid. sect. 2. cap. 2. parag. 3. 4. 5. for their sinne, iudged vnworthie of his societie: of all such as resist not his motions, to follow the lusts of the flesh. And as for men altogether illiterate, that cannot read the Scriptures in any tongue, we doe not hold them bound (nor indeed are any) to beleeue absolutely or expresly, euery clause or sentence in the sacred Canon, to be the infallible Oracle of Gods Spirit, otherwise thanLib. 1. par. 2. sect. 4. cap. 4. is before expressed: but vnto the seuerall matters or substance of truth, conteyned in the principle parts thereof, their soules and spirits are so surely tied and fastned, that they can say to their owne consciences; Wheresoeuer these men that teach vs these good lessons, learned the same themselues, most certaine it is that originally they came from God, and by the gracious prouidence of that God (whose goodnesse they so often mention) are they now come to vs. Such are, the rules or testimonies of Gods prouidence, the doctrines or reall truthes of originall sinne, of our miserie by nature, and freedome by grace: Such are, the articles of Christs passion, and the effectes thereof; of the resurrection, and life euerlas^ing.
 Vnto these, and other points of like nature and consequence, euerie true Christian soule, indued with reason and discourse, giues a full, a firme, and absolute assent, directly and immediately fastned vpon these truthes themselues, not tied or held vnto them by any authoritie of man. For albeit true and stedfast beliefe vnto these fundamentall points might be as scant, as the true worship of God seemed to be vnto Elias in his daies: yet euery faithfull soule must thus resolue:Thus much C^n^s grant^th de loc. ^h^ol. cap 8. re^p^^d 4. Ad ^ae^, si ^mnes h^, q^ me docu^ran^, ^o ad^o ange^^ ^oelorum m^ ast^^ ut oppositi^ eius, quod fide teneo, non ex eo fides me a l^befactaretur. Iuxta Pauli Apostoli praescriptum illud, Cicet nos aut Angelus, etc. Gal. 1. v. 8. Consequently h^reunto he proueth the last resolution of faith not to be in^o the veracitie or infallibil tie of the Church, taxing Scotus, Gabriel, and Durand, as the margine telleth vs: but his reason holdeth good against all such as make the Churches infa libilitie the rul^ of fai h: as sha l bee shewed ^od wil ing in the thi^d s^ct 3 ^ib. V ^ cap 10. ^u^^s s^ct. Though the world besides my selfe should worship Baal, and follow after other Gods: yet will I follow the God of Heauen, in whom our fathers trusted, and on whose prouidence who so relies shall neuer fall. So likewise must euery Christian, both in he^rt resolue, and outwardly professe with Peter, (but with vnfained prayers for better successe, and diligent indeauours by his example to beware of all presumption:) * Though the world beside my selfe shou^d abiure Christ, and admit of Mahomet for their mediator: yet would not I follow so great a multitude to so great an euill, but alwaies cleaue vnto the crucified Christ, my onely Sauiour and Redeemer, who I know, is both able and willing to saue all such as follow him, both in life and death. So againe, though all the subtiltie and wisdome of hell, the world, and flesh, should ioyntly bend their force, and stretch inuention to ouerthrow the glorious hope of our resurrection from the dead: yet euery faithfull Christian must here resolue with Iob, and out of his beleeuing heart professe,^ob. ^9. v. 25. I am sure that my Redeemer liueth, and he shall stand the last on the earth: and though after my skin this body be destroyed, yet sh^ll I see God in my fl sh, whom I my selfe shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me. As we hope to see Christ with our owne eyes immediately and directly in his person, not by any other mens eies: so must we in this life stedfastly beleeue, and fasten our faith vpon those points and articles, which are nec^ssarie for the atta^ning of this sight of Christ, in and for themselues, not from any authoritie or testimonie of men, vpon which we must relie; for this were to see with the eyes of others faith, not with our owne.
12 Many other points there be, not of like necessitie or consequence, which vnto men, specia^ly altogeth^r vnlearned, or otherwise of lesse capacitie, may be proposed as the infallible Oracles of God: vnto some of which it is not lawfull for them to giue so
 absolute, and firme irreuocable assent, as they must doe vnto the former, because they cannot discerne the truth of them in it se^fe, or for it selfe, or with their owne eyes, as (it is supposed) they did the truth of the former.


CHAP. III.
The generall heads of agreements, or differences, betwixt vs and the Papists in this Argument.
1 ALL the d^fficulties in this Argument may be reduced to these three heads. First, How we can know, whether God hath spoken any thing or no vnto his Church. Secondly, What the extent of his word or speeches is; as whether all he hath spoken be written, or some vnwritten; or how we may know amongst bookes written, which are written by him, which not. Likewise of vnwritten verities, which are diuine, which counterfect. Thirdly, How we know the sense and meaning of Gods word, whether written or vnwritten.
2 These difficulties are common to the Iewes, Turks, Christians, and all heretiques whatsoeuer: all which agree in this maine principle, That whatsoeuer God hath said or shall say at any time, is most vndoubtedly and infallibly true.
3 But for this present, we must dismisse all questions about the number or sufficiencie of canonicall bookes, or necessitie of traditions. For these are without the listes of our proposed methode. All ^he professours, eyther of reformed, or Romish Religion, agree in this Principle: That certaine books, (which both acknowledge) doe containe in them, the vndoubted, and infallible word of God.
The first breach betwixt vs.4 The first point of breach or difference betwixt vs and the Papist is, concerning the meanes how a Christian man may be in conscience perswaded, as stedfastly and infallibly as is necessarie vnto saluation, that these bookes, whose authorititie none of them denie, but both outwardly acknowledge, are indeed Gods words.
5 The secondThe second. point of difference (admitting the stedfast and infallible beliefe of the former) is, concerning the meanes, how euery Christian man may be in conscience perswaded, as infallibly
 as is necessarie to his saluation, of the true sense and meaning of these bookes ioyntly acknowledged, and stedfastly beleeued of both.
6Our agreement concerning the nec^s^itie of minist riall function, for the planting of faith. In the meanes or manner, how we come to beleeue both these points stedfastly and infallibly, we agree againe in this Principle: That neyther of the former points, can (ordinarily) be fully and stedfastly belieued, without the ministery, asseueration, proposall, or instructions of men appointed by God, for the begetting of faith and beliefe in others hearts; both of vs agree, that this faith must come by hearing of the diuine word.
7 Concerning the authoritie of Preachers, or men thus appointed for the begetting of faith the question againe is twofold.
8 First, whether this authoritie be primarily,The points of differen^e betwixt vs, about the prerogatiue of Pastors, and the manner of their begetting faith in others. or in some peculiar sort, annexed to any p^culiar men or company of men distinct from others by prerogatiue of place, preheminence of succ^ssion, and from him or them to be deriued vnto all others set apart for this ministerie; or whether the m^nisterie of any men, of what place or societie soeuer, whom God hath called to this function, and enabled for the same, be sufficient for the begetting of true faith, without any others confirmation, or approbation of their doctrine.
9 Secondly, it is questioned, how this ministerie of man, which is necessarily supposed (ordinarily) both for knowing the word of God, and the true meaning of it, becomes auaileable for the begetting of true beliefe in eyther point. In whomsoeuer the authoritie of this ministeriall function be, the question is; whether it performe thus much, onely by proposing or expounding the wo^d, which is infallible, or by their infallible proposall or exposition of it, that is: whether for the attaining of true beliefe in both points mentioned, we must relie infallibly vpon the infallible word of God onely; or partly vpon it, and partly vpon the infallibilitie of such as expound it vnto vs. Or in other words thus: whether the authoritie or infallibilitie of any mans doctrine or asseueration concerning these Scriptu^es, or their true sense, be as infallibly to bee beleeued as those Scriptures themselues are, or that sense of them, which the spirit of God hath wrought in our hearts, by sure and vndoubted experience.
10 These are the principall rootes and fountaines of difference
 betweene vs, concerning our present controuersie, whence issue and spring these following.O^her branches of the former differences. First, Whether Christ (whose authoritie both acknowledge for infallible) hath left any publique Iudge of these Scriptures which both receiue, or of their right sense and meaning, from whose sentence we may not appeale; or whether all, to whom this ministerie of faith is committed, be but expositors of diuine Scriptures, so as their expositions may by all faithfull Christians be examined. Hence ariseth that other question, whether the Scriptures be the infallible rule of faith. If Scripture admit any Iudge then is it no rule of faith: If all doctrines are to be examined by Scripture, then is it a perfect rule.
The Romanists assertions.11 Our aduersaries, especially later Iesuites, positions are these. The infallible authoritie of the present Church, that is of some visible companie of liuing men, must be as absolutely beleeued of all Christians as any Oracle of God: and hence would they binde all such as professe the Catholicke faith, in all causes concerning the Oracles or word of God, to yeeld the same obedience vnto decrees and constitutions of the Church, which is due vnto these Oracles themselues, euen to such of them as all faithfull hearts doe vndoubtedly know to be Gods written word.
12 The reasons pretended for this absolute obedience, to bee performed vnto the Church or visible company of men, are drawn from the insufficiencie of Scripture; eyther for notifying it selfe to be the word of God, or the true sense and meaning of it selfe. Consequently to these obiections, they stifly maintaine, That the infallible authoritie of the present Church, is the most sure, most safe vndoubted rule in all doubts or controuersies of faith, or in all points concerning these Oracles of God: by which we may certain^y know both, without which we cannot possibly know either; which are the Oracles of God which not, or what is the true sense and meaning of such as are receiued for his Oracles: one of the especiall consequents of these assertions is that this Churches decisions or decrees may not be examined by Scriptures.
Our Churches assertions contradictorie to the former.13 Our Churches assertions concerning the knowledge of Gods word in generall is thus. As Gods word is in it selfe infallible, so may it be infallibly apprehended, and beleeued by euery Christian, vnto whom he vouchsafeth to speake, after what manner soeuer he speake vnto him. Yea whatsoeuer is necessarie for
 any man to beleeue, the same must be infallibly written in his hart: and on it once written there he must immediatly relie, not vpon any other authoritie concerning it.
14 Or if we speake of Gods written word, our former generall assertion may be restrained thus.
15 We are not bound to beleeue the authoritie of the Church, or visible companie of any liuing men, either concerning the truth or true sense of diuine Oracles written, so stedfastly and absolutely, as wee are bound to beleeue the diuine written Oracles themselues. Consequently to this assertion we affirme.
16 That the infallible rule whereupon euery Christian, in matters of written verities absolutely and finally, (without all appeale, condition, or reseruation) is to relie, must be the diuine written Oracles themselues; some of which euery Christian hath written in his heart by the finger of Gods Spirit, and beleeues immediately in and for themselues, not for any authoritie of men; and these to him must be the rule for examining all other doctrines, and trying any matters of faith.
But because most in our daies, in matters of faith, and Christian obedience, misse the celestiall meane, and fall into one of the two extreames: It shall not be amisse, while we seeke to diuert their course from Sylla, to admonish least they make shipwracke in Charybdis.


CHAP. IIII.
Shewing the meane betwixt the two extremities; the one in excesse, proper to the Papists; the other in defect, proper to the Anti-papist.
1 IT is a rule in Logicke, that two contrary propositions, for their forme, may be both false; And hence it is, that many Controuersers of our times, (eyther in loue to the cause they defend, or heat of contention) not content onely to contradict, but desirous to be most contrarie to their aduersaries, fall into errour with them. No controuersie (almost) of greater moment this day extant, but yeelds experiments
 of this obseruation, though none more plentifull than this in hand, concerning the visible Churches authoritie, or obedience due to spirituall Pastours.
2The first extremitie held by the Papist. The Papists on the one side demaund infallible assent, and illimited obedience vnto whatsoeuer the Church shall propose, without examination of her doctrine, or appeale; which is indeed (as we shall afterwards proue) to take away all the authoritie of Gods word, and to erect the present Churches Consistorie aboue Moses, and Saint Peters Chaire.The second held by the Antipapist. On the other side, sundrie by profession Protestants, in eagernesse of opposition to the Papists, affirme, that the Church, or spirituall Pastors must then only be beleeued, then onely be obeyed, when they giue sentence according to the euident, and expresse law of God, made euident to the hearts, and consciences of such, as must beleeue and obey them. And this, in one word, is to take away all authoritie of spirituall Pastors, and to depriue them of all obedience, vnto whom (doubtlesse) God, by his written word, hath giuen some speciall authoritie and right, to exact some peculiar obedience of their flocke.
Now if the Pastor be then onely to be obeyed, when he brings euident commission out of Scripture, for those particulars, vnto which he demaunds beliefe or obedience; what obedience doe men performe vnto him, more than to any other man whomsoeuer? For whosoeuer hee bee that can shew vs the expresse vndoubted command of God, it must be obeyed of all: but whilest it is thus obeyed, it onely, not he that sheweth it vnto vs, is obeyed. And if this were all the obedience which I owe vnto others, I were no more bound to beleeue, or obey any other man, than he is bound to obey or beleeue mee: the flocke no more bound to obey their Pastors, than their Pastors them. Yet certainly God, who hath set Kingdomes in order, is not the Author of such confusion in the spirituall regiment of his Church.
3 Seeing then, it is most certaine that the Romanistes doe fouly erre, let vs see how their errour may bee fully contradicted, not striue to bee most contrarie vnto them, but rather to seeke out the meane betweene these two erroneous extreames.
4 Infallible assent, and illimited, vnreserued obedience we may not performe to the present Church, or any visible companie of men; but to the Scripture onely, made knowne, and euident to our consciences. This assertion is directly, and fully contradictorie vnto the Papists.
5 Conditionall assent, and cautionarie obedience we may and must performe to our spirituall Pastors, Ouerseers, and Gouernors,The third or middle assertion contradictory to the two former extreames, and^ onely consonant to the truth. albeit we see not expresse commission out of Scripture, to warrant these particulars, whereunto they demaund assent or obedience. It is sufficient that they haue their generall commission for obedience, expr^sly cont^ined in Scripture. This assertion directly contradicts the other extreame, or contrarie assertion, and of all the three onely doth not contradict the word of God, which expresly teacheth, that some peculiar obedience is due vnto spirituall Gouernours. Vnlesse we hold, that when Christ ascended on high, and led captiuitie captiue, his donation of spirituall authoritie, was but a donation of bare titles, without Realities answering vnto them.Ephes. 4* vers. 11. To some he gaue to be Apostles, to some Prophets, some Euangelists, some Pastors and teachers.That some peculiar obedience, though not so great, as the Romish Church doth challenge, is due to spirituall gouernor^. Though prophecying in some degree hath ceast, and the eminencie of Apostleship bee dead with the Apostles; yet Pastors remaine, and Teachers must continue in Christs Church vnto the worlds end. If Pastors we be, then must we haue our shepheards staffe: if teachers, a rod to keepe our schollers in awe. The same Apostle from these grounds thus exhorteth the flock.Heb. 13. vers. 17. Obey them that haue the ouersight of you, and submit your selues: for they watch for your soules, as they that must giue account, that they may doe it with ioy, and not with griefe, for that is vnprofitable for you. What manner of submission, or what kind of obedience doth he heere exact? only spirituall will the carnall gospeller replie. But what manner of obedience is this spirituall? the least of all others? It is doubtlesse in their esteeme, which feare no losse, but what is sensible for the present, nor know not the vertue of any thing, but what is palpable: vnto all such, to be spiritual, is all one as to be inuisible, and to be inuisible is all one as not to be at all. This is the last resolution of most mens conceit of all spirituall authoritie in our times. But such as dread the Maiestie of that inuisible God, and feare to grieue his holy Spirit, will be most affraid of contemning spirituall authoritie. Disobedience to it,
 though in a prince, is as hateful to the King of Kings as the sinne of witchcraft: for no subiect is more bound to obey his Prince in ciuil actions, than his Pastors in spirituall. He that said, touch not mine annointed, said also, do my Prophets no harme. Of Princes it is said by the ApostleRom. 13. He that resisteth them, resisteth God. To Pastors it was said, (by the wisdom of God by whom Princes raigne)Luc. 10. v. 16. He that heareth you, heareth me, he that despiseth you, despiseth me, and he that despiseth me, despiseth him that sent me, and elsewhereIohn. 20. v. 23. Whose sins ye remit, th^y are remitted, whose sinnes ye retaine, they are retained. These are prerogatiues of Priests, and were not esteemed as words of course, or formalitie, in the ancient and Primitiue Church. It was the iust feare of disobedience in the flocke, which first gaue occasion to Pastors, to vsurpe this tyrannie ouer them, which now they practise. For as Idolatrie and superstition could not haue increased so much in the old world,Vid. li. 1. 2. part. sect. 2. cap. 6. pag. 60. vnlesse there had beene euident documents of a diuine power in ages praecedent: So neither could this extreme tyrannie ouer Christs flocke haue beene eyther vsurped in the middle, or continued to the later ages of the Christian world, vnlesse the flocke had made it a maine matter of conscience to disobey their Pastors, and Ouerseers, whose authoritie they knew from those places of Scripture, then well expounded by the practise of holy men, to be exceeding great.
6 Saint Peter foresaw, that this Antichristian authoritie was likely to spring from the peoples reuerend conceit of their Pastors authoritie* and because the flocke was bound most strictly to obey them, he willeth the Pastors not to be too Lordly in their commands.1. Pet. 5. v. 3. Feede the flocke of God, which dependeth vpon you, caring for it not by constraint, but willingly: not for filthie lucre* but of a readie minde: Not as though ye were Lords ouer Gods heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to the flocke. So doth S. Paul,Act. 20. vers. 28.29. Take heede therefore vnto your selues, and to all the flocke, whereof the holy Ghost hath made you ouerseers. to feed the Church of God, which he hath purchased with his owne bloud: for I know this, that after my departing shall grieuous Wolues enter in among you, not sparing the flocke. Vnlesse the flocke, for their parts, had beene bound to strict obedience, vsurpation of Lordship ouer them had not beene so easie, especially when there was no power beside the pastoral staffe to keepe them vnder: nor could their Pastors haue had any such oportunity to attempt it, as
 might iustly occasion these caueats from these two Apostles, which by their moderate carriage had prescribed a contrarie example to their successors. Easie it had beene for the flocke to haue spared themselues, or kept aloofe from such mercilesse ouerseers: whose designes, though they could not with safe consciences contemne, auoid they might, by circumspect and carefull attending to other true shepheards voices, who by their skill in Scriptures, and true knowledge of the Apostles rules, knew how to limite the former large commission, directed to Pastors, after they begun to degenerate into Wolues. For this cause neither of these Apostles direct these admonitions to their flocke, as if it were permitted them to limite their obedience at their pleasure, but vnto their Pastors. And Saint Peter, in the words immediately following this admonition vnto Pastors, exhorts the flocke vnto obedience,1. Pet. 5. v. 5. Likewise ye younger submit your selues vnto the Elders; without any the least intimation, that they might disobey, as soone as the other began to dominiere. Not that the flocke may not refuse to obey their ouerseers, in some cases; but our Apostle did foresee, that the people would be alwaies most prone to disobedience, vpon lesse occasions than was requisite: and yet disobedience, vnlesse vpon euident, and iust occasions, he knew to be as dangerous, as blinde obedience in matters vnlawfull; the one vsually is the forerunner of superstition and idolatrie, the other the mother of carnall securitie, schisme, and infidelitie. And, according to our Apostles feare, did it fall out in the Church of God. The first mischiefe, which befell her in her prime, was from the want of due reuerence, and awfull regard of Ecclesiasticke iniunctions, and constitutions. Hence did heresies spring in such abundance; Sathan had sowne their seeds in proud hearts; and the ciuill Magistrates facilitie to countena^ce euery prating Discontent, or forthputting Vocalist, in preaching what he list, though contrarie to his gouernours constitutions, was as the spring sunne to cherish and bring them forth. And as the Romish Church, vpon the depression of such rebellious spirits, did raise her selfe aboue all that is called God: So in truth it cannot be denied, but that many in reformed congregations, by seeking to cure her diseases, haue cast the Church of GOD into a relapse of her former sicknesse: which was the vsurpation of too much libertie in her
 children. For the auoidance whereof, we are now, as God hath enabled vs, to aduise.


CHAP. V.
Of the diuersitie of humane actions: the originall of their lawfulnesse, vnlawfulnesse, or indifferencie: which without question belong to the proper subiect of obedience, which not.
1 OF the subordination of spirituall Gouernours amongst themselues, we shall haue fitter occasion elsewhere to entreate: Now we are to enquire the limits and bounds of spirituall authoritie in generall, onely so farre forth as it concernes the rectifying of their beliefe, who are bound to obey.
2 Out of the places before alleaged, these truthes necessarily and immediately flow. There is some peculiar authoritie in the Priesthood, or ministerie, which is not to be found in other men. This authoritie in them is as essentially subordinate to Christ, as the authoritie of any other magistrates is, vnto the principalitie, or soueraigntie, of that nation wherein they liue. Disobedience vnto spirituall gouernours, doth redound as directly and fully vnto Christs, as disobedience to inferiour Magistrates doth vnto the Princes or supreme gouernours dishonour: For he that heareth Christs messengers heareth him, he that despiseth them despiseth him: and yet it is as euident againe in some cases they may bee disobeyed. The difficultie is in which they are to be obeyed, in which not; or in one word, what is the proper subiect of obedience due vnto them.
3The generall or remote subiect of obedience. All obedience is seene, eyther in doing what is commanded, or abstaining from what is forbidden; all disobedience in refusing to doe what is commanded, and doing that which is forbidden by superiours, or men in authoritie. Things commanded or forbidden are of three sorts, eyther good in themselues, and required, or else simply bad and prohibited by the law of God or nature; or finally indifferent, neither commanded, nor forbidden by eyther of the former lawes. Againe, of good things, some are better,
 some lesse good, and so of euill, some are more, some lesse euill: things indifferent onely admit no degrees; but our perswasion of their indifferencie, as al^o of the two other kindes, may be stronger or weaker.Perswasions pure or mixt. Our perswasion in all three kinds may be pure or mixt. Our perswasion of any kind, is then pure, when there is no surmise or perswasion of any contrarie qualitie in the action to be vndertaken; then mixt, when we are partly perswaded, that it is of this or that nature, but not without some surmise or probability, that it may be of another quality.Of the various mixture of perswasions, whence the varietie of actions* or of doubts concerning their lawfulnesse or vnlawfulnesse doth arise. The mixture of our perswasion likewise may be diuers. Somtimes we may be strongly perswaded, that the matter enioyned is good, and yet haue some weake perswasion or surmise, that it is euil, or contrariwise. Sometimes we may haue an equal perswasion both waies, and thinke it as probably good as euil. Somtimes we may haue a strong perswasion, that it is indifferent; and a weake, that it is good or euill, or contrariwise. Sometimes we may haue a we^k perswasion or coniecture, that it may be a great good, and a strong perswasion that it is but a little euill, or contrariwise. Sometimes a strong perswasion that it is a thing indifferent, and yet some surmise, that it is a great euill, or great good. Finally, as the good or euill apprehended by vs, so our apprehension or perswasion of their truth, or the truth of that indifferencie, which is found in some actions, may be diuided into as many degrees as we please: from the multiplicity of whose different combination, the varietie of humane actions (if we would descend to Mathematicall mensurations of our conceits, or calculate euery scruple, which curiositie of speculation might breed in ma^ters of practise) may be in a manner infinite. But because most men measure matters of conscience, as they doe commodities of little worth, onely grosso modo^ for our present purpose, it will suffice to suppose three degrees of good, and three of euill, and as many of our perswasions concerning the lawfulnesse, vnlawfulnesse, or indifferency of our actions.
4 Of things good in themselues, or so apprehended by vs, without any suspition or scruple of euill in them, there is no question. Euery mans conscience hath authoritie sufficient to enioyne their practise, and other authoritie is scarce seene in the substance of such actions. For seeing the good it selfe is to be done, one time or other, in some measure, onely the alacritie of doing it being
 enioyned; in what time or measure it is to be done, or other like circumstances, doe properly come within the subiect of obedience.
5 Concerning pure perswasion of things indifferent likewise, there is no difficultie of moment. For no man that vnderstands what he saith, wil once denie, that euery lawfull gouernour is to be obeyed, in things acknowledged for meerely indifferent. Only this question may be made, Whether indifferent in the general, or vnto many, or most men at ordinarie times, be indifferent in the indiuiduall, to this or that particular man, at some peculiar seasons? Eyther he makes no conscience of his waies, or else he is besides himselfe, that denies obedience vnto any lawfull Magistrate: saue only in such matters as at that time seeme vnlawfull for him to doe, though indifferent in the generall, or at other seasons, or to other men. Hence ariseth the first degree of difference betwixt gouernours and priuate persons, that in things acknowledged for indifferent vnto vs, at this very instant, we are not bound to follow priuate mens aduice; but a magistrates or gouernours commaund we are in conscience to obey, and to make choice of whether part he shall appoint.
The rule of piuate resolutions in matters apprehended as meerely euill.6 If we speake of priuate resolutions concerning things euill: This rule in generall is most certaine; Whilest we are perswaded, that any action is euill, without any conceit or perswasion of good in the same, the aduenturing vpon it is desperate, and the performance of it vnlawfull. And yet, as he that exchangeth a commoditie worth eleuen shillings, for another not worth fiue, sustaines greater losse, than he that hath a Crowne taken from him,In what case some matters apprehended as m^erely euill may be vnder^aken with l^sse dange^, the^ o hers which re partly apprehended as eui^l, partly as good. without any thing in liew thereof: so may a man oft-times wrong his owne soule and conscience more, by vndertaking actions which haue some shew or probabilitie of goodnesse in them, than in vndertaking others, which haue none, but are onely apprehended as euill. This falles out onely and alwaies then, when the difference betweene the greatnesse or probabilities of the euill feared in the one, and the goodnesse hoped in the other action, is greater than the quantitie or probabilitie of the former euil, which admitted no mixt apprehension of good. The reason is plaine, because the mixture of good doth onely recompense so many degrees of euill as it selfe containes of good. Now if in the actions
 of equally mixt perswasions, the proportion betweene the euill and good be such, as is betweene eleuen and fiue; the ouerplus of the euill will be as sixe; and so shall it make the action, wherein it is, worse, than that which hath but fiue degrees or partes of euill, albeit without all mixture of any contrarie perswasion, or conceit of good. But alwaies where the euills feared are equall, and the probabilities of their ensuing likewise equall: any mixt apprehension of some good probably incident to the one, not to the other, doth make that action wherto it is incident, lesse euill, according to the degrees, eyther of the good apprehended, or of our probabilities that it may be accomplisht: and yet shall the action still be euill, as long as the euill which we feare is greater than the good which we can hope for; or, (these being equall) the probabilities greater, that the euill should fal out, than the good. For if to preferre a lesse good before a greater, be euill, much more to aduenture vpon a great euill, in hope of a lesser good; most of all to aduenture vpon any great or probable euill, without probabilitie of any good to counteruaile it in the choice.
7 Concerning mixt perswasions of good and euill,The rule of priuate resolutions, in matters, as probably good as euill. this rule is generall for priuate resolutions. Wheresoeuer the probabilities or perswasions of the goodnesse of any action, are as great, as the perswasions and probabilities of the euill that may ensue, and the measure of the goodnesse apprehended, as great as the quantity of the euill feared: a man of his owne priuate accord may as safely aduenture vpon the action, as the omission of it, referring the eue^t to Gods prouidence, which fauoureth positiue actions, more than priuations; works rather than idlenesse; and the following of that which is good, more than abstinence from euill. A lawfull gouernours command, whether spirituall or temporall, must in this case rule all priuate choyse, eyther for doing or omitting it: the case is all one, as in things meerely indifferent; for heere is an indifferencie of perswasions. These rules are euident in priuate resolutions.
8 All the difficultie concerning the subiect of obedience vnto gouernours, is, eyther in pure perswasions of the euil,The chiefe points of difficultie concerning the subiect of obedience. that may be in matters commanded, without any probabilitie of good, or else where the mixture of perswasions is vnequall, in respect of the euill
 feared, or lastly, where (supposing the probabilities of good and euill are equall) the quantitie of the euill which men feare, is greater than the quantitie of the good which they hope: The points of difficultie are especially two.
9 First, whether iniunction of publike authoritie may ouersway any degree of our priuate perswasions, concerning the vnlawfulnesse of any opinion or action; as, whether we may safely aduenture vpon such actions, or embrace such opinions, as we our selues iudge euill, without any shew or conceit of good: or such as we are more strongly perswaded, that they are euill than good: or such, wherein the euill which wee feare, seemes greater, than it can bee recompenced with the good, which wee can hope for; though it were as likely to ensue.
10 Secondly, if publike authoritie may ouer-sway any at all, what kinde of priuate perswasions these be, or how farre they may be ouerswayed by it.


CHAP. VI.
That sincere obedience vnto lawfull authoritie makes sundrie actions lawfull and good, which, without it, would be altogether vnlawfull and euill.
1 MAny in our daies are perswaded, that no iniunction of authoritie ought to moue vs to any thing, which priuately we deeme euill, eyther absolutely, or vnto vs. Obedience, in matters lawfull, they acknowledge to be good, and acceptable in the sight of God: but the goodnesse of it not so great as may warrant our vndertaking actions, eyther suspected for vnlawfull, or alreadie condemned for such, in the consistorie of our priuate conscience: for this, in their opinion, were to do euill that good migh^ ensue.
2 But heere men should consider, that many actions may be euill, whilest vndertaken by priuate men, vpon priuate motions, which are not euill, once allowed or enioyned by authoritie; not that any authoritie can make that which is euill, good: but that it may adde some circumstance or motiue, whereby the same action which, barely considered, was euill before, may now by this addition
 or alteration, become not euill, because not altogether the same. For Abraham, vpon priuate instigation or secular motiues, to haue killed his sonne, had beene hideous and monstrous crueltie, one of the greatest breaches imaginable of the law of nature: but being appointed by God so to doe, to haue killed his sonne had been no man-slaughter. Not that God in this particular did (as some speake) dispense with the law of nature: for dispensation had made his action or purpose, only not vnlawfull; whereas Gods commaundement did, not onelyAbraham non solum non (...) culpatus crud^litatis (...), verum e^ ^am laudatu^ est ^omine piet^^^ quod v^^^^t (...) n^quaquam ^celerate, ^e^ ob^dienter occidere. Aug. de ciu. Dei. lib. cap. 21. exempt his resolution from that precept, Thou shalt not kill, but placed it in the highest ranke of goodnesse. For he had done better in killing his sonne, vpon this motiue, than in sauing of his enemies life, out of his priuate resolution, or goodnesse of nature. Most true it is (for a Prophet said it) of the generallAbrahams obedience made that action which without it had beene worse than mur^her, to be better than s^crifice. Obedience is better than sacrifice: the truth whereof was most vndoubtedly most perspicuous, in this particular, by which that verie action, which otherwise had beene most cruell murther, became more acceptable in the sight of God, than any sacrifice that euer was offred, saue onely That, wherein greater obedience, than Abraham heere intended, was actually performed.
3 But some (perhaps) will heere demaund, what argument can be drawne, from obedience vnto diuine supreme authoritie,How farre the former insta^ce serueth to inferre the conclusion proposed. for iustifying obedience vnto subordinate powers, in matters, which in our priuate estimation we deeme vnlawfull? Shall wee equalize man wi^h God, or humane authoritie with diuine? No, but we should know, that all lawfull powers are from God, and he that resisteth them, resisteth the authoritie of diuine power. Abrahams warrant for killing his sonne, was more authenticke and expresse, than we can haue for any particular act^on, which we priuately conceiue as euill: but not more authenticke and expresse, than many diuine precepts for obedience vnto lawful gouernours are. As his warra^t was better, so had his action without it bin more desperate, than such as superiour powers vsually impose vpon inferiours. The former instance then was brought, principally, to mitigate the rigour of their precisenesse, who stifly maintaine, That no obedience can legitimate such actions, as, without i^, would be euill; but all must be performed, onely in matters presupposed good and lawfull, or, at least acknowledged for indifferent
 vnto priuate men, before inioyned by publike authoritie. The contradictorie to which vniuersall negatiue appeares most true, in this particular affirmatiue of Abrahams resolution and obedience: from which we may further argue thus. As the immediate interposition of diuine authoritie made that action holy and religious, which otherwise had beene barbarously impious: so may the interposition of authoritie, deriued from God, make some actions, which, barely considered, would be apparantly euill, desperate, or doubtfull to be honest, good, and lawfull. To beate one that is sui iuris, at his owne disposition, and in his right minde, against; or one that is not such, with his consent; were insolent wrong: Because, we haue no power ouer the one; the other none ouer himse^fe, to authorize such vsage of his bodie. What would it be then, in priuate men, to beate such as they know for Gods Embassadours, though requested by them so to doe; when as the verie request might seeme to argue some present distemper, or distraction of minde? No doubt, but he that refused to smite his neighbour Prophet (whether Elisa or some other: the storie is in the first of Kings,)1. King. chap. 20. vers. 35.36.37. did not onely pretend, but truly had some scruple of conscience, least he should offend, eyther that generall law of not doing wrong vnto his neighbour, or that peculiar precept, Do my Prophets no harme: and yet for his disobedience to the Prophets command became a sacrifice to the Lion. But he that took the Prophets authoritie for his warrant, though he smote, and in smiting wounded him, yet did he not hurt his owne conscience a whit but rather by thus doing, preserued it whole, notwithstanding the former precept of doing Gods Prophets no harme.Miles cum obediens potestati sub q^a legitime co^stitutus est bominem occidit, nulla ciuitatis suae lege reus est h^mi^^dij: imo nisi fecerit, reus est ^mperii deserti atque contempti. Quod si sua spon^e atque authoritate fecisset, in crimen effusi hum^ni sanguinis incid^^set. ^taque vnde punitur si fecerit iniussas, inde punietur nisi fecerit iussus. Aug de ciu. Dei. lib. c. 26. To rifle a Spanish ship, vpon priuate quarrels, were piracie in an English Nauigator, to kill a Spaniard murther; but suppose the Kings Maiestie, vpon wrong done, by that nation to our state, not satisfied, should grant his letters of Mart: to rob them of their goods were no piracie, to take away their liues no murther: yet were the outward action in both cases the same, but the circumstances diuerse, and the partie that now vndertakes it, hath better motiues than before he had.
4 Many instances might be brought vnto this purpose, all euidently euincing thus much in general, That sundrie actions, which vndertaken out of priuate choice, would be wicked, (because we
 conceiue in them some euil, without any conceit of possible good to set against it) may by iniunction of publike authoritie become lawfull to vs; because we haue new motiues and better warrants for to doe them; nor can our aduenture vpon such actions be censured for desperate, as before it might well haue beene. For first, whilest men of skill and iudgement, appointed by God to aduise in such matters, are otherwise perswaded than we in priuate are: the rule of Christian modestie bindes vs to suspect our owne perswasion, and consequently, to thinke there may be some good euen in that action wherein heretofore we thought was not; wherein as yet we our selues see none, yet may safely perswade our selues that others see, eyther more good or lesse euill. And vnto thi^ perswasion we must adde this consideration also: That performance of obedience it selfe is a good and acceptable action in the sight of God. Or to come nearer the point.He that doth that which in his priuate opinion he suspecteth for euili, because inioyned by lawfull authoritie, in this respect, doth not euill that good may ensue, seeing the goodnesse of obedience is no consequent of the action, but a motiue precedent.The same reason holds in auoidance of scand^ll or bad example.
5 The goodnesse of sincere obedience alone is not a consequent onely of the action, but either an essentiall part, or such a circumstance, or motiue precedent, as brings a new essence for it concomitant: whereby the euill which we, out of priuate perswasions, feare may be counteruailed, as well as if we did conceiue some good probably included in the verie obiect of the action it selfe, which might be equiualent to the euill feared. At the least then, some actions, which priuately we would auoid as altogether euill, may vpon the former motiues be as lawfully vndertaken, as those which we h^ld, as probably good, as euill.
6 But, as euerie conceit of any good is not sufficient to counteruaile all conceit of eui^l, which may appeare in the same matter: so neither may all authoritie counteruaile euery priuate perswasion, in any man; but the greater, or more publike, the authoritie is, the more should it preuaile with all priuate persons, for the vndertaking of such actions, as otherwise would seeme vnlawfull. The like may be said of the danger, or sc^ndall, which might arise from the example of our disobedience, or non performance of obedience. The greater the harme is, likely to ensue such neglect of obedience, the more we are bound to be lesse scrupulous in obeying, for these are not more consequents of the action. The reason why men often mistake
 them for such, is, because they distinguish not betweene the reall harmes themselues, or scandalous euents, which follow the action and the serious forecast of their danger. For as the meanes are precedent to the reall assequution of the end, and yet the intention of the end doth alwaies goe before the right choice of meanes, and as it were, seasons them for the production of what we intend: so albeit the reall euents or harmes be meere consequents, yet the mature and prudent forecast of danger, likely to follow any action or resolution, must be admitted into the consultation precedent, and ought to sway our consciences, according to euery degree of their probabilities vnpartially conceiued, as well as if we were as probably perswaded of so many degrees of inherent goodnesse in the action it selfe, or it essentiall obiect For the auoydance of any euill equally probable, is as good as the attaining of an equall good. If the danger, which we iustly feare may follow our neglect of obedience, whether in things forbidden or commanded, be as great as the euill, which (vpon like probabilitie) we conceiue in the verie action it selfe; it should make vs as willing to do what we are commaunded, as to refuse: albeit wee set apart the goodnesse, which may arise from the meere act of obedience it selfe.
7 That both the goodnesse of meere obedience, as obedience, and also the danger of euill likely to ensue our deniall thereof, are eyther essentiall parts of the obiect, or such internall motiues precedent, as may raise a new forme in the action: may be gathered from what hath beene said afore of things indifferent.Some obedience may alter that euil which appeares in some ^ctions: because any obedience (though in the lowest degree) doth make acti^ns which without it were indifferent, to be truy good. For the iniunction of authoritie, as none (I thinke) will denie, makes things which to haue done, or not to haue done, was before indifferent, now not to be such, but necessarie and good. So as, not onely the obedience is to be thought good, but the very action wherein obedience is seene, though before indifferent, is now inherently good, and the omission of it would be in it selfe euill, and not by consequent onely. For obedience eyther is, or causeth, a new forme or essentiall diff^rence, which doth as it were sublimate the outward action, to an higher nature and qu^litie than it was capable of before. For the same reason may this goodnesse of obedience, and the due consideration of harmes, which may follow its refusall, make such actions, as before had beene euill for
 vs out of priuate resolutions to haue vndertaken, not to be any more euill, but good. The difficultie onely is,To giue precise ^ules what actions may of euill become good by obedience, is very difficult. what priuate doubts or disl^kes may be counteruailed by publike authoritie: or what certaine rule may bee giuen when they may, and when they may not.
8 Generall rules in this case are verie hard to be giuen, because the circumstances may be many and diuers. The authoritie may be greater or lesse: so may their dislike that are to performe obedience be of the things enioyned. The iniunction likewise may be more or lesse peremptorie. Sometimes it may seeme to resemble rather an aduice, than absolute command: somtimes rather to adiure, than command: Sometimes the parties in authoritie may be of lesse, and the parties of whom obedience is exacted, of greater reach, and deeper insight in those matters, whereunto obedie^ce, is enioyned, according to the diuersity of the subiect of obedience, which somtime may be such, wherin men of experience or practize are to be most beleeued, wherein occurrence of iudgements and multitude of voices may argue more truth: Sometimes the subiect of obedience may be matters of abstruse speculation, wherein one man of profound iudgement is more to be belieued, than fiue hundred but of ordinarie capacitie. For as things visible, but farre distant, for matters of abstruse speculation, cannot be discerned by multitude of eyes, but by clearenesse of sight; and as he that could discerne ships in the Carthaginian, from the Lilibae an hauen, saw more than all Xerxes Armie could in like distance: so doth it oft fall out, that some one profound iudicious contemplator sees clearely that truth, which all the wits of the same age had not been able without him to discouer. Such men may sinne in obeying authoritie, whereunto others in yeelding obedience, sin not; because they can discerne the vnlawfulnesse of the commaund it selfe better than others. But vnlesse a man can iustly plead this, or some other like peculiar reason or priuiledge, it is a very suspitious and dangerous case to disobey lawfull authoritie, (whether spirituall or temporall) in such matters as he thinkes others of his owne ranke may with safe conscience obey, or in such matters, whereunto he sees many men, by his owne confession of great iudgement and integritie of life, yeelding obedience with alacrity. For if thus he thinke of them, he cannot but suspect himselfe and
 his perswasions of error; nay he cannot be otherwise perswaded, but that the commandement, or publike iniunction of authoritie, is not absolutely against Gods commaundement; for so it could not be obeyed, with safe conscience, by men of skill and integritie.A certaine rule when authoritie may be disobeyed, without whose obseruation disobedience is alwaies more suspicious than safe. And this I take to be the safest generall rule that can be giuen in this case: Not to consider the particular matters inioyned, with such of their circumstances or consequences as we out of our priuate imaginations conceiue, or feare; so much, as the general forme of publike iniunction, as it indistinctly concerns all. If we can truly discerne the law or publike act it selfe to be against Gods law, and such as will lay a necessitie vpon vs of transgressing Gods commandements, if we yeeld obedie^ce to particulars inioined by it:Act. 4. vers. 19. Our Apostles haue alreadie answered for vs, It is better to obey God than men. Christ had commanded them to preach the Gospel: The Priests and other Gouernors forbid them to preach Christ. Heere was a contradiction in the lawes themselues. But God commands vs to obey the powers ordained by him; and their co^mandements are particular branches of Gods generall commandements for this purpose: and he that disobeyeth them, disobeyeth God, vnlesse their commandements be contrarie to some other of Gods commandements. And it is a course as preposterous as dangerous, to disobey authoritie, because wee dislike the things commanded by it, in respect of our selues, or vpon some perswasion peculiar to vs, not common to all. For seeing obedience is Gods expresse commandement; yea seeing we can no more obey, than loue God, whom we haue not seene, but by obeying our superiours whom we haue seene: true spirituall obedience, were it rightly planted in our hearts,Such as disobey publike iniunctions, vpon s^spicion or feare least their practise might occasion euill, are vsually taken in their owne feare, and fall into that verie sinne which they seeke to auoid. would binde vs, rather to like well of the things commanded for authorities sake, than to disobey authoritie for the priuate disl ke of them. Both our disobedience to the one, and dislike of the other, are vnwarrantable, vnlesse wee can truly deriue them from some formall contradiction or opposition, betwixt the publike or generall iniunction of superiours, and expresse law of the most high.
9 It will be replied, That albeit the generall forme of publike iniunction be not absolutely vnlawfull, nor the things inioyned (for this reason) essentially or necessarily euill: yet are these most vnexpedient, and may be grand occasions of great euill.

He that is thus perswaded, might as farre as became his place, disswade any publike act concerning such matters; and yet withall were bound to co^sider, whether the want of such an act might not occasion as great euils, as he feares may follow the practise of such obedience as it commands: or whether other might not as probably foresee some equiualent good, which he sees not. But after such acts are publikely made, and obedience duly demanded,Jn vitium ducit cu^pae fuga si caret arte.As we may not do euill that good may ensue, so may we not omit any good, lest euill might happen thereon, and yet obedience by all mens consent is good. Thus from an vnnecessarie feare of the former men fall into the later, (which is but a sister sinne) by denying obedience which in it selfe is good, for feare lest they should giue occasion of euill. he that denies it vpon feare onely of some euill that may follow, doth giue great occasion to others of committing that euill, which hee himselfe by this refusall certainly commits, he opens the gappe to that capita^l mischiefe of publike societies anarchie and disobedience. In doubts of this nature, it will abundantly suffice to make sincere protestation in the sight of God, or if need require, before men, that we vndertake not such actions vpon any priuate liking of the things enioyned, but onely vpon sincere respect of performing obedience to ^uperiours, whom God hath appointed to make lawes for vs, but not vs to appoint them what lawes they should make, not to iudge of their equitie being made, saue only where the forme of the commandement is contrarie to some of Gods commandements, so as the particulars enioined become therby essentially and necessarily euil. In such case, the lawes of superiours are alreadie iudged and condemned by Gods law, by which whilest they stand vncondemned, they shall condemne vs for disobedience both to Gods lawes and them, albeit we stand in doubt, whether that which they enioin, would not be most vnlawfull for vs to doe, if we were left vnto our priuate choyce. For seeing the case stands in controuersie betwixt vs and our superiours: we should doe as we are commanded by them, and referre the finall decision to the supreame Iudge, whether they do well or ill in making such lawes, as to vs may seeme to be occasions of euill, but whether they shall proue so or no, he best knowes, that onely can preuent the danger. We, as I said before, might aduise if we were thereunto called, for the mitig^tion or abrogating of such lawes, but iudge or condemne them, by the probabilities or feares of their consequents, we may not, but onely where they are alreadie iudged by the law of God. What priuate man is there, that knowes the secret intents or purposes of the state, in most actions of publike seruice? Can any man doubt but that a great many oft
 feare some dangerous consequentes of those seruices wherein they are imployed? why then doe most men thinke themselues bound to obey the state, against their priuate doubtes or feares?Thus much Saint Austea taketh as granted by all. For he bringeth in these words following to inferre a conclusion denied by his aduersarie.Vir iustus, si forte sub rege homine etiam sacrilego militet, recte potest illo iubente bellare, ciuicae pacis ord^n m seruans. Cuiquod iubetur, vel non esse contra Dei praeceptum certum est vel, vtru^ sit, certum non est. vt fortasse reum regem faciat iniquitas imperandi, innocentem autem militem ostendat ordo serviendi. Aug. l. 22 contra Faustum Manichaeum. cap. 15. It is enough that we know such businesses (as for example warres with forrainers) not to be vnlawfull in the generall, and the determinations of warres, or like businesse, to be referred to the King, and his Councell: but whether this or that warre bee iustly vndertaken by them or no; common souldiers, nay captaines are not to iudge, nor to detract obedience, albeit they suspect the lawfulnesse of the quarrell, or could wish for peace if they were in place to determine of such matters. But if the whole state should commaund promiscuous vse of women, adulterie, murther of our brethren vncondemned by law, blasphemie, or the like: such commandements were not to be obeyed, but we are rather bound to suffer death our selues, than to be their instruments in such actions: for heere is a direct contradiction, betwixt the forme of such lawes and the law of God.
10What hath beene spoken of authoritie in generall, applied to spirituall authoritie. From what hath hitherto beene deliuered, we may collect, That superiours or men in authoritie are to be obeyed in such points, as their inferiours are not at leisure to examine, or not of capacitie to discerne, or not of power, or place, to determine whether they be lawfull or no. Thus much at the least is common to all absolute authoritie, of what kinde soeuer. And from the former places alledged, containing the commission of Priests or ministers, it is most euident, That the lawfull Pastor or spirituall Ouerseer, hath as absolute authoritie to demaund beliefe or obedience in Christs, as any ciuill Magistrate hath to demaund temporall obedience in the State or Princes name: And if any of Christs fold denie obedience, or appeale from his Pastor, without iust and euident reason, he doth thereby denie Christ, and endanger his own soule, as much as he doth his bodie that resists a lawfull Magistrate, when he is charged by him in his Princes name to obey. And as in temporall causes, if a man appeale without iust occasions, from an inferiour court to a higher, he is not thereby freed, but rather to be returned to the inferiour court from which he appealed, or to be censured (besides his other facts,) for his vnlawfull appeale: so likewise such as vpon pretence of ignorance in Gods word, or libertie of conscience, appeal^ from ordinarie Ministers to Christ
 the chiefe shepheard, are not thereby presently acquitted, but stand still liable to the censure of their Pastors, eyther to bind them if they continue obstinate, as well for this their disobedience in appealing from them, as for their other sinnes; or to loose and remit their sinnes if they repent. For God hath appointed his ministers to gouerne his Church, and Gouernours are to be obeyed in that they are gouernours, vnl^sse such as are to performe obedience, do perfectly know, or haue reasons (such as they would not be affraid to render to Christ in that dreadfull day,) to suspect, that their Pastors in their commaunds, goe beyond their commission, or the expresse lawes and ordinances of Christ Iesus, the supreme Gouernour and Commaunder both of Pastor and People.
11 But many men are oft-times strongly perswaded, that the verie forme of the law, or their superiours iniunctions,Vnto what a man stands bound being strongly perswaded that the lawes of superiors are against Gods lawes, and wherein his sin consisteth, if he disobey vpon such strong, but ill grounded perswasions. are opposit vnto Gods lawes, when in truth they are not. And hence they thinke they denie obedience vpon sinceritie and conscience, when indeed they do not, but in both cases are meerly blinded by affection. The questio^ is, whether denying obedience vpon such perswasi^ns, they doe well or ill? That the perswasion is euill, is without contr^uersie. The difficultie is, whether (the perswasion remaining in full strength, without any mixture of suspition, or apprehension of their errour,) they adde a new sinne of disobedience, besides the sinfulnesse of their erroneous perswasion, or that habituall aff^ction whence it springs: that is, whether they should doe better in obeying against the full strength of their perswasion, or in disobeying, whilest it remaines? If they obey, they sinne ag^inst their consciences, and preferre the lawes of man before Gods: If they doe better in disobeying, it may seeme an happie errour, which exempts the^ from the yoke of obedience, wherunto the orthodoxe are subiect. The answere is easie; Whosoeuer shal denie obedie^ce vpon such perswasions, doth commit disobedience actually; Not that it were better for him to obey, (supposing the strength of his perswasion to the contrarie,) but he actually sinnes in that he suffers not the strength of his perswasion to be broken by the stroke of authoritie, but rather suffers it to confront authoritie: So that his sinne (if we will speake precisely) consists onely in the exercise of his former perswasion, or in the motion of his
 habituall affection: not in any proper act of that peculiarIt may iustly be questioned whether there be any such peculiar vice distinct from all vntoward affection, or whether all disobedience consist, onely in the formall opposition betweene some one or other affection, and the law, seeking to restreine it. habite or vice, which we call disobedience. That whereunto he stands bound by authoritie, is to abiure his former perswasion, that hee may with safe conscience obey: or (to speake more distinctly,) he is not bound immediatly to obey in the particulars now enioyned, nor to renounce his perswasion without more adoe, but to enter into his owne soule and conscience, to examine the grounds or motiues of his perswasion, to rate his owne wit and iudgement at its due worth and no higher, to renounce all selfe-conceit, or iealousies of disparagement, in yeelding to that he had formerly impugned, that so he may sincerely and vncorruptedly iudge of the truth proposed, and esteeme aright of authoritie, and others worth that yeeld vnto it. If we would sincerely obey in these pointes, which are the immediate and first principles of true Christian obedience, the grounds of erroneous perswasions would quickly faile: so as wee should be alwaies readie to obey in the particulars, whereunto obedience was iustly demaunded. But of the grounds, occasions of erroneous perswasions, and their remedies, by Gods assistance, more at large in the article of the Godhead, and some other Treatises of Christian faith.


CHAP. VII.
What actions are properly said to be not of faith in the Apostles sense: What manner of doubt it is which makes them such.
1 AGainst all that hath beene hitherto deliuered concerning this point, that happily may be yet obiected, which hath alwaies bred greatest scruple for yeelding obedience in doubtfull cases. For our Apostle saith:Rom. 14. v. 23 Whatsoeuer is not of faith, is sinne: But whilest men obey spirituall Gouernours, in those particulars for which they shew no Scripture, this obedience is not of faith, (for faith is alwaies ruled by the word:) Ergo his obedience is sinfull, euen in this respect alone, that it hath not the word for it w^rrant, but much more
 if we doubt whether the things enioyned bee good or bad: for doubting breedes condemnation as our Apostle in the same place gathereth. He that doubteth is condemned if he eate, because he eateth not of faith.
2 Vnto the former part of this obiection, the answere is easie and briefe: Seeing Gods word commands obedience in generall vnto spiritual Pastors, and that in most expresse termes; it doth warrant our obedience in particulars, which are not forbidden by the same word. But for clearing of the later obiection, because this place of Saint Paul is as often vrged to as little purpose, as any other in the whole booke of God besides, it shall not be amisse to consider. First in what sense it is true; Whatsoeuer is not of faith is sinne. Secondly, what manner of doubt it is, that makes a thing to be not of faith, in that sense which our Apostle meanes.
3Three diuers meanings of this phrase, not of faith.The first meaning. A thing may bee said to bee of faith three waies. First, strictly and properly, That is said to bee ex fide, of faith, which is an act or exercise of the habite or vertue of faith, as to beleeue in GOD, in Christ, or to assent vnto any article in this Creede. In this sense no man I thinke doth vrge this place of our Apostle: Whatsoeuer is not of faith is sinne. For then all deeds of charitie should be sinfull, seeing they are no actes or exercises of the habite of faith, but of charitie, which is a distinct habite from faith, according to best Diuines: nor can we properly say, that such works flow from faith, as the fruit doth from the roote, seeing charitie is no branch of faith, but a coaeuall stemme of infused sanctifying grace, the common roote to both. Such acts then may be said to bee of faith, onely because the doctrine of faith enioynes them, and the habite or vertue of faith inclines the soule vnto them, and moues charitie vnto the exercise of them. And this is the second sense or meaning of the speech, ex fide, of faith: that is, those things are said to be of faith, or to proceed from faith, which are commanded by the doctrine of faith* or vnto which we are inclined or moued by the habite or vertue of faith. But neither is it alwaies true, Whatsoeuer is not of faith, in this sense, is sinne. For so no recreation, no meriment,The second. not eating and drinking, with many other works both of reason and nature, generally nothing meerely indifferent could be truly of faith: at the least
 at this or that time. How then are not all these sinfull, seeing they are not of faith, in none of the former senses, being neither acts of faith, nor enioyned by the doctrine of faith? This necessarily enforceth vs to seeke a third significatio^ of the former words.
4 Thirdly then, that is said to be not of faith, whatsoeuer is not warra^table by the doctrine of faith,The third meaning onely meant by our Apostle. whatsoeuer conscience, or the vertue of faith, being consulted, cannot countenance or allow, but rather disswade. And in this sense, all that may be said to be ex fide, of faith, whatsoeuer is warrantable by the doctrine of faith, whatsoeuer faith, conscience, or the law of reason and nature can approue or allow of, either absolutely, or at that present whilest they are vndertaken, albeit they do not enioyne them, or impell vs vnto them (at the least) for that season. As for example; If a man, free from necessarie imployments of his calling, should ride halfe a score of miles to be merrie with his honest friend: This were neither an act of faith, nor an exercise enioyned by faith, and yet truly of faith in our Apostles sense, and no way sinfull, because warrantable by the doctrine of faith: Neyther faith, nor conscience, nor lawe of nature would condemne him for so doing. But if his dearest friend lay on his death bed, and did expect some comfort by his presence: his absence vpon such light occasions would be sinfull, because it could not be of faith. Neyther the doctrine of faith, nor the law of reason, could countenance such an action. Such resolutions may properly be said Not of faith, because they cannot proceed but from some inclination, or disposition, opposite to the habite of true faith, and the dictates of naturall well disposed, much more of sanctified conscience. Suppose some mans conscience were so scrupulous, as to doubt whether he might ride so farre to be merrie with his friend, when he had no vrgent occasions to withdraw him; and another so confident, and fully perswaded in his mind, as to make no question whether he should meete his friend in a plaguie house, or when his owne father lay a dying. The question is, whether of these two doth sinne the more? or if both doe not sin, whether of them is freed from sinne, and by what meanes? The former, as is supposed, doubts of the action, and yet doth it: the other doth the like, but worse, and doubteth not. If that iourney
 which in it selfe is lawfull, (supposing the former case) becomes vnlawfull to the one, because hee doubts it is vnlawfull: then may the others confident perswasion make his expedition lawfull vnto him, although in it selfe (supposing the case aboue mentioned) it were vnlawfull. For who can giue any reason, why confidence of perswasion may not as well legitimate what otherwise is vnlawfull, as doubt or scruple illegitimate that which otherwile were lawfull and warrantable. So that, according to these grounds, the former partie aboue mentioned should sinne, not the later. And our Apostles speeches (vnlesse they admit some restraint,) will inferre thus much.Rom. 14. v. 14, I know and am perswaded through the Lord Iesus, that there is nothing vnclean of it selfe: but vnto him that iudgethOur Apostles words, vnlesse the vniuersalitie of their forme be restrained by the matter or subiect, inferre ^as forcibly, that confident perswasion might acquit vs, as doubting condemne vs in any action. Yet confidence of perswasion doth neuer acquit vs: But in matters presupposed indifferent; no more can doubting condemn vs without some inequalitie in the matter. any thing to be vncleane, to him it is vncleane, And againe; This man ^st^emeth one day aboue another day, another man counteth euery day alike* let euery man be fully perswaded in his mind: as if he added, and then there is no danger. And yet if we should but consult natural^ reason; who could denie, that he that made an idle iourney whereby he might endanger his owne, or neglect his fathers life, did sinne most grieuously; albeit he were most fully perswaded to the conscience: yea the stronger his perswasion were, the greater his sinne. On the contrarie hee that should vndertake the like iourney, hauing no serious occasions to withdraw him, if the truth bee rightly scanned, did not sinne at all: vnlesse perhaps in doubting whether he sinned or no. For euerie doubt of what we doe, doth not make our action sinfull, or not of faith: which is now to be discussed.
5 If that speech of our Apostle, He that doubteth is condemned if he eate, were to be vniuersally vnderstood of all doubts, or all actions: we should neuer haue an end of doubting, nor any beginning of many good and most necessarie works.The effects of such scrupulosities as our Apostles rule vniuersally vnderstood, would necessarily breed, are contrary to the Analogie of faith. This very perswasion, were it throughly and generally planted in all mens hearts, were enough to bring all states to vtter anarchie, and to set the whole world in combustion. For what enterprise is there of greater moment, but diuers men will be of diuers minds, concerning the lawfulnesse or vnlawfulnes of it? Who could not by this exception excuse himselfe from performance of necessarie allegeance or seruice? If the Kings Maiestie should wage warre against the Spaniard, he that were addicted to their religion might reply,
 I should be as willing as another to doe my King and Countrey any seruice, but I doubt whether I may afford him my goods to the hurt and dammage of Romane Catholikes: the cause I am affraid is most vnlawfull, and will bring Gods plague vpon this land, theref^re I may not hazard my life in it, nor aduenture to shed the innocent bloud of our holy mother the Churches children. The like might a Lutheran say, if warre should fall out betwixt our state and the Saxons; or if with some other reformed Churches, the like might be said by most in our land: Finally there would be continuall distraction in the mannaging of all publike affaires. But such scrupulous demurres in ciuill matters, are eyther seldome made, or quickly answered by the temporall sword. And are they lesse dangerous in cases as little doubtfull, (wherein the consequents feared are of lesse moment) when they are giuen to the chiefe mannagers of our spirituall warfare, in times wherein disobedience threatens dissolution of Christs armie, that must fight his battels against Sathan and the man of sinne? Is the authoritie of binding and loosing, opening and shutting the Kingdome of heauen, lesse than the authoritie of life and death, or the disposing powers of temporall goods? What should be the reason then that euery scruple should be held sufficient to denie obedience (in matters of greatest consequence) vnto spirituall, more than temporall authoritie?Deniall of obedience vpo^ scruple, yea eu n the scruple or doubt it sel^e, may be not of faith, as we^l as the positiue action of whose lawfulnesse they doubt, whence the obiection, which many draw from the Apostles rule is most ^orcibl^ against th^mselues. Out of doubt, that rule of Saint Paul doth no more warrant the one than the other. The true reason is: most men feare temporall censures, more than eyther Gods or his, an ordinarie Gaile, more than hell: and had rather bee doore-kepers in great mens houses, than glorified Saintes in heauen; but of this hereafter. To proceede then with our Apostles rule. Were it vniuersally to be vnderstood, it would bring all Christian soules into such perpetuall, miserable, inextricable perplexities, as they should alwaies liue in suspence, and scarce resolue vpon any thing. For his rule holds as true in the omission of what should be done, as in the commission of what we thinke should not be done. Suppose then thy Pastor commaunds thee to obey in this or that particular, which he verily thinkes, eyther necessarie to be vndertaken by all Christians, at all or most times; or else most expedient for thy soules health, the setting forth of Gods glorie, or the good of others, at this present. But thou art contrarie-minded, and doubtest
 whether thou maist doe it lawfully or no. Why? because thou hast no warrant for it out of Scripture, or because he brings no necessary reasons why thou shouldest do it, but bare probabilities, which cannot ouersway that doubt, which thou hast framed vnto thy conscience. But he can shew thee expr^sse commandement out of Scripture, that thou shouldest obey him. Thou wilt say; in things lawfull onely. This he auoucheth to be such; Thou deniest it. He can shew thee againe expresse words of Scripture, that thou shouldest not be wise in thine owne conceit, but be willing to learne of thy Pastor, Who is the messenger of the Lord of hostes, at whose mouth thou should^st seeke the law, and on whom, as our Apostle saith, thou dost depend. Tell me then, first, by what place of Scripture thy disobedience in this particular can be warranted? How canst thou chuse but doubt, whether thy deniall of obedience be of faith or no, seeing Gods word commands thee, in generall termes, to obey, and no where willes thee to disobey in this particular. Or if thou thinkest thou hast some generall warrant for disobedience, because thou supposest this particular to be vnlawfull: yet how canst thou but doubt, whether thou hast learned the precepts of Christian modestie as thou shouldest? Whether thou hast learned to denie thy selfe, and thy affections? whether thou hast learned to reuerence thy Pastor as Gods messenger, not taking any offence at his person? Finally, whether thou hast abandoned all such delights and desires, as vsually are the grounds of false perswasion, and impediments of sincere obedience? If thou canst not be fully and truly resolued in these, then must thou doubt, (whether thou wilt or no) whether thy doubt or scruple it selfe be of faith or conscience, or of humour onely. And if thou canst not but doubt herein, then maist thou assure thy selfe, that thy deniall of obedience is not of faith, and therefore sinfull: if the Apostles rule (as thou supposest) were vniuersally true; that whosoeuer doth any thing, of whose lawfulnesse he doubts, doth sinne, because he doth it not of faith.A man in^^ some cases may eyther obey or disobey authoritie, not without doubt, and yet without sinne. But I dare not denie, but that sundrie of Christs flocke may sometimes eyther denie, or performe obedience vnto their Pastors, not without doubt or scruple whether they should doe so or no, and yet not sinne in eyther. In performing obedience they sinne not, vnlesse the doubt be verie great or probable, and the euill which they conceiue in the action
 extraordinarie. Againe, in denying obedience they sinne not, albeit they doubt whether they should doe so or no: if the euill, which vpon mature deliberation and serious forecast they much suspect, be extraordinarie, such as cannot be recompensed by the goodnesse, which appeares in the act of obedience, nor in the fruits of the action it selfe, which their Pastor proposeth, as a motiue to vndertake it. According to those grounds must our Apostles speech be limited. He that doubteth is cond^mned if he eate, because he eateth not of faith.
6 What then? Is euery man that eateth any thing, which hee doubts whether it were better for him not to eate, straight condemned? God forbid. He that hath such a tender infants squemish conscience, as to thinke thus, had need to haue a verie ancient, graue, wise, and moderate stomacke: and it were fit he neuer came at any feast, or table, furnished with varietie of dishes.
7 But for a direct answere to our Apostles speech. It must be granted,It was not the doubt or scruple, but the qualitie of the things doubted of, which made their actions, of whom our Apostle speaketh, so grieuously sinfull. For the euill which vpon great probabilities they feared, was incomparably greater, than any good possible to ensue vpon their eating. that they of whom he speakes, did sinne in eating when they doubted. For if they had beene as fully perswaded in their mindes, as the Apostle himselfe, and sundrie others of their brethren were, they had not sinned in eating the selfe same meat: yet for all this they sinned not in eating (simply) when they doubted, but in eating such meates when they doubted: Other meats they might haue eaten with little or no offence; albeit with more vncertaintie, whether it had been better for them to eate or no. Nor was it so much a positiue doubt, as rather a rashnesse, or want of setled resolution, in many of the^, which made them sin; as may appeare from the circumstance of the place: yet was this eating not only a sin, but a most grieuous sin, in all that did eate such meats, without a constant and well-grounded resolution. Both the sin, and the extraordinarie grieuousnesse of it did hence, arise: they had eate^ of things sacrificed to Idols, or other meats, (in their iudgement) accursed by the law, which they suspected not onely to be vnlawfull to be eaten, but doubted whether in eating them they should not be partakers of the table of Diuels, initiate to the Sacraments of idolatrie, or separated from the Israel of God, or finally become Apostata's from faith, and the holy doctrine. As on the one side, the euill which they feared was extraordinarily grieuous, and the reasons of their feare such as could not easily be cast off, but
 would be alwaies likely to breed despaire after the action were past, albeit many of them did shake off all doubt for the present: so on the other part, there was not quid pro quo, not the least possible surmise of performing any degree of any good or acceptable seruice in the sight of God, by their eating. For, as Saint Paul in the same place notes: The Kingdome of God is not meate or drinke, but righteousnesse and peace; whosoeuer in these, (as if he had said, not in eating and drinking) serueth Christ, is acceptable vnto God, and is approued of men. Those then of whom he there spake, accounting it a chiefe part of their righteousnesse to abstaine from all vncleane things, their danger in eating was in quantitie exceeding great, and for the qualitie spirituall: their losse in abstaining from such meates (being prouided of others) was in quantitie as nothing, and for the qualitie meerely corporall. Wherefore thus to haue eaten, with the least scruple of such grieuous danger, was worse than Esau's alienating of his birth-right for a messe of pottage. And albeit they had doubted to day, and growne resolute to morrow, vpon no better motiues than the bare examples of others; or in an humour or brauerie, because they would not doubt any longer, but vse their libertie as others did: yet had such resolutions beene deadly. For opinions of this nature may not bee cast off in a moment, nor may a man aduenture vpon a doubt of such fearefull consequence, but vpon great motiues of some spirituall good; the probabilities of attaining which may counteruaile the euill feared: or vpon serious deliberation, and perspicuous discouerie of their former errour, and causelesse scruple. From these grounds did our Apostle inferre that exhortation. Let euery man be fully perswaded in his mind.Vers. 5. He exacteth not this fulnesse of perswasion in matters of ordinarie consequence; too much curiositie in them alwaies occasioneth lesse diligence or circumspection, than were requisite for establishing our minds with true faith, in pointes of greatest moment: nor did he meane such fulnesse of perswasion, as hot spirits vsually enforce vpon themselues, without mature and sober deliberation. For such resolutions, albeit they may seeme most strong, as indeed they are for the time exceeding stiffe: yet are they easily to be vnderminded by Sathan; the inward temptations of the flesh; or other occurrents; and after once they begin to faile, such as leane
 most vnto them, fall so much the more headlong into deepest despaire, by how much they haue beene stronger or higher pitcht; as it seems some of these, to whom he writes, had beene too bold in eatng, and were afterwards tortured by the sting of conscience. The end of our Apostles exhortation was this: Seeing their perswasions, concerning the vnlawfulnesse of such meates, had beene (as it were) bred vp with the parties doubting, they should in no case aduenture vpon the contrarie practise, but vpon long and well-setled resolution, grounded vpon a sincere and cleere manifestation of their former errour. For as the Phisitions of our bodies do not alwaies apply such medicines, as they know most forcible to expell the present disease, if the same be contrarie to our former long accustomed diet, (for vitiosae consuetudini indulgendum est, there must a care be had that a custome, though depraued, be not too violently thwarted, or too sodainly broken off:) so likewise must skilfull Physitions, of the soule, not seeke so much to expell inueterate opinions, (though erroneous,) by present force of strongest arguments, or eager exhortations; but rather suffer them to weare out their strength by little and little, neuer infusing contrarie perswasions, but mitigated and qualified, and that sparingly, as opportunitie shall serue. Otherwise, what one saith of Nature her selfe,
Expellas furca licet, vsque recurret:Though with strong hand she be out-throwne,She still repaires vnto her owne: will proue true of that altera natura, inueterate custome. It, sodainly expulsed, will one time or other retire as violently: and so shall the relapse be much worse than the disease it selfe.
8 For these reasons did they also offend most grieuously, who by their example or instigation, did cause their weake brethren to eate such meates as they made this conscience of:Vide. 1. Cor. 11.8 for so they caused them, for whom Christ Iesus died to perish for their meats sake, as it is vers. 15. Whereas the losse of meate, or life it selfe, should, by the rule of charitie, be accounted gaine in respect of our brethrens inestimable da^ger, which may ensue vpon such actions. Better it were we should suffer our selues to starue for meate, and so procure our owne corporall, than occasion their eternall death
 by our example; so saith our Apostle: If meate offend my brother, I will eate no meate while the world standeth that I may not offend my brother. It were better for me to die,1. Cor. 8. v. 13.1. Cor. 9.15. than that any man should make my reioycing vaine. Nor did our Apostle in this place speake hyperbolically, or more than hee meant to haue performed, if hee had beene called to such a triall of his resolution, as some of his forefathers had beene. So we read, when Antiochus officers, out of great loue (as they esteemed it) vnto the good old man, had permitted Eleazar one of the principall Scribes to make choyse of of such flesh as he would, and might safely eate by his countrey lawes; only requesting him to dissemble by his silence,2. Machab. 6. vers. 21.22.23.24. etc. As though he had eaten the things appointed by the King, euen the flesh of his Idols sacrifices: Albeit he might haue had life vpon this condition: yet he confidently answered: and willed them straightwaies to send him to the graue. For it becommeth not our age (said he) to dissemble, whereby many young persons might thinke, that Eleazar being fourescore yeares old and ten, were now gone to another religion: and so through mine hypocrisie (for a little time of a transitorie life) they might be deceiued by me, and I should procure malediction, and reproach to mine old age. This eating, which hee refused, could neuer haue beene of faith, that is, no way warrantable, by the doctrine or principles of faith, which had taught him the contrarie: as he well exprest in the next words following: for though I were now deliuered from the torments of men, yet could I not escape the hand of the Almightie, neither aliue nor dead. Wherefore I will now change this life manfully, and will shew my selfe such as mine age requireth.
9 And it should bee considered, that the parties of whom ourTwo principall circumstances to be considered, peculiar to those of whom our Apostle speaketh* Apostle speakes in the fore^entioned place, were neuer inioyned by any lawfull superiours, eyther ciuill or Ecclesiastique, to eate such meates as they made scruple of: yea the verie original or fountaine of their scruple, was from the expresse law of God, denouncing fearefull iudgements against all such, as polluted themselues with vncleane meates: so that their eating, albeit solemnly inioyned by the greatest powers on earth, could not fall within the subiect of true obedience, because the lawes inioyning it (as they conceiued) stood actually condemned, by the expresse law of God to the contrarie, in defence whereof, many of their ancestors
 had exposed their bodies to most grieuous tortures, and the refusall of such meates, as they made scruple of, had beene alwaies accounted the iustest title of glorious martyrdome amongst the Iewes. And albeit these lawes concerning vncleane meates were indeed antiquated at the alteration of the Priesthood; yet should we not meruaile, if at the first planting of the Gospell, many good Christians did make great conscience of eating such meates as were forbidden by them, when Saint Peter himselfe, long after our Sauiours ascension, durst scarce take Gods owne word against his written law, then not abrogated (as he supposed) in this case. For when there came a voice vnto him (as it is)Act. 10. v. 13. saying, Arise Peter, kill and eate, Peter said, Not so Lord, for I haue neuer eaten any thing that is polluted, or vncleane. And the voice came vnto him againe the second time, saying, the things that God hath purified doe not thou account polluted. Nor was Peter, as it seemes, yet fully satisfied, for it is added in the next words: This was so done thrice, and the vess^ll was drawne vp againe into heauen. All these circumstances abundantly euince, that it was not the bare doubt or scruple, but the qualitie of the things doubted of, and the inueterate opinion, or abhominable conceite, which the Iewes, or other of their instruction, had of the meates themselues, that made their eating to beeThis phrase includeth a contrarietie or opposition vnto faith as (...) and many like phrases, as vsuall in the Hebrew Dialect, as the Latine compounds immitis, immisericors, etc. (...), so fa^re from being of faith, that it rather seemed to ouerthrow it. Had the excesse of the daunger they feared beene lesse, or had there beene any ordinarie possibilitie of any proportionable good to set against it: their sinne in eating had beene lesse, albeit the grounds of their scruple had beene greater, or their perswasions one way or other lesse setled.
10 Albeit this exposition of our Apostle, may seeme strange and new to many honest and well disposed minds in our Church: yet in truth, the manner of the deduction only is new, the doctrine it selfe is generally held by all Diuines, though not expresly in conclusion, yet in the premises, wherein it is essentially contained, and may be most euidently deduced; thus.
11The former interpretation necessarily follow^th from grounds of diuinitie acknowledged by all. All sinne consists, either in preferring none before some, the lesse before a greater, or a corporall before a spirituall good: the hainousnesse of sinne, in the excesse of difference, betwixt the true good neglected, and the seeming good embraced, which is
 eyther absolutely euill, or else a farre lesse good, which in competition with the greater good is likewise to bee accounted euill. Now, if whatsoeuer be not of faith be a sinne, then by the former rules it is a sinne, because a lesse good is preferred before a greater, or some euill chosen without any proportionable good, that might serue as a sufficient recompence. But if the nature of all actuall sinne consist in one of these two: It is questionable, how or in what case, doubting or scruple of what we do, doth make our actions sinfull.How scruples or doubt of what we doe, concurre to make our actions sinfull. Briefely, it is an externall cause, or circumstance, concurring to the making of a sinfull action, not any essentiall part, or internall circumstance of the sinne it selfe once caused. And it thus concurres onely, when that which in it selfe is euill, or proues so in the euent, would not be euill vnto vs, vnlesse we had some doubt or scruple, that is, some notice or apprehension of it as euill: In such cases indeed we should not sinne, vnlesse we had formerly doubted: but to speake exactly, we doe not sin, because we doe what we doubt of, but because in doingAs when the euill feared, is greater than any good that can be hoped. some actions, when we doubt, we actually preferre euill before good; which otherwise we should not, albeit we did the selfe same action. For it could not be euill to vs, without the apprehension of its nature, so as the apprehension of it concurres to the making of it euill. And because in all doubts or scruples, there is some apprehension of euill: therefore when we doubt, in cases aboue mentioned our actions are not of faith, but sinfull. But if eyther we could be fully perswaded to the contrarie; that is, if we could out of sinceritie of conscience, and setled iudgement, discerne that very thing which eyther we ourselues sometimes did, or others yet, apprehend as euill, not to be truly euill: the same action, which before had beene, shall not be now sinfull vnto vs: because we now preferre not euill before good. Or againe, albeit the thing were in it selfe euill, (as being prohibited by some positiue law,) but we vpon inuincible or vnculpable ignorance, did not apprehend it for such: wee should not actually sin in doing it, because in this case, wee could not truly be censured for preferring euill before good (seeing the apprehension maketh it euill to vs) albeit we did prefer that which was euill, before that which was good. As for example: If a Proselite should haue eaten swines flesh, being altogether ignorant (not by his owne, but the Priests negligence) of the Israelites law to the
 contrarie: he had done that which was euill, because forbidden by the law, but notMalum non male. ill, because he had no apprehension of it as euill, but did eate it without all scruple, as well as the strong in faith did in Saint Pauls time. As doubting, in those cases wherein wee haue an apprehension of some excesse of euill, makes mens actions not to be of faith; and want of doubt, (so all other circumstance be obserued) makes them to be according vnto faith:The same action though simply euill in both, may be lesse of faith in him that doth it confidently, then in another that doth it not without scruple. so it oft-times falles out, that such as nothing doubt whether they do ill or no, do sinne farre more than such, as not without great scruple of conscience make the same sinister choyce. For, oft-times the causes why men make no scruple, or why they apprehend not the euill which they doe, are such, as will necessarily make their actions worse, than if they had doubted, and yet had done the same. This rule holds alwaies true, when the cause, why men doubt not of their actions, is some inordinate desire of gaine, pleasure, or other like corrupt affection, or some strong humour of contradiction: not stedfast or well-grounded resolution, not pure simplicitie, or inuincible ignorance, not occasioned by default or negligence in our vocation. If scruple eyther hath not beene conceiued, or else expelled vpon these later motiues, our actions are thereby iustifiable or excusable: but where strength of inordinate affection or desire^, either expelles or impaires a scruple (of some excessiue euill,) which hath beene conceiued (though amisse,) or hinders the conceiuing of some such doubt or scruple, in matters whose vnlawfulnesse might well be doubted of, or rather might clearely bee discerned, and ought with resolution to be auoyded: there the action is so much the more sinfull, as the scruple is lesse, or their confidence or boldnesse that vndertake it greater. The difference betwixt him that in this case doubteth, and him that doubteth not. is altogether such as Moralistes acknowledge betwixt the actions of intemperate and incontinent men.



CHAP. VIII.
Who most transgresse our Apostles former rule: with directions for squaring our actions vnto it or other rules of faith.
1 FRom what hath beene said in this point we may safely gather, that none in our daies so much transgresse, as those that perswade themselues, they most precisely keepe this rule of our Apostle, which indeed was the rule of conscience, and of nature. They of all others transgresse it most, that make no scruple of denying obedie^ce, but confidently aduenture vpon any course of life, against their Pastors serious admonitions, for their spirituall good. For whosoeuer doth any thing for his owne priuate commoditie, or bodily good, which (though he doubt not) might vpon due examination, and attention to his Pastor, seeme doubtfull whether it may not endanger his soule, or impaire his spirituall estate, doth in so doing, sinne against his owne soule, and wound his conscience: because there is no proportion betweene the good which he seekes,Hoc itaque de vno sibi genere non edendo, vbi aleorum tanta copia subiacebat, tam leue praeceptum ad obseruandum, tam breue ad memoria retinendum, vbi praesertim nondum voluntati cupiditas resistebat quod de poena transgressionis postea subsccutum est, tanto maiore in^u^lit^a violatum ^st, quanto faciliore possit obseruantia custodiri. Aug. 4. de Ciu. Dei lib. 41. cap. 12. and the euill which he might iustly feare. Such actions too well resemble our first parents sinne, who preferred the momentarie pleasures of their licorish tast, before the perpetuitie of their estate in Paradise, wherein did grow much better fruit than that they so greedily longed for. And we may as truly say, that our first parents were condemned for eating, as those that doubted of the lawfulnesse of what they eate. They did not eate of faith more than the others but lesse: although they were perswaded, that God rather had dealt hardly with them in forbidding them to eate, than that they should giue iust offence to God in eating. But the bolder they were, the greater was their sinne, and lesse of faith, nay most against faith: because their incontinent desires had expelled all feare, and made them co^fident.
2 The best methode to square our actions to the rule of faith, would be this. First, to be rightly instructed and perswaded in what order, or ranke of goodnesse, obedience to spirituall gouernours ought to be placed. Secondly, (hauing found out the true
 nature and qualitie, and due estimation of obedience in generall,) to accou^t the degrees of goodnesse, which appeare in this or that particular act of obedience. And these are to be taken, according to the generalitie, or soueraigntie of the authoritie commanding, or according to the manner, and tenour of the command, or charge it selfe; as, those commands are to be obeyed with more alacritie, (although they proceed from the same, or equall authoritie,) in which obedience is demanded vpon stricter, or more adiuring termes, or wherein the zealous desires of men in authoritie are eyther more fully and significantly expressed to all, or more liuely intimated vnto vs in particular.
3 Thirdly, to calculate the inconuenience, or scandales that may arise from our disobedience. For albeit we might denie obedience in sundrie particulars, with farre safer consciences than others could, yea, although it were indifferent for vs (as perhaps in diuers cases it is to some men) to performe or denie obedience:This is a point, which I am perswaded, many haue lesse regarded than had been requisite, as not considering that our Apostles rule might be violated, as well by the omission of some actions as by the commission of others. or that the same offence might be giuen to weake and tender consciences, by emboldening them to denie obedience, as was giuen in our Apostles time, by emboldening them to eate of things suspected for vnlawfull Nor can we doubt but many in our time haue made scruple of matters inioyned by lawfull account, onely from the example of others whom they reuerenced. yet we should alwaies haue an especiall care, that we embolden not others, (who haue not the like motiues, or cannot be so well perswaded) to doe the like, by our example. For so we may commit the selfe same sinne, which they that were strong in faith did, by causing others to eate such meates, as they eyther made scruple of before they eate, or else were vpbraided by their consciences after they had eaten: And (as I intimated before) vnlesse disobedience be vpon euident, and well grounded resolutions, it is as dangerous a si^ne as a man can practise, and of all sinnes that are, it is most properly said to be (...) not of faith, seeing faith and obedience (amongst all other vertues,) are of most strict alliance. Neyther is there any breach or defect of faith, but in some disobedience or other; no sinne, but in disobedience to the rule of faith. Which l^ter (God willing) shall afterwards more plainely appeare.
4 Lastly, we are diligently to consider the hopes, or probabilities of goodnesse eyther inherent, or consequent to the actions themselues, which are to be vndertaken.
5 All these considerations must be put in opposite ballance to our doubts, or feares of euill, whether inherent or consequent to the same actions, or matters inioyned, if we were left to our owne choice; or to the probabilities, or iealousies, which we may haue,
 that the forme of publike commaund is contrarie to Gods law. Although for doubts or scruples conceiued out of priuate dislike to the things inioyned, onely because we see no expresse warrant for them out of Scripture, or because they goe against our consciences: we need not so much to oppose former considerations, to ouersway the^, as seeke to extirpate the^. For after the interpositio^ of authority, we may rather suspect that these doubts are not of faith, but of humour, vnlesse we can deriue them from some opposition, betwixt the publike edicts inioyning obedience, and the law of God, which must be presumed to countenance, as long as it doth not contradict, superiours actions, because it giues authoritie and commission to make them. Euery doubt, or scruple, that such edicts are formally or directly contrarie to Gods law, is not sufficient to denie obedience vnto them: nor doe spiritual Gouernours, in demanding obedience to such as their inferiours suspect to bee against Gods law, oppose humane authoritie to diuine, or desire men to obey them rather than God, as some friuolously haue obiected. Indeed the least probabilitie or suspition of disobeying God, should make vs refuse to obey man, in case our disobedience vnto man redounded onely to man, and not to God. But in as much as Christ hath said, He that heareth you, heareth mee, disobedience vnto spirituall gouernours is disobedience vnto Christ, yea vnto God. And therefore obedience may not be denied vnto such, but vpon great and waightie motiues, and serious examination of such reasons, as moue vs to thinke, that their edicts are contrarie, or opposite to Gods lawes. Otherwise we should preferre a coniecturall conceit, or surmise of obeying God rather than man, before a greater probabilitie of obeying God by obeying man. For it is certaine in general, that men in spirituall authoritie should be obeyed, and that in obeying them we obey God: but vncertaine and coniecturall, (according to our supposition) whether in this particular they should be disobeyed, and therefore vncertaine, whether God, by our deniall of obedience, should bee disobeyed or obeyed.
6By obeying humane authoritie deriued f^om diuine (in the generall) we may in some particulars inioyned by it, diso^ey diuine autho itie it selfe directly and immediately. Albeit I must confesse, there must a difference be put betwixt the immediate and direct disobeying of Gods expresse lawes, resulting from ob^dience vnto mans lawes that are opposite vnto them; and the disobeying of Gods lawes immediately or by consequence:
 that is, by disobeying mens lawes, whose authoritie is deriued from them. As if a priuate man should obey a publike Magistrate commanding him, or his Pastor perswading him, vnder some faire pretence to tell a lie, or preiudice his neighbour by false reports, he doth immediately and directly disobey the ninth commandement by thus obeying man. And this sin may iustly seeme greater, than his that should denie obedience to publike authoritie in such matters, as are by it commend d vnto him for good, and as much tending vnto Gods glorie as the former did to his dishonour: but yet such as the partie denying obedience is not so perswad^d of, nor hath any such particular, expresse, or immediate law of God for doing this, as the other had for not doing the former. This later then disobeyes Gods law, which commaunds obedience to authoritie in lawfull matters; but not so directly, and immediatly as the former did the ninth commandement. Wherefore the former sins are worse in their kind; the worst of the^ is worse than the worst of the later; the least of the former, worse than the least of the later kind:Hard to determine what degrees of feare, least we shou^d, by obeying mans lawes, disobey Gods lawes immediatly, ough^ to expel all feare of disobeying mans lawes, whose authoritie in generall is from Gods. but in what degree or proportion they are worse is hard to define, and therefore a verie d^fficult point to determine, what degrees of probabilities, or what measure of feare, least they should disobey Gods lawes immediately, and directly, by obeying mans that seem opposit vnto them, should ouersway our generall certainty, that Gods deputies on earth are to be obeied, or our habitual inclination to Christia^ obedience grounded hereon. Most certaine we are, that they must be obeyed in all lawfull cases, or where their lawes are not opposite vnto Gods: and if wee were certaine, that theirs were contrarie to Gods lawes, we are as certaine, by the doctrine of faith, that they should bee disobeyed. But when we doubt whether their degrees be against Gods lawes, we cannot but doubt, and doubting feare, least we should disobey God directly in obeying them. And by the former reasons, it is euident, that if the doubt were equall on both sides; that is, were it as probable that their co^mands are against Gods as not* we were bound in conscience not to obey the^; because we shold commit a greater sin in obeying them, if they were indeed opposite, than we should in disobeying them, supposing they were not opposite or contrarie to Gods lawes. For in the one case we should disobey Gods lawes directly and immediately: in the other only mediately,
 and by consequence. Now of two euils equally probable, the lesse must be aduentured vpon, and the g^eater more eschewed.
7 YetSometimes by disobeying mens iniunctions we may disobey Gods lawes both mediately and immediately. oft-times againe it may fall out, that the things commaunded by publike authoritie, may bee in themselues verie good, and commaunded, at least in their vniuersall, by some particular Lawe of God. As if a spirituall Gouernour, should in the name of Christ commaund, or adiure a man (otherwise backward, and fearing the face of great men) to witnesse the truth for his poore neighbours good: If obedience in this case were denied, both Gods particular commaundement should bee immediately and directly transgressed, and that generall Lawe also bee transgressed by consequence, which commaundes obedience to Gods Ministers, or Embassadours. And it is all one, whether the matter inioyned be actually knowne for such as I haue said, vnto the partie denying obedience: or might haue beene knowne vpon due exmination, and supposall of his former obedience to his Pastor in other points. The further prosecution of these matters I leaue vnto the learned, th^t purposely write of iurisdiction; Whereof by Gods assistance, according to the talent which God hath giuen v^, in the Article of the Catholicke Church. It may suffice, for our present purpose, to haue shewed, that it is not euerie doubt, or scruple of the vnlawfulnesse of Superiours comma^^ds, that can warrant deniall of obedience to them: and that all inferiours are bound to a sober, diligent, and vnpartiall examination of their owne hearts, and consciences: to a resolute deniall, or abandoning of their owne affections, or desires, that they may be more fit to discerne the t^uth it selfe, and more sincerly waigh the consequence of their Superiours admonitions, before they can pleade the libertie of con^cience, for reiecting them, or appealing from them.
8 Whether any such opposition as I haue spoken of, can probably be found between any expresse law of God, and our Churches publike iniunctions of such rites and ceremonies, as many painefull labourers in Gods haruest haue made scruple of, or whether such scruples haue beene first conceiued vpon probable discouerie of such opposition, after such serious and due examination, I leaue it to their consciences that haue made,
 or doe make them: beseeching God, for the good of his Church, and his glories sake, to inspire many of their harts but with this cogitation; Whether were more likely, That they themselues should commit any act of infidelitie or Poperie, by continuance in their pastorall charge, vpon such termes as many of their religious and learned brethren doe: or whether Atheisme and Infidelitie should increase abundantly throughout this land by their silence. Many of them I know haue held the things inioyned not absolutely euil, but suspicions, or occasions of euill. And could we in such cases vsually take but halfe that paines, in seeking to preuent the particular euils, which publike acts, (we feare) may occasion, as we doe in censuring them for inconsiderate, or occasions of euill, or finally, as we doe in breeding iealousies of their vnlawfulnesse: the euils which we feare, would not fall out halfe so fast, as by this meanes they doe; besides that the vnitie of faith should alwaies be faster kept, in the stricter bond of loue; and true obedience in things essentially good, and necessarie for the preseruation of Gods Church, would be more plentifull and cherefull.
9 But my purpose in this place was, onely to search out the limits of true obedience vnto spirituall authoritie in generall, so farre as it concernes the rectifying of their faith, or edification in manners,That the goodnesse of obedience, by our Apostles rule, (whatsoeuer is not of faith is sinne) ought to moue men vnto such conditional assent and obedience vnto their Pastors as hath beene mentioned. who are to be gouerned and instructed by it. None of them can iustly pretend, (ordinarily) any scruple of such consequence as inferiour Ministers may. If they could but duly consider, and vnpartially esteeme the goodnesse which accompanies obedience (which is better than sacrifice,) and the euill of disobedience, (which is as the sinne of witchcraft) these two laid together would be more then equiualent to any euill that lay-men, or inferiours, vsually conceiue in such actions, as they denie obedience in vnto their Pastors. Nay in this vnbeleeuing age, wherein it is more to be complementall than religious, it is thought an answere good enough, so it be complementally performed vnto their Pastors: We will doe as you aduise, or inioyne vs, in Christs name, if we certainly knew that it were Christs will, or agreeable to Gods word. Whereas in truth, in giuing such answeres, when neither they certainely know, nor are carefull to learne, whether their aduise be contrarie to Gods word or no, they sinne directly against Christian faith, aduancing their owne humors aboue Gods
 word, which commands obedience vnto Pastors, preferring the liberty of their vnruly willes before the safetie of their consciences. And it is preposterous to plead ignorance of Gods wil before the^, whose instructions therein they are bound duly to heare, and hearing to obey, vntill they can light on better, or finde them false, vpon serious and due examination: that is, They must obey them not absolutely and irreuocably, but wi^h limitation and caution. And questionlesse if men did infallibly beleeue, or absolutely from their hearts obey, that which they vndoubtedly know to be Gods will: they would neuer make question, but that, for which they haue presumptions that it is part of Gods will, or that, which is commended vnto them for his will, by such as he hath appointed to be messengers of the same, should be conditionally beleeued, and with caution obeyed, especially when it is deliuered solemnly vpon deliberation, and premeditatio^ or out of that place whence he hath appointed the^ to learne his wil. Did not Priests (as the Prouerb is) forget that euer they were Clearkes, or such as take themselues for great proficients, that they were sometimes Nouices in the schole of Christ: they might remember how they came vnto that absolute and infallible beliefe of those Christian principles, by which they hope for saluation, by entertaining this conditional beliefe, which we speake of, and by yeelding like obedience vnto diuine truthes, now fully, but at the first imperfectly, knowne for such. And albeit such generall articles of Christian faith, as are necessarie for all to beleeue, neither increase, nor diminish their number: yet if we descend vnto the diuersitie of mens estates and callings, and difference of time and place: Christian faith receiueth perpetuall increase, not onely in it proper strength, or as we say by way of intention, but in extent also vnto many particulars, eyther directly contained (though not so easie to be discerned) as essentiall parts vnder the former generall principles, or else annexed vnto them collaterally as limmes or borders. Besides, all Christian duties, or matters of practise, are not promiscuously fit for euery time or place, but must be seuerally proportioned to their diuersitie. Againe, the same duties, (I meane of the same kinde) must be performed in different measure, according to the different exigence of time, place, persons, or other occurrents. In all these and many more respects is this conditionall assent, and obedience vnto Pastors
 most necessarie. And ere men can retaine stedfastly that which is best, they must make triall of all, or many things of different kinds: and yet triall of spirituall medicines without spirituall Physitio^s prescripts, is so much more dangerous to ordinary mens soules, than like triall of Phisicke-conclusions is to their bodies, by how much such men are more ignorant of the state of their soules, than of their bodies. The necessitie and vse of what hath beene deliuered concerning obedience in generall, will appeare in sundrie points to be discust hereafter. In respect of which (especially of that point concerning the manner, how wee may know the sense of Scriptures, and that concerning the nature of Christian faith,) some further vnfolding of this conditionall assent and obedience will be likewise necessarie.


CHAP. IX.
Of the nature, vse, conditions, or Properties of conditionall assent or obedience.
1 THE first step in the way to life, is from this infallible ground of nature; Whatsoeuer God hath reuealed concerning matters of mans saluation, is most true, and by all meanes to be obeyed. This Principle all men absolutely capable of reason, acknowledging a God, doe beleeue: and from their absolute beliefe hereof they yeeeld a conditionall obedience, and reuerence vnto those bookes which we call Scripture. From the triall of whose truth, we rise a steppe or degree higher, and vndoubtedly acknowledge certaine generall Principles contained in Scripture, (without whose beliefe no man ordinarily can be saued) for the Oracles of God, or diuine Reuelations: and vnto them we yeeld absolute obedience. This second steppe brings men within the listes, or borders of Christianitie, where no Christian man is to set vp his rest. Euen the meanest that beares that name, once come to yeares of discretion, or capable of instruction, must hold on his progresse still, thus resoluing with himselfe: Though I must be as a child for innocencie,
 yet not in knowledge of Gods will. A shame it were I should alwaies be a babe in that profession, which of all is onely necessarie; a shame I should accustome my selfe to milke, for this were to nourish vnexpert babishnesse in the word of righteousnesse. A Christian I was from my cradle, and now as old a Christian as a man: butHeb. chap. 4, vers. 13. strong meate is fit for them that are of age which haue (or should haue) their wits exercised through long custome, to discerne good from euill:Phil. 3. v. 10.14.15. Let therefore as many as be perfect (or would be) be thus minded. not the fundamentall principles of Christian religion onely, without which none can be saued: not he that hath professed Christianitie but an houre, These are grounds which once surely laid, must (as the Apostle speaketh) beHeb. 6. v. 1.2. left that we may be led on to perfection, not alwaies hammering vpon the foundation of repentance from dead workes, of faith towards God, or of Baptisme, of laying on of hands, of the resurrection from the dead, and of eternall iudgement, but seeking to build vpon these, whatsoeuer is befitting present times or seasons, whatsoeuer may make our election sure. And they, who laid the former foundations in my heart, seeke yet my farther edification in many points, of whose truth my conscie^ce as yet hath no such firme perswasion or liuely taste, as it now hath of the former: but is so affected towards these later, as it was to the other before better acquaintance with them Should I for this reason, forthwith denie obedience to my instructors? or withdraw assent from matters proposed by them? God forbid: For he hath commanded all, not excepting me, to obey their ouerseers in the Lord. Must we obey them whilest they plant, and may we disobey them whilst they water? how then can I expect, that God should giue increase vnto that faith which they haue planted in my heart? heretofore I trusted them, and I found their sayings true, euen the Oracles of the liuing God: all which I so esteeme, as I had rather abiure this present world than vtterly disclaime any, which vpon like triall, might proue such. What if I know not this particular to be such? I may in good time, be as well perswaded of it, as of the former; if so I will vouchsafe to make like triall of it, by sincere religious obedience.
2 Nor doth the greater stedfastnesse, or infallibilitie of the point beleeued necessarily, exact either obedience of an higher nature, or more intention, or alacritie in the act, than may without offence
 be performed, vnto some other points of doctrine lesse infallible, or lesse euident to their consciences, who must obey. Infallibilitie of it selfe exactes only a more full and absolute title ouer our obedience, than probabilities or presumptions can expect. For that which is infallible, and absolutely beleeued for a diuine truth, exacts such obedience, (both for qualitie and degree,) as is conformable to the nature of the thing proposed, without all limitation, condition, or reseruation: that is, perpetuall and absolute allegeance. That which is but probably, or conditionally assented vnto as diuine truth, (Whatsoeuer the nature of the thing propoposed, the end or consequence pretended, or exigences of other circumstances be,) can exact onely conditionall, or cautionarie obedience: yet obedience, for the qualitie, sutable to the nature of the thing proposed, and for the alacritie, or intention of the act, proportionable to the end or consequence pretended, and auouched by Gods Embassadors. So that if they commend it vnto vs, as fit to be entertained in some higher rancke of goodnesse, or as most necessarie for the present time, albeit we our selues doe not apprehend the same as expresly commaunded by God: yet may we performe obedience, both as sincere for the qualitie, and entire for degree, as we doe vnto some other things, which we stedfastly beleeue to be commanded in Gods word. But wee must not tender our obedience vnder the same stile or title. Absolute obedience, of what kinde soeuer, we may not yeeld vnto it, vntill it be absolutely knowne for Gods will. When it is once knowne for such, we must absolutely yeeld vp the same obedience, which before was but conditionally yeelded: as a man may pay the same summe vpon caution, before hee be throughly perswaded of the demaunders right vnto it, which after his right be fully knowne, he paies absolutely. In this case these foure things must be considered.
Foure points to be considered for the rectifying or right framing of our assent vnto truthes proposed.3 First, the assurance or probabilitie which we can haue, that the thing proposed is Gods word. Which sometimes may bee grounded vpon reasons, (eyther communicate vnto vs by our Pastor or others, or conceiued by our selues,) as well as vpon authoritie: sometimes all the assurance, which men of lesse capacitie can haue, is only from the Pastors authoritie. Secondly, the title, or pretended nature of the truth proposed. Thirdly, the act or qualitie
 of obedience. Fourthly, the manner or limitatio^ of our obedience.
4 The act or qualitie of our obedience, (so we be more probably perswaded that it is Gods word, than otherwise, or know nothing to the contrarie) must be proportioned to the title, or nature of the thing proposed, which is commended vnto vs as a spirituall good. So that our obedience must be religious and spirituall, not meerely ciuil: although our best motiue, why we hold it to be a diuine Oracle, or spirituall good, be the authoritie of our teacher, which is but humaine; but now he exacts not obedience to his owne authoritie, but vnto Gods word, (as he affirmes:) which because we know is diuine, therefore we must yeeld religious, obedience to it; and therefore religious, albeit conditionall obedience vnto this precept, which we probably know to be diuine, and assent vnto conditionally as such. The act of our obedience in this particular, must proceed from the same habite, from which our actes of obedience vnto such truthes, as we infallibly beleeue for diuine, doe: for euen this verie act, is performed primarily and absolutely to Gods word in generall, vnto which we owe religious and spirituall obedience: and vnto this particular (inioyned by our Pastor) onely secondarily, and vpon supposition that it is part of Gods word. So as if the particular by him inioyned, should in the euent proue no part of Gods word: yet obeying it onely vpon the former motiues, it might be truly said, we had obeyed Gods word, not it; as he that shewes kindnesse to a stranger, vpon presumption that he is a brother or alliance of his deare and familiar friend, albeit he were mistaken herein, may be said to haue done a friendly office rather to his knowne acquaintance, for whose sake he vsed the stranger kindly, than vnto the stranger himselfe thus kindly vsed vpon a mistake. But albeit the qualitie be such, as Gods word absolutely knowne requires: yet the manner of our obedience must be limited by the degrees of probabilitie, or morall certaintie, which we haue of this particular, that it is Gods Oracle. Where the probabilities are lesse, and the inducements for beliefe of this particular weaker, there the condition of our assent, and reseruation of our obedience must bee more expresse: that is, we must stand further off from yeelding absolute, and be more inclined to renounce this present conditioniall obedience (which we yet performe,) vpon lesser motiues
 to the contrarie, then we would, if our probabilities for beleeuing it were greater. Where the probabilities, or inducements for beleefe of this particular, are greater and stronger, there wee must the more incline vnto absolute and irreuocable obedience, or assent vnto the same particular: and be more vnreadie, or vnwilling to recall our assent, or renounce our obedience, but vpon greater and more euident reasons. Onely there we are to fixe our beliefe absolutely; onely there we may safely, vndoubtedly, and fully passe ouer our full and absolute obedience vnto it, without all condition, limitation of time, or reseruation: when the truth of it shall be as fully confirmed, and manifested to our consciences, as the others are, vnto which we haue formerly yeelded absolute obedience, without appeale or reseruation: or when wee can as clearely discerne, and as stedfastly beleeue, the consonancie of this particular with the formers, as wee can the formers with Gods word.
5 And whereas we said before, that the onely motiues which some men haue to beleeue the sense and meaning of sundrie doctrines, (necessarie perhaps vnto them in particular at some seasons, when God shall call them to some extraordinarie point of obedience) might be the authoritie of their teachers: this authothoritie may bee greater or lesse, according to the qualitie of the Minister or spirituall Gouernour. As the world goes now a daies, this function is committed to some, in whose mouth the word of God, or any good doctrine, may rather seeme to lose its vertue and power, than his any way binde men to obedience, vnlesse besides his commendation of what hee proposeth, they haue other motiues to perswade them, that it is Gods word, or wholesome doctrine. If the minister, who should carrie Gods message, be such a one as Sir Thomas Moore iested vpon, That he would not for any good heare him say the Creed, lest he should take it for a lie comming out of his mouth: It is doubtfull what the people should do in such a case, albeit he exact obedience vpon their vow in Baptisme, if they haue no other motiue but his authoritie. Yet for all this, it is not best to be too bold in contemning his admonitions, or adiurations, vnlesse they be apparantly false. In this case others more sincere and skilfull, or such as haue authoritie to examine his doctrine, should be consulted, his may not be neglected in all
 particulars, vpon a generall preiudice of his lewdnesse or simplicitie. For though his life be bad, yet may his meditations for that present, wherein he publikely speakes, be good and fruitfull vnto them, so they will yeeld due obedience to his doctrine. And although a man should know a Constable, or some greater Officer, that pretends commission from the King, to be a notorious lying knaue, or treacherous companion: yet were it not the safest way to tell him he lied, when he charged him to obey him in the Kings name, nor to make a scoffe of his authoritie, or replie he would not beleeue he had any, because he might abuse himselfe, and it at other times: If so he doe at this time, he may answere it before his betters hereafter: but in the meane while, it were best for the partie commanded to obey him, vntill he be certaine, that he did eyther faine authoritie, where he had none, or else abuse it in this particular. He that should yeeld obedience, being thus (perhaps wrongfully) charged in the Kings name, (so hee yeeld it for this reason, and vpon this condition:) shal not be thought guiltie of disloyaltie, albeit he be hereby brought to commit some fact, distastefull to his Maiestie, or publike peace. For the fault in this case, must be returned vpon the Author: if so the partie obeying did not know it to bee simply vnlawful, and against the Kings peace, or had no opportunity of consulting other publike Officers, but hath beene abused, by the craft and cunning of the other, who hath concealed his end, intention, or other circumstance which made the fact vnlawfull. It is enough to disclaime his former obedience when he knowes the truth. And if Officers should not be obeyed in the Kings name, vntill men sought the truth, whether they had a lawfull commission, or but a counterfait, or whether they did not goe beyond their commission: the Kings Maiestie should want a great deale of necessarie seruice, and the Common-weale bee at an ill passe for continuance of publike peace. Did most men feare God, as much as men, or the sonne of man, the Iudge of quicke and dead, as much as earthly Iudges: they would not so often withdraw their necke from the yoake of Christian obedience, (being charged to vndertake it in Christs name, and as they would answere it at that dreadfull day,) vpon such sillie exceptions against the meanenesse, basenesse, or lewdnesse of the Ministers person. Bee hee as they list to make
 him for his life, it hath pleased God to make him his messenger, his officer to demaund obedience of them. And shall it serue their turne to say, we will not beleeue that God sent him with this message, or sure he goes beyond his commission: when they know nothing to the contrarie; but onely will take occasion from his person, to discredite his doctrine, if it controll them in the pursuit of worldly affaires? And God knowes for whose sake it is: wee all may feare, it is especially for the infidelity and disloialty of this people towards him, and their disobedience to his messengers, that he sends them such idle, foolish, or lewd Pastors, as they haue in many places. Because the Laitie of this land are so prone and headstrong to cast off Christes yoake, and to denie due obedience to his faithfull Ministers: he therefore sets such watchmen ouer them in many places, as they shall haue no lust to obey in any thing that they shall propose vnto them, but harden their hearts in infidelitie and disobedience. Albeit I should prosecute this point a great deale further, I should not much digresse from my maine purpose and drift, which God he knowes is no other, but to bring home sillie soules from yeelding this blinde obedience to the Romaine forraine yoke. For the diuerting of which from this lands and peoples neckes, I know no better meanes, than to take vp Christs yoake vpon vs. For questionlesse, this open malapert scoffing disobedience to all Ecclesiasticke power now openly professed by the meanest, and countenanced by many great ones of the Laitie, is the sinne, which to all that know Gods iudgements, or haue beene obseruant to looke into the daies of our visitation, cries lowdest in the Almghties eares, (more lowd by much than Fryars, Monkes, and Iesuites prayers doe,) for Gods vengeance vpon this land: for vengeance to be executed by no other than our sworne, inueterate, malitious enemies; by no other grieuances, than by the doubled grieuances of the long enraged Romanistes iron-yoake, which is now prepared for vs ten times more heauie and irksome, than was that which our forefathers haue borne. It were hard to determine, whether Atheisme and Infidelitie amongst professed Prorestants, or superstition and Idolatrie amongst the Papists, haue more increased throughout this land in later yeares: or, whether the Romish Priests and Iesuites haue beene mo^e industrious, and earnest to sow the seeds of the one, than sundrie
 which oppose themselues most eagerly against them, haue been to foster and cherish the other: both perhaps (vnto their seeming) for a good intent: neither intending either mischief expresly and directly: For so the reluctation of conscience would haue abated their indeuours: nor could Idolatrie, or Infidelitie haue growene so fast, had their fosterfathers seene them in their proper shape. But both haue masked in sheeps clothing, both had their faces couered with zeale.
6 Sure, if there be degrees of malignancie in hellish Ghostes, the most potent factions of most malignant spirits, throughout the infernall Anarchie, the one vpon emulation of the others might or abilities in doing euill, striue for glorie by doing greatest mischiefe in this land. The one part hath made choice of their fairest meanes, by solliciting, partly desperate discontents, partly, sillie soules (vnder pretence of ancient Catholike Religion) to superstition, and Idolatrie: the other, by driuing proud and disobedient mindes, vpon their deadly dislike of popish tyrannie, to cast off the yoake of Christian obedience, and vnder pretence of Christian libertie, to rush headlong into hypocrisie, Atheisme, or Infidelitie. For euen where the best and most industrious Ministers are, throughout this land, how scarce is this Christian obedience to bee found? Let the Pastors skill and sinceritie bee neuer so great, let him tell his flock, for whose soules he must answer, that they must doe thus and thus, if they will be saued: they can be diligent perhaps to heare him, and say he spake exceeding well. [1] Verie ill of others (as they coniecture) but not of them or their adherents: If for his good lessons in the Pulpit he haue good words returned at table, he seeth the best fruits of his labour. For if one of his flock shall haue an aduantage against his neighbour, or haue picked a quarrell with his Lease; or let a Gentleman bee disposed to put off his tenants, or inhance their rents to their vtter vndoing, let any, gentle or meane, haue but good hope to make his owne great gaine by some others losse: Heere if we trie him, and charge him vpon his allegiance vnto Christ to remit his hold, to let go all aduantage, and be good vnto his fellow-seruant, or poore brother, these are matters the Minister must meddle no more with than another man, the law can determine whether he he doe right, or wrong, and this case belongs properly vnto the Lawyer. As if the power of Gods Spirit, or authoritie of his Misters
 did consist onely in words, and required no other obedience, than a formall speculatiue assent vnto their generall doctrine, not a full resignation of mens willes, or heartie submission of affections, vnto such rules as they shal prescribe, for the preseruation of a good and vpright conscience in particular actions, or entercourse of humane affaires. Or if one of a thousand will be so good as to grant that he is to obey the precepts of Christ, before the customes of our common law, or other ciuill courts: yet euen the best of such, when it comes to points of priuate commoditie, will dispense with his Pastor, and replie: I would doe as you admonish me, if I saw any expresse commaund for it in Gods word, or any euide^t necessity that should bind me to renounce that right which law doth giue me: but for ought I can perceiue, I may prosecute my right in this present case, with a safe conscience, and you doe not know all particular circumstances, which belong vnto this matter; if you did, or were in my case, I am perswaded you would be of my mind. This although it be the only shelter, vnder which the infidelitie of later ages takes its rest, the onely dorture wherein hypocrisie sleepes profoundly, and neuer dreames of further danger: yet is it a most sillie excuse, and shamelesse Apologie, in the iudgement of any that knowes, or knowing rightly esteemes, the principles of Christianitie. For, suppose thou see no euidence, that Christ hath commanded thee to confesse his name in this particular, doth the law lay any necessitie vpon thee, to make thee prosecute thy supposed right? If it did charge thee vpon paine of death so to doe, thou hast some pretence to obey it; albeit thou shouldest feare him more, that could condemne thee, and the interpreters of it, to euerlasting death: but the law doth leaue it to thy choise, whether thou wilt vse the benefit of it, or no: and thy Pastour vpon penaltie of incurring Christs displeasure, commaunds thee, that thou vse it not. Thou repliest, thou seest no euidence that Christ commands thee. But doest thou absolutely and infallibly know, that he doth not call thee at this time, to trie thine obedience in this particular? If thou canst out of sinceritie of heart, and euidence of truth, fully informe thy conscience in this negatiue (so the end of thy proceedings be good,) thou maist be the bolder to disclaime thy Pastors summons. If thou canst not, how wilt thou answere thy Iudge, when thou shalt appeare before him, why
 thou out of the stubbornesse of thy heart, didst more respect thy priuate gaine, than his heauiest displeasure? For suppose thy hope of gaine were great, (as it is vsually to such as thou art more great than certaine) yet cannot the greatnesse, and certaintie of it, counteruaile the least danger of incurring his wrath, nor could the certaintie of worldly gaine cou^terpoise, much lesse ouersway, the least surmise or probabilitie of incurring thy soules destruction, vnlesse thy minde had beene set more on gold, than vpon thy God, more inclined to priuate commoditie and selfe-loue, than vnto Christ thy Redeemer. Or shall thy answere stand for good in his sight, when thou shalt say vnto his messenger: It is more then I know, that Christ commands mee? Then should the damned be iustified at the day of iudgement, when they shall truly replie, they knew not that euer Christ did supplicate vnto them sub forma pauperis? Most of them we may safely sweare, had lesse probabilities to beleeue this in their life time, than thou hast now to perswade thee of this particular: although thy Pastors authoritie, and frequent admonitions were set aside; which make thee so much the more inexcusable. For thou mightest haue knowne by him, that God had commanded thee as much, vnlesse thy bad desires had made thee blinde. But neither shal theirs, or thy ignorance herein helpe. For ignorance which is bred of bad desires, corrupt affections, or greedy appetites, brings forth hardnesse of heart, and infidelitie: so that seeing thou shalt not see, and hearing thou shalt not heare, nor vnderstand the warnings for thy peace; because thou hast formerly shut thine eares at thy Pastors admonitions, or raged at his iust reproofe. And the law of God binds thy soule, vpon greater penaltie, and better hopes, than all lawes in the world besides could binde thy bodie, euen vpon hope of euerlasting life, and penaltie of euerlasting death, to lay aside all selfe-loue, all worldly desire, for the finding out of the true sense and meaning of it, as well as to obey it, when thou knowest it. And when any point of doctrine or practise, either in generall or particular, is commended to thee by thy Pastor, Gods word doth binde thee to search, with all sobrietie and modestie, the truth and force of all motiues, inducements, or probabilities which he shall suggest vnto thee; all priuate respect laid aside, least thou become a partiall Iudge of euill thoughts: and if thou
 canst not finde better resolution, it bindes thee to relie vpon his authoritie. And euen in this againe, Gods word (so perfect a rule is it) doth rule thy thoughts, to discerne the fidelitie, sinceritie, or authoritie of thy teacher.
Vnto such as approue themselues, as Saint Paul did2. Cor. 4. v. 2. to euery mans conscience in the sight of God, or to such as make not a marchandize of the word of God, but speake in Christ as of sinceritie, and as of God in the sight of God:2. Cor. 2. v. 17 Christian people are bound to yeeld greater obedience. Generally, vnto such as, in their liues, expresse those characterrs of faithfull dispensers, set downe by Saint Paul, and other Pen-men of Gods word, euery Auditor is bound to yeeld greater obedience, than vnto others, in points wherein he hath no other motiues to beleeue, beside his Pastors authoritie. For this is a dictate of common reason, and cannot but commaund the assent of euerie sanctified mind; That such men are most likely to haue the meaning of Gods Spirit, which walke according to Gods Spirit, and seeke not their owne gaine, glorie, or pleasure, but Christs glory, his will, and peoples good: and such againe are most likely to vse greatest sinceritie in deliuering the truth, which they know, without partialitie or respect of persons. Againe, men are bound (caeteris paribus) to beleeue them best, and obey them most, of whose skill, and sinceritie in dispensing the mysteries of faith, they haue had most comfortable, and spirituall experience. For the article of Gods prouidence binds vs hereto, and willes vs to reuerence our fathers in Christ, eyther such as (by his word) first begot faith, or nourished it in vs, more than others.
Thus much concerning this point, I haue thought good to insert in this place, because the true and sincere practise of obedidience, according to that measure of truth, or beliefe which men haue, though but imperfect, is the excellentest meanes, for attaining the cleare sight of diuine truth, and that perfect measure of sanctifying beliefe, which in this life can bee looked for, as shall (God willing) afterwards appeare.



CHAP. X.
Wherein this conditionall beliefe differeth from the Romanes implicite faith. That the one is the other, not subordinate to Gods word, or Rule of faith.
1 AS this opinion of conditionall assent vnto diuine truthes, not absolutely knowne for such, holdes the meane betwixt the two extreames, or contrarie errours aboue mentioned: So is this conditionall assent it selfe a meane, betwixt that absolute beleefe, which all acknowledge to be necessary in some principall points of Christian faith, and that implicite beliefe, which the Romish Church exactes in all points whatsoeuer. Our assent vnto many articles of faith, is actually,What implicite faith is. and expresly absolute. The implicite beliefe of the Romanists is but potentially, or rather vertually, and implicitely absolute: This conditionall beliefe, hitherto mentioned, not so much as potentially, much lesse implicitely, or virtually absolute. That properly is beleeued by an implicite faith, which is not actually, and expresly assented vnto in the particular: but yet is so essentially and immediately contained in some generall article, or point of faith absolutely or expresly beleeued, that this particular likewise is assented vnto in grosse, whilest we assent to it, and may be as absolutely as expresly, and distinctly assented vnto, as the generall, when it is once explicated and vnfolded. In this sense we say, the conclusion is implicitely contained in the premisses, the corallarie in the Thaeoreme, or the immediate consequent in his necessarie antecedent. For he that grants one of these absolutely, must vpon the same termes grant the other, at the first proposall of it vnto him. But this conditionall, or reseruatiue beliefe may be of such points, as are not certainly, and infallibly co^tained in any principle of faith, absolutely, expresly, actually, or infallibly acknowledged; much lesse so essentially, and immediately contained in any, that a man cannot absolutely grant it, but he must absolutely beleeue them. And albeit oft-times, they may be infallibly deduced from known vndoubted principles of faith, yet is not the deduction so immemediate,
 as can be made cleare, and euident to all capacities, at least not at the first sight, without any further increase of knowledge in spirituall matters. And before the deduction be made as euident, and apprehended as infallible, as are the generall articles whence they are deduced, the particulars deduced from them may not be so infallibly and absolutely beleeued, as the generals are. The Papists, besides their explicite beleefe of some few maine points, demaund an implicite beliefe of as many particulars as the Church shall propose: so as whatsoeuer the Church shall propose, with them once proposed, admits no co^ditional beliefe: all must be absolute, albeit the parties beleeuing cannot discerne any necessarie, or probable deduction of the particulars, from generall points absolutely and expresly beleeued. It is enough that they know them to be proposed by the Church. For once beleeuing, Whatsoeuer the Church saith is most infallible, (which is the maine article of Romane faith,) no man can denie any particular proposed by it to bee infallible, more than he can denie the conclusion for certaine, after he hath granted the premisses for such. Consequently to these positions, they make the visible Church the rule andA speech well beseeming the seruants of the great whore. mistresse of mens faith, as they speake. For albeit a man at this present thinke otherwise of many points of greatest moment, than the Church or Pope doth, or though he thinke not at all of many things, which they in time may propose vnto him: yet after they haue proposed, either a contrary opinion to that which his conscience tels him is Gods word, or a new and strange position, which he neuer thought of, he must without more adoe, beleeue both absolutely and expresly, and so finally, retract, extend, enlarge, a bridge direct and frame his faith, according to that rule or standard, which they shall set him.That the faith of moderne Papists cannot be resolued into the Scriptures or the first truth. Hence (God willing) shall appeare the madnesse of some great schollers among them, who holding the Church to be such a rule of faith, would perswade vs, (if we would be so simple,) that their last resolution of faith is, not into the Churches authoritie, but into the Scripture. For nothing can be resolued beyond it rule, and to make the Churches authoritie such an absolute, authenticke, vnquestionable rule of faith, as the Papists do, and withall to seeke the resolution of any point of faith further then it, or to deriue it from Scripture, doth argue such a medley of folly and impietie, as if some gullish Gentleman, desirous
 to proue the antiquitie of his house, should draw his pedigree from Adams great grandfather, and yet hold the records of Moses for most vndoubted and true, which affirme Adam to haue beene the first progenitour of all mankinde. Whether they seeke to resolue their faith into the Scriptures acknowledged by vs and them, or into other vnwritte^ reuelatio^s, pretended for diuine truthes, their folly will still appeare the same, so long as they hold that impious and blasphemous opinion, making the Churches authoritie such a rule of faith, as hath beene said. Their iniuries and contumelies vnto Gods written Oracles (as hath heretofore been intimated) are especially two. First, they denie them to be any entire rule, for the number of precepts. Secondly, they make those verie precepts, which are acknowledged for diuine, insufficient for the establishment of true faith vnto themselues, without the Churches authoritie. We acknowledge them, euery way sufficient for the edification of Christs Church in faith and maners: and consequently both to our positions, and the truth, we teach, that all matters of faith, must be finally resolued into these diuine written verities, which for this reason we acknowledge the only infallible rule of faith: The meaning of which assertion is here to be further explicated, that so the truth may be maintained against their obiections.


CHAP. XI.
In what sense we hold the Scriptures to be the rule of faith.
1 WHen we affirme, that the Scriptures are the only infallible rule in matters of faith and Christian obedience, we vnderstand such a rule in those matters, as Aristotles Organon may be said of Logick: supposing it were sound, and free from all suspicion of error in euery point, and contained in it all the generall and vndoubted principles, from which all true forme of argumentation must be deduced, and into which all must be finally resolued. To illustrate this truth, by a known practise. Our yonger students are bound to yeeld their absolute assent vnto Aristotles authoritie, in matters of Logicke: but not vnto any interpreter, that shall pretend it, saue onely when he shall make euident vnto them, that this was Aristotles
 meaning. And while they so onely, and no otherwise yeeld their assent, they yeeld it wholy and immediately vnto Aristotle, not to the interpreter, although by his meanes they came to know Aristotles meaning; which once knowne, without any further confirmation of other testimonie or authoritie, commands their obedience and assent. But ere they can fully assent vnto this great Master, or throughly perceiue his meaning, they must conditionally assent vnto their priuate Tutors, or other expositors, and take his sense and meaning vpon their trust, and credite. In like manner (say we) in all matters, doctrines, or controuersies of faith, and Christian obedience, we are bound to yeeld our assent, directly, absolutely, and finally vnto the authoritie of Scriptures onely: not vnto any Doctor, Expositor, or other whosoeuer he be, that shall pretend authoritie out of Scripture ouer our faith, saue onely when he shall make it cleare, and euident vnto vs, that his opinion is the true meaning of the Scripture. And thus yeelding our absolute assent vnto the truth explained by him, wee yeeld it not to him, but vnto the Author of truth, whose words we hold to bee infallible in whose mouthes soeuer; and once knowne to be his words, they neede not the testimonie or authoritie of him, that did bring vs to the true knowledge of them. And before wee be brought to see their truth with our owne eyes, and feele it by our sense, (by the effects or experiments of it vpon our owne soules,) we are to limite our assent and obedience, (as it is set downe before) according to the probabilities, or vnpartiall inducements, which we haue of the Expositors skill, and sinceritie, in dispensing diuine mysteries. And these motiues or inducements, which we haue of his skill and sinceritie, must be framed according to the rules or precepts of Scripture, not according to our affections, or humours: we may not thinke him most to be belieued, that is in highest place, or hath the greatest stroke in other affaires. For as the faith of Christ, so must our perswasion of the faithfull dispensers, or skilfull seedes-men of faith, bee had without respect of persons.
2 If we yeeld assent or obedience vnto any Expositor, or other, otherwise than vpon these conditions and limitations, then, as we said before, whilst wee yeelded absolute obedience vnto his doctrine that perswaded vs to true beliefe, because wee perceiued
 that which he spake to be the word of God, we did not yeeld it vnto him, but vnto Gods word, deliuered and made knowne vnto vs by him: so heere againe by the same reason (onely inuerted) it will euidently follow, that if we beleeue any mans doctrines or decisions, to be the word of God, because he speakes it, or because we hold his words to be infallible, we doe not truly and properly beleeue the word of God, (suppose his doctrine were the word of God,) but his words and infallibilitie onely. Hence againe it followes, that if we yeeld the same absolute and vndoubted assent vnto his authoritie, which we would doe vnto Gods word immediately knowne in it selfe, and for it selfe; or relie vpon his infallibilitie in expounding Gods word, as fully as he doth vpon the word, (which it is supposed he knowes immediately in it selfe, and for it selfe:) by doing thus we rob God of his honour, giuing that vnto man, which is only due to him. For the infallibility of this teacher hath the same proportion to all that thus absolutely beleeue him, as the infallibilitie of the Godhead hath vnto him; his words the same proportion, to all other mens faith, that Gods word hath vnto his. Gods word is the rule of his, and his words must bee the rule of all other mens faith. Or, to speake more properly, God must bee a God onely to him, and he a God to all other men.
3 Heere it will be demaunded, how men, altogether illiterate, can examine any doctrine by Scriptures?In what sense the Scriptures may be said the rule of mens faith altogether illiterate. If they cannot read them, how shall they examine any thing by them? not examining the points of faith by them, how can they be said to be the rule of your faith? In such a sense as Aristotles workes (supposing them only authentick, and all his opposites counterfaits or new-fangles) may be said to be the rule of blind-mens Logicke; for albeit they cannot read his works, yet are they capable of his generall and vndoubted rules, seeing they haue (as well as other men) a naturall facultie of discerning truth from falshood, and can distinguish betwixt rules deriued from the pure fountaine of truth in that kinde, and precepts drawne from coniecturall, erroneous, and corrupt surmises of shallow braines; if both be distinctly proposed vnto them. And the rules of truth once fully apprehended and embraced, serue as a touchstone to discerne all consequences and conclusions, which shall be suggested vnto them by others:
 so as they wil admit of nothing for sound and true Logick, but what may be resolued into the former, or some other principles, which they can perspicuously and immediately discerne, to haue beene drawne from the fountaine of truth, by the same naturall facultie or abilitie, by which they did discerne the former: for the facultie will still be like affected with all principles, of like nature, vse and perspicuitie. In like sort must the first and generall principles of faith be deriued from Scriptures, (the onely pure fountaine of supernatural truthes) vnto all illiterate hearts, by the ministerie of the learned. For hearts, though illiterate, once illuminated by Gods Spirit, are as apt to discerne spirituall principles, from falshood or carnal co^iectures, as the naturall man is to discerne natural truths, from errours of the same kinde. And these generall and fundamentall principles of faith, engrafted in their hearts, serue as infallible rules, for discerning the consonancy or dissonancie of such particulars, as shall be suggested vnto them; as shall (God willing) hereafter be declared: nor may they without iniurie to Gods Spirit or inward grace, admit any other precepts into the same ranke or societie with these, but eyther vpon euident and distinct deduction from them, or sure experiments of their like spirituall fruite and vse, for the amendment of life, and procuring that peace of conscience, which no naturall man can conceiue, much lesse can it be caused by meere naturall precepts. For wee suppose (what afterwards will manifest it selfe) that all truthes necessarie for men to beleeue, haue a distinct relish from all falshood, or other vnnecessarie or superfluous truthes: and may be knowne by their fruit, so men will be carefull to preserue the sinceritie of their spirituall taste.
4 Gods written word then, is the onely pure fountaine and rule of faith: yet not such immediately vnto all as it is written, but the learned,Qua scriptum. or spirituall instructors, onely, whose hearts and consciences must be ruled by it, as in all other spirituall duties, so especially (as they are instructors) in this; That they may not commend any truthes, or principles of faith, vnto the illiterate, but such as are expresly contained in Gods written word, or (at least) are in substance the selfe same with these written truthes. If the vnlearned, through Gods iust iudgement, absolutely admit of other principles, and equalize them with these: such shall lead them into
 errour, and peruert their faith. If they doubt of any mans doctrine, whether it be truly spirituall, or consonant to the foundation of faith, they may appeale to Scriptures, as they shall be expounded o them by others. Finally, they are tied to no visible companie of men, whom they must vnder paine of damnation follow: but for their soules health, they may trie euery spirituall Physition. If they will be humorous, they may, but at their owne perill, both for temporall punishment in this life, and for eternall in the life to come.
5 For conclusion; the Scripture according to our doctrine, and the generall consent of reformed Churches, is the onely infallible rule of faith, in both respects or conditions of a perfect rule. First, in that it containes all the principles of faith, and pointes of saluation: So that no visible Church on earth may commend any doctrine to others, as a doctrine of faith, vnlesse it bee commended to them for such by the Scriptures, by which euerie ones doctrine, that acknowledgeth God for his Lord, must be examined, as by a law vncontrollable. Secondly, in that these principles of faith, are plainely, perspicuously and distinctly, set downe to the capacities of all that faithfully follow their practicall rules most plaine, most perspicuous, and easie, to all capable of any rule or reason: So that this sacred Canon needs no associate, no addition of any authoritie as equally infallible, nor more perspicuous than it selfe, to supply what it wants; onely the ministerie of men skilfull, and industrious in the search, or exposition of it, is to be supposed. And all these (be they neuer so excellent and wel conuersant in them) are vnto Scriptures, but as the ordinary expositors of classique and authenticke bookes are vnto the chiefe Authors or Inuentors of the science contained in them: Supposing that the first authors were men of extraordinarie and infallible skill, and their expositors (as they vsually are) but of ordinarie capacitie, or experience in those faculties.
6 Finally,The prerogatiue of Scriptures, in respect of faith,, aboue all other rules, in respect of arts or sciences. the bookes of Scriptures are to be reputed a more absolute rule for all matters of faith and diuine mysteries, than any bookes or writings of men are, for naturall sciences or secular professions, as in sundrie other respects, so in this, that they giue as more facile, so more infallible directions, for finding out their true sense and meaning, than any other writings
 doe, or writers could haue done, who, though present, could not be so fully assistant, but cannot so much as affoord their presence, to their expositours in the search of truthes, rather professed than fully conceiued, much lesse infallibly taught by them: whereas the Spirit of truth which first did dictate, is euery where present, alwaies assistant to such as seriously and sincerely seeke the truth contained in these diuine Oracles, conducting them from knowledge to knowledge, both by al such means as Artists haue for increasing their skill, and by other meanes extraordinarie, such as none in any other facultie can haue, nor any may hope for in the search of Scriptures, but onely such as delight in, and meditate vpon them day and night.



SECT. II.
That the pretended obscuritie of Scriptures is no iust exception, why they should not be acknowledged the absolute Rule of faith, which is the mother-obiection of the Romanist.

CHAP. I.
How farre it may be granted the Scriptures are obscure; with some premunitions for the right state of the question.
1 IT is first to be supposed, that these Scriptures, for whose soueraigntie ouer our soules we plead against the pretended authoritie of the Romish Church, were giuen by God, for the instruction of all succeeding ages, for all sorts of men in euery age, for all degrees, or diuers measures of his other gifts in all seuerall sorts or conditions of men. This diuersitie of ages, and conditions of men in seuerall callings, who so well considers, may at the first sight easily discouer our aduersaries willingnesse to wrangle in this point: whose vsuall practise, (as if they meant to cast a mist before the weake-sighted Readers eyes) is, to picke out heere and there some places
 of Scriptures, more hard and difficult, than necessary or requisite to be vnderstood of euery man, perhaps, of any man in this age. The knowledge of all, or any of which, notwithstanding, those that liue after vs, (though otherwise, peraduenture, men of farre meaner gifts, than many in this present age) shall not therefore need to giue for lost or desperate, when they shall be called vnto this search. For God hath appointed, as for euery thing else, so for the reuelation of his word, certaine and peculiar times and seasons. Daniel, though full of the spirit of prophecie, and one that during the raigne of Nabuchadnezzar, and Balthasar his sonne, had (as it were) continually trauelled of reuelations concerning the estate of Gods Church, and the affaires of forraine kingdomes for many generations to come: yet knew not the approaching time of his peoples deliuerance from captiuitie, vntill the first yeare of Darius, sonne of Ahashuerosh. And this he learned by bookes.Dan. 9. vers. 2. Euen in the first yeare of his raigne, I Daniel vnderstood by bookes the number of the yeares, whereof the Lord had spoken vnto Ieremiah the Prophet, that he would accomplish seuentie yeares in the desolation of Ierusalem. And of his owne Reuelation he saith:Dan. 12. v. 4. And Daniel was commanded to shut vp his words, and seale vp his booke vnto the end of the time, or as some read (vnto the appointed time:) and then many shall runne to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased. For at the time appointed, as he intimates in the words following, others though no Prophets were to know more of this prophecie than the Prophet did himselfe. Then I heard it, but I vnderstood it not: then said I, O my Lord what shall be the end of these things? And he said, Go thy way Daniel: for the words are closed vp and sealed till the end of the time.
2 The Prophets of later ages did see Reuelations of matters, which had beene hid from the ancient Seers. And as it fared with them in the succession of visions, immediately inspired from God, not framed in imitation of any precedent written word, but to be then first written for posterities instruction: some saw one vision, some another, alwaies such were seene by the present Prophet,All Scriptures not alike perspicuous to all ages. as most concerned the present times. So fares it still with the Ministers of Gods Church, and Christian people throughout all succeeding ages, wherein visions haue sailed, and onely the written stories of former visions are reserued for perpetuall direction:
 Some part of Gods will contained in Scripture is reuealed in one age, some in another; alwaies that which is most necessarie for the present time is most easie to be vnderstood by the faithfull then liuing, so they seeke the meaning of it as they should, not vpon curiositie of knownig mysteries for the raritie of that skill, but for the edifying of Christs Church, which is sometimes out of reparations in one point, sometimes in another: for which cause God suffereth the knowledge of sundrie places to grow and increase, according to the necessitie of the present times, nourishing (as it were) a continuall spring, for repairing or beautifying of his Temple.
3 For this reason, those places which seeme most plaine and easie vnto vs, might bee more hard and difficult to such in former times, as should haue sought their meaning too curiously; yea it might haue beene curiositie in that age, to haue sought halfe so much knowledge in them as wee now see at the first sight, because the time of their Reuelation, now is, was not then come.
Latter ages more to be beleeued in the exposition of the Apocalyps then former.4 It is but a silly shift for our aduersaries to say, that some of the ancient Fathers did otherwise interprete the Apocalyps, than our men doe: the perfect interpretation and knowledge of which booke, more peculiarly concernes this latter, than that flourishing age of ancient Fathers, most of all these daies wherein wee liue, in which the true and perfect meaning of it, were most likely to be reuealed, as (God be praised) in good measure it hath beene, and daily shall be more and more, vnlesse the daily increase of our sinnes deserue the contrarie. Many godly men, yea disciples in our Sauiours time, were ignorant of sundrie mysteries, which since his glorification haue beene communicated to the meanest of his flocke by the holy Spirit, who neuer failes to reueale Gods will, either by extraordinarie or ordinarie meanes, so men be not negligent to inquire after it by lawfull meanes. For God is as farre from partiall respect of ages as of persons; so the persons of seuerall ages respect his word alike,All Scriptures not alike perspicuous, because not alike necessarie to all nations in the same age. and as they should.
5 The like obseruation wee may take, from the diuersitie of place or nations. As the knowledge of Ieremies Prophecies did more concerne the state of Iudah vnder Iehoiachim and Zedekiah,
 then the prophecie of Isaias, or some more ancient Prophet did: so in this our age, the knowledge of some one part of either their prophecies, and the manner of Iuda his progresse (in their times) to her ouerthrow, may more concerne this our land, than the knowledge of some other parts of the same or other Prophets. And yet those other whose knowledge concernes vs lesse, may at this instant concerne some other land or people more. Alwaies, the gracious prouidence of our God directs the studie and industry of all that loue him to the search of those points, which most concerne the^; but suffers the endeuors of such, as by their transgressions haue procured his wrath, to run at rando^, neuer seeking after those things which belong vnto their peace, vntil his iudgments ouertake them.
6 These Collections are no paradoxes, but truthes, probable enough of themselues to win the assent of sober and vnpartiall mindes, so capable of externall fortification, as they may easily be made euident and strong enough to conuince the froward mindes of such as delight most in contradiction. From their truth supposed (which we are readie to make good against all gainsayers) it necessarily followes, that this question about the Scriptures obscuritie, or perspicuitie, cannot be vniuersally meant of all,The question concerning the obscuritie or difficultie of Scriptures, cannot bee ment of all Scriptures, in respect of all ages, or all men. and euery part of Scripture, in respect of all persons and ages: as whether no part be obscure or difficult to all, or any this day liuing. For, from this diuersitie of ages, we may easily discerne some things kept secret from the ancient Patriarches, by the wisedome of God made manifest vnto vs: and some things againe, by the disposition of the diuine prouidence, become obscure and difficult vnto vs, which were more manifest vnto them; as the particulars concerning the mysterie of mans redemption, were more obscure to them than vs; although the mysterie it selfe was, in some sort, revealed to them, in the Propheticall and Mosaicall writings. So likewise all the Propheticall predictions or prelusions vnto the time of Grace, are better and more distinctly knowne of vs than them; because the expresse knowledge of these particulars more concernes vs that haue liued since, than those that liued before the fulnesse of time. So the Israelites Iudaical constitutions, their types and ceremonies, were much more plaine and easie vnto them, than vs: because the knowledge of these matters, if we speak of their iudiciall law, more concerned theirs than any other state, as their
 types and ceremonies, did their persons, vnto whom the Messias was to bee pourtraied or shadowed out, more than any in this present or other precedent age, since he was manifested in our flesh and substance. The knowledge of the moral law, the end and scope thereof (the obseruation of Gods commandements and doctrine of repentance after their transgression,) was equally perspicuous to both, because equally necessarie, most necessarie to both for their saluation.
Diuers degrees of Scriptures perspicuitie, arising from the diuersitie of mens conditions or callings:7 Againe, from the diuers conditions of men liuing in the same age, this resolution is most euident, and most certaine. The same portion of Scripture may be difficult vnto some sort of men, and easie vnto others, without any preiudice to their sufficiencie, for being the perfect and infallible rule of faith to all. For, what we said before of diuers ages, we may conclude againe of diuers sorts or conditions of men. Sundrie places are more necessarie, and requisite to be vnderstood of this or that sort, and other places of others: nor are all places necessarie for the one to know, requisite for men of another condition or calling to search into. Thus the knowledge of many places is necessarie for him that is a publike Reader, Teacher, Instructer, or generall Ouerseer of Gods flocke: which to search into, or laboriously to examine, would be curiositie in him that had no such calling, especially if engaged to any other, which might iustly challenge the greatest portion in his best endeauours, or take vp the most part of his choicer houres for studie.
8 In this assertion we auouch no more than our aduersaries must of necessitie grant, and expresly doe acknowledge in their supposed infallible rule; which they doe not suppose should be alike plaine and easie, to all sorts or conditions of men, in all points. They would iudge it damnable presumption for the most learned amongst their Laitie, to professe as great skill in the Canons of their Church, as their Cardinals, Bishops, Abbats, or other principall members of it, either haue or make shew of; a great presumption of heresie in any of their flocke, to discusse the meaning of their decretals, as acccurately as their Canonists, or sift other mysteries of their religion, as narrowly as the Casualists doe. Should one of their greatest Philosophers, that were no Cleargie-man, or profest Diuine, professe he knew the meaning of that
 Canon in the Trent-Councell:Sessione 2. Canone. 6. Sacramenta conferunt gratiam ex opere operato, as well as Soto, Valentian, or Vasques did, Suarez or other their greatest schoolemen in Spaine or Italy now liuing do it would breed as dangerous a quarrell in their inquisition, as if he had entred comparison with a Rabbin in a Iewish Synagogue, for skill in expounding Moses law.
9 That the Scriptures therefore may be said a sufficient rule of faith and Christian carriage, to all sorts or conditions of men, it is sufficient that euery Christian man of what sort or condition soeuer, may haue the general and necessary points of Catholike faith, and such particulars as belong vnto a Christian and religious carriage in his owne vocation, perspicuously and plainely set down in them. And no doubt but it was Gods will, to haue them in matters concerning one calling not so facile vnto such as were of another profession: that euery man might hence learne sobrietie, and be occasioned to seeke, if not only yet principally, after the true sense and meaning of those Scriptures, which either necessarily concerne all, or must direct him in that Christian course of life whereunto his God hath called him. But shall this difficultie of some parts (which ariseth from the diuersitie of vocations) be thought any hindrance, why the whole Canon of Scriptures should not be a perfect rule to all in their seuerall vocations? Suppose some vniuersall Artist, or complete Cyclopedian, should set out an absolute systeme, or rule for all secular sciences: it would be a ridiculous exception to say, his works could be no perfect rule for yong Grammarians, Rhetoricia^s, Logicians, or Moralists, because he had some difficult Mathematicall questions, or abstruse Metaphysical discourses, which would require a grounded scholers serious paines, and long search, to vnderstand them throughly: and if he should admonish yong students, to begin first with those common and easie arts, and not to meddle with the other, vntil they had made good triall of their wit and industrie in the former: this would be a good token of a perfect teacher, and one fit to rule our course in all those studies which he professeth. And yet the Scriptures (which the Iesuits would not haue acknowledged for the rule of Christian life) besides all the infallible rules of life, and saluation (common to all) admonish euery man to seek after the knowledge of such things as are most for edifying, or most befitting his particular calling.
Of the pretended difficulties in S. Pauls Epistles.10 And euen in Saint Pauls Epistles, (which are the common places of our aduersaries inuention in this argument) after he comes to direct his speeches, (as in the latter end of them vsually he doth) vnto maisters of families, seruants or the like, or generally, where he speaks of any Christian dutie, (either priuate or publike) his rules are as plaine and easie to all men in this age, as they were to those housholders, or seruants, or the like, vnto whom they were first directed. So plaine and easie they are vnto all ages, and so familiar, especially to men of meaner place, that I much doubt whether the Pope himselfe, and all his Cardinals, were able in this present age to speake so plainly vnto the capacitie, or so familiarly to the experience of men of their qualitie vnto whom he wrote. For, setting aside the absolute truth and infallibility of his doctrines; his manner of deliuering them is so familiar, so lowly, so heartily humble, so naturall and so well befitting such mens disposition in their sober thoughts, as were impossible for the Pope to attaine vnto or imitate, vnlesse he would abiure his triple Crowne, and abstract himselfe from all Court-state or solace, vnlesse he would, for seuen yeares, addict himselfe vnto familiaritie, with such men in a pastorall charge. It was an excellent admonition of one of their Cardinals (if I mistake not, and would to God our Church would herein be admonished by him,) to begin alwaies with the latter end of Saint Pauls Epistles. For once well experienced in them, we should easily attaine vnto the true sense and meaning of the former parts, which vsually are doctrinall, and therefore more difficult than the latter. Yet the true reason of those difficulties in the former parts containing doctrine, is, because he wrote them against the disputers of that age, especially the Iewes. Euen in this age they are onely seene in matters concerning the learned expositors of Scriptures, not necessarie for priuate and vnlearned persons to know. And the especiall reason, why his doctrine in some Epistles (as in the Epistle to the Romanes) seemes obscure, difficult, and intricate, is, because learned men of later times haue too much followed the authorities of men in former ages, who had examined. Saint Pauls doctrine, according to the rule or phrase of those arts or faculties, with which they were best acquainted, or else had measured his controuersie with the Iewes, by the oppositions or contentions of the age wherein they liued. Where this
 partialitie vnto some famous mens authoritie (which indeed is made a chiefe rule in expounding Scriptures, euen by many such, as in words, are most earnest to haue Scriptures the onely rule of faith) once laid aside, and the rules of faith, elsewhere most perspicuously and plainly set downe by Saint Paul, vnpartially scanned: his doctrine in that Epistle would become so perspicuous and easie vnto the learned, as it might by them bee made plaine enough and vnoffensiue to the vnlearned. For the light of truth, elsewhere deliuered by this lampe of the Gentiles (might it be admitted as a rule, against some expositions of that Epistle) would direct mens steps to auoid those stumbling blocks, which many haue fallen vpon. But to conclude this assertion; their difficultie (take them as they are) is no iust exception against this part of Scripture: because it remaines difficult still, euen for this reason, that it is held generally for difficult, and is not made a rule, indeed for our directions; but other mens opinions or coniectures concerning it are taken for an authenticke Rubricke, by whose leuell only we must aime at our Apostles meaning from which we may not, without imputations of irregularitie, swerue in the decision of pointes (to say no worse) as now they are made hard and knottie.
11 Thirdly from the diuersitie of capacities,Scripture more or lesse difficult, to men of the same profession, from the different measure of their naturall capacities or Gods gifts bestowed vpon them. or different measure of Gods gifts, in men of the same profession, we may safely conclude, that the difficultie of the same portion of Scriptures vnto some, and facilitie and perspicuitie vnto others of like profession, cannot iustly impeach them of greater obscuritie than befits the infallible rule aswell of theirs as of all other mens faith, in their seuerall vocations. For as mens callings are diuers, and Gods gifts to men in their diuers callings in nature and qualitie different: so likewise is the measure of his like gifts, to men in the same calling not one and the same. To some he giues more knowledge, to others lesse: yet all he commands, not to presume aboue that which is written, and euery man to limit his desires of knowing that which is written, by the distinct measure of Gods giftes in himselfe, not to affect or presume of such skill as they haue vnto whom God hath giuen a greater talent. And besides this, that the Scripture is the inexhaustible storehouse, whence all men haue their seuerall measures of diuine knowledge, as well he that
 hath most as he that hath least: euen in this againe it is a perfect rule, that it commands all sapere, idque ad sobrietatem, to be wise according to that measure of knowledge which God hath giuen them, and not to seeke to know, at least, not to say, why should I not know as much as any other of any profession? For this were pride and arrogancie (the fatall enemies of all true Christian knowledge) if so his gifts be lesse than others. And for the auoidance of these maine obstacles of Christian knowledge, or true interpretation of Scriptures, the Scripture hath commanded euery man to thinke better of others, than of himselfe, and not to be wise in hi^ owne conceit.
12All Scriptures not alike perspicuous to all ministers of the Gospell or men of God. From the former generall will follow this particular Albeit some parts of Scripture bee verie obscure vnto some; the same perspicuous vnto other Ministers, or Preachers of the word^ yet may the whole Canon be the infallible rule of faith vnto both, according to the diuerse measure of their gifts, rightly and vnpartially taken. If the one either faile in the exposition of sundrie places, which the other rightly expounds, or cannot apprehend so much in them, as the other doth: he is in sobrietie of spirit bound to acknowledge his owne infirmitie, and content himselfe with that knowledge, which is contained within the measure of Gods giftes bestowed vpon himselfe: and this againe he is to take by the same rule. So that the Scriptures are a perfect rule to both, to all; for direction in the search of diuine knowledge, for limitation of mens desires whiles they seeke it, or conceit of what they haue gotten. That they doe not so throughly instruct or furnish some, as others, (though all men of God) for exact performance of their ministeriall function; can be no argument of their insufficiencie ^a make all such in their place and order competently wise vnto saluation, more than it would be to proue Euclides elements (or other more absolute Mathematicall worke) an insufficient and imperfect rule for instructing Surueyours or other practicall Mathematitians, whose skill lies onely in measuring triangles, circles or other plaine or solid bodies, because containing many questions of higher nature, and greater difficultie, (as of the circles quadrature, of lines or numbers surd, or asymmetrall) well befitting the exercise of speculatorie, learned Mathematicall wits.



CHAP. II.
The true state of the question about the Scriptures obscuritie or perspicuitie: vnto what men, and for what causes they are obscure.
1 THE question then must be; whether the Scriptures be an absolute rule of Christian faith and maners to euery man in his vocation and order, according to the measure of Gods gifts bestowed vpon him? We affirme, it is such to all. None are so cunning, none so excellent or expert in diuine mysteries, but must take it for a rule, beyond whose bounds they may not passe, from which they daily may learne more, none so silly, but may thence learne enough for their saluation, so they will be ruled by it. And yet euen of those points which are perspicuously set downe to the diuers capacities of men in the same or seuerall professions, the question is not; Whether any can fully comprehend their intire meaning? certaine it is, in this life they cannot. But neither will our aduersaries, (I hope) auouch, that the infallible authoritie of their Church can make vs so comprehend the full meaning of mysteries contained, either in Scriptures, or her pretended vnwritten traditions. Of Scriptures the best learned Christian may say with the heathen Socrates: Hoc vnum scio, me nihil scire, I know this one thing, that I know nothing; nothing as I should, or as fully as I then shall, when I shall know as I am knowne: for in this life, we know but in part,1. Cor. cap. 13. vers. 12. and 9. and we prophecie in part.
2 Lastly, euen in respect of places (though containing points of saluation) onely thus imperfectly knowne (though as perspicuous and cleare as can be required the rule of faith should be) the question is not, whether they be very obscure, and difficult vnto some, or vnto the maior part of mankinde: if we consider them as they are, or may be, not as they should or might be, that is, if wee consider them as disobedient to the truth knowne, or carelesse to amend their liues by this light of Scripture. For vnto all such as hate it, this very light it selfe proues an occasion of falling. Nor
 could any thing be more plainly or perspicuously set downe in any other rule of faith imaginable, than this very point we now handle, is in Scriptures, to wit, that such parts of them, as containe matters necessarie to saluation, are most easie to some, most hard to others. And albeit they might, through the iniquitie of mankinde, proue difficult to all, or impossible to be vnderstood of most now liuing (liuing as for the most part we do) yet were this difficulty or impossibilitie of vnderstanding them aright (vpon these suppositions) no hindrance to all, why they should not be a complet rule of faith at all, no iust reason for admitting any infallible authority besides theirs.
This is a point to be obserued, because the weaknesse and impertinencies of all our aduersaries arguments will best appeare, if they be hereto reduced, as shall appeare by the particulars in this, and the next section.3 For of such as admit any authority equiualent to theirs, it must be further demanded; whether the infallibilitie of it, can take away that blindnesse of heart, which by Gods iust iudgement, lights vpon all such as detaine the knowledge of God or his sacred word in vnrighteousnesse? If, for their sinnes, God punish them with this spirituall darknesse, in discerning his will reuealed in his written word: no other infallible authoritie (as we suppose) can take away those scales from their eyes, which hinder their sight in the meanes of their saluation. If men haue beene called to this light, and preferre darknesse before it: either they must receiue sight and direction from it againe, or continue still in ignorance and the shadow of death; but doth God locke vp all or most mens eyes in such darknesse? No, for this blindnes (by our doctrine) befals only such, as haue deserued it by the fore-mentioned sinnes, which once remoued by repentance, the rule of life shal inlighten the^; vnrepented of; no other rule or authority shall teach them the way to life.
4 Since we thus grant, that the Scriptures may be obscure to most men by their owne default, but perspicuous to others free from like fault or demerit: it remaines, we further inquire whether the same Scriptures do not most plainly set downe: First, the causes why they are so obscure to some, and perspicuous to others: Secondly, the remedie or meanes how their obscuritie or difficultie may be preuented. If they plainly teach these two points, this is a sure argument that they are, if not, that they cannot be, so excellent a rule of faith as wee acknowledge them. For this very point, [That the Scriptures in respect of diuers persons are obscure and perspicuous, though obscure to none but through their
 owne default] is a principle of Christian faith, and therefore must be plainly set downe in the absolute complete rule of faith. And (to omit others in their due place to bee inserted) what can be more perspicuously taught, either by Scriptures or other writings than this truth, God giueth grace to the humble, and resisteth the proud? or this, He will confound the wisedome of the wise, or such as glorie in their wisedome? These and like rules of Gods iustice in punishing the proud and disobedient, hold as true in the search of Scripture, as in any other matter, yea especially herein. Thus were the Scribes and Pharisees (men of extraordinarie skill in Scriptures) blinded in the most necessarie pointes of their saluation, though most plainly set downe in Scriptures. For what could be more plainly set downe then many testimonies of their Messias? Many places of farre greater difficultie they could with dexteritie vnfold: how chanced it then they are so blinded in the other? They were scattered in the proud imagination of their hearts, and glorious conceits of their prerogatiues in being Moses successours: and in their stead, simple and illiterate, but humble and meeke spirited men, raised vp, to be infallible teachers of the Gentiles, to vnfold those mysteries of mans redemption, (which the Scribes and Pharisees could not see) with euidence of truth to inlighten the silly and ignorant, and conuince the consciences of their learned proud oppugners. By their ministerie, Propheticall and Mosaicall mysteries became a light vnto the Gentile, whose life had beene in the shadow of death: whilest a veile was laid before the hearts of the most learned Iewes, so that euen whilst the Sunne of righteousnesse, which inlightens euery man that comes into the world, did arise in their coast, and ascend vnto their Zenith, they groape their way, as men that walke in dangerous pathes by darke night.
5 Was the Scripture therefore no rule of faith vnto these Iewes, to whom it was so difficult and obscure? Or is it not most euident, that this blindnesse did therefore come vpon Israel, because they hated this light, carried away with lowd cries of Templum Domini, Templum Domini, as the Papists now are with The Church, The Church: And for words of supposed disgrace offered to it (only vpon a surmise that Christ had said hee would destroy and build it vp again) brought to seek the destruction of the glory of it,
 euen of the Lord of glorie. Thou that wouldest make others beleeue the Pope is such, dost thou beleeue the Scriptures to be infallible? How is it then, whilest thou readest Gods iudgements vpon thy brother Iew, thou doest not tremble and quake, least the Lord smite thee also (thou painted wall) with like blindnesse? seeing thou hast iustified thy brother Pharisees stubborne pride, wilfull arrogancie and witting blasphemie in oppugning Scriptures. And as for all such, whose hearts can be touched with the terrour of Gods iudgements vpon others, in feare and reuerence I request them to consider well; whether one of the greatest Romane Doctors,Disce ex vno omnes. Gather how mad Baals other Priests are in this argument from Valentians Iewish phrensie in vrging Scriptures against vs which make most plainly for vs. were not taken with more than Iewish madnesse in mistaking Scripture in it selfe most plaine and easie, who to proue the Scriptures obscurity to be such as in this respect it could not be the rule of faith, alledgeth for his proofe that place of theIsa. cap. 29. vers. 11. Prophet. And the vision of them all is become vnto you, as the word of a booke that is sealed vp, which they diliuer to one that can read saying, Reade this I pray thee, then shall he say, I cannot for it is sealed.
6 The Prophet relates it as a wonder, that they should not be able to discerne the truth. What truth? an obscure or hidden truth, impossible to be vnderstood? This had beene a wonderfull wonder indeed, that men should not bee able to vnderstand that, which was impossible to be vnderstood. Wherein then was the true wonder seene? In this, that they, whose eyes had formerly beene illuminated, by the euidence and clearenesse of the diuine truth, reuealed by Gods messengerr, should not be able to discerne the same, still alike cleare and perspicuous; but now to bee shut vp from their eyes, as appeareth by the similitude of the sealed booke, whose character was legible enough, but yet not able to be read whilst sealed? A man might as well proue the Sunne to be darke, because Polyphemus, after Vlisses had put out his eye, could not see it; as the Scriptures by this place to bee obscure. The Prophets words entire are these.Vers. 9 10. etc. Vers. 13. Stay your selues and wonder, they are blinde and make you blinde, they are drunken, but not with wine, they stagger, but not with drinke. For the Lord hath couered you with a spirit of slumber, and hath shut vp your eyes: The Prophets and your chiefe seers hath he couered. And the vision of them all is become vnto you, etc. And more plainly. Therefore the Lord said, because
 this people come neare me with their mouth, and honour mee with their lips, but haue remoued their heart from me: and their feare towards me was taught by the precepts of men (doth hee not meane the blinde obedience of moderne Papists, as well as ancient Iewes?) Therefore behold I will doe a maruellous worke in this people, euen a maruellous worke and a wonder. For the wisedome of the wise men shall perish, and the vnderstanding of the prudent man shall be hid. The Lord himselfe foretelles it as a wonder, that this people should be so ignorant in the word of God: and yet will the Iesuite make vs beleeue, the word of God is so obscure that it cannot be vnto vs the rule of faith, when as without the knowledge and light of it, (not which it hath in it selfe, but which it communicates to vs,) there is no vision no knowledge in the visible Church, but such wonderfull darknesse as the Prophet heere describes.
7 Let the Reader heere giue sentence with mee, whether it were not wonderfull Iewish blindnesse, or wilfull blasphemie inVelamen quod ipse Paulus (2. Cor. 30 15.) affirmat vsque in hodiernum diem, cum legitur Moses, esse positum supra cor Iudaeorum: profecto textum (vt ita dicam) bona ex parte est ex difficultate scripturarum illarum. Valent. tom. 3. ^n Aquin. disp. 1. quaest. 1. punct 7. parag 4. He addeth immediately. Hoc enim (vt ant^^^ monuimus) o^ scripturam esse difficilem, em^modi eam esse, and tam mutae vt illa int^^^ gatur, requ^^^ practiue fuerit Iudaeis, and sit alijs omnibus non percipere veram eius sententiam: quod quia dare nobis coguntur vel^^t, nol^m sect (...), r^ct^ ac necessarie inde concludimus, commune illam r^gula^ and magi tram fidei, quam recesse est esse propos^^am delibus omnibus, non esse scriptura, cum non sit cognita fa^il s ips^s hom^nibus. Huc and in^^ Isai^^ 29. pertinit. Valentia, so confidently to auouch, that the veile which Saint Paul saith is laid before the Iewes hearts, was wouen (a great part) out of the difficultie of Scriptures, such Scriptures, as the sectaries (so he termes vs) contend about: and for proofe of this blasphemous assertion to bring the forecited place. Ere their allegations of this or like places, brought to proue the Scriptures difficultie or obscuritie, can be pertinent, they must (according to the state of the question alreadie proposed) first proue this obscuritie or difficultie to be perpetuall and ordinarie, nor inflicted as a punishment vpon hypocrites, or such as loue darknesse more than light, And this they neuer shall be able; this one place alledged by Valentian most euidently proues the contrarie. For this was an extraordinarie and miraculous iudgement vppon these Iewes, for their hypocrisie, as appeares, verses the thirteene and fourteene. And vnto such as they were, wee acknowledge the Scriptures, by the iust iudgement of God, to bee most difficult (...); but denie such difficulties to be any barre, why they should not be the complete rule of faith. If the Iesuites will auouch the contrarie: Let them tell vs whether any other rule could in this
 case supplie their defect, be it vnwritten tradition, or viua vox infallibilis authoritatis, the infallible teaching or preaching of the visible Church or Pope. This (I presume) they will be ashamed to affirme.So our Sauiour expoundeth it Mat. 15 vers 18.9. O hypocrites Esa as prophesied well of you saying, This people, etc. vsing the words before cited out of the 13. verse of Esay, cap. 29. Out of both places it appeares that their hypocrisie and disobedience to the truth knowne caused this blindnesse: and what the Prophet threatned v. 14. Our Sauior ratifieth Mat 15. v. 12.13.14. For when his disciples said vnto him, perceiuest thou not that the Pharises are offended in hearing this saying? He answered, Euery plant which my heauenly Father hath not planted. shall be rooted vp, let the^ alone, they be blinde leaders of the blinde, and if the blinde lead the blinde, both shall fall into the ditch. So the prophet had said in the 14. verse. The wisedome of their wise men (to wit the Pharises) shall perish, and the vnderstanding of the prudent shall be hid, and in the 9. verse. They are blinde and make you blinde. For this cause our Sauiour in the fore-mentioned place calleth not them as he did the multitude to heare and vnderstand. vers. 10. Nor expoounds the parable vnto them as he did to his disciples. vers. 15. For this prophecie was fulfilled of the Pharisees which liued in our Sauiours time, and heard him preach the doctrine of saluation, as plainly as the Pope can doe: yet neither could his doctrine, nor miracles win them to his father. Why could they not? Because they had, as the Papists now haue (though not so openly) disclaimed the Scriptures for the rule of their faith, and did follow the precepts or traditions of men; and God (as we said before) hath so decreed that such as neglect the truth knowne, or loue darknesse more than light, should bee giuen ouer to this reprobate sense; that the more euident the truth is, the more hatefull it should be to them: as the hate of these Scribes and Pharises to our Sauiour was greater then their fore-elders had beene to the Prophets, because the light of his doctrine was greater, his reprehensions more sharpe, and their deeds and hypocrisie worse than their Fathers. No maruaile then, if it be so hard a matter to recouer a learned Papist, or make a Iesuite recant his error in this point, seeing they are farther gone in this Iewish disease of contemning Gods word, following traditions, and precepts of men, for the rule of their faith, than these Iewes themselues were; not likely therefore they would haue yeelded to our Sauiour himselfe, if they had liued in his time. Nor should the ingenious Reader thinke we hyperbolize or ouer-lash, when we charge them with deeper blasphemie in this point, than these Iewes were guiltie of: as if this were strange, seeing they are such great schollers, and professe that they loue Christ as well as we: for so would these Iewes boast of their antiquitie, and skill in Scriptures, and thought that they loued God, and his seruant Moses, as well as Christ and his Apostles did. But it was Gods purpose to confound the wisedome of the worldly-wise: of the Scribes and Pharisees then, and of the learned Priests and Iesuits now.



CHAP. III.
How men must be qualified, ere they can vnderstand Scriptures aright: that the Pope is not so qualified.
1 OVT of the fore-mentioned places it is euident, that Gods word (otherwise plaine and perspicuous) was hidden from this peoples eies for their hypocrisie; and the same blindnesse continues still in their posteritie for continuing in like sin. But can it be proued as euidently, by any other place of Scripture, that vnto such as doe the will of God, and practise according to his precepts, the same word shall be plaine and easie so farre as is necessarie for their saluation? Yes, infinite places may bee brought to this purpose. And least any man should except against the extent of such bountifull promises, as if they included some condition of learning, great dexteritie of wit, or the like, whereof many men are not capable: Our Sauiour Christ addes the vniuersall note;Iohn. 7. v. 17. If any man will doe his will, hee shall know of the doctrine, whether it bee of God, or whether I speake of my selfe. If any man will doe his will: Not if any man will learne the learned tongues, or studie the Scribes and Pharisees comments, which this people supposed to haue beene the onely, as they were good, meanes, for vnderstanding Scriptures aright, whilest subordinate to this principall condition heere mentioned by our Sauiour. The occasion of the multitudes admiring his doctrine, was that hee, who had neuer beene Scholler to their Rabbins, should be so expert in Scriptures [as it is verse the fifteene.] Our Sauiours replie to this their doubt conceiued by way of admiration, [in the sixteenth verse] is, that hee had his learning from God, and not from man: My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent mee. And as hee was taught by his father, to deliuer and teach the heauenly doctrine, so might the simplest, and most vnlearned amongst them, be likewise taught of God to discerne whether his doctrine were of God, or whether he spake of himself; If they would doe the will of God and seeke his glory, not their owne, as Christ did not seeke his own glory, but his that sent him.
 Yet might these Iewes haue brought the same exceptions against our Sauiours rule for discerning doctrines, which the Papists now bring against the Scriptures, why they should not be the infallible rule of faith; as shall appeare hereafter. In the meane time whom shall we beleeue, the moderne Iesuite, who will sweare one thing sitting, and the contrarie standing, or Christ Iesus, whose word (as he himselfe) remaines, yesterday, to day, the same for euer?Our Sauiour fully confirm^th this truth vnto vs, which the Psalmist had before in effect del^uered, Psalm. 25. vers. 14 The se^ret of the Lord is reuealed vnto them that feare him: and his couenant to giue them vnderstanding, and vers. 9. Them that be meeke will he guide in iudgement, and teach the humble his way, vide etia^ vers 10 and 12. This euidently confuteth their folly, who thinke or rather say, our Sauiour spake in this place of his owne peculiar doctrine and authoritie. Albeit Canus (amongst others) might be excused (by such as would salue his credit) by the common answere, non locutus est ex sua sententia, as appeareth by the manner of his reply. Lib. 2. de Coc. Theol. cap. 8. Euen at this day, (as well as at that time, when he spake this Oracle) if any man will doe the will of God, (which sent him:) he, amidst the varietie of mens opinions concerning matters of faith, shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether men speake of themselues, without recourse vnto the infallible authoritie of such as sit in Peters chaire: who are to Peter, but as vnto Moses the Scribes and Pharisees were, vnto whom Gods Church in Iewrie, about our Sauiours time, was not much beholden for doctrines of faith, or decisions of doubts, concerning the truth of Scriptures, or principall mysteries taught by Moses.
2 Will you heare what Bellarmine (the onely champion that euer Rome had, for eluding euident authorities of Scripture) could answere vnto this place?Non haec dixit dominus vt ostendat omnes viros bonos per se intelligere posse omnia loca scripturarum: sed vt doceat viros probos carere quib^sdam impedimentis, propter quae alij quidem nec per se, nec per alios, fidei veritate^ intell g^re possun^, vt Ioh in 5.44. Luk 16.14. Bellarm. Tom. 1. lib 3. cap 1. Canus in his first answere to th s place seemes willing to assent vnto the truth Concedimus inquit, liberaliter doctrinam cuique in sua vita and statu necessariam, illi sore perspectam and cognitam, qui fecerit voluntatem Dei. S^cut enim gustus bene aff^ctus diff^rent^as saporum facile disceruit, sic animi optima affectio facit, vt homo doctrinam Dei ad salutem necessariam discernat ab errore contrario qui ex Deo non est. Que vero Ecclesiae sunt communia, nec ad iudicia nec ad fidem s^ectant singularum, ea non a quonis discerni and iudicari possunt, quatumcunque is Dei faciat voluntatem. In h^s second answere he bewraies a willingnesse to dissent from vs, or perhaps a feare, not to say somewhat against vs: and therefore, to su^h as will not be satisfied with the former, he giues a second a^swe^e, in effect, the same with Bellarmines. We may admit both their conclusions, without harme to our cause. From that which Canus granteth of priuate men (both in his answere to the second and third argument,) we may conclude against h^m thus As God giueth them the spirit of discerning true from false doctrine, in points necessarie to saluation, without all respect of persons: so likewise will he, by h^s prou^d nce, direct the learned or spirituall ouerseers in euerie nation (without respecting person place, or other prerogatiue) for discerning Apochryphall from Canonicall bookes. Nor is there any more reason to appropriate their discretion to the Pope, or Cleargie of Rome, more then to appropriate the gift of d^scerning truth from falshood in points necessarie to saluation, to their seruants. V. Can. l^b. 2. de Loc. Theol. c. 8. Responsione ad secundum and tertium. Our Lord and Sauiour did not intend in this speech to shew vs that all honest-minded men might vnderstand euery place of Scripture by themselues: but to teach vs that good
 men are free from diuers such impediments, as dis-enable others for vnderstanding the true doctrine of faith either by themselues, or by others helpe. For some became vncapable of true faith by pride and desire of worldly honour, others by couetousnesse. All these things heard the Pharisees also which were couetous, and they mocked him.
3 That all honest-minded men should bee able to vnderstand all places of Scriptures, wee neuer affirmed; that without the ministerie or helpe of others they should (ordinarily) vnderstand any aright, we neuer taught. This notwithstanding we constantly auouch. Without this condition of doing Gods will, not men otherwise furnished with the best gifts of Art and nature, can euer be competently qualified for spiritual instructors: By performing it, the simple and illiterate shall be made capable of good instructions, and enabled to discerue true doctrine from false. By our Sauiours rule in the verie next words (more infallible than any other pretended infallibilitie can bee) wee may discerne the Pope, of all others to bee no true, much lesse any infallible teacher, vnlesse of lies and Antichristian deceit. For he that seeketh his owne glorie (as what Pope is there doth not so? many seeke the Popedome by their predecessors bloud) he speakes of himselfe; not the word of him, whose Vicar he boasts himselfe to be.
4 To place the Apostle Saint Pauls authoritie next in file vnto our Sauiours.Rom. 12. v. 2. Vpon which place hee whom Bellarmine commendes as one of the most excellent interpreters of later-yeaers iere to lansenius, saith thus. Per renouationem me^ti^ quam iam per fidem in Christum accepistis, transformemini in nouos aff ctus, vt sic reddamini apei ad intelligendum, quid a vob^s iustificat^s per totam vitam requirat Deus. Quid gratum sit beneplacitum and acc^ptum Deo. Simile quiddam ^^pe et Apost Eph. 5. Propantes qu^d sit bene pla^itum Deo. Nisi enim mactanerimus cupiditates tarnis no^^rae, non possumus esse idonei, vt in act onibus nostris int lli, imus, quae sit voluntas Dei: sed quod nostro s nsui vehemen^er arr d^t, interp^etamur ^d esse voluntatem Dei. Sasbout in hunc locum. Vide annotat. ex Beda ad paragraph. 5. Fashion not your selues (saith hee vnto his beloued Romanes) like vnto this present world: but be ye changed by the renewing of your minde, that ye may proue what is the good will of God, and acceptable and perfect. Being fashioned like vnto the present world, they were altogether disproportionable vnto the kingdome of heauen, vncapable of heauenly mysteries; but being renued in their minds; they might proue, taste, and relish aright the meaning of Gods word reuealed. Of such as disanull the Scriptures for being the rule of saith, and transferre this Canonicall dignitie vpon the Pope, I would gladly be resolued,
 whether this his Holinesse infallibilitie, can take away the veile, which is laid before the Iewes hearts, or this desire which raignes in most men, of fashioning themselues vnto this present world; whether he can in all such, as professe Christianitie, roote out those lustes and concupiscences, those (corneae fibrae) stiffe and stubborne heart-strings, as are the verie threeds whereof this veile is made, which makes the Scriptures so difficult, and so eclypseth their light in respect of men. If he cannot, well may he make them vnderstand or beleeue his owne decrees; but neuer rightly apprehend, or stedfastly embrace the spirituall mysteries of their saluation: That rule of Saint Pauls is still most infallible. The naturall or carnall man is altogether vncapable of the things of Gods Spirit; of those things, which are in themselues most euident: Neither can he know them. If you will not beleeue his authoritie as infallible, he giues you a reason for the truth of the conclusion, for they are spiritually discerned. Is it then the Popes infallibilitie, or the framing of our liues according to Gods holy word, that must purge the errours of our young and wanton daies, and make vs cease to be homines (...) naturall or carnall men; and become spirituall? If the Popes infallibilitie cannot performe this, to what vse doth it serue? The Scriptures will be difficult still, and their sense insipide to such as haue not their hearts thus clensed. If without his infallibilitie, (by the industrie of faithfull Pastours, attentiue hearing, and serious meditation of his sacred word,) our liues may be amended, and we of carnall men become spirituall: we shall discerne the things of God, what is his will and mercy towards vs in Christ: wee shall know of euerie doctrine necessarie vnto our saluation, whether it bee of God or no: much better than the Pope, and his Cardinals can doe, if they be carnals. For our Apostle addes,Apostolus. 1. Cor. 2. comparando temporalem facultatem ad spiritualem ait, quod animalis homo non percipit ea quae sunt spiritus Dei sed spiritualis dijudicat omnia and ipse a nemine iudic^tur. Soto in 4 Sentent. dist. 25. and 2. Art. 1. Con 5. No marua^le if Val^^tian grosly mistake this place, wherein this graue Diuine as Bellarmin^ in-stiles him is so sottish. The spirituall man iudgeth or discerneth all things, and is iudged of none. The sense of which words some of your schoole-men much mistake, when they hence gather, that the Pope may iudge Princes: but the Spiritualitie (so in common talke wee call the Cleargie) may not bee iudged by any temporall or lay power. Our Apostle meanes, (nor will a learned interpreter though a Papist denie it) that in matters of faith, and in the truth of diuine mysteries, the truly spirituall, (that is, such as are
 renewed in the inner man, not such as beare the name or title of spirituall men in their corrupt language, see and vnderstand those things, which the wisedome of God hath hidden from the wisest, and most glorious teachers of the world, from all carnall men, of what gifts soeuer they may be in other matters; as appeares by our Apostles discourse in that place. Which doctrine of our Apostle how truly it is verified in the wise men of Rome, the Iesuites I meane, (to giue them what by our prouerbe we are bound to giue their masters, their due) men of famous indudustrie and excellent reach, in all subtile and profound artes: but how ignorant and besotted in matters of faith, and mysteries of mans saluation, their doctrine in this present controuersie, being compared with this Axiome of our Apostle, m^y abundantly witnesse, to the astonishment of all sober-minded Christian Readers.
5 They cannot denie that matters of faith and Christian life, the mysteries of mans saluation, are matters belonging to the Spirit of God; and that a lewde, naughtie, ambitious, luxurious man, an heretique, is homo (...) a carnall man; they will not offer to call in question. Againe, that many of their Popes be such, as I haue said (naughtie, wicked, luxurious men,) they openly confesse. Some of them grant thatDenique quod Honorius and nonnulli alij Pontifices in errorem lapsi fuisse dicuntur (quanquam de nullo prors^s satis compertum est, pertinaciter errauiss^) id quidem vtcunque res habeat, non nisi ad priuatum attinet personarum vitium: atque adeo nihil nobis obstare potest, vt qui tam non ipsas personas, quam authoritatem illam Apostolicae sedis in definiendo defendimus, sicut supra, Augustini etiam exemplo, respondebamus. Valent. Tom. 3. in August. Disp. lib. 9 1. punct. 7. Paragraph. 10. cas. 11. Honorius was an heretique.Valentianus loco citato. Ad fidel tatem erga Ecclesiam sp ctat, vt impediret in eo casu, quo minus per Pontificem illum controuersia falso definiretur. Id quod facere Deus possit aut Pontificem de medio tollendo, ne ipse, sed successur pot^us, rem decerneret; aut interna mentis illustratione, vel alio aliquo modo Pontificem an errore reuocando. Neque vero huiusmodi prou^dentia Dei in similibus casibus miraculosa esset censenda, sed esset potius quidam effectus eius l gis ordinarie qua Deus per promissiones de veritate factas, sese obstriaxit Ecclesie. Ac sane huius rei exemplum illud proferri pot^st, quod cum Ioannes xxij. existimaret, sanctorum animas ante diem Iudicij diuinam essentiam non v^dere, idque eo tempore, quo in Ecclesia (sicut Canus etiam lib. 6 de locis Theologicis. cap. vlt. ad 1. argument. notauit) nondum erat satis explicata hec controuersia, and ad rem defiarendam sese compararet, priusquam id faceret, e vita excessit. Et Benedictus successor contrariam sententiam definiuit. Valentian will not dispute this particular de facto, whether he were one or no, but that the Pope or Popes may hold hereticall opinions he granteth: albeit thus tainted with heresie they cannot propose their heresies ex Cathedra, to be beleeued by others; (beleeue Valentian herein who list:) for God by his prouidence would preuent this mischife. But howsoeuer;
 the Pope and his Cardinals may (by their owne confession) be carnall men with a witnesse.Homines Animales cum ad dita^ento. 1. Cor. ca. 2. v 14 Now Saint Paul saith plainly, ^omo animalis non potest cognoscere ea quae sunt spiritus Dei,Quis autem carnalis and animalis homo non per phanta^m^ta sui co^dis euagetur, and constituat sibi Deum, qualis ei pro suo carnali sensu placuerit, atque ita cred^t tantum longe aliter quam Deus est, quantum a veritate vanitas d ffert. Verissimam quippe sententiam dixit Apostolus, plenus lumine veritatis. Animalis, inquit, homo, non percipit quae sunt spiritus Dei. Et tamen de ijs haec dicebat, quos iam fuisse baptizatos ipse manifestat. Beda in hunc locum ex Augustino. l. 3. de Baptismo. This opposition betwixt the spirit and the flesh, is (as wee say in schooles) formall, or directly contrarie: so as this rule and that other late mentioned (Rom. 12.) hold as true in the Pope as in any. If hee fashion himselfe as much to this, hee is as disproportioned to the world to come, as any other: If hee bee as carnall as other men, hee is altogether as incompetent a Iudge of things belonging to the Spirit of God, as others are, whosoeuer. Beda in the same place addeth: Ad animales pertinet vetus Test^mentum, ad spiritales nouum: veteris autem Sacramenta cessarunt, sed concup^scentiae tal^s non cessauerunt. In illis enim sunt quos Apostolus iam per Sacramentum noui Testamenti natos, adhuc tamen dicit animales non posse percipere quae sunt Spiritus Dei. no carnall or naturall man can conceiue the things of the spirit of God, (for this indefinite proposition in materia necessaria may haue thi^ vniuersa l note, homo animalis non po est cognoscere, no carnall man can perceiue.) The Iesuites affirme the contradictorie vnto Saint Pauls doctrine, as an vndoubted Ar icle of faith. The Pope (say they) albeit homo animalis though a most wicked man, though oth^rwise an heretique, the worst of carnall men,) cannot but discerne the things that belong vnto the spirit, all the mysteries of mans redemption, all points whatsoeuer necessarie to mans saluation. For he cannot erre in deciding such matters if he speake ex Cathedra. More vnhappie man Honorius, more fooles haue the whole generation beene, that euer would shut their mouthes, or cease to speake ex Cathedra euen to the last gaspe.
6 That sundrie lewde and wicked men may learnedly discourse of spirituall matters, and deduce necessarie consequents out of truthes supposed, or commonly receiued for diuine, in such pointsNo carnall affection, or desire habituate, but harbour some one or other heresie, if the soule bee well searched, or the predominant desire or affection directly crossed; as shall (God willing) heereafter appeare; so that men of lewde life or vitious, onely conceiue well, eyther of such spirituall matters as are not directly opposite to their peculiar vices, or else of such generalities, as may bee prosecuted without p^^iudice to their affections. as contradict not their affections, or tempt them not to become partiall Iudges of euill thoughts: that we are to reuerence and obey Gods word, manifested to our consciences, though by their ministerie, we denie not. But that such wicked monsters of mankind, as many of their Popes haue beene, and may be, should so conceiue and discerne all the principles and grounds of faith, be so familiarly intimate with the holy Spirit, that their decrees, (in matters which concerne their owne pompe and glorie, in matters whose losse would breed their temporall ruine,) should be held for the
 infallible Oracles of God, the onely rule of faith, for all other Christians to relie vpon continually: thus to denie the infallible presence, or illumination of Gods Spirit, to all faithfull and godly men throughout the world, and to appropriate it to a succession of such sons of Belial as their owne writers picture out vnto vs in their Legends of Popes liues, is a blasphemy against the Godhead, (I pray God it proue not soThe matter of the Iewes blasphemie against the holy Ghost, was their charging Christ, in whom he rested, with an vncleane spirit, as appeareth in Mark. cha. 3. vers. 29. and 38. The former soule (if I may so speake) of that sinne in them, was their intertainment of that conceit, against the euidence of their owne consciences, Christs life and actions bearing witnesse of his sanctification by the blessed spirit. The matter of this sinne in the Iew, and moderne Iesuite, is allowe: for it is the selfe-same impiety, only inuerted, to say or thinke the diuell is author of goodnes, or the holy Ghost of mischiefe, to make the diuell a familiar of the son of God, and the son of Sathan an associate of the holy spirit. Whether the Popes works do not of^-^imes as truly test^fie hi^ impurity, as Christ did his sanctity. The aduersary will scarce question. I wil not conclude, but God grant the Iesuites parasiticall encomions of their Popes sacred authority, be not wilfull, as were the Iewes detractings of our Sauiour. against the holy Ghost) of such huge and vgly shape, that I much maruaile, how it could possibly creepe into any Iesuites pen, being scarce able (I thinke) to get out of the wide, vast, gaping mouth of hell it self, in whose intrails it was conceiued. Was it more in heate of passion (perhaps,) to say that theThat the Pope hath no such ab^olute authority as he pretends from Saint Peter, proued by Saint Peters peremptory deniall of the like to Simon Mag^s. Diuell was a familiar of the sonne of God, than to teach it as an article of faith, that the holy and eternall spirit is a perpetuall associate, an infallible assistant, or familiar companion of Satans first-borne of Coniurers, Inchanters or incarnate Diuels? was it so horrible and infamous a crime in Simon Magus, to offer to buy the gifts of the holy Ghost? and is it lesse sinne in such as hee was, Coniurers, Sorcerers, to seeke after as great, or greater spirituall prerogatiues, (as great as Saint Peter had) by the same meanes that he did? Is it no sinne for the Iesuites, to begge this as a Postulatum, or maine Axiome of faith, that whatsoeuer the Pope (such a Pope as hath gotten his triple crowne, and spirituall power by Simonie) shall decree ex Cathedra, should be esteemed and reuerenced as the dictates of the holy Ghost? Did that old Magus want wit to insert this condition to his request, that whomsoeuer he should lay his hands vpon [ex Cathedra] he might receiue the holy Ghost? Might not S. Peter haue conferred this extraordinarie gift as well vpon him, as he did his infallibilitie vpon the Pope? Simon did not desire the Monopolie of bestowing the holy Ghost, but could haue beene content to haue shared with others in this prerogatiue:Act. 8. vers. 19. Giue me also this power, but his brother in wickednesse, the Romish Leui, of what spirit soeuer he be, must haue this prerogatiue alone, that whatsoeuer he shall speake, must be the Oracle of the holy Spirit. Is it more
 to haue the holy Ghost attend on Simon Magus hands, but not on them alone, than to haue him tied only vnto the Popes tongue or pen? The spirituall prerogatiue which he sought, and that which the Pope vsurpes, are (on the Popes part at least) equa^l. The manner or meanes of seeking them, in both alike, the same. For we heare in the corner of the world, wherein we liue, that your elections of men into Peters chaire, doe not goe gratis. I confesse I doe not beleeue the corruption of your Cleargy so firmely, as I doe the articles of my Creede, because I haue not expresse warrant for it out of this sacred Canon, which I make the rule of my faith: but ere you can make vs beleeue the Popes infallibility, as an article of faith, you must make euident proofe to the contrarie: you must make it cleare by testimonie from aboue, that neither any State of Italy, or forraine Prince, doth make request or suite vnto your Cardinals, that his kinsman, his countryman, or fauorite may be elected Pope before another. We haue farre greater reason to beleeue, that such offers are both made and taken, then to thinke that, if a forraine Prince or domesticke Potentate should offer a Cardinall some thousands of Ducates for his voyce, hee would answere, (like one that would bee Peters successour in synceritie,)Act. 3. vers. 20 Thy money perish with thee, that thinkest the gift of the holy Ghost can be bought with money.
7 Yet if the Cardinall take any gift vpon this condition, or respect any Princes fauour in such election; his and the parties sinne solliciting him hereto, is altogether as great as Simons was. For the request is in effect thus much: Let such a man haue this prerogatiue, that on whomsoeuer he shall lay his curse, to whomsoeuer he shall impart his blessing, the one shall be accursed, the other blessed from aboue; whatsoeuer he shall determine in any controuersie shall be the dictate of the holy Ghost. And he that yeelds his voyce vpon such conditions; doth take vpon him, to bestow that vpon the Pope, which S. Peter denied to Simon Magus: The Pope thus chosen, doth vsurpe that, as bestowed vpon him, which Simon Magus did seeke; his practise and profession is continually as villanous as Simons desires were, when he sought after this; his blessings are no better than Simons charmes.
8 It is no maruaile if the Iesuites be so eager in this argument; or the polticke Papists so forward to disclaime the Scriptures, for
 the rule of Christian faith. For if men should so esteeme of them in heart and deed, those few rules out of them alreadie alledged, would quickly descrie the Pope and Cleargie of Rome, (I meane their Cardinals and States-men,) to be of all others the most incompetent Iudges, eyther of Scripture-sense, or controuersies in religion thence depending: Or were the vse of Scriptures freely permitted to their Laicks, without the glosses and false representations of the Iesuites, Priests or Fryars, they might quickly see, that the silliest soule among them, might sooner bee partaker of their life-working sense, than their great States-men can be, if so they would frame their liues, according to the knowne rules thereof, better than such great ones doe. For sillinesse or simplicitie of wit or vnderstanding, doth not so much hinder, as singlenesse of heart, or sinceritie of conscience further men, in the search of truth necessarie to their owne saluation. That promise of our Sauiour, (Habenti dabitur)Mark. 4. v. 24 and 25. And he said vnto them, take heed what ye heare, with what measure you mete, it shal be measured vnto you, and vnto you that heare more shall be giuen. For vnto him that hath shall be giuen, and from him that hath not shall be taken away, euen that he hath. Ie^em. 31. v. 34. hath its proper place, and peculiar force in this point. Whosoeuer he be that yeelds sincere obedience vnto the least part of Gods word knowne, to him shall bee giuen greater knowledge. And of such is the Prophets speech most true, They shall be all taught of God, from the greatest to the least. As well the meane schollers and silliest soules, as the greatest and wisest Doctors.Apostolus autem spiritu sancto locutus ait. Scientia inflat, charitas vero aed^ficat. Quod recte aliter non intelligitur, nisi scientiam tunc prod^sse: cum charitas inest: sine hac atuem inflare, id est, in supe^biam inaniss^mae quasi ventositatis extollere. Augustin. lib. 9. de ciuit Dei. cap. 20. The like affection in the Pope or Cleargie of Rome maketh them arrogate so much vnto th^mselues in this businesse of establishing beleefe. That which Saint Austen addeth in the same place seemeth in proportion true of them Est ergo in daemonidus scientia sine charitate: and ideo tam inflati, id est, tam superbi sunt, vt h^nores diuinos, and religionis seruitutem, quam vero Deo deberi sciunt, sibi sategerin^ exhiberi, and quantum possunt, and apud quos possunt, adhuc agunt. And againe. Contra superbiam porro Daemonum, qua pro meritis possidebant g^nus humanum, Dei humilitas quae in forma serui apparuit, q^antam virtutem habeat, animae hominum nesciunt, immunditia elationis inflatae, daemonibus similes, superbia non scientia. For with great worldly wisedome there is alwaies great pride, the greatest aduersarie to true and sanctified Christian knowledge: and the best sort of secular learning puffeth vp. All the skill which men so minded can attaine vnto in heauenly matters, is but like lessons got by rote. It must be quite forgotten, at least vtterly renounced and laid aside, before we can be admitted into the schoole of Christ, in which a^l in this life are but paruuli, petties, or children, for their simplicitie and harmelesse mindes, for lowlinesse and nullitie of selfe-conceit. Hence saith our Apostle,The first of the Corintb. vers. 18. vid. Iob. 37, vers. 24. If any man thinke himselfe wise, let him become a
 foole, that he may learne wisedome aright: And our Sauiour Christ saith vnto his disciples,Matth. 18. vers. 3. except ye be conuerted and become like little children, yee shall not enter into the kingdome of heauen, that is, they cannot be capable of this heauenly doctrine. For true and sanctifying grace must be ingrafted in this harmelesse simplicitie, and child-like disposition.
Ingenuous simplicitie (such as the Orator ment when he said Omne officium simplex est) and plane dealing are qualities best symbolizing with the internall proprietie of Scriptures. Pae. 19.7.9 It is the nature and propertie of Gods word to be plaine and facile vnto such as are of disposition semblable to it; as to the sincere of heart, single in life, and plaine in dealing: but obscure and difficult vnto the worldly-wise. The simplicitie of it, and the subtiltie of the polititian, or secular Artists, parallele as ill, as a straight rule or square with a distorted crooked sticke: The testimonie of the Lord saith the Psalmist is sure, and giueth wisedome to the simple. The word(...) in the originall sillie or credulous, such as in worldly affaires are more easie to bee deceiued, then apt to deceiue: and is rendred by the Septuagint (...) paruuli, which word it pleased our Sauiour to vse, when he intimates this perspicuitie of Gods word vnto such little ones,Matth. 11. vers. 25. I thanke thee O father, Lord of heauen and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise, and men of vnderstanding, and hast opened them vnto babes. It is so, O father, because thy good pleasure was such. Such as in this whole discourse we haue supposed, (and this place doth proue:) that is, such as had decreed that the doctrine of life should be most difficult and hard to proud, disobedient, or craftily-minded men, but most perspicuous (because to be reuealed by God) vnto such little ones. And againe, (least any man should presume vpon his wisedome, or dexteritie of wit) he telles vs expresly, no man knoweth the father,Vers. 27. but the sonne, and he to whom the sonne will reueale him. And his will is, to reueale himselfe, and his word vnto all, and only such as we haue said, to little ones, or such as become little children, casting off the burthen of age, which hath brought such faintnesse and wearinesse vpon their soules, that they cannot hope for any good successe in the course which tends to euerlasting life, vntill they be disburthened of all former cares. And hence in the next verse his words are generall, [Come vnto me all yee that are wearie and heauie laden.] So they will take vp his yoake, which is easie, and his burthen which is light, he will free them from all the g^i^u^^ces and discommodities of their former yoake, learning but
 this one lesson of humilitie and meeknesse of him, it will teach them all the rest; for by it they shall finde rest vnto their soules: which Christ will refresh, not as the Pope doth with Anathemaes binding vnto negatiues, but with the true taste of this water of life.
10 Nor willOr if they will, we shall meete with their exceptions in the Article of the Godhead, and other treatises hereafter. any of our aduersaries (I hope) be so peruerse, as to say, our Sauiours doctrine in this place did hold true onely for that time, wherein the knowledge of Christ, and doctrine of his Gospell was to be first published. For such peruersitie would bewray so great ignorance in scriptures and little experience in the course of Christianitie, as they would be ashamed to be suspected of. For who sees not this opposition betweene worldly wisedome, and heauenly knowledge to continue still in their seuerall professors throughout all ages. Nor can any man be sure, his faith is not humorous or hypocriticall, vnlesse he be transformed into such a little one, as Christ heere speakes of, and haue true humilitie surely planted in his heart. This is the fundamentall or first principle, whereinto faith must be resolued: euen all those graces or pledges of Gods fauour whereon most relie in triall of their spirituall estate, must be apparantly seated in this lowlinesse, and simplicitie, or else euerie man through the multiplicitie, and subtiltie of his owne heart, shall be ouerseene in his perswasions.
11 A liuely experiment of our Sauiors doctrine, and our assertion in this point, we haue in SaintInstitui (inquit) animum intendere in scripturas sacras, vt viderem quales essent. Et ecce vid eo rem non compertam superbis, neque nudatam pueris, sed incessu humilem, successu excelsam and velatam mysterijs: and non eram ego talis vt intrare ad eam possem. Nam illa erat quae crescebat cum paruulis; sed ego indignabar esse paruulus, and fastu grauidus mihi grandis esse videbar. Aug. lib. 3. Confess. cap. 5. Austen, as himselfe witnesseth: I purposed to looke into the sacred Scriptures, that I might see what manner of writings they were. And loe I light on a matter altogether hid from the proud, and yet not laid open vnto children, in progresse lowly, in processe or issue stately, and wrapped in myster^es: Finally such as my qualitie made me vncapable of entrance vnto it. For the property of it was to grow vp with little ones, but I disdained to be a little one, and swolne with fastuous conceit, in mine owne eyes I seemed a great one. HeereAn vero null us difficultatis res est, ab hoc tumore vitiorum vaeuum esse, eorumque fuligine velatum cor, instar Iudaeorum, non habere, sed humilem fieri ac docilem discipulum ad huiusmodi Spiritus sancti disciplinam caepessendam? Valentian. Tom. 3. disp. 1. quaest. 1. @. 4. Valentian (sucking poyson out of this reuerend fathers honie) demaunds importunately, whether it be a matter of no difficultie, to procure our freedome from this tumour of viciousnesse.
 To haue our hearts purged from that soote which is as the Iewish veile vnto them.Saint Austen supporteth the Scriptures to containe in the^ the words of life, but intimateth no other meanes by which either the Scripture should become more plaine, or the sauing truth which he taught be otherwise manifested to his soule then only by practising such rules as the Scriptures prescribe, for their right vnderstanding, whence the madnesse of this Romish Doctor may againe appeare. See the second part of this last folly, in the annotations vnto the third pa^ag. of the fifth chapter. Matth. 11. Matth. 11. v. 30 And finally, whether it be so easie a matter, (as we, to his seeming, make it,) to become humble and meeke, without which vertues the Scriptures were obscure and difficult vnto Austen himselfe, otherwise a man of excellent wit.
12 Me thinks this cumbersome Iesuites cholericke straine, and foole-hardie passionate carriage in this whole controuersie, doth liuely resemble a strong sturdie lubber, that had thrust himselfe vnawares into a quarrell, which hee is no way able to make good; yet so stubborne, that hee will not giue ouer, but fightes, and winkes, and cries, (and hit he misse he) layes about him. For can any man thinke, hee see where these fierce blowes would light? As much as wee haue said, is most cleere out of this verie place of Austen, which hee would throw vpon vs. Most cleere it is that vnto such as follow our Sauiours methode, set downe before, that is, vnto such as will become like little children, and beginne (as it were) a new againe; the Scripture (which for the present seemes hard to all farre entered into the worlds schoole) is perspicuous, cleere, and easie to bee learned. But whether it bee hard to become such a one, or whether it be a difficult matter to lay aside all pride, and selfe-conceit, is no part of the point now in question, nothing at all to this intended purpose. To man, no doubt, it is most hard, or rather altogether impossible. But what it is to man once made partaker of the grace of God, and power of his Spirit, let Christ Iesus the fountaine of grace be Iudge. Hee hath tolde vs that a his yoake is easie, and his burthen light. Or will they replie, that his yoake is easie indeede to beare,His yoak and burden is the practise of patience and humilitie which Valentia saith is so hard. when it is taken vp, but hard to take vp. Our Sauiours next wordes imply the contrarie: but of this question wee shall take occasion hereafter. Onely now I say the Iesuites of all other are most vncapable of this plea. For they hold free will in men, wherby they may assent vnto grace offered: and if men haue free will, and Christ offer his grace vnto such, as vse it well, the learning of humilitie, and taking vp his yoake will be easie through grace, though impossible to nature. But let this question concerning grace and free will, stand still, as it doth, in controuersie, betwixt vs and them, and the Lutheranes. This is
 granted by all; that if Christ grant his grace to all that will endeauour to follow his precepts, then is it easie to all, to learne this first lesson of Christianitie, lowlinesse, and meekenesse, the rudiments of true knowledge in Scripture, without which all other learning in them is but verball. As this is confessed by all, so would I be resolued by any Iesuite, whether, if it be Christs pleasuse to denie his grace to any, it be not altogether impossible for him to learne this lesson perfectly, or to become a good proficient in the schoole of Christ, although the Pope, their supposed infallible teacher, should vouchsafe to catechise him ex Cathedra. What hath this Iesuite got then, by his fierce obiecting this difficultie of learning humilitie, for to make the Scriptures seeme obscure? If the same obscuritie, the same impossibilitie of vnderstanding them aright, still remaine, albeit the Pope himself, should stretch his plenarie power, to illustrate them with his infallible authoritie.
13 Or wil it not be more hard for the Pope (being so highly placed in secular honor and dignitie as he is) to stoop so low as a little child for lowlinesse of mind, than it will be for vs poore and sillie men. If it be more hard for him, than vs so to do, wee are more likely to become better schollers in Christs schoole, than his infallible Holines: more likely to be more certaine of the true sense or meaning of Scriptures then he can be, much more certaine (in all necessarie points) hereof, than he can be of his infallibilitie. For this lesson of true humilitie must of necessitie be learned, ere we can proceed in the true knowledge of these mysteries. Suppose this be a verie hard lesson to learne, yet (caeteris paribus) it will be harder as mens places are higher, or their dignities greater: hardest of all to men of highest place and greatest dignities, specially if their aduancements, to such preeminencies be (as many Popes and Cardinals haue beene) per saltum, or ab extremo in extremum sine medio, like lazie beggers sodainly mounted on stately steedes: shall then this dfficultie late obiected depriue these Scriptures of this dignitie, which wee pleade for? Shall this debarre them from being the infallible rule of faith? or rather doe they not, in giuing this verie rule of learning humilitie, and thus forewarning of their impossibility to be vnderstood without it, approue themselues to be an excellent rule of faith; a more excellent rule for these super-excellent diuine mysteries, than any other rules
 are for ordinarie, pettie, or triuiall arts? For suppose Bellarmine, or any other more exquisite, though he an excellent teacher of the Hebrew tongue, should in his Grammer haue giuen this caueat (easie to be confirmed by sound reason and experience) that whosoeuer would become perfect in that language, should begin his studie in his younger daies, before he were engaged to subtile or profounder studies, or giuen to deepe meditations of realities, otherwise it would be verie hard for him, to descend againe vnto Grammer rules, and beginne like a schoole-boy to cunne declensions, coniugations, without which, and many other pettie rules about altering of vowels, he could neuer hope to be an absolute Hebrician: Had Bellarmine set downe these or like caueats more at large, should this admonition be accounted any iust exception, why his Grammer (otherwise supposed authenticke,) should not be a perfect rule for learning Hebrew? or must we for this reason haue stretched our wits to inuent some infallible teacher of Hebrew for such men? I am sure he that should haue found the truth of his admonitions by experience in himselfe, or obseruation in others, would commend his iudgement herein, and thinke so much better of his Grammer, or wish that he himselfe had known, or others would obserue these admonitions, whiles they were young, and rather vse Bellarmine than experience, for their Schoolemaster in this point.
14 Doubtlesse it is for want of acquainting youth, and childhood with the former rules of Scripture, which make the Scripture generally either seeme obscure or difficult, or causeth men mistake thm seeming euident. For when they are growne to mans estate, or be embarked in worldly affaires, or inuested in secular dignities, before they haue studied Scriptures, or practised the former precepts: this seeming difficultie, either moueth them to seek for other rules, more easie to their capacitie, or not to care for any rule of faith at all, or else to transforme this which God hath giuen for reforming his image in them, into the nature of their corrupt affections. Were this lesson of becomming like little children, throughly planted in our hearts, when we were children: true knowledge in other parts of Scriptures would grow with vs, and faith (once planted in humilitie, while our hearts were tender, and easie to be wrought vpon by this plaine and easie precept) albeit at
 the first but like a graine of mustard seed, yet hauing got the start of pride, and desire of secular glory in the Spring, should afterwards florish in all heauenly knowledge, and fructifie in euery good and acceptable worke, without the husbandrie, lopping, or pruning of an infallible teacher. But if we, either through our owne wilfulnesse, or parents negligence, haue peruerted the waies of our ^outh, that they will not parallele this straight and easie rule, shall Gods righteousnesse be preiudiced by our iniquitie? shall not his waies (this way of life) be equall, because our waies be vnequall? Must we become like Senecaes blinde woman, who accused euery place, wherein she could not see, for being too darke: must the Scriptures for our blindnesse of heart, be thought obscure? not in themselues (saith the Iesuit) but vnto vs: how vnto vs? or vnto which of vs? onely to such as are therefore become blind, because they haue not in time, been made acquainted with this light. For otherwise the Scriptures were written to enlighte^ vs, not themselues, or such as wrote them. And vnto such, as are blinded in their owne desires, difficult they are and obscure, without any respect of persons: to the Pope, as well as to any meaner man, not more proud, or carnall than He. Thus wee see our aduersaries cannot offer one blow against vs in this point, but we can make it fall more heauie vpon themselues. And well were it, if their obiections did light heauie onely vpon the obiecters themselues, for they haue deserued it. But heere I must intreate the Christian Reader to consider well vpon whom their vsuall obiections of scriptures obscuritie are most likely to fall: Vpon vs for whose good they were giuen; Or vpon God the Father who gaue them; his sonne that partly spake them; his holy Spirit who onely taught them; his Prophets, Apostles, Euangelistes, or other his blessed ministers which wrote them.



CHAP. IIII.
The Romanists obiections against the Scriptures for being obscure do more directly impeach their first Author and his messengers their pen-men, then vs, or the cause in hand.
1 THat these Scriptures (which our Church holds canonicall, and we now maintaine to bee the rule of faith.) were giuen for the good of Christs Church, or multitude of faithfull men throughout the world, our aduersaries will not denie: or if they would, the Scriptures, which expresly to denie they dare not, beare euident testimonie hereof. Infinite places are brought to this purpose, by such as handle that question, Whether the written word containe all points necessarie to saluation.
2 Saint Iohn saith he wrote his Gospel that we might beleeue. By what authoritie did he vndertake,The perspicuitie of Scriptures (to such as obserue the formall rules) proued from the end why they were written, and the Euangelists carefull endeuours to make them plaine. by whose assistance did he performe this worke? Vndertaken it was by Gods appointment, effected by the assistance of his eternall spirit, to the end we might beleeue the truth: what truth? That which he wrote concerning the mysteries of mans saluation. But how farre did he intend, this our beliefe of such mysteries should be set forward by his pen: Vnto the first rudiments onely, or vnto the midway of our course to heauen? Questionlesse vnto the vtmost period of all our hopes: for he wrote these things, that we might beleeue;Iohn. 20. v. 31 yea so beleeue in Christ as by beleeuing we might haue life through his name. Was he assisted by the eternall Spirit, who then perfectly knew the seuerall tempers, and capacities of euery age? And did he by his direction aime at the perfect beleefe of succeeding ages, as the end and scope of all his writings? And yet did he write so obscurely, that he could not be vnderstood of the^, for whose good he wrote? Out of controuersie his desire was to be vnderstood of all, for he enuied no man knowledge, nor taught he the faith of our glorious Lord Iesus Christ with respect of persons He wished that not the great Agrippaes,Iames. 2. v. 1. or some few choise ones only, but all that should heare or read his writings to the worlds end, might be, not almost, but altogether such as he was, faithfull beleeuers. From his feruent desire of so
 happy an end as the saluation of all, he so earnestly sought the only correspondent meanes, to wit, posterities full instruction in the mysteries thereto belonging. And for better symbolizing with the ignorant, or men (as most of vs are) of duller capacitie in such profound mysteries: his paraphrase vpon our Sauiours speeches, is oft-times so copious, as would be censured for prolixity or tautologie in an Artist. But seeing the common saluation of others, not his owne applause, was the thing he sought, he disdaines not to repeat the same thing, sometimes in the same, otherwhiles in different words, becomming in speech as his fellow1. Cor. 9. v. 22 Apostle was in carriage, all vnto all, that he might at leastwise, of euery sort gaine some: oft-timesIohn. cap. 21. vers. 23. and 2. vers. 21. sollicitous to preuent all occasion of mistaking our Sauiours meaning, though in matters wherein ignorance could not be deadly, nor errour so easie or dangerous, as in those other profundities of greatest moment, which hee so dilates and workes vpon, as if he would haue them transparent to all Christian eyes.
3 Do not all the Euangelists aime at the same end? do they not in as plaine tearms as they could deuise, or we would wish, diuulge to all the world the true sense and meaning of our Sauiours parables, which neither the promiscuous multitude, to whom hee spake, nor his select Disciples or Apostles themselues (vntill they were priuately instructed) vnderstood aright, as they themselues testifie: so little ashamed are they to confesse their owne, so they may hereby expell or preuent like, ignorance, in others. Tell me: were not our Sauiours parables expounded by his blessed mouth, as plaine rules of life as may (without preiudice to his all sufficiencie) be expected from any other mans? Are not his similitudes (wherein notwithstanding are wrapt the greatest mysteries of the Kingdome) drawne from such matters of common vse, as cannot change whilest nature remaines the same? for the most part so plaine and easie, as will apply themselues to the attentiue, or well-exercised in moralities? Strange it seemed vnto our Sauiour that his disciples should not at the first proposall vnderstand them.Mar. 4. v. 13 Matth. 15. v. 16. Perceiue ye not this parable? how should you then vnderstand all other parables? Yet happie were they, that they were not ashamed to bewray their ignorance, by asking when they doubted, though in a point of little difficultie. This good desire of progresse in
 their course begunne, brought them within the hemispheare of that glorious light, whereby they were enabled afterward to discerne the greatest mysteries of the kingdome. And vnto their question concerning the meaning of that great parable of the Sower, which is one of the fundamentall rules of li^e; Our Sauiour immediatly repliesMark. 4. v. 11 These words confirme the truth of the state of the question proposed by vs. To you it is giuen to know the mysteries of the kingdome of God: but vnto them that are without, all things are done in parables, that they hearing may heare, and not vnderstand, least at any time they should turne, and their sinnes should be forgiuen them.
4 Had our Euangelists onely set out the Text and concealed the Comment, it might haue ministred matter of suspicion, whether all Christians throughout all generations, whilest this Gospel shall endure, should be taught of God from the greatest to the least of them; or, whether Christ had not appointed some great infallible teacher as his Vicar generall to supply the same place successiuely in the Church, that he himselfe had borne amongst his disdiples; one, on whose liuing voice all the flocke, besides, were in all doubts or difficulties to relie as the Apostles did on Christs in the vnfolding of this parable. But seeing they haue plainly reuealed to vs in writing, what was reuealed to them (concerning the meaning of this and other parables of greatest vse) from our blessed Sauiours mouth; Their written relations of these mysteries with their expositions must be of the same vse and authority vnto vs, as Christs liuing words were vnto them. And as they were not to repaire vnto any other but their master aloneIohn. vers. 68. for the word of eternall life; not to admit any other infallible teacher for declaration of his meaning: so may not any Christian to this day infallibly relie vpon any mans expositions of his wordes, alreadie expounded by himselfe, and related by his Apostles; these laid vp like precious seede in our hearts, the diligent labours of Gods ordinarie ministers onely supposed, would bring forth the true and perfect knowledge of other precepts of life, in abundance, competent to euery man in his ranke and order.
5 For seeing what our Sauiour imparted to his Disciples in priuate, is now by Gods prouidence plainly communicate vnto vs. This is an argument beyond exception, that we are not in their case, who in that parable are said to be without, but of their number to whom it is giuen to know the mysteries of the kingdome of God;
 vnlesse we will in life and manners imitate hypocrites rather than Christs disciples. And least we should proue like these Iewes, which hauing eares to heare would not heare, thoughMark. 4. v. 9. inuited thereto by our Sauiour: our Euangelists inculcate againe and againe the causes of this dulnesse in hearing, or conceiuing what is heard, or auersenes from the truth in some sort conceiued. They tell vs, the Iewes, sometimes forIohn. 5. v. 44. and 12. v. 42. ambition, sometimes forLuk. 16. v. 14. couetousnesse,Iohn. 8. v. ^9. Math. 3. v. 9. generally, for presumption, pride, and hypocrisie, in saying they had Abraham for their Father, did make themselues vncapable of sauing knowledge. To what purpose do men, guided by the Spirit of God, inculcate these or like admonitions so oft? That the growth of such carnall affections might in all succeeding ages be preuented: That Christian parents, forewarned by the lamentable issue of this stubbornesse in Abrahams seed, might teach their children these heauenly lessons, which had beene so distastfull to the Iewes, before these or other inueterate humours had b^ought them to the same or like distemper. For, (as I obserued before, and this parable directly proues) might celestiall seed take roote in childrens hearts before these secular weeds sprung vp: their soules should continually receiue blessing from God, and daily drinke in these streames of life, which found no enterance into such Iewish barren soyle,Heb. 6. v. 8. as did beare nothing but thornes and brambles, whose end was, to be burned, as altogether vnworthy of more watering.
6 Shall either the world, diuell, or flesh, be able to breede the least suspition in any Christian heart; whether God who enabled the Apostles and Euangelists to speake so plainly to the capacitie of all sorts of men, in euerie nation, cannot either by increasing internall docilitie in succeeding ages, or subleuating their dull capacitie by facilitie and plentie of externall meanes, repaire whatsoeuer the iniuries of time might detract from the perspicuitie of writings Apostolicall or Euangelicall. So that although the decay of Dialects, absolutenesse of phrase, or alteracions of customes, (whereunto they allude as wel knowne then, because in vse) might breed some difficultie vnto posteritie: yet (vnlesse true faith be decayed with them, or all characters of Gods prouidence worn out of our hearts) how can we distrust, whether, He, by whose wisedome, as well diuine mysteries vnheard before,
 as skill to vtter them in euerie language, were extraordinarily and immediately infused into illiterate soules, without the helpe or ministerie of man; cannot or will not, by his good blessing vpon our endeauours in the ordinarie course of attaining skill in sacred tongues, continue the vse of tongues and all other good meanes whatsoeuer, necessarie or expedient, either for our right vnderstanding, or communicating, the infallible truth alreadie taught, without any others infallible assistance besides his, who can teach vs as infallibly by meanes in themselues not infallible, as hee hath done others without any meanes at all. To doubt of Gods prouidence in this point, were to doubt whether he were the same God still: and if the same, he will (albeit by other meanes) performe the same effects still; vnlesse the sinnes of the Christian world deserue the contrarie, and pull that blndnesse, which (in our Sauiours time,) raigned in those Iewes, vpon themselues, by like hardnesse of heart, pride or hypocrisie. And if so they doe, what shall this supposed infallibilitie of the Pope auaile? Is his teaching more infallible than Christes was? shall he loose, where God hath bound? shall he disanull what the Almightie hath ratified: shall hee make the Scriptures cleare to them, before whose heartes the Lord hath laid a veile? Or shall hee giue light, where he that made the eye hath called for blindnesse? Oh that they could remember this who haue forgotten their God and cannot see, that whosoeuer accuseth the Scriptures of difficultie or obscuritie, doth indict the Omnipotent of impotencie, in not being able to performe what by his Apostles he intended.


CHAP. V.
That all the pretences of Scriptures obscuritie are but mistes and vapours arising from the corruption of the flesh, and may by the pure light of Scriptures rightly applied, easily be dispelled.
1 VNto this and all demaunds of like nature [if the Scriptures be not obscure, how chanceth it, that so many finde such difficulties in them, euen in those places, wh^ch seeme to containe in them matt^rs of faith?] The answere is alreadie giuen:
 It was the Almighties good pleasure to decree, that the Scriptures should be plaine and easie to such as faithfu^ly practise their most plaine and easie precepts, but hard and difficult to be vnderstood aright of such as wilfully transgresse them, or knowing them to bee Gods word doe not glorifie them as his word: Most difficult, most impo^sible to bee vnde^stood of such as acknowledging by what Spirit they were written, yet renounce their authoritie, or disclaime them for the rule of their faith. All such, though for the cleerenesse of their vnderstanding in other speculations they may seeme to haue angelicall heads, yet for diuine mysteries haue but Iewish or obscure hearts: and being blinded in their mindes they imagine the Scripture wheron they looke to bee obscure. This answere notwithstanding, though most true, will not satisfie all For seeing this blindnesse in most men is not voluntarie, at the least, not wilfull or affected, the captious will yet demand; How shall they helpe it? The Scriptures plainely teach, how, they may bee holpen. What can be more plaine then that rule:Iam. 1.5. If any man want wisedome, let him aske of God: Yea, many doe so, and yet goe without it. So they must as the Scripture telleth vs, if they aske amisse. Doth the Scripture then serue as a streight rule to direct them, how they should a^ke aright? Yes. For what rule can be more plaine then that of Saint Iohn.1. Iohn. chap. 3. vers. 22. Whatsoeuer wee aske, wee receiue of him, because wee keepe his commaundements, and doe those things which are pleasing in his sight. The promise indeede is plaine, but the condition hard: for the first thing wee would aske of God is grace to keepe his commaundements. But what hope haue sinners to receiue this, seeing hee heareth onely such as keepe his commaundements? wil this, or any other rule of Scripture helpe vs out of this Labyrinth? It will not faile vs, nor forsake vs. For if we haue but a desire to amend our liues, Christes words are as plaine, as forcible,Matth. 12.20. Hee quencheth not smoaking flaxe, a bruised reede hee will not breake. And this is his commaundement, that wee trie the truth of this and other like sayings of comfort by relying vpon his mercie; or, if wee doe but seeke after repentance, we do that which is pleasing in his sight; For hee is not pleased in the death of a sinner, but reioyceth at his repentance. If wee bee wanting to our selues in
 the practise of these rules, the Popes infallible authoritie shall neuer be able to supply our negligence; his blessing, where God hath laid his curse, shall do as little good, as Balaams indeuour to curse the Israelites did them harme, whom God, had blessed. Obseruing the former precepts well, the word of God, which these men (belike out of their owne experience) challenge of obscuritie, should bePsal. 119.105 a lanterne vnto our feete, and a light vnto our pathes, as it was vnto Dauids.
2 For the Readers further satisfaction, may it please him but vnpartially to consider what two of the most learned Iesuites, in matters of moderne controuersies, could answere vnto this last place of the Psalmist. Bellarmine would haue two strings to his deceitfull and broken bow. First, saith hee, it may be answered, that the Psalmist speakes not of all Scriptures, but of the commandements onely. If this answere of his could stand for good, it would serue as a new supporter to our former assertion grounded on our Sauiours words in the seuenth of Iohn. For thus the commaundements shall not be obscure, but a lanterne vnto our feete, and if we follow them, they will be (as I haue shewed before) a perfect light vnto vs, to discerne true doctrine from false. And in this respect, all good commandements (not the decalogue, or these ten onely) are properly a light, whereby we may cleerely know as to auoide euill, so to discern that which is good. And by this light was Dauid conducted vnto that true wisdome which his enemies wanted.Psal. 119.98. By the commandements thou hast made me wiseser than mine enemies. But what reason had Bellarmine to thinke, that Dauid in the forementioned verse should meane the commandements onely. For there he saith plainly, thy word (...), which is much more generall then (...) commandements or testimonies: yet Dauid saith, That he had more vnderstanding then all his teachers, not the infallible teacher that sate (if any such there were) in Moses chaire excepted. So that his commandements are a light, his testimonies a light, and his word a light. And the best interpreters, as wellSynonymous autem vsurpat, et si Hilarius neget, pro diuina lege and sapientia haec vtroque numero, legem, Mandata, statuta, viam, ^udicia, testimonium, praecepta, Iustitiam, Aequitatem, Iustificationes, Sermones, Verbum, Elo quium, Veritate^. Nam vel non diffe^unt, vel cum re id^m fint, eandemque Dei legem doctrinamque significe^t, ^atione and notatione duntaxat distinguuntur, quatenus legis diuinae qualitates, notae, perfectiones, proprietates, variae sunt ac multiplices. Genebrard. com. in prima^ partem Psal secundu^ nos. 119. Vide Molleru^ in eunde^ Psalmu^. theirs, asVerbum Propheticu^ Lucernae comparans Apostolus Petrus, habemus, inquit, certiore^ Propheticum sermonem, ^ui bene facit^, intendentes veluti lucernae lucenti in obscuro loco. Quod itaque hic ait, lucerna pedibus meis verbum tuum and lun e semitis me^s verbu^ est quod scripturis sanctis omnibus continetur. Aug. in versum Psalmi citatum, Lucerna^ pedib. etc. ours, take these words, Testimonies,
 Precepts, Commaundements, Words, promiscuously throughout this whole Psalme. Any one of these (most of all the most generall of all words) signifie at least all Scripture which serues for mans direction, in the way of life.
3 None can be restrained to the Decalogue onely. This Bellarmine saw well enough. Wherefore his second answere is; It may (it must) be granted, that he speakes of all, or rather of the whole Scripture. But the Scriptures, saith he, are called a lanterne and a light, non quia facile intelligantur, not because they are perspicuous and easie to be vnderstood, sed quia intellectae cum fuerint illustrant mentem, but because when they are vnderstood, they illuminate the minde or vnderstanding. Thus much wee haue said before, and still doe grant, that the Scriptures are not plaine, and easie vnto all, liue they as they list: nor do they shine vnto such, as are blinded in the pride, vanitie, or corruption of their hearts: yet a light in themselues, and a light to all that loue not darknesse more than light. A light, not after they are vnderstood, forThe enterance into thy w^rds sheweth light, and giueth vnderstanding vnto the simple. Psalm. 119. vers. 130. and vers. 104. By thy precepts I haue gotten vnderstanding: therefore I hate all the wayes of falshoode. From which words Saint Augustine gathers this doctrine. A mandatis tuis intellexi. Aliud est mandata tua intellexi, aliud esta mandatis tuis intellexi. Nescio ergo quid aliud se significet intel lexisse a mandatis Dei, quod est, quantum mihi videtur, faciendo mandata Dei, peruenisse se dicit ad carum rerum intelligentiam quas concupiuerit scire: propter quod scriptum est, concupisti sapientiam, serua mandata, and Dominus praebet eam tibi, ne qui quam praeposterus antequam habeat humilitatem obedientiae, velit ad altitudinem sapientiae peruenire, quam capere non p^test, n si ordine venerit. Audiat ergo ^tiora te ne quaesieris, and fortiora te ne scrutatus fueris, sed quae pracipit tibi Dominus, ill^ cogita semper. Sic homo ad occultorum sapientiam peruenit per obedientiam mandatorum. Cum autem dixisset, quae bi praecipit dominus ill^ cog ta: ideo addidit, semper, quia and custodienda est obedientia, vt percipiatur sapientia, and percepta sapientia, non est deserenda obedientia. Dauid got true vnderstanding by their light: whose propertie is as well to shew the way how to auoid that blindnesse, which causeth them seeme obscure, as to illuminate the cleare sighted. For as by the Sunne we see what bodies are not transparent or penetrable by its light: so by Scriptures we discerne what bee the obstacles that hinder the intromission of their splendour, (in it selfe, and for it selfe most apparent,) into our hearts. And the glimpse of their scattered beames, appearing through the chinkes and ruptures of that veile of corruption, which nature hath wouen about the eie-sight of our soules, doth enlighten vs so farre as we beginne to desire the veiles remoueall, that we way haue a full fruition of their maruellous and comfortable light: as men in the morning after long and irksome darknesse (vnlesse desirous with the sluggard in the Prouerbe to haue a little more sleepe) are occasioned to open their windowes, when they see the Sunne-beames appeare in at the chinkes. My meaning is, those precepts
 whereof I spake before [to learne hum litie and me^knesse, G^ds threatnings to sinners, his sweete promises to the penitent, to pray for wis^dome from aboue, and infinite other like] are so perspicuous and cleare, that they cannot but finde entrance into enueiled, if not withall malitiously wilfull or sluggish heartes: and finding entrance, can^ot but suggest considerationsRom. 13. vers. 11 12.13. what their former life hath beene, and whereunto their now professed hopes doe call them, that now it is time they should arise from sle^pe, seeing saluation draweth nearer then when they first beleeued, that the night is p^st, and the day at hand, therefore time to cast away the workes of darknesse, and put on the armour of light, to wa^ke honestly as in the day, not in gluttony and drunkennesse, neither in chambering and wantonn^sse, nor in strife and enuie. Vnto hearts thus prepared the Scriptures neede no other commendation then their owne, no infallible proposers authoritie to illustrate or confirme their truth, more then the Sun doth a more glorious starre to manifest his brightnesse vnto men indued with perfect sight. For vnto such as walke like children of the Gospels light, nothing necessarie to their soules health can be hid in darknesse; not the day of destruction, which shall come as a snare vpon other inhabitants of the earth, can1. Thes. 5.23. steale vpon them as a theefe in the night.
4 But vnto infidels, haughtie and proud-minded men, vnto such as delight in sinne, and loue to sleepe in sinfull pleasures, vnto such as scorne to be controlled in their courses, the light of Gods word, if it once shine, or send some scattered raies into their hearts, it shines not so againe, f^r they draw a curtaine, and spread the veile, least further intromission of such beames might interrupt their pleasant sleepe. This did Luther well teach (had hee beene as well vnderstood) that the Scripture was only obscure or difficult vnto infidels or proud mindes. But BellarmineBel lib. de verbo dei. cap. 1. replies, At certe Dauid non erat superbus aut infidelis: Surely Dauid was neither a proud man, nor an infidell, and yet the Scripture was obscure and difficult to him. Let him bee accounted both, that thinkes Dauid was either, a proud man or an infidell. But the question is not whether he were, but what was the cause hee was not such: was it not^salm. 19. vers. 7. the perfection of Gods law which did conuert his soule? was it not the certaintie of Gods testimonies
 that gaue wisedome vnto his simplicitie? Yes, by these precepts hee had gotten vnderstanding to hate all the waies of falshood.Psal. 119. v. 104 Vers. 92. And except that law had beene his delight, he had perished in his affliction.Videbat Lutherus posse obijci, vnde sint tot controuersiae, si scriptura est tam ^lara: duo eff^gia excogitauit, vnum, quod scriptura, etiamsi alicubi sit obscura, tamen illud idem alibi clare proponit. Alterum, quod scriptura, licet per se clarissima, tamen superbis and infid^libus sit obscura ob eorum coecitatem, and prauum afctum. Add^t Brentius in proleg. Contra Petrum a Soto tertium effugium, quod etiam in terdum sit obscura, p^opter phrases al enae linguae, id est, Hebraicae and Graecae, tamen sensus eius clarissimus sit. Quae sententia manifeste falsa est: nam scriptura ipsa de sua difficultate atque obscuritate testimonium perhibet. Psal. 118. Dae mihi intellectum, and scrutabor legenit^am. Ibid. Reuela oculos meos, and considerabo mirabilia de lege tua. Ibid. Faciem tuam illumina super seruum tuum, and doce me iustificationes tuas. Et certe Dauid nouerat totam scriptura^, quae tunc erat, and nouerat phrases linguae Hebraicae, nec erat superbus aut infid^lis. Bellarm. lib. 3. de verbo Dei cap. 1. Bellarmine would proue the S^riptures to be obscure, because Dauid praies to God for the right vnderstanding of them. And Valentian would perswade vs to relie vpon the Churches infallible authoritie, because it is a hard matter to pray vnto God (as Saint Augustine did) for the gift of interpretation His words are these: Quid autem precatio ad Deum pro sapientiae interpretationisque scripturae deno? An exigua difficultas est and pie and perseueranter illud cum eodem Augustino lib. 11. Confess. cap 2 orare: Domine attende etc Valent tom. 3. disp. 1. quaest. 1. @ 4. These words of Valentian immediatly follow his former obseruation vpon S. Austen, noted Paragraph. 11. chap. 3. l. F. How then doth Bellarmine proue that law was obscure to him, which as hee himselfe confessethPsal. 19. v 8 had giuen light vnto his eyes. If it were not, why did he pray to God to vnderstand it? Then I perceiue the Iesuites drift in this present controuersie is to establish a rule of faith so easie and infallible as might direct in all the waies of truth without prayer to God, or any helpe from heauen. Such a one, it seemes, they desire as all might vnderstand at the first sight, though liuing as luxuriously as their Popes, or minding worldly matters as much as their Cardinalles: Nisi v^lint nimium esse caeci, vnlesse they would, as Valentian speakes, desire to bee blinde.
5 Surely more blinde then beetles must they be that can suffer themselues to be perswaded, that euer God or Christ would haue a rule for mans direction, in the mysteries of saluation, so plaine and easie, as he should not need to be beholden to his maker and redeemer, for the true and perfect vnderstanding of it. This is a wisedome and gift, which commeth onely from aboue, and must be daily and earnestly sought for at the hands of God: who (we may rest assured) wil be alwaies more readie to grant our petitions herein with lesse charges, then the Pope to giue his decisions in a doubtfull case. Had Dauid asked this wisedome of him that sate in Moses chaire, we might suspect the Pope might be sued vnto. But Dauids God is our God, his Lord, our Christ, our Redeemer, and hath spoken more plainly vnto vs then vnto Dauid, who yet by his meditations on Gods written lawes, added light to Moses writings, as later Prophets haue done to his. All which in respect of the Gospels brightnesse are but as lights shining
 in darke places: yet euen the least conspicuous amongest them, such as will giue manifest euidence against vs to our eternall condemnation, if wee seeke this wisedome from any others then Christs, his Prophets and Apostles doctrine, by any other meanes or mediatourship, then Dauid did his, From Gods lawe written by Moses.
6 Let vs now see what Valentian can say vnto the fore citedPsal. 119. vers. 105. testimonie, and to thatPet. 1. v. 19. other like vnto it. [Wee haue also a most sure word of the Prophets, to the which yee doe well that yee take heede, as vnto aYet might the Prophets writings, if any place of Scripture seeme obscure. light that shineth in a darke place, vntill the day dawne, and the day-Starre ariseth in your hearts.]Concedimus igitur pari modo, sacras literas, quae diuinae doctrinae co^tinent lumen, tanquam lucernam esse per se ipsam splendidissimam semper, atque fulgentissimam. Sed nobis tamen considerandum est, quomodo sit hoc lumen non in se modo lucidum, verum etiam (vt regiu^ Propheta Psal. 18. d^cit) illuminans ocul^s. Nunquid q^a ratione vnusqu^sque ingenij proprij atque industriae suae finib. illud tanquam modo quodam ex guo camprehendit? M nime ve^o, sed quatenus est diuinitus in Ecclesiae Catholicae authoritate tanquam in candelabro positum, vt luceat ombus qui in domo sunt, Mat. 5. Hanc enim Ecclesiae authoritatem docebimus postea suo loco, esse in vniuersum iudicem atque magistram fidei viuam: idcirco necesse est, vt lumen illud fidei, quod in diuinis literis splendet, praeferat ipsa atque ostendat omnibus, qui ad eam aggregantur, in eaque manent, licet incruditi sint al^oqui, nec valea^t ^psi per se aspicere lumen illud, vt in ipsis literis sanctis tanquam in lucerna continetur. Valent. Tom. 3. disp. 1. punct. 7. @. 4. It is true (saith the Doctor) the word of God is a light, and this light is cleare and illuminates the eyes. But it must bee considered, how it comes to enlighten our eyes: Doe you suppose that it effects this, in as much as euery man doth comprehend it, within the bounds of his priuate wit, or industrie, as it were in a little bushell? Nothing lesse. But it effects it, as it is placed in the authoritie of the Catholicke Church, as in a d Candlesticke, where it may giue light to all that are in the house. For we shall shew (saith he) in due place, that this authoritie of the Church is the liuing iudge and mistresse of faith. And therefore is it necessarie, that shee should carie this light, which is contained in holy writ, and shew it vnto all, that associate themselues to her, and remaine in her bosome; although they be vnlearned men, and such as are not able by themselues to behold this light, as it is contained in the Scriptures as in a lanthorne.
7 Hee that could find in his heart to spend his groate, or goe a mile to see a Camel daunce a ligge; let him but lay his finger on his mouth, that hee spoyle not the Pageant with immoderate laughing, and he may (without any further cost, or paines) bee partaker of as prettie a sport, to see a grande demure Schoole Diuine, laying aside his wonted habit of metaphysicall proofe, turned Doctor Similitude on a suddaine, and swaggering it in the metaphoricall cut. For what one ioynt, or straine is there, in this long labourious vaste similitude, that doth any way incline
 vnto the least semblance of truth: or can be drawne, to illustrate any such meaning, as this man intended; or any way to breake the force of our writers arguments, drawne from the forecited places? For, first, what semblance is there betweene a priuate mans interpretation, or comprehension of Scripture-sence, and the putting of a light or candle vnder a bushell? For what though some one, some fewe, or more such men, will apprehend this or that to be the full meaning of some controuersed place in Scripture? I am (by our Churches doctrine) no more bound to beleeue them, then I am to beleeue the Pope of Rome, whom I neuer saw, nor knew. I am bound to beleeue neither of them more, then if they should tell me, that the whole light of that candle which shines alike to all, were o^ely comprehended in their eyes. For by our doctrine I may behold the same light of Scriptures, which they doe, as freely as they; iudge of it by mine owne eyes and sence as well as they; not onely submit my sence and iudgement vnto theirs. But if we should (as this Iesuite would haue vs) permit the iudgement of all Scripture-sence, wholly and irreuocably vnto the Pope and his Cardinals; as if their Consistorie were the compleate Hemisphere, or rather the (...) spheare, the whole Spheare wherein this heauenly Lampe doth shine: then indeede we should see no more of it light then we could of a Candle put vnder a bushell, or locked vp in some close roome; In which case we might beleeue others, that it did shine there still, but whether it did so or no, we could not iudge by our owne eyes. And in like manner would this Doctor perswade vs, that we should iudge of this light of Scriptures, onely by the testimonie or authoritie of such, as see it shine in the Consistorie at Rome, not with our own eies. Had the Lord permitted but one graine of good wit to haue remained in this bushell of branne, not impudency in graine could without blushing haue offered to accuse our Church for hiding the light of Scriptures vnder a bushell; when as we contend, the free vse of it should be permitted to the whole congregation. But he disputeth of the light, as blinde men may of colours. He liued at Ingolstade, and the light of Gods word was at Rome lockt vp within the compasse of the Consistorie, for that he could not see to make his comparison of it. Secondly, what proportion is there betweene the Churches authoritie, (such authoritie as hee
 claimes for his Church) and a Candlesticke? Let the Consistory be supposed the Candlesticke, wherein the word of God doth shine as a light or candle. Doth it indeed shine there? vnto whom? To all that will associate themselues to that Church? Come then, let euery man exhort his neighbour to repaire to the mountaine of the Lord. Shall we there immediatly see the truth of Scriptures, clearely and distinctly with our owne eyes, because the Pope, or Trent-Councel holds out vnto vs the books of Canonical Scripture? May priuate spirits discerne their true sense in matters of faith, as clearely as if they were a light indeed to thee? Oh no, you quite mistake his meaning, in making such collections? Let Valentian explicate himselfe in the ende of this fourth paragraph.
8Posteaqua^ Ecclesia sententia^ aliquam ex scriptura colligit, scripturamque prouide, vt est a se secundum Apostolicam tradition^m intellecta, contrarijs erroribus opponit: summa improbitas est, al^quid praeterea desiderare in eiusmodi scripturae vel authoritate, vel interpretatione, quocunque id fiat siue diffcultatis siue obscuritatis praetextu. Quae enim scriptura per authoritate^ Ecclesiae commendatur, explicaturque, ea iam hoc ipso and maxime est authentica, and splendidissime clar^ssimeque lucet, tanquam lucerna, videlicet (vt supra exponebamus) pofita super candelabru^. Tom. 3. disp. 1. quaest. 1. punct. 7. @. 4. After the Church hath once gathered any opinion out of Scriptures, and thereupon opposeth the Scripture (thus vnderstood by it, according to the Apostolicall traditions,) vnto contrarie errors: It is extreme impietie and wickednesse to desire any more, (eyther concerning the authoritie or interpretation of that parcell of Scripture,) vnder what pretence soeuer, of difficultie, obscuritie, or the like. For that Scripture (I pray marke his words well) which is commended and expounded vnto vs by the authoritie of the Church, that Scripture now (ea iam) euen for this reason (hoc ipso) is most authenticke, and shines most splendently, most clearly, like a light, videlicet, as wee haue formerly expounded, put vpon a Candlesticke: Nay in good sooth, iust like a Candlesticke put vpon a light or candle. For in this countrey wherein we liue, we see the Candlesticke by vertue of the light, not the light by meanes or vertue of the Candlesticke. And yet if your Church be the Candlesticke, as you suppose, and the Scripture the light (as you expresly acknowledge:) we must by your doctrine discerne the light of Scriptures, onely by the commendation, explication, or illumination of your Church, the Candlesticke. And this illumination is onely her bare asseueration, for Scriptures she seldome expounds, but onely by negatiues or Anathemees. The best correction that can be made of this vntoward, crooked, vnwieldy similitude, would be this: wheras this Doctor supposeth the Pope to be the Church, and saith further, necesse est vt lumen illud fidei quod in diuinis literis splendet praeferat Ecclesia: Let him put lucem for lumen, and so the Pope
 (being by his assertion the Church) may be truly called Lucifer. And then, as, when cloth shrinkes in the wetting, men shape their garments accordingly, making sometimes a Ierkin of that which was intended for a Iacket: so out of this vnhandsome ill-spunne similitude, which was marred in the making, we may frame a shorter, which will hold exceeding well, on this fashion: Euen as Sathan, being the Prince of darknesse, doth to mens seeming transforme himselfe into an Angell of light: Iust so doth the Roman Lucifer, being (by Valentians confession) but the Candlesticke, labour to transforme himselfe into the light it selfe; and would be taken for such a light or Candle, as should make the very light of heauen it selfe (Gods word) to shine most splendently and clearly by the glorious beames of his maiesticall infallibilitie once cast vpon it. For otherwise, vnlesse the supernaturall glory of his infallibilitie do infuse light, or adde fresh lustre to this light, or lanterne of truth, the Candlesticke naturally giues no increase of perspicuitie to the light or candle, Which wil shine as cleare in a priuate mans hands, (so he wil take the paines to hold it,) as in a publike Candlesticke. But that which I would haue the serious reader to obserue especial y, is this speech of his, Scripture,Quae scripturae per aut^oritate^ Ecclesiae commendatur explicaturque, ea iam hoc ipso, and maxime auth^ntica est, and splendidiss^me clarissimeque lucet. as once commended vnto vs, or expounded by the Churches authoritie becomes therby most authenticke, and shines most clearly, and most splendently. For this same Doctor, (if a Doctor may be said the same, affirming and denying the same,) in the beginning of that dispute would gladly shuffle so, as he should not bee taken with that tricke, which will discredite their cause for euer, and descrie their villanous blasphemie in this doctrine of their Churches authoritie. There he would perswade vs, that he doth not allow of this speech [I beleeue this or that to be a diuine reuelation, because the Church doth tell me so:] or of this; [the Church is the cause, why I beleeue the diuine reuelations:] whereas this speech of his, (Quae Scriptura per authoritate^,) doth inferre the authoritie of the Church to be the verie principall, and immediate cause of our assents vnto Scriptures.
9 Secondly I would haue the sober Christian Reader to obserue, what an vnhallowed and vnchristian conceit it is, to admit the Scriptures for a lanterne and yet to affirme that Christians cannot behold the light therin contained, but only as the Church
 of Rome doth hold it out, what is this else, but to call the people from the maruailous lightYet haue the the Papists in times of darknesse borne the people in hand that the Bible was the holy mount which no man might approch but the Priest. of the Gospell, vnto the feareful lightnings of the law? And to make the Pope that mediator, which the people implicitely did requestExod. 20. v. 19 when they desired that Moses might speake to them, not God. If we be in Christ, then are we not called into Mount Sinai, to burning fire, blindnesse, darknesse, and tempests; this light of the Gospell is not enuironed with a fearefull cloud, or smoake, threatning destruction if wee should go vp into the mount to heare the Lord himselfe speake: we haue an aduocate with the Father, and need not looke for a Moses to go vp for vs, while we stand trembling a farre off. For as our Apostle tels vs,Heb. 12. v. 22 We are come vnto the Mount Sion, and to the Citie of the liuing God, the celestiall Ierusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels, and to the congregation of the first-borne, which are written in heauen, and to God the Iudge of all, and to the spirits of iust and perfect men, and to Iesus the Mediator of the new Testament, and to the bloud of sprinkling, that speaketh better things then that of Abel. What is the consequence, or effect of this our challenge? OurVers. 28. Apostle makes this inference, See therefore that yee despise not him that speaketh. Whom did he meane? The Pope, or Cardinals? But they would be but of like authority as Moses was? but he that speaketh vnto vs, is of farre greater. For so our Apostle collects, See that yee despise not him that speaketh: for if they escape not, which refused him, that spake on earth, much more shall we not escape, if we turne away from him which speaketh from heauen. The Israelites I suppose had despised Moses, if they had admitted any other infallible teacher besides him, whilst he was aliue, or belieued any other, as well as his writings, after his death, but only so farre forth, as they could discerne their words to bee consonant vnto his. If Moses writings were to these Iewes a plaine rule of faith, then much more must Christs word, registred by his Apostles and Euangelists, be the rule of faith vnto vs. That Moses doctrine was their rule of faith, a rule most plaine and easie, these places following abundantly testifie.



CHAP. VI.
That the Mosaicall writings were a most perfect rule, plaine and easie to the ancient Israelites.
1 SO perfect directions had Moses left for posterities perpetuall instruction, that a greatThe author of the the 78. Psalme. Vers. 3. and 4. Prophet in later ages, desirous to bring Gods people into the right pathes which their fathers had forsaken, and for this purposeSasbout vpon those words of S. Paul. 2. Tim. 3. Thou hast knowne the holy Scriptures of a child. professing to impart to them whatsoeuer he had heard or learned, from his godly ancestors: doth but trace out the Prints of Moses footsteps, almost obliterate and ouergrown by the sloth and negligence of former times wherein euery man had trod what way he liked best. And though the same Prophet descend to later ages as low as Dauids; Yet he proceeds still by the same rule, relating nothing but such historicall euents or experiments as confirme the truth of Moses diuine predictions, such as are yet extant in Canonicall Scriptures. So perfect and absolute in his iudgement, was that part of the old Testament which then was written,Deut. 6. v. 6.7.8. to instruct not onely the men such as hee was, but euery child of God, that he presumes not to know or teach more then in it was written. And thus much this people should haue done by Moses precept, without a Prophet for their remembrancer. And these words which I commaund thee this day, shall be in thine heart. And thou shalt rehearse them continually vnto thy children, and shalt talke of them when thou tarriest in thine house, and as thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest downe, and when thou risest vp. And thou shalt bind the^ for a signe vpon thine hand, and they shall be as f^ontlets betweene thine eyes. Also thou shalt write them vpon the postes of thine house, and vpon thy gates.Deut. 32. v. 46. And againe, Set your hearts vnto all the words, which I command you this day, that you may command them vnto your children, that they may obserue, and doe all the words of this law. For it is no vaine word concerning you, but it is in your life: and by this word you shall prolonge your daies.
2 Questionlesse they that were bound to obserue, and doe this law, were bound to know it; and yet Moses referres them not
 to his successor, as if it were so obscure, that it could not possibly be knowne without his infallibility; but on the contrarie, he supposeth it so plaine and easie, that euery Father might instruct his sonne in it, and euery Mother her daughter. It was their owne daily experience of the fruits and benefits in obeying, of their harmes and plagues in disobeying his precepts, which was to seale their truth vnto their consciences. For without such obseruation, without squaring their liues, and comparing their thoughts, and actions vnto this straight and plaine rule, all other testimonies of men, or authorities of their most infallible teachers were in vaine. The miracles which they had seene to day, were quite forgotten ere nine daies after. Nor could their perswasions, or conceit of Moses infallibilitie, serue them for any rule, when they had shaken off these inward cogitations, and measured not the truth of his predictions by experiments. In their temptations they were as readie to disclaime Moses, as alwaies they were to distrust God whose mightie wonders they had seene. To what vse then did the sight of al Gods wonders, or of miracles wrought by Moses serue? Motiues they were necessarie and excellent to incline their stubborne hearts to vse this law of God for their rule, in all their actions and proceedings: and to cause them set their hearts vnto it, as Moses in hisDeut. 32. v. 46 last words commaunds them. For this lawe, as hee had tolde themDeut. ^0. before, was in their hearts.
3 Would any man that doth feare the Lord, or reuerence his word, but set his heart to read ouer this booke of Deuteronomie, or the one hundred and nineteene, with sundry other Psalmes, but with ordinarie obseruation or attention, (that so the character of Gods Spirit, so liuely imprinted in them, might be as an amulet to preuent the Iesuites inchantments:) It would be impossible for all the wit of man or Angels, euer to fasten the least suspicion on his thoughts, whether the ancient faithfull Israelites did take this law of Moses for their infallible rule in all their proceedings. For nothing can bee made more euident, then this truth is in it selfe; That the Israelites swaruing from this rule was the cause of their departure from their God; and the occasion, or cause of their swaruing from it, was this diuellish perswasion, which Sathan suggested to them then, (as the Iesuites doe vnto the Christian people now:) As, that this law was too obscure, too hard,
 too di^ficult to be vn^erstood: nor compleat rule for their actions, without traditions, orThere priests authority was neuer more stood vpon, then in those times wherein Moses was in least request, and their skill in his writings as little. So in Iehoiakims daies these oppose their Pri^sts and other state-Prophets vnto Ieremy. Ier. 18. vers. 18. Then said they, Come, and let vs imagine some deuise against Ieremiah: for the law shall not perish from the Priest, nor counsell from t^e w se, nor the word from the Prophet: come let vs smite him with the tongue, and let vs not g^ue heed to any of his words. relying vpon their Priests or men in chiefe authoritie. This hypocrisie Moses did well foresee would be the beginning of all their miseries, the verie watch word to Apostasie. For which cau^e he labours so seriously to preuent it.Deut. 30. v. 11 For this commandement which I set before ^hee t^is day, is not hid from thee, neither farre of, but the word is very neare vnto thee, euen in thy mouth, and in thy heart, to doe it. How was it in their mouthes and in their hearts, when it was so obscure, and difficu^t vnto them, after Moses death? It was in their hearts, and in their posteritie too, had they set their hearts to it. But as it is true, pars sanitatis est velle sanari. It is a part of health to be willing to be healed; so was it heere pars morbi, nolle s^nari, more then a part of this their grieuous d sease, (their blindnesse of heart,) was their pronenesse to be perswaded, that this word or doctrine, which Moses heere taught was too obscure, and difficult for them to follow. They fi^st beganne (as the Iesuites doe) to picke quarrels with God: for which their stubbornnesse he gaue them ouer to their hearts desire. And this his sacred word, which should haue beene a lanterne vnto their feete, and a light vnto their pathes, as it was to Dauids, became a1. Cor. 1. v. 23 stumbling blocke, and a stone of offence; what was the reason? By their swaruing f^om this plaine and straight rule their waies became crooked, and their actions vniust. And it is the obs^ruation of the wise sonne of Strach.Eccles. 39, vers. 54 As Gods waies are right, and plaine vnto the iust, so are th^y stumbling b^ockes vnto the wicked. Not Moses himselfe, had hee beene then aliue, could haue made this, or any other true rule of faith, plaine vnto these Iewes, whilest they remained peruerse and stubborne. And had they (without Moses, or any infallible teachers helpe) cast off this crookednesse of heart, Moses his infallible doctrine had still remained easie, straight and plaine vnto them. For it was in their hearts, though hid and smothered in the wrinkles of their crooked hearts. In our Sauiours time, they will not assent vnto the word written, nor vnto the eternall word, vnto which all the writings of the Prophets gaue testimonie, vnlesse they may see aIohn. 6 v. 30.31. 1. ^or 1. v 22. signe; What was the cause? They had not laide Moses commaund^mentes to their hearts. ForIohn 5. v. 46. had they (from their hearts)

Quod vero subiungit Malachias, Meme^^te legis Mosi serui mei q^am mandaui e in Choreb ad omn^m Israel: ^^^^pta and (...) a opportu^^ c^mmemo^at, ^o^t d^cla^um tam ^g^um futur^m ^nter obs ^u^tores legis contemptoresque (...) ^crimen: simul etiam vt discant legem spiritualiter intelligere, and inueniant in ea Christum, per quem iudicem facienda est inter bonos and malos ipsa ducretio. Non enim frustra idem Dominus ait Iudaeis, si crederetis Moisi, crederetis and mi^i. De me enim ille sc ipsit. Carnaliter quippe accip^ nda legem, and eius promissa terrena rerum coe^estium figuras esse ^^scientes in illa ^urmura co^ruerunt, vt dicere aude^e^t: Vanus es^ qui seruit Deo. Et qu^d amplius quia custodiuimus mandata eius, and quia ambulauimus simplices ante fati^n T^ mini omnipotentis. August. de ciuitate Dei. l b 20. cap. 28. beleeued Moses, they had beleeued Christ. For all whose miracles, wrought for their good, in their sight and presence, they cannot or will not see, that his words were the words of eternal life, asIohn. 6. vers. 68. Peter confesseth. Nor would any Iesuite haue acknowledged as much, had hee beene in their place. For why should he? Any other might say, he had the spirit of God, and that he was the Messia; and what if Peter one of his fellowes, late a fisherman, did confesse him? The Scribes and Pharisees, principall members of the visible Church, denie him to be their Messias. And how should they know his words to be the word of God, vnlesse the Church had confirmed them? If Christ himselfe should haue said in their hearing as he did to theMatth. 22. v^ 2. Iewes. Moses wrote of me, consider his d^ctrine, and lay it to your hearts: A Iesuite would haue replied, you say Moses wrote of you; But how shall we know that he meant you? Moses is dead, and saies nothing, and they that sit in his chaire say otherwise. And verily the Scribes and Pharisees had farre greater probabilities to plead for the infallibility of that chaire, then the Iesuites can haue for their Popes: who, had they beene in the others place, could haue coyned more matter out of that one saying of our Sauiour,Iohn. 7. vers. 48.49. Sedent in Cathedra Mosis, for the Scribes and Pharisees infallible authority, then all the Papists in the world haue beene able to extract out of all the Scriptures that are or can bee vrged, for the Pope, or Church of Romes infallibilitie.
4 The Scribes and Pharisees (though no way comparable to the Iesuites, for cunning in painting rotten, or subtiltie in oppugning causes true and sound) could vrge for themselues, agai^^t such as confessed Christ, that none of the rulers, nor of t^e Pharisees did beleeue in him; but only a cursed crew ofIohn. 7. vers. 48.49. such as knew not the law. They could obiect the lawe was obscure, and the interpretation of it did belong to them. But could these pretences excuse the people for not obeying Christs doctrine? You will say (perhaps) they could not be^ excused, because Christs miracles were so many and manifest. These were somewhat indeed, if Christ had beene their accuser.
 But ourOur Sauiours miracles and maner of life, so fully su able to Mosaical types and predictio^^ of him, conde^ned the Iewes of wilful malice and affected blindnesse for not laying Moses law vnto their hearts, whose spirituall sense would haue brought forth the light of the Gospell therin contained as the branch in the roote. So that Moses condemns the^ immediatly because he was their s^holmaster, and would haue ^aught the^ Christ, so they wold haue practised his rul^s which they acknowledged Christs miracles condemne them mediatly, and leaues them without excuse for n^t looking more narrowly into the spirituall sense of Moses writings which would haue inlightned the^ to ha^e discerned the gl^ry of Christ and hi^ Gospel in his works So as there is no contradiction but subordination betwixt those places which tell vs Christs works d d condemn the^, and others wherin Mo^es o^ the Prophet^ (...) said to condemne or leaue the^ without excuse. Sauiour saith plainly, that he would not accuse them to his Father. And for this cause he would not worke many miracles amongst such as were not moued with the like alreadie wrought, least he should increase their sins. If Christ did not, who then had reason to accuse them? Moses, as it is in the same place, did: Moses, in whom they trusted, and on whom they fastened their implicite faith: Moses, of whom they thought and said, we wil beleeue as he beleeued: Moses, whose doctrine they (to their seeming) stood as stifly for, against Christs new doctrine, (as they supposed) as the Iesuits do for the Catholike Church (as they thinke) against heretikes and sectaries, as they terme vs. Why then is Moses, whom thus they honored, become their chiefe accuser? because while they did beleeue on him only for tradition, or from pretence of succession, or for the dignity of their temple, Church, or Nation, they did not indeed beleeue him, nor his doctrine. For had they beleeued his doctrine they had beleeued Christ. For he wrote of Christ. So he might (thinks the Iesuite) and yet write so obscurely of him as his writings could bee no rule of faith to the Iewes without the visible Churches authority Yea rather they should and might haue beene a rule vnto them for their good, against the visible Churches authority, and now remaine a rule or law against both, to their iust condemnation, because the doctrine of Christ was so plainly and clee^ly set downe in these writings, had they set their hearts vnto them. Euen the knowledge of Christ, the word of life it selfe, was in their mouthes and in their hearts. For that commandement which Moses there gaue them, was that word of faith, which S. Paul the infallible teacher of the Gentiles did preach, as he himself b testifies. If any man aske how this place was so easie to bee vnderstood of Christ, or how by the doctrine of Moses law the doctrine of the Gospell might haue beene manifested to their consciences: my answere is already set downe in our Sauiours words; had they done Gods wil (reuealed vnto them in that law) they should haue knowne Christs doctrine to haue beene of God.
5 Had they, according to the prescript of Moses law, repented them of their sins from the bottome of their hearts, the Lord had blotted all their wickednesse out of his remembrance. And th^ir hearts once purged of wickednes, would haue exulted in his presence
 that had made them whole; faith would haue fastened vpon his person though neuer seene be^ore.Malach. cap. 4. vers. 2.3.4. But vnto you that feare my name shall the sonne of righteousnes arise, and health shall be vnder his wings, and ye shall go forth and grow vp as fat calues. 2. And ye shal tread downe the wicked: for they shall be dust vnder the soles of your feete in the day that I shall doe this, saith the Lord of Hostes. 3. Remember the lawe of Moses my seruant, which I commaunded vnto him in Horeb in all Israell, with the statutes and iudgements. Not the Moone more apt to receiue the sun beams cast vpon it, then these Iewes hea^ts to haue shined with the glorie of Christ, had they cast aw^y al^ pride, and self-conceit, or the glory of their nation: but vnto t^ (as now they are, and long time haue been) swollen with pride, a (...) full of hypocrisie, Christs glory is but as cleare light to sore ^r dimme-sighted eyes: They winke with their eyes, least (...) should bee offended with the splendour of it. This doct^i^e ^f Christ, and knowledge of Scriptures in points of faith, shall bee most obscure to vs, if we follow them in their foolish pre^en^^s of their visible Church: most cleare, perspicuous, and easie, if we lay Moses commaundements to our hearts. For truth inherent must bee as the eye-sight, to discerne all other things of like nature.


CHAP. VII.
Concluding this controuersie according to the state proposed, with the testimonie of Saint Paul.
1 WE may conclude this point with our2. Cor. 4 vers. 3.4. Apostle; Si Euangelium nostrum tectum est, ijs qui p^reunt tectum est: in quibus Deus huius saeculi excaecau^t mentes, id est, infidelibus, ne irradiat eos lumen Euangelij gloriae Christi, qui est imago Dei. If the Gospell be obscure, or rather hid, (For it is a light, obscure it cannot be, God forgiue me if I vsed that speech, saue onely in our aduersaries persons) It is hid onely to such as haue the eyes of their mind^ blinded by Sathan, the God of this world. Of which number, may we not (without breach of charitie) thinke hee was one, who seeing the light and euidence of this place, would not see it; but thought it a suff^cient answere to sayBell^rm. lib 3. de verb. Dei cap. 2. Resp ad 5 arg. The reason why ^ellarmine with his f^llowes and many oth^r g^eat schollers besides, make such hypocriticall gl^sses of Scriptures p^a^nl^ teaching what th^y denie, is their not consid^ring that the same inord^nate affections w^i^h made the Iewes to reiect the very hist^^i^ (...) truth or letter of the Gospel, mak^s such as admit it content the^selues with it onely, neuer looking in^o the m^aning of the spiri^, ^f it once contradict their desires. Of this fallacy in the 3. sect. of the 4. boo^^. Apostolus non loquitur
 de intelligentia scripturarum, sed de cognitione and fide in Christum; The Apostle speakes not of vnderstanding Scriptures, but of knowing and beleeuing in Christ. It is well the Iesuite had so much modestie in him as to grant this later, that he spake at the least of knowing Christ. For if the knowledge of Christ be so cleere to the godly and elect then are the Scriptures cleare too, so farre as concernes their faith. For Saint Paul wrote this, and all his Epistles, onely to this end, that men might truly come to the knowledge of Christ. But hee meant of a perfect and true knowledge, not such as Bellarmine (when hee gaue this answere) dreamed of; vt neque sit puer, neque anus Christiana, quae non sciat Christum natum, and incarnatum fuisse. Saint Pauls Gospell was sufficiently knowne (in this mans sense of his wordes) because there is neyther Christian childe, nor old wife, but knowes that Christ was incarnate and borne. Too many I feare of his, and his fellowes catechizing, know Christ no otherwise, then olde wiues, or little children know ordinarie matters or stories past, that is, onely by olde wiues tales, lying Legends, or tradition. And on this fashion, and better, did the Iewes know Moses, and beleeued on him; yet did they neyther know him, nor his doctrine, as they should haue done, nor in such a sense, as the Scripture vseth this word Knowledge. Such as hee would haue vs content our selues withall is rather blindnesse then knowledge, and makes a man neuer a whit the better Christian, but a grea er hypocrite.
2 Let Bellarmines answere stand thus farre for true, that the knowing of Christ, and beliefe of the Gospell, are manifest to all, that are not giuen ouer to Iewish blindnesse. And what it is to know Christ, or beleeue the Gospell, in Saint Pauls phrase, (by Gods assistance) wee shall further explicate in the Articles following. To know Christ, was all Saint Paul desired, because it contayned all knowledge of Scriptures: and whether Saint Paul did not desire to know Scriptures, or whether he had not his desire herein, let Christian consciences iudge.
3 And because I must conclude this poynt, (as I promised) with this testimonie of Saint Paul: Beloued Christian whosoeuer thou art, that shalt reade these meditations, aske counsell of
 thine owne heart, consult with thy conscience, consider well, and giue sentence betwixt mee and this Romish Doctor, what kinde of knowledge Saint Paul heere meant: whether an implicite or here-say knowledge of Christ and his Kingdome in grosse, or an expresse, distinct, true knowledge (raised from Moses and the Prophets consonancie with the Gospel) of Scriptures necessarie to mens saluation in their seuerall courses of life. I will not wrong thy iudgement so much, as to seeke argumentes, or authorities of Expositors, for thy information in this plaine vndoubted case. It shall suffi^e to rehearse the wordes of that law, about whose sense wee now contend, and by which wee must bee tried; from the twelfth verse of the third, to the sixth verse of the fourth Chapter of the second to the Corinthians.
4 Seeng then wee haue such trust, wee vse great boldnesse of speech, and wee are not as Moses, which put a veile vpon his face, that the children of Israel should not looke vnto the end of that which should be abolished. Therefore their mindes are hardened. For vntill this day remaineth the same couering vntaken away in the rea^ing of the old Testament. Yet was the old Testament the onely Scripture in those times easie to bee vnderstood, but for his veile. And this veile (as the Apostle addes, verse the fourteenth) put away, these Scriptures then which were so difficult to the Iew, are easie to all that are in Christ, by whose death the veile was rent, and that light which shone on Mos^s face as the Sunne vppon the Easterne skie in the dawning, was fully manifested to the inhabitants of the earth since the Sunne of righteousnesse d^d appeare. For the publishing of the Gospell is the putting away of the former veile. But for the Iewes euen vntill this day, (saith the Apostle,) When Moses is reade, the veile is laid ouer their heartes.Vers. 1^. Vers. 30 vers. 8. Neuerthelesse when their hearts shall bee turned vnto the Lord, the veile shall bee taken away. For this doctrine of Saint Paul (as often hath beene said) was in their hearts,Deut. 30. ver. 11 and in their mouthes.
The Apostle concludes, Now the Lord is the Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is,Iohn. 15. v. 15 there is libertie: Libertie indeed in respect of that seruitude which was vnder the lawe; then they
 wereVers. 18. seruants because they knew not their Masters will; but since the ministerie of the new Testament, Wee all behold as in a mirrour, the g^o^ie of the Lord w th open face. Out of our Apostles d^scourse, this is most euident, that it was the glorie of his ministerie. and eui^ence of doctrine which made him so confident, in the execution of this function. God (saith hee) hath made vs able Min^sters of the new Testament, not of the letter,Chap. 3. v. 6. but of the spirit: And this, compared with the ministerie of the old, did farre exceede it in glorie and perspicuitie, as he proues from the sixt verse to the eighteene.
5 The iudicious Reader, though not admonished,Cum enim scriptu^am obscuram esse dicimus, non vitium aliquod in doctrina ipsa diuinitus, tradita inesse sentimus, sed maiestatem atque altitudinem potius eiusmodi sapientiae and scientiae Dei, and imbecillitatem ingenij nostri profitemur. Valent. tom. 3. dup. 1. quaest. 1. punct. 7. @. 4. Chap. 4. vers. 1. Vers. 2. would of his owne accord obserue how the Apostle takes clearenesse and perspicuitie as an adiunct of the new Testamentes glorie; the Iesuites quite contrarie would make the Scriptures dignitie and maiestie mother of difficultie and obscuritie. But because it was so much more glorious and perspicuous then the ministerie of the old Testament was, The Apostle inferres: Therefore, seeing wee haue this ministerie of the new Testament, (so glorious and perspicuous) as wee haue receiued mercie, wee faint not; but haue cast ^ff the cloake of shame, and walke not in craftinesse, neyther handle wee the word of God deceitfully (for why should any when it will approoue it selfe) but in declaration of the truth approoue our selues to euery mans conscience in the sight of God. What proofe could hee make to their consciences, but onely from the euidence of that truth which hee taught, and his sinceritie in teaching it? These two would binde all such as made any conscience of their waies to admit his doctrine. Whence hee inferres in the verie next words. If then our Gospell be hid, etc:Vers. 3. Briefely refuting all the Romanistes obiections in this argument, before they we^e conceiued, punctim, euen to an haires breadth. For this would haue beene their common place, had they liued in Saint Pauls time. You may boast and say your doctrine of the newe Testament is euident and manifest, but what wise man will beleeue you, when a great many, as good schollers as your selfe, thinke the contrarie most true. Vnto this obiection of the Ie^es then, of the Iesuites now, of Sathan both now and then, and alwaies frequent in the mouth of Hell, our Apostle answeres
 directly, as from his doctrine wee haue done all the Iesuites arguments.) If the Gospell bee hid, (as in deede to some (too many) it is) Yet is it hid onely to them that perish, whose mindes the God of this world hath blinded, that the glorious Gospell of Christ, which is the image of God, should not shine vnto them.
6 The Gospell then did shine, yet not to blinded eyes; to whome then? onely to such as were indued with the spirit of libertie: seeing the new Testament, as hee said, was the ministerie of the spirit, of which these Iewes were not partakers, because they followed the letter or outside of the law, and had Moses writings, (as children, lessons they vnderstand not) at their tongues end, not in their hearts.




SECT. III.
That the continuall practise of Heretikes in vrging Scriptures for to establish heresie, and the diuersitie of opinions amongst the learned about the sense of them, is no iust exception, why they should not be acknowledged as the sole, entire, and compleat rule of faith.
OVT of the former discourse their other obiections are almost answered alreadie: and they bee especially two. The first, If the Scriptures be plaine and easie, how comes it to passe, that there should be such contentions amongst the learned about them? Or whence is it, that euery Heretike is so forward to vrge Scriptures for his opinion euen to the death? The second lies (as it were) in the wombe of this, (as this did in the formers) and drawne out in it proper shape, is thus. There can be no certaine meanes of taking vp controuersies or contentions in the Church, but onely by admitting an infallible authority for deciding all controuersies viua uoce seeing the Scripture is alwaies made a partie on all sides, in such contentions.
2 In the former obiection they endite the Scripture as the principall: in the latter, our Church, as an abetter of such quarrels and contentions as it breedes. For our Church wee shall answere in the next: for Gods word in this present Section.

CHAP. I.
Containing the true state of the question, with the aduersaries generall obiections against the truth.
1 IT cannot bee denied, that alwaies there haue beene, and alwaies will continue, contentions amongst learned men in points of faith, or doctrine, or about the true sense or meaning of Scriptures, in these and other cases. For thus much these Scriptures themselues doe plainly witnesse, oportet
 esse haereses.1. Cor. 11.19. 2. Pet. 2.1. For there must be heresies euen among you, that they which are approued among you, might be knowne. But the question is not whether there haue beene, now are, or alwaies shall continue many contentions about the sense of Scripture: but first, whether the Scriptures haue not plainly set downe the original causes and nurses of such contentions, and the meanes how to auoid them, so men will be ruled by them, most plaine for this purpose: or, secondly, whether, not submitting their wils, desires and affections vnto these plaine and perspicuous rules of life, this supposed infallible rule of the Romish Church can preuent, remoue, or compose all such contentions, according to the truth, and cause men stedfastly hold the vnitie of faith in the bond of peace.
3 The causes of contentions about the sense of Scriptures, areSo Beda gathers out of Augustine. Ex ipso animali sensu (quia homo animalis non percipit quae sunt spiritus Dei) omnes dissensiones et schismata generantur. Beda in 2. Iam. 4.12. the very same with the fore-mentioned, which made the Scriptures vnto sundrie seeme obscure; or the same, which make men to mistake their true sense and meaning. For euen these warres and contentions whereof we speake (specially these) arise from lustes, which fight in our members: we lust and haue not, we enuie and haue indignation, and cannot obtaine: we fight and warre, and get nothing, (not the truth which we seeke) because we aske it not. Do not such as contend most about the true sense, aske it most? doth not euery heretike, the earnester he is, professe that he praies for the truth so much the more feruently? yea, but such men receiue not that which they so earnestly aske,Vers. 3. because they aske it amisse. They desire skill in Scripture to aduance their owne conceits, and maintaine their foolish and carnal affections, otherwise asking they should haue, and seeking they should finde,Matth. 7.7. especially the true sense and meaning of Gods word, which must instruct vs, how to frame all our other petitions vnto God aright.
4 These and infinite like places we acknowledge, plainly declaring the^ causes of contentions, and as many more, (some of which shall be heere and there inserted) directing vs how to auoid all occasions of strife and debate. Both which if we obserue, contentions will quickly cease: Which, those not obserued, must increase, as a iust punishment of truth neglected, contradicted or low esteemed, notwithstanding the best indeuours of any authority vpon earth imaginable to the contrarie.
5 But some perhaps will demand, Is there no vse of humane
 authoritie in this case? yes; As for the begetting of true and liuely faith, we suppose the liue-voice of an ordinary ministery as the Organe, whereby the written word must be conuaied to our spirits: so for retaining the vnitie of this faith in the bond of peace; for suppressing or preuenting all occasions of schismes, heresies, or contentions; we acknowledge the necessary vse of a lawfull Magistracie, yet no infallibility in eyther.The true vse of the magistracy and ministry for auoiding schismes and contentions. The proper end and vse of both is to espouse mens soules with an indissolub^e knot of loue and loyalty vnto the written word, the only infallible rule of that faith whereby they liue: the one, by vnfolding the g^nerall points or Maximes of Christian faith: the other, by constraining them, at least, to a ciuill practise of vndoubted principles acknowledged by all; and inhibiting such courses as the morall precepts of this Canon haue detected for causes and nurses of contention. Our aduersaries, whether out of wilfull malice or ouersight, or out of both, (according to the diuersities of their tempers) haue taken occasio^ to traduce our Churches doctrine, as if it admitted no meanes for preuenting or composing contentions, but only the bare letter of Scripture: Whereas we all teach that the written word is the only meanes infallible, not the onely meanes simply, for effecting both. Nor doth it skill how necessary either ministeriall expositions, or iuridicall decisions bee, for bringing vs vnto, or retaining vs in, the vnitie of the truth professed: for not necessity is meanes, but infallibility of direction is the proper, vnseparable condition of the rule of faith. And seeing Gods word onely endures for euer, and therefore onely is infallible: it must be the sole rule of faith, how many or how necessary soeuer the means be, that must bring vs to the true knowledge of it.
6 Valentian and Sacro-boscus thinke it all one,The grosnesse of our aduersaries exceptions being a branch of their generall extremitie mentioned. cap. 4. sect. 1. further to be prosecuted. sect. 3. lib. 3. to acknowledge no Ecclesiasticall authority or vse of Ministerie, and not to acknowledge an infallibility in both. But this is a position deuoid both of sense and reason. For as our senses, though of themselues only capable of particular and m^terial obiects, subiect to change and contingencie, are the necessarie and only ordinary means whereby our intellectiue faculty is brought to apprehend vniuersal and immaterial principles, whose truth is necessary, euerlasting and immutable* so may the ministerie and magistracie, though both in themselues fallible and obnoxious to errors, be the necessary and onely ordinarie
 meanes, whereby we are brought (as it were by a sensible induction) to the infallible acknowledgement of the supernaturall, diuine, eternall truthes, which are the proper obiect of the illuminated or spirituall, as immateriall and vniuersall principles are of the naturall vnderstanding; which shall (God willing) be declared hereafter. In this place I onely thought good to forewarne the Reader of this hiatus in our aduersaries collections: whereinto the blinde and ignorant English Papist, led by such blinded forraine guides as Valentian and Sacro-boscus, who eyther did not or would not know what our Church in this point doth hold, fall headlong in the very first entrance of this dispute.
7 But in this, as in the former question, it shall not be amisse to propose our aduersaries principall arguments and exceptions against our Churches doctrine, in admitting the Scripture for the rule of faith. And I would request any man, that is able to iudge of the force and strength of an argument, to read the best learned, and most esteemed of our aduersaries, for the further confirmation of this truth which we teach. Against which, some (who haue not sought into their writings) may happily imagine, that much more hath or might be said by any of them, then can bee found in all their writings. Whereas Bellarmine and Valentia two excellent schollers, and most iudicious diuines, (where their wits were their owne) and all other good writers of their side, whom I could hitherto meete with, by reason of the barrennesse of their matter, and shallow vnsetled foundation of their infallible Church, haue performed as good seruice to our cause in this present controue^sie, as that Romane Orator, famous for his vnskilfulnesse in Augustus his time, did to the parties whom he accused; I would to God (said the Emperour) this foolish fellow had accused my gallerie, (which had beene long in building,) for then it had beene absolued, that is, according to the vse of this word in Latine, finished long ere this. In this case we haue his wish. And for the edification of mine owne faith in this point, I must (out of the synceritie of a good conscience,) professe, I would not for any good on earth, but Bellarmine, Valentian, and other grand patrones or plausible aduocates of the Popes cause, (especially Valentian) had taken such earnest paines in accusing our Churches doctrine; for they haue most clearly acquitted it, in that we may iustly presume
 there can be no more said against it. And whether all they haue said or can say be aught, I leaue it to the iudicious readers iudgement: I will set downe some of their obiections, and then prosecute their generall topicke, or formes of their arguments, whence all particulars, which in this case they can bring, must receiue their whole strength.
8Omnes haeretici qui scripturas in authoritate recipiunt, ipsas sibi videntur sectari, cum suos potius sectentur errores. Aug. Epist. 222. ad Consentinum. All heretikes, (saith Saint Augustine) which admit the authoritie of Scriptures (for some reiected all or most parts of the sacred Canon) seeme to themselues to follow the Scriptures, when as indeed they follow their owne errors.Neque enim natae sunt haereses and quaedam dogmata perue^sitatis illaqueantia animas nisi dum scripturae bonae intelligantur non bene: and quod in ijs non bene intelligitur, etiam temere and audacter asseritur. Tract. 18 in Iohan. Non modo locos scripturae obscuros, sed etiam alios qui sunt aperti and clari corrumpi ab hoereticis. lib. 2. de nuptijs and cap. 31. Nor doe heresies (saith the same father in another place) and other naughtie opinions, which ensnare mens soules, spring from any other root then this, That the right sense of Scripture co^ceiued amisse, and yet so co^ceiued, is boldly and rashly auouched.
9 And in another booke of Augustine, it is said (Valentian would haue the saying well obserued, as it shall be to his shame,) c That heretikes do not corrupt onely the obscure and difficult, but euen the plaine and easie places of Scriptures; andChristus etiam facilime ab haereticis doctrina^ corrumpi subindicauit, cum admonuit vt ab ijs tanquam a falsis prophetis caueremus. Videntur prophetae, quoniam scripturae verba proferunt, quae diuinae doctrinae sunt character and quasi externa species sed prophetae non sunt, quoniam sub ea verborum diuinorum externa specie non ostendunt nobis genuinam S. S. sententiam, sed adulter^nas suas perue^sasque opin^ones sacrilege in verbis sacris a se collocatas, tanquam abominationem (vt eleganter Origines Homil. 29. in Matt. notauit) st^ntem in loco sancto. Eadem de causa vocantur lupirapaces, qui vestimentis induti sunt ouium. Val^nt. tom. 3. in Aquinatem. punct. 7. quaest. 1 @. 6. Haec ideo recitaui, vt quoniam vniuersi haeretici facilime scripturas omnes in suam perditionem si^ut D. Petrus inquit d^prau^nt. (2. Pet. 3.) Jntelligamus certe non in scripturis solis con^titutam esse vniuersalem illam, and ad salutem hominum accommodatissimam authoritatem, totius fidei iudicem, quam inquirimus. Valent. loc. citat. parag. 7. our Sauiour Christ (as this writer addeth) did intimate how obnoxious the eua^gelical doctrine was to this corruption by heretikes, when he forewarned vs, to beware of false Prophets. Heretikes, saith he, seeme to be Prophets because they make a faire shew of Scripture-phrases, which are as the character or externall shape of heauenly doctrine. But Prophets they are not, because vnder the outward shew of heauenly words they manifest not the natiue sense and meaning of the holy Ghost, but their owne adulterate, corrupt opinions, sacrilegiously inuested by them in sacred phrase, as it were the abomination of desolation standing in the holy place, as Origen elegantly notes, Hom. 29. in Math. By the same analogie are they called rauening wolues, being arayed in sheeps cloathing, etc.
10 These and like places are brought by Valentian (as the title and conclusion of that Paragraph shew) to this purpose: That e seeing all heretiks may and do easily peruert the Scriptures, as S. Peter saith to their own destructio^: we should hence be instructed, that this vniuersall.
 authoritie, and most behoouefull for the saluation of all, which wee seeke as the common iudge in all pointes of faith, cannot be seated in the Scripture alone.
11 Another marke whereat these fierie darts doe vsually aime, is; to fasten the conceipt of heresie vpon our Church, seeing it hath alwayes beene the practise of Heretikes, to couer their wicked imaginations with sacred phrase, and, as Lyrinensis saith, to inter-sperse or straw their depraued opinions with the sweet and fragrant sentences of Scripture, as with some precious spice, least the exhalation of their natiue smell might bewray their corruption to the reader. This is a common place trodden almost bare by the English pamphleting Papist, who learnes the Articles of his Roman Creede, and generall heads of controuersies betwixt vs, with their vsuall arguments or exceptions against our doctrine, no otherwise then the Fidler doth his Song; holding it sufficient for his part, to affoord a Mimickes face, scurrilous stile, or Apish gesture, vnto the inuentions of Bellarmine, Valentian or some forraine Iesuites braine. And as it is hard for vs to speake, though in generall termes, against any sinne in a Countrie-Parish, but one or other will perswade himselfe, that wee aime at his ouerthwart neighbour, vnto whome, perhappes, our reproofes are lesse applyable, then vnto him that thus applyes them: so is it very easie for this Mimicall crue to perswade the ignorant or discontented people, that euery Minister, whose person or behauiour, vpon what respect soeuer, they dislike, is the very man meant by the Auncient Father and our Sauiour in the former generall allegations; if hee vse but the phrase of Scripture, not the Character of that forraine beast; Whereas their obiections duly examined can hurt none but the obiectors.



CHAP. II.
That the former obiections and all of like kind, drawne from the cunning practise of Heretiques, in colouring false opinions by Scripture, are most forcible to confirme ours, and confound the aduersaries doctrine.
1 MVster they as many authorities or experiments of this ranke, as they list, wee know the strength and nature of their weapons. They are dangerous indeede to such as haue not put on the breast-plate of righteousnesse, or shield of faith: but yet (God be praysed) as sharpe at the one end as at the other, and they had neede to be wary, how, and against whome they vse them. For beaten backe directly by the defendants, they may be as faire to kill the thrower, at the rebound, as them against whom they were first intended. For proofe hereof, looke how easily we can retort all they haue throwne at vs, vpon themselues. It hath beene the practise of Heretiques, (say they) to misinterprete Scriptures, and pretend their authoritie for countenancing errours. This wounds not vs, except wee were naked of all syllogisticall armour of proofe. For they should prooue (if they will conclude ought to our preiudice) that none but Heretiques haue v^ed Scriptures authoritie to confirme their opinions. For if orthodox and truly religious writers, in the best and flourishing ages of the Church, haue beene as copious and industrious, in citing authorities of Scriptures for their opinions, as Heretiques: this argument prooues nothing against vs, why we may not bee Orthodoxes and true Catholikes, as well as Heretiques. That this hath beene the practise of Heretiques we acknowledge; and hauing receiued this their blow, wee can returne their owne weapons vpon them, with greater probabilitie of better speede.
2Our appealing to Scriptures alone, is no such presumption of heresie in vs, as the refusal^ of triall by them, is of Antichristianisme in the aduersa y. It hath beene the practise of sundrie Heretiques, neuer of any Orthodoxe, to refuse their triall by Scripture, and flie vnto traditions. It hath b^ene the continuall practise of most monstrous and blasphemous impostors, of false Messiahs, and such as
 oppose themselues against Christ, of Mahomet, and such like, to pleade the infallible assistance of the Holy Ghost, and a Supreame authoritie ouer others, without subiection to any triall, either by Scripture or other meanes. If most of them haue failed in getting so many stedfast followers, as the Pope now hath, and for many yeares hath had; it is most likely this was either because their heresies were more open, and more easie to be descried; or they lesse cunning in countenancing them by Scriptures, antiquitie, or other plausible showes of custome, tradition, or the like. For we all know, that Antichrists greatnesse must grow by the multitude of his resolute followers,2. Thess. 2.11. that God shall send them (be they neuer so many) strong delusions, that they should beleeue lyes; that his comming is by the working of Sathan (who can vrge Scripture as cunningly to maintaine falshood as any Heretique,) and by all power, and signes, and lying wonders. So that it will bee hard to discouer or preuent his comming, vnlesse men bee very cunning and expert in these Scriptures, the rule of truth, the onely light, whereby all falshood must bee discouered.
3 That they may once for all know, how little wee feare their force, we will set our bodies so as they shall not misse them, and prepare our selues to take the full strength and dint of all their strokes. The Heretiques of olde time (say they) haue vrged Scriptures for their doctrine vehemently and copiously: we will giue them better hold, and helpe them to presse this point a little harder; They did vrge Scriptures most cunningly, most subtily, and hereby deceiued many, yea almost staggered the very elect. What if they did? so would Pharaohs enchaunters haue obstupified most of the Israelites beside Moses and Aaron: but did their cunning iugling preiudice the truth of Moses miracles? or did he neglect to manifest the power of God, for feare least hee should bee censured for such a one, as they were, onely more cunning in his craft? Their wicked cunning serued as a foyle so to set forth his heauenly skill, as the Enchaunters themselues could not but see the finger of God in his working: herein more ingenuous then the moderne Iesuites; who in so cleare a point as this, we now dispute, after so many foyles as they haue taken, will not acknowledge the force of that Scripture in themselues; Magna est veritas and praeualet. The reason is; because they will not come
 vnto the open Court, to trie their skill before vnpartiall Iudges.
4 The Diuel, wee all know did vrge the Scripture to our Sauiour, with great ^kill and dexteritie. Had he beene the onely follower or first founder of this practise, or the first of all wee had read of, we should haue beene (vntill we had found some better example and warrant for it) as much afraid to haue imitated him herein, as that scrupulous Monke was to weare his hood; because he thought the Diuel had been the first that euer had worne one, being vsually painted in that habite, when he came to tempt our Sauiour Christ, and that Story hee thought in all likeli-hood, to be as Auncient as the first hood. But with what weapon did our Sauiour vanquish Sathan, that had set vpon him with Scripture? did hee charge him sub poena anathematis to bee silent? or did hee craue the Churches peace vnder paine of greater penalties? or did he appeale vnto the infallible authoritie, or Supreame Tribunall of the Iewish Church? did hee except against him for vsing an vnlawful, Heretical weapon? can you deny that he foyled him with these very weapons, wherewith wee now contend, that all Heretikes (Sathans followers) are to bee assaulted and repulsed, ere they can be lawfully foyled and quite ouerthrowne? And here I would beseech all sober-minded Christians, euen as they loue our Sauiour Christ, (the chiefe C ptaine of the Lords Host, the authour and finisher of our faith) and as they hate Sathan himselfe (the head and Prince of all Gods, Christs, and our enemies) to consider these subsequent reasons well, and waigh this instance in the quiet, calme, and setled motions of their hearts.
5 If Sathan can thus teach Heretikes,What adua^tage the orthodoxes haue of heretiques in trial of controuersies by scriptures. and other his like wicked instruments, such great skill and cunning in Scriptures, as they can thereby countenance errours, and deceiue others with a shew of godlinesse: why should wee not hold it as a principall article of our faith, that Christ Iesus is able to instruct his chosen, immediately, in the true sense and meaning of the same Scriptures, so as they may ^ereby grow skillfull enough, to retaine such as loue the truth in the knowledge of truth; and defend themselues and others against the oppositions of Heretikes, although they bring their arguments out of Scripture. For first we know, and beleeue that Christ is stronger then Sathan; for he hath bound
 that strong man; Secondly that hee is better skilled in Scripture: for after his first enterance into his Propheticall or Sacerdotall function, heMat. 4. put him hereby to flight, and at his passionIoh. 22 vers. 13. Now shall the Prince of this world bee cast out. threw him out of his hold. Sathans strength since that time hath beene lesse, and Christs power greater; so that in his strength wee may be stronger then all Sathans followers. Thirdly wee know that the Scripture is in it selfe much more fauourable vnto truth, then vnto falshood; and (caeteris paribus) farre more apt to confirme true Religion, and instruct in points of faith, then to establish heresie, or fill the world with errours? onely the sonnes of darknes haue beene wiser in their generation, then such as should bee, or (in some measure) are the sonnes of light. And if Heretiques may seeme to haue had the better sometimes of the Orthodoxe, in trying controuersies by Scripture; this doubtlesse was for no other reason but only this: Their alacritie and industrie in searching Scriptures for maintenance of errours, was greater then the others for establishment and confirmation of the truth; otherwise, as wee said before, the truth is more consonant to the puritie and integritie of Sacred Writ, then any falshood (though neuer so faire in shew) can be: And Christ Iesus is more powerful, and more skilfull, more able and more willing to assist and strengthen such as follow him,The argume^ts proposed in the last chapter can haue no ground, to proue ought against vs, but this: Sathan is more powerfull or skilfull in Scriptures then Christ; o^ more readie to helpe his instruments then Christ to assist his Chosen. then Sathan is to enable his wicked instruments Seeing then by these Scriptures hee hath crushed Sathans head, and put him to flight; why should his faithfull followers despaire, by the same weapons, to foyle and sley Sathans seruants, so they will bee as industrious to vse them, as the others are to abuse them. Nor will you (I hope) deny that Christ is present perpetually to his true Church, as well as Sathan is to Heretiques. Say then what you can or dare, why yee should thinke it strange or impossible, that hee should teach all faithfull soules the true sense and meaning of his word, immediately by his blessed spirit, working with the Ministerie of Saints, (without a Vicar general on earth,) as well as Sathan doth Heretikes the counterfeit sense or false but faire seeming meaning of it immediately by himselfe, or his wicked spirits. For we neuer heard that Sathan had any Vicar generall, by whome he teacheth Heretiques all their cunning; vnlesse this be the Pope: which if he bee, then is he not Vicar generall vnto Christ.
6 Seeing, (beloued Christians) we are compassed about with such a cloud of witnesses, whereof not one, without open infidelitie can bee impeached: let vs not disdaine to take the practise of Christ Iesus, the Authour and finisher of our faith, as a patterne well befitting our imitation. Not to bee as industrious in searching the inward sense and secret meaning, as Heretiques, in vrging the outward letter of the Law; were not to follow the footsteps of a victorious Lord, most good and gratious to his followers, with as great alacritie, as vanquished Sathans, wicked instruments doe his: both (if not detested by vs, as the foulest shame, that in this life can befall vs) will breed our euerlasting confusion, in the life to come.
7 That I may dispute with such as make a ieast of Scriptures, according to their childish folly; if by this meanes, I might possibly cure their impietie: Tell vs I pray, yee Doctors of Rome, many of whom I know to be men of learning wit and spirit, and for this reason (as I should thinke) more vnwilling to make your selues palpably ridiculous, to euery child or nouice in arts, howsoeuer, vnto all sorts you striue to make Christs practise such: Tell vs what is your counsell in this choice? shall wee forsake Christ, our, yea Saint Peters best master, to become Schollers vnto your Staphilus, or Hosius Coalier? who (if their reports bee true) did sooner put the Diuell to silence with this doctrine of your Churches infallibilitie, then Christ did for all his Scripture; for the Diuell, as theMat. 4. vers. 47.10. Euangelist tels vs; departed not from our Sauiour before the third blowe, Auoide Sathan, able to abide the Coalier, but two or rather one a little doubled, I beleeue as the Church beleeues, and the Church beleeues as I beleeue, So much by your doctrine, doth the Diuell feare the very name of your Church though in a Coaliers mouth, more then the word of God, albeit vttered by the sonne of God himselfe.
8 But wee know the Prouerbe too well, Like to like, Children and ignorant people are not ignorant, that the Diuell will bee commaunded, by such as studie the blacke Art: no maruaile if he suffer himselfe vpon good termes to bee put downe by a Coalier. And as I will not peremptorily denie, but the story might bee true: so questionlesse such as most beleeue it, mightily mistake the true cause of Sathans sudden silence, for the truer the story were,
 the liklier were it, he should hold his peace, as soone as hee heard the Coalier beleeue as hee would haue him. This is Catechisme in it kind so perfect and absolute, so well suiting to the olde Serpents purpose; that if Hell might haue a generall vacancy from all other imployments for time as long as hath beene since Lucifers fall; not all the powers therein could deuise what one word might be added, what detracted; vnlesse perhaps they would expresse what the Coalier happily vnderstood, [I beleeue as the Church Romish beleeues, and the Church Romish as I beleeue.] whose consequence is, both shall beleeue whatsoeuer Hell would haue them. The vse of such rustique weapons, as those, was perhaps on your part not vnnecessary in that rude world; wherein Lindan's Panopley went for approoued harnesse, or Ecchius bolts for good artillery; but should you vse the like now, euery punie in our Schooles that knows but how to manage an argument, (of which God bee praised we haue enough for a whole Army) shall match your great Golias, whilest they thus keepe aloofe, and lay your stoutest Champions in the dust, by returning their owne or like shot vpon them.


CHAP. III.
The pretended excellencie of the supposed Romaine rule, for composing controuersies, impeached by the frequencie of Heresies in the Primitiue Church, and the imperfection of that vnion, whereof since that time they so much boast.
1 BVt let vs leaue off skirmishing a far off and come a little nearer to the point. You are content to ioyne with vs in this, That it hath beene the practise of Heretiques from time to time, to stand much vpon the authoritie of Scriptures, Then were not Luther and Caluine, the first, that euer made this odious comparison betwixt Gods word and the Popes, Nay you will not deny but this practise of vrging Scripture was most frequent, and the truth most troubled hereby in the Primitiue Church. If
 a man might aske you, where was this your supposed infallibilitie then? in the swadling clouts or vnborne? If then vnborne, it is too yong to make yonger brethren of al Congregations else; too yong to cause Christian Kings and Emperours subiect their Crownes vnto your vpstart Mitre: If then borne, albeit but in its infancie: yet such an Herculean power, as you professe yours to bee, which puts an (...) to all Christian mens thoughts in pointes of faith, (for to this purpose your controuersors cite that place of Scripture, as your vulgar reades it, verba sapientum sunt tanquam claui in altum fixi per magistrorum consilium, conscripta and a pastore vno data; viz. the Pope, istis amplius fili mi ne requiras) might in all congruitie haue taken Hercules Motto for its word, Cunarum labor est angues superasse mearum: though it had laine then sleeping in the cradle, yet might it, (were it such as you would make it) easily haue crusht this seede of Serpents in the very nest, wherein they bred, and not haue suffered them to growe vp to flying Dragons, to pester the world farre and neare with their deadly poyson.
2 I would haue you here to consider this incongruitie well, which I must farther prosecute in the next dispute. You plead the necessitie of your Churches infallibilitie for composing all contentions and varietie of opinions about Scripture-sense, and yet we euidently see (which you cannot deny) that such bitter contentions, and dangerous varieties of opinions about Scripture-sence, were most rife, most eagerly prosecuted, and maintained, when this title of your Churches infallibilitie (if it were iust) might haue beene best knowne, and soonest assented vnto. ForThat the Fathers, if wee take the litterall plain Gramaticall sense of their words, attribute as much to Scriptures as we do, our aduersaries cannot deny. May wee not then safely thinke, they meant what their words naturally import? No, Valentian hath found out a mystical interpretation of them. Que^admodum quando vni personae diuinae aliquae perfectio diuinitatis absoluta tribuitur, intelligunt Theologi, ab eius perfectionis communione creaturas tantum excludi, non autem personas alias diuinas quae sunt eiusde^ naturae: Jta Sancti patres sicubi Scripturae authoritatem solam ad fidei quaestiones finiendas valere significant: Ecclesiae certe authoritatem pro diuina habe^t, and quam ipsa nobis commendat Scriptura, minime excludunt, sed alia siue testimonia, siue argumenta. quae sint ta^tu^ humana. Nam si non ita intelligerent, profecto nu^qua^ illi in controuersijs fidei ipsa per se authoritate Ecclesiasticae traditionis ad probandum vterentur. At vtuntur ea ipsi frequentissime and vtendum esse doce^t. As the non co^sequence of this collection, so how far the Fathers did vrge the Churches authority, how the most pregnant speeches that ca^ be found in any of their writings must be limited, will easily appeare, if we consider the two former distinctions: the one betweene the infallible rule of faith, and the meanes or motiues inducing vs to beleeue: the other betweene that conditionall assent, which in cases doubtfull we must giue to the visible Church, and that absolute beleefe, which is onely due vnto Scriptures: The Fathers vsed the Churches authoritie against Heretiques, as we doe theirs against Nouelists, not as a rule whereby finally to examine or determine diuine truths, but as a curbe to b^idle presumptuous gainsaying opinions generally receiued or supposed for true, by men of sincerity and skill in diuine mysteries: sure, the Auncient Fathers who had learned Christian obedience,
 alwayes ready to giue honour, where honour was due, would most willingly haue acknowledged, so absolute a Soueraigntie, and could haue beene glad to haue vsed the benefits of it, to haue spared themselues a great deale of trouble and paines, if it could haue beene prooued then to haue beene such an excellent meane, for allaying all contentions amongst the learned. The Pope was much to blame, to let Athanasius suffer such paines, exile and abuse by the Arian faction, in the defence of the truth, if his infallibilitie could haue composed the quarrell. Austin hath beene famous throughout all Generations since, for his learned labours against the Pelagian Heresie; Cyril for his accurate confutation of Nestorius, and yet the Scripture was the best weapon they knew. Neither of them did euer appeale to the Popes infallibilitie, nor the Popes themselues which then liued would haue vsed any other rule but Scripture, for their own defence.
3 Your vsuall argument is, that vnlesse God had left such an infallible authoritie as might take vp all controuersies; hee had not sufficiently prouided for his Church. Then, by your consent, he left such an authoritie, as was sufficient to performe this good seruice to it. To whome then did hee commit it? To the Sea of Rome say you. How chanceth it your fore elders did not put it in practise, and make the power of it better knowne? This blame you cannot lay vpon the Almightie; for hee, for his part, (by your confession) prouided abundantly for the peace and quiet of his Church. And yet it seemes the Church was ill prouided for, when Schismes and Heresies sprung so fast. This therefore was your Churches fault, that bore this spirituall sword in vaine, and would not vse it; when the Christian world stood most in neede of it, for the finall decision of controuersies. So then although wee should grant you, that your Church had sometimes the birthright, amongst all the Israel of God: yet might we iustly say of it, as olde Israel said of Reuben his eldest sonne, Thy dignitie is gone; and we were to seeke this Supreame authoritie, (if God had giuen any such Supremacie to any) in some other tribe which were likely to vse it better.
4The more excellent prerogatiues the Iesuites bestow vpon their Church, the greater they make her disgrace, for not vsing her authoritie better, whe^ the Christian world stood most in need of it. If you reply, your Churches authoritie in composing controuersies amongst the learned hath beene better knowne since
 that flourishing age of learned and religious Fathers; and since it hath beene so well knowne and acknowledged, Heresies haue beene more thinne sowne, then before; (few or none till Luther arose daring to confront the Church or Popes authoritie, with Scripture:) You giue vs hereby iust cause to suspect, that Heresie had got the vpper hand of truth, for the multitude of followers; that there had beene a generall combination in falshood till Luther brake it. For if sundrie of the Auncient Heretiques, with whose doctrine the Primitiue Church was pestered, could vnder pretence of Scripture, haue got into Supreame authority; or haue established their propositions, framed (as they thought out of Gods word) with strength of temporall sword, as Mahomet did his: It were great simplicitie to thinke, that they could not haue beene content, to haue let the Scriptures sleepe, or haue threatned all with death and destruction, that should haue vrged them to the preiudice of their opinions, especially of such opinions as did concerne their dignitie. For all falshood and spirituall blindnesse hates this light, and could either wish it put out, or them vtterly extinct that obiect it to them. As hee that hath wound himselfe into an others inheritance by some quirke in Law or Captious clause not well vnderstood, would not bee much offended to haue all euidences or primarie coppies either burnt or buried, euen that by which hee got it, if it, vpon better consideration or more indifferent hearing, were likely to ouerthrow his title.
5 And if wee may ghesse at the course of Sathans policie, in watching his opportunities to effect his purpose by the customary fashion of secular Politicians (his Schollers) in like cases; most probable it is, that after these broiles of dissention about the Gospell of peace so frequent in the Primitiue Church, the great calamities, and bodily affliction which followed thereon; most men grew weary of their spirituall warfare, and became slouthfull in the search of Scriptures, the only Armorie for all munition, in this kind of warre. Euery man afterwardes, in the fresh memorie of the Church their mothers bleeding wounds, and the desolation which had ensued these furious broyles, became more tractable to entertaine conditions of peace: and Sathan himselfe, who had sowne the seedes of all the former dissention, after hee
 see all or most wearie of warre, was content to turne Peace-maker for his owne aduantage. These were as the first preparations for laying the foundations of the mysticallRoma Babel rediuiua, the mysticall Babel raised by compounding those Eleme^ts wherevnto olde Babel was resolued. The dissolution of the one, and the erection of the other differing but as the resolutio^ of quicksiluer into fume and the co^uersion of it again, into quicksiluer. ^he Citie of Babylon likewise (as shall God willing else-where appeare) was the true type. Babell, in whose erection, the manner, methode, and circumstances of the formers dissolution are all inuerted. The building of the first was hindered by the confusion of tongues, or the diuision of one language into many; whence insued the scattering of the people throughout the earth: the second was finished by the concourse of diuerse people, and the composition or confusion of different languages. For (asGen. 11.7. of Rome; the one as Saint Austin compareth the^, being the mother, the other the daughter, each euidently paralleling the other in most abhominations: which is the reason (as I take it) why the holy Ghost instiles Rome with the name of Babylon, whose abhominations were well knowne to the faithfull, and might serue as a light, to discouer Romish filthines. Goropius acutely obserues) the present temper of moderne Italian, Spanish, French (we may adde of our English) Dialects, was from the mixture of the Romane and barbarous tongues, whilest the naturall inhabitants of these Countries, (before accustomed to the Romane language,) and the Barbarians which at that time ouerranne them, were inforced to imitate each other in their words and manner of speech, that they might be the better vnderstood in matters ofIn the beginning of his Hermathena. necessarie commerce or ordinary contracts. And this is the true reason why our Auncient English Latinismes are not as the Latine Graecismes, which were deriued by art and imitationThe reason why our old English participates most of Butterie-hatch-Latine. from cleare Helicon extracted from the purest Romane; but from Latine of the base and vulgar stamp. This confusion of the Latine and other barbarous tongues, was but a type or picture of confounding the Auncient true Romane Religion with barbarous Heresies, Heathenish rites, and seuerall kindes of Paganisme; whilest theThat such was the disposition of the Romanes at that time, as would easily condescend to admit a mixture of Paganisme, may appeare out of Saint Austins first bookes de Ciuitate Dei, and Saluianus de prouidentia. Romanes, who had already begun to distast the truth,As may appeare out of some workes going vnder the name of Gregory the great, and Gregory of Towers Historie. sought by lying legends and false wonders, to please the grosse palate of the Goths, Vandals, Hunnes, Alans, Franks and Saxons: and they againe herewith delighted were content to imitate the other in sundry sacred and religious rites; so as neither kept their Auncient religion, but all imbraced this mixture or new confused Masse. And, to speake properly, that vnity whereof the Aduersarie so much
 boasts, since that flourishing age of Fathers, wherein contentions were so rife, and the Romane Church no better esteemed then some of her sisters, was not a positiue consent in the sincere truth, wrought by the Spirit of God, (as a perfect Homogeneall mixture by true and liuely heat) but rather a bare negation of actuall dissention, caused by a dull confusion of the dregges of errour, coagulate and congeled together by ignorance, carelesnesse, slouth, negligence, and want of zeale to the truth.
6 And after this composall was once so wrought, that men had felt some intermission of publique dissention which they feared most: such as were industrious in the search, or would haue beene expert in the knowledge of Scriptures, were esteemed of but as Souldiers in the time of peace and ease, alwayes suspected least they should raise new broiles; And for this reason, debarred of free accesse vnto his Armorie. But howsoeuer the practise of examining the Churches authoritie by Scripture, was for many generations rare, till Luther arose; yet during all this time, that of our Apostle was in this case most trueActs. 14 17 Our Church was in the Romish Synagogue as a little portion of fine gold, in a great masse of drosse, vntill the flames of persecution seuered it and made it conspicuous. (...) GOD did not leaue himselfe without a witnesse. In all these ages hee had his Martyrs who in the feruencie of their zeale earnestly sought the dissolution of the coagulated Masse and extraction of Celestiall quintecensses therein buried; offering their bodies as fuell to the flames of persecutions that were to effect it.
7 Nor can you in reason demaund wee should giue particular instancies of such Martyrs in euery age.The miserable and shamefull persecution of sundry, for professing most points of our Religion in Saint Bernards time. For no man of sense but will easily conceiue that your Church should seeke by all meanes possible to obliterate their fame and memorie vpon whose bodies shee had exercised such extreme tyrannie, least their example might encourage Posteritie to like resolutions. Vnlesse DRIEDO had (vnawares I thinke) acquainted mee with the Prouost of STENELDAS Epistle to Saint BERNARD I had not knowne either your crueltie against the Albigenses or Picardy, as I suppose, or their constancie, in suffering tortures in themselues most greiuous, yet attended with vsages as disgracefull; both for the mnner or forme of proceeding, as iniuriously, afflicted in
 as the ground or matter of accusations brought against them were vniust and impious. The Prouosts Epistle was to this effect.
8 I would gladly bee resolued (Holy Father) might I enioye your presence, whence it is that in Heretiques, the Diuels members, there should be so great resolution for defence of their Heresies, as the like can scarce bee found in very religious and faithfull Christians. There are (saith he) amongest vs, Heretiques which put no confidence in the suffrages of men deceased,Iam olim aute annos 400. Praepositus quidam venerandus Steneldensis interrogabatbeatum Bernardu^; vell m inquit, scire, Sancte pater, si praesens essem, vnde in haereticis diaboli membris tanta fortitudo in sua haeresi, quanta vix reperitur etiam in valde religiosis Christi fidelibus. Sunt, inquit, apud nos h retici, qui insuffragijs mortuorum and in o^ationibus sanctorum non confidunt: (marke the word non co^fidunt) ieiunia caeterasque afflictiones q^ae pro peccatis fiunt, aiunt iustis non esse necessaria: purgatorium ignem post mortem non concedunt: in altari Corpus Christi sicrinegant: Ecclesiam apud se esse dicunt, non habentes neque agros neque possessiones. Nouimus etiam ex istis nunnullos esse raptos a populis ^imio zelo permotis, and nobis inuitis in ignem positos cremato^; qui tormentum ignis non solum in patientia, Sed and cum laetitia introierunt. Vellem igitur scire, Sa^cte pater, vne in Diaboli membris tanta for ^tudo Driedo lib 4 de Ecclesiast. dog. and scrip ^ap 5. part 1. or prayers of Saints: fastings and other afflictions of the bodie vsually vndertaken for sinne, are not in their opinion necessarie to the righteous: Purgatorie after death they acknowledge none, Denying the making of our Lords bodie in the Sacrament of the Altar; the Church they affirme to be amongest them, hauing neither fieldes nor possessions. Of such we haue knowne diuerse, by the multitude, misled with too much zeale, violently haled against our will vnto the flame; whose torments they not only indured with patience, but entertained with ioy. I would therefore bee resolued by you, (Holy Father) whence so great resolution, in the Diuels members, should spring.
9 No question but this Prouost which esteemed no better of them, then as of Heretiques or Sathans members, did relate the worst opinions then knowne to bee helde by them: and yet, Hee (as I would haue the Reader note) liuing in their time, layes no such odious tenents to their charge, as those that liued long after, or were imployed by the Romish State, to write against Wicklife, Husse or Ierome of Prage, haue charged them and their followers with. Driedo tels vs, he finds no direct answere by way of Epistle or writing vnto this venerable mans demaund in particular. But out of Saint Bernards doctrine else-where deliuered concerning like Heretiques, he findes this resolution,Nihil simile habet constantia Martyrum, and pertinacia h^reticurum, quia in illis pietas, in istis duritia cordis contemptum mortis operatur. B^rnardus Hom. 66. in Canticum Canticorum. The constancie of Martyrs hath no affinitie with the stubbornnesse of Heretiques; pietie breedes contempt of death in the one, hardnesse of heart in the other. Such good minded men as Saint Bernard, I thinke had least to doe
 in the examination of such men, most obnoxious to mis-information in the particulars of their carriage: with which the Ciuill Magistrates of France, though Romish Catholiques, better acquainted, haue giuen them laudable testimonies for their honest and religious liues: and whether these mentioned by that Prouost were such, as Saint Bernard spake against, in the place late cited, is more then Driedo knew. Howsoeuer, in matters of this nature it is most true, Bernardus non vidit omnia, as easie in his life time to be abused by crafty Polititians, as his authoritie is now by moderne Iesuites. He that will beleeue these men were such Heretiques as Driedo would make them, only because Driedo sayes so, may easily bee perswaded that their resolution did not spring so much from true and liuely faith, as from humorous obstinacy or stubborne pride. But while wee consider all circumstances well, (though many wee take from your relation, who in this case relate nothing so well, and truely as you should) we haue iust cause to thinke they were not Heretiques, but men rightly religious, fearing God more then men, and more obseruant of his lawes then of humane traditions. For at this time, as the glory, so the temporall power and authoritie of your Church was exceeding great, the lesse these poore soules hopes, either of purchasing glorie by contradicting, or priuate gaines by disobeying your decrees. To attempt the one was the readiest way to procure their vtter disgrace; the other, an infallible prouocation of greatest danger. Your Church had the whole multitude of Nations as readie at her becke to applaude your cruell designes against them, as the High-Priestes and Elders had the Iewish people to approue our Sauiours condemnation. The manner of their tortures, accompanied with such certaintie of ignominie and disgrace, were dreadfull to the setled and deliberate cogitations of flesh and bloud; their memorie (for ought they could in humane probabilitie foresee) was either to sleepe with their bodies, and lie buried in their ashes, or (if suruiuing them) to be perpetually scourged by the scurrilous pens and tongues of their bitter aduersaries. No hope they had of being Canonized for Saints: in the vehement desire whereof some in your Chruch haue solicited the procurement of their owne violent death, by others hands.
10 All these and many other like circumstances, whiles wee
 consider yee may brag of the multtude and vniuersality as an no^e of the true Church, and we will easily grant you to haue beene at that time farre more in number, then these silly sheep; whose admirable constancy neuerthelesse in the heat of such extreme tyrannie, and alwayes matcht with such harmelesse simplicitie, doth make vs thinke, that albeit you were the greater, yet these were that little flocke vnto whose hearts, our Sauiour, by his holy Spirit of comfort had said, Feare not, for it is your fathers will to giue you a Kingdome, lands and possessions (as your aduersaries truly obiect) here on earth, yee haue had none. But the losse is little, or rather your gaine exceeding great. For these, because these you haue forsaken for the Gospels sake and mine, you shall receiue lands and possessions an hundred fold with life euerlasting in the world to come. These Heretiques, some of you (I imagine) would say, albeit they might pretend Scriptures for the rule of faith, yet would not be ruled by Scriptures when they were euidently brought against them. For your euidence of Scripture, to proue these points there mentioned, wee know them well enough; for some of them you professe tradition onely.


CHAP. III.
That our aduersaries obiections do not so much infring, as their practise confirmes the sufficiency of Scriptures for composing the greatest controuersies in religion.
1 BVt suppose many Heretikes (your selues for exa^ple) wil not submit their minds vnto the euidence of Scripture? what remedie? who can helpe it? Their condemnation is iust, and vengeance is Gods, he will repay. Man it behooueth to see euidently, that they contemne or abuse Scripture, before he aduenture to infl^ct punishment vpon them for it, least otherwise he become an intruder into the Almighties Tribunall. But if the euidence of Scripture will not, what else shal recal such from errour?
2 Besides the former generall allegations, let vs see what more can bee said, why the Scriptures may not bee the most effectuall, and infallible rule, that can bee imagined to guide men in the way of truth.Authoritas quae ad iuca^das omnes fidei quaestiones diuinitas est instituta, proculd^bio est accommodatissima ad ignosce^dos and cauendos errores omnes fidei contrarios. Scriptura sacra sic compusita est, vt experientia etiam doceat, ea^ per se sola^, non ta^ regulam aco^modata^ esse ad declinandos omnes errores, qua^ arcano Dei iudicio esse velut lap de offensionis, and in te^tationem pedibus insipientia^, vt qui velint ea sola niti facile impinga^t and errent, Vale^t. tom. 3. disp. 1. quaest. in punct. 7. 8. 6. The authoritie (saith Valentian) ordained by
 God for determining all questions of faith, is without all question most apt to discerne and preuent all errours contrarie to faith.The like blasphemous speeches he iteates, in the very next parag^aph. Why may not the authoritie of Scripture bee accounted such? The Scripture, saith he, is so framed, (yet was it God that framed it,) as experience may also teach vs;It seemes his meaning is that the Scripture by Gods iust iudgement, is a snare to all such as relie infallibly vpon it alone, euen because they relie vpon it alone. that of it selfe alone it is so farre from being a fit rule for auoyding all errors, that by the secret iudgement of God it is a stumbling blocke, and as a snare to the feete of the vnwise, so that such as will relie vpon it alone, may soone trippe or tread awrie.
3 The Reader must lay the blame where it is due, if these indefatigable mouthes of blasphemies reiterating the like absurd impieties so oft, enforce me often to oppose the same or like answers to them: Such an occasion as Gods creatures were of Idolatrie, the Scriptures we grant may be of heresie. For of Gods good creatures, wherewith th idolatrous heathen polluted themselues, the wise man speakes in that place whereto Valentian alludes. And such an occasion should this infallible way of the Romish Church pretended for auoiding bee of beeding heresies, were it any of Gods waies, of which the wise sonne of Syrach saith indefinitely. They are stumbling blockes to the wicked: so was the way of life, the Gospell it selfe euen whilest proposed and auouched by Saint Peter and Saint Paul. The question then must be,The place cited by him is Wisd. 14. v. 10. for what cause the Scriptures are a snare to some mens feete: because they admit and embrace them, for their rule of life? If thus eyther Valentians ghost, or any Iesuite now aliue, dare auouch, I say no more then the Archangell said to Sathan, The Lord rebuke thee. Onely vnto the vnwise, and wilfully wicked because such; the Mediator and Sauiour of the world, Salus ipsa, Saluation it selfe, was a stone of offence: and vnto all such nor Scripture, nor any of Gods waies serues as a rule to saue, but to condemne them.
4 This is the Article then, vpon which the Iesuite must once againe be examined, whether vnto such, as are by Gods iust iudgements decreed to destruction, and giuen ouer by his holy spirit to beleeue lies, and follow lying traditions, or fables of mans inuention, the Popes infallible authoritie can be a rule of life, or sauing faith? If it can, then we will grant it, to be a more infallible rule then Scripture; because able to controule Gods immutable decree: if it cannot (as none without open and presumptuous blasphemie
 will say it can) then is it no more effectuall for to reclaime men from errors, then the Scriptures are, nor doth it any waies supplie their want. If they will not beleeue Moses and the Prophets,Luke. 16. saith our Sauiour, neither will they bee perswaded though one were raised from the dead: why so? Because God hath decreed this word, as the only meanes of saluation to such, as haue beene partakers of it: and such as refuse this, are giuen ouer by his spirit, to the stubbornesse of their owne hearts: shall then the Popes infallibility make such beleeue? By what meanes? Are his words more effectuall then the words of life? Are his bulles able to withstand the decrees of the Almightie? Or are his curses to the disobedient more terrible, then the euerlasting woes pronounced by our Sauiour Christ and his Prophets? more piercing then the relation of Hell-paines by a messenger from the dead? By your Churches continuall practise I should gesse this would bee your replie, (for there is no other left,) that the Pope can constraine men to subscribe to his decrees, by fire and sword. This might command their hands or tongues, but not their mindes. For the Iesuites would teach such as feared the smart of their fleshly members, to cosen their conscience for sauing their bodies, with this distinction, Iuraeui lingua, mentem iniuratam gero. And if fire and sword be the best weapons of spirituall warfare, or vnrelenting persecutions the ensignes of infallible authoritie, then the greater tyrants may be alwaies the more infallible teachers: But these weapons, by your best writers consent, ye may not vse against any but such as are alreadie admitted into Christs fold: Quae foris sunt, iudicabit Deus: Such as are without, God will iudge: The Pope may such as are within, in what manner, for what cause, he please, not lyable to any account, whether in so doing hee doe right or wrong.So the Councell of Trent it selfe declares Sect. 14. cap. 2. Let the fruits of our practise then witnesse, whether, what is by you obiected to vs for vsing our Sauiours language, may not by fit analogie be verified of your selues in this point, whether we or ye be the men of whom our Sauiour gaue the world warning, when he told, Of false Prophets outwardly appearing in sheeps cloathing being inwardly rauishing wolues. Vnto such as are by vs wonne to the Gospell we grant that Christian liberty after, which before their conuersion we promised. Your factors abroad, (as in the Indies or Iapan) appeare to men in sheepes cloathing, making
 faire promises of the glorious Gospell of Christ, and the libertie of the sonnes of God, but inwardly (as in Italy, Spayne, or generally within your owne folds) are rauening wolues. Or to fit you with an Embleme essentially parallele to your nature and custome, ye are (...) inuersi, men abroad, and wolues at your owne home. For whiles you seeke to conuert an Alien, you magnifie the doctrine of the Gospell, your speech is faire, your whistle pleasant, and your feeding sweet and good; if ye mention the Popes authoritie, it is moderately, and vrged in that stile, (...) Peter feede my lambes:Iohn. 21. ver. 16. but when yee haue once drawne these lambes within yout hurdles, ye change your note, and turne into your proper shape, then you crie with rauenous mouthes, (...): That is as you interprete, Rule my sheepe, or, Petre macta and mandata, kill and eate.Baronius Now all the pretended glorious promises of the Gospell, or large hopes of liberrie, which you had giuen them before, are sodainly contracted in these two maine commandements, the chiefe supporters of your religion, on which your Law and Gospell hang: If any thing be proposed to be beleeued. Beleeue or be burnt: If to bee acted, Doe or die.
5 But as I was saying, such kinde of weapons must bee vsed onely towards such, as are admitted into Christs fold: vnto them the Popes authoritie must be a rule, for they must bee ruled by his iron rod. But let vs suppose, a Christian (eyther wel minded Protestant or Papist) a Iew, or Mahumetan, all zealous in their kind, and of carriage moderate, should meete together: in some principles of beleefe they all agree, al acknowledge the old Testament to be the word of God, but differ in the true sense and meaning of it. What meanes would you prescribe to winne eyther of these two vnbeleeuers to the truth? I am sure ye would not begin with the Popes authoritie. Were not the readiest way to winne a Mahumetan, to shew him, that the greatnesse of that kingdome in which he glorieth, was ordained by God to punish the Christian world, as Nebuchadnezzars was to plague the Iewes, and should decay, would Christians amend: and (the strength of his affection to the prosperitie of that Empire abated) to propose the carnall affection of Mahomet, and his religion, most of which is lothsome
 the eares of such as haue any notion of any religion; whereas the puritie of Christs Gospell is such, as a sober minde once therewith acquainted would reuerence, albeit hee could not obey.
6 This or the like methode is vsed by sundrie learned Papistes to disswade Mahumetisme. If they reply, that they first seeke to make them acknowledge the Scriptures, that they may thence learne to relie vppon the Popes infallibilitie: they vtterly deface their owne pretended glory, in conuertingTo conuert Pagans to the Romish faith as it is nowe taught by the Iesuites, is but to palliate infidelitie with hypocrisie: As the mysteries of that religions iniquitie are but a medlie or vntoward confusion of Gentilisme and Christianitie which cannot symbolize, or rather their imperfect mixture depraueth both, so as the compound is worse then eyther of the ingredients taken apart. Thus Lodouicus Viues complaineth vpon these words of Saint Augustine. (lib. 14. De ciuitate Dei. cap. 18.) Vsum scortorum terrena ciuitas li^itam turpitudinem fecit) concubine and pellices (saith Viues,) non sunt prohibit^: quemadmodum ex legibus Dei concubinarijs ostenditur libro Digestor. 25. Satis aperte Augustinus testator esse iure ciuili vetore Romano multa permissa quae sunt contrario legibus diuinis. Hoc isti nolunt qui dum gentilitatem coniungere and coaptare Christianismo laborant, nec gentilitatem nec Christianismum retinens. so many Aliens vnto the faith. For all this paines in such as follow this supposed methode, is but to purchase a double portion in the Pharisees woe, For compassing Sea and Land, to make others of their profession. The Pharisees, in such conuersions, did as it were quadrate the measure of Proselytes sinnes: multiplying Gentilisme by Pharisaisme: The Iesuites make vp the full cubicke, whilest they produce Mahumetisme, which is but a medley of Gentilisme and Iudaisme, into Iesuitisme, which is the sublimation of Pharisaisme, mixed with malignant Atheisme.
For it is impossible that this conuersion should abolish the forme or essentiall qualitie of the Mahumetanes former carnall corrupt Religion: but rather intend the badde temper of it, by superaddition of this second in qualitie more malignant. And yet for the effecting of this change, they make Christ Iesus, their crucified Lord and God, but a Stale for the aduancement of his Kingdome, that by their owne confession may bee for life and manners, farre worse then Mahomet. Suppose then a conuert-Mahumatane should know what manner of men most of their Popes be: how could he chuse but eyther repent of his conuersion, or turne trecherous Atheist; to out-luie the Iesuite in such villainous
 gulleries, as this;So R.B. in his second booke of Resolution arg. 6. pag. 249. obiects such matters to Mahomet and his successours, as a man might iustly suspect, out of Platina, de vitis Pontificum. It is a pretie straine of impudency in him and his fellowes to draw such arguments from Mahomet, and his successors lewde life against Mahumetans, and not admit the same as good against themselues, many of whose Popes by their owne confession are as bad as bad may be, albeit euen vnto the most abhominable of them that haue bin or may be, they attribute as much in matters of religion as the Turkes can to Mahomet. Sed^illis aes triplex circa frontem fuit, their foreheads are fenced doubtlesse with a triple shield of brasse, that can without blushing obiect intemperancy to Luther, or infamy to Caluin (both, in respect of most their great Prelates, Saints for good life and conuersatio^) and vge their forged blemishes to the preiudice of reformed religion: which no way dependeth vpon Luthers life death, or doctrine, as their Catholik religion doth continually vpon their Popes. If Luthers life though we should grant it bad, might any way preiudice ours: the impiety of their Popes (fro^ whom their faith is essentially deriued) must of necessity vtterly disgrace their religion. wherein hee vseth Mahomets beastly life as an argument to disswade his followers from his religion: and yet vseth the word of God, whose sanctitie both acknowledge, but as a baite to bring men on to fasten their faith vpon a more detestable sonne of perditio^. This were indeed the best way to harden the Mahumetan in his preposterous beleefe: That Mahomet, (though as wee obiect a notorious impostor) might be sent from God to winne the world vnto that truth by the sword, whereunto Christ could not bring it by his godly life and most effectuall kinde of preaching. And I doe not see, what else, but this or like conclusion, can with any probabilitie be gathered from any arguments brought by the Papists, to proue the necessitie of the Popes or their corrupt Churches infallible authoritie, for supplying the defect of Christ and his Apostles writings. Finally, to bring eyther Mahumetan or Pagan to acknowledge the truth of the new Testament, or Christ for their Sauiour, that they might afterwards relye vpon such men, is but to leade them into the entrie of the Kingdome of heauen, that they may finally shut the doore on them, when they haue one foote within it: which is indeede the sole, entire, formall effect of this supposed infallible key. But my good liking of industrie, (though of our greatest aduersarie) in this sloathfull age, makes mee hope, (God grant I faile not in my hopes) that in remote countries, whose ayre is not pestered with the noysome and loathsome sent of Rome their mothers whooredome, euen Iesuites are inspired with more pure and hallowed cogitations; and that they vse not Valentian, Bellarmine or others of their Italionated fellowesBy Gods good prouidence for the poore Indians good, it was, no doubt that the Spanish Catechistes did not vse this which we call the Apostles Creed, lest they might haue bin thence occasioned to ouerlash in their blasphemous Encomio^s of the Catholik Church, which is scarce mentioned in that Creed or confession which they following Aquinas haue vsed, as Iosephus Acosta complains. l. 5. de procuranda Ind. Salute. ca. 7 De sancta vero Ecclesia articulus a vulgaribus chatechistis fere omittitur, causam eam opinor, quod in mysterijs fidei explicandis, non taem symboli Apostolici seriem sequantur, quam vsitatem istam distributionem articulorum fidei in septem ad diuinitatem pertinentes, and totidem ad humanitatem, etc. methods in catechising
 Conuerts: or if they doe, yet God, I trust, will be mercifull vnto such poore soules as thus adore the Pope, not knowing what manner of creature he is, but rather in charitie presume him for such in the concrete as the Iesuites make him in the abstract, euen a second-Christ or Holinesse it selfe.
7 Were not the best methode to win the Iew, to compare the Prophecies of the old Testament with the historie of the new, and experiments of Gods iudgements vpon that nation? SomeIohannes Baptista was converted by this methode, as he himselfe expresly witnesseth in his Epistle to his countrimen, whom he well hoped to win by his lab^urs in this kinde: the best vse ^e knew of the Popes authority, was such as is incident to ordinarie Magistracy, (whether ciuill or Ecclesiasticke) only to co^straine the Iewes to reade his booke (as our lawes bind Papistes to heare Sermons) and for this purpose he intreates the Cardinall, vnto whom he dedicated his labours to sollicite thus much at the Popes feete in Purgatorie. Aduersum est sane vt Ecclesiae authoritatem habeat discernendi verba Dei a verbis hominum, sensum Dei ab humano sensu non habeat. Canus, lib. 5. cap. 5. pag. 270. Quod si aliam authoritatem praeter scripturam necesse est esse infallibilem, Quae doceat id quod in fide est maximum, nempe scripturae ipsius doctrinam esse in vniuersum diuinam: profecto est insania (some editions haue, infamia, but falsely as I thinke,) non credere illam ipsam authoritatem infallibiliter item docere, quae sit sententia eiusmodi diuinae doctrinae, Valentianus loco soepius citato paragrapho. 5. Iewes haue beene brought vnto the truth by these meanes, who haue done the Church of Christ excellent seruice in the exposition of prophecies, concerning Christ, labouring to winne their countrimen vnto him by comparing the old Testament with the new. If the Scripture may be a rule, to compose the diuersitie of these opinions, most repugnant amongst themselues, may it not much more bee a rule to compose all controuersies amongst professed Christians, who agree in farre more principles of faith, and rules of Scripture, then the former did, if Christians would be as soberly affected, and not stand vpon the authorities and customes of men, the speciall obstacle that keepes the Iewes from Christianitie?
8 It is vsuall with your writers to argue thus, We cannot know Scriptures to be the Scriptures, but by the authoritie of the Church; therefore we cannot know the true sense and meaning of them, but by the infallible authoritie of the same. The antecedent of which argument, as we haue partly shewed, and hereafter (God willing) shall shew to be most false: so for the argument it selfe I only now say, that it may be farre more probably inuerted vpon you, thus. The Iewes may come to acknowledg the new Testament for the verie Gospell of their Messias, and to beleeue in heart, and professe with their mouthes the mysteries therein contained, by sober and diligent comparing them with the prophecies of the old, without the infallible authoritie of your Church: therefore they may know the true sense and meaning of the Gospell, in all points necessary
 to saluation, without any such infallible authoritie. For it is a matter of farre lesse difficultie, for any man of sense and reason, to deduce particular conclusions from generall and euident principles, then to finde out the generall and fundamentall principles, by naturall notions, or other principles: And therefore more easie for any such man to resolue his conscience in particular pointes of faith or Christian obedience, after hee hath found out the foundation of Christian faith, (to wit Christ Iesus crucified, raised from the dead, and other generall dictates of faith in the Apostolicall writings) then to come vnto the acknowledgement, and beleefe of these fundamentall points themselues, from the broken knowledge (such as the Iewes haue) of the old Testament. And thus it euidently followes, that if the old Testament be a rule vnto the Iewes, for finding out the truth of the new, much more may the new, once acknowledged by them, and admitted of equal authoritie with the old, be a perfect rule for them in matters of saluation. And if these Scriptures are, or may be a rule to the Iewes, (if they will beleeue them) then must they be a rule to al Christians that beleeue them. No Christian I hope will denie, but that the old Testament is the rule of the Iewes: For the vnbeleeuing Iewes shall be condemned in what part of the world soeuer, for not following this rule, which God hath commended and made knowne vnto them, not for not acknowledging the Popes infallibility, of which many of them neuer heard. And if the old Testament be such to them, much more must the whole Canon bee vnto vs such a rule: and if we die in misbeliefe or infidelitie, we shall be iudged by this rule of Gods Law and Gospell, which we transgressed, not by the Popes decrees or expositions of it. That many Christians by profession erre in points of faith, or mistake the true sense and meaning of it, or peruert it to their destruction, proceeds from their ingratitude towards God that gaue it, and for their delight in falshood. Which is the reason why these Iewes mistake the true meaning of the old Testament.
9 If any of our aduersaries heere demaund, how chanceth it so many Iewes erre in the foundation of faith, if the Scripture be such an infallible rule? he must be content to resolue me in the like question: How chanceth it, so many Iewes liue vnconuerted
 in Spaine and Italy, and other places, eyther in the Popes dominions, or where his authoritie is established, if the infallibilitie of his authoritie, or their Church, be such an excellent rule? If they replie, the Iewes might beleeue all points of Roman-Catholike faith aright, so they would admit their Church as Iudge or mistresse of faith: the Iewes might with as good reason reioyne: so might the Romanes beleeue all points of Iudaisme, would they acknowledge this supposed infallibility of doctrine to be in their Rabbinicall expositions, not in the Popes determinations. But the Romist, I suppose, would desire a signe ere hee beleeued them here: and are wee lesse bound by the rule of faith, to desire some tollerable satisfaction to these reasons following, ere we beleeue them in this point, as preiudiciall in our iudgement to religion in generall, as subscription to Rabbinicall doctrine is vnto Christian veritie.
10 The Iewes admit the old Testamentes authoritie as vndoubtedly as the Iesuites doe the Popes: yet it enlightens not their hearts. What is the reason? Because that part of Scripture is so obscure? So Valentian (and such as follow him) in all congruitie must say; yea hee hath said it:Before cited, lib. 2. sect. 2. 2. cap. 2. That veile which Saint Paul saith is put before the hearts of Iewes that they cannot behold the glorie of the Gospell (as the Apostle there argues) is wouen for the most part of the difficulties of Scriptures. Nor doe the Iewes onely denie the new Testament to bee infallible, but bitterly inueigh against it as erroneous and contradictorie to the old. What is the cause? Is it not that which Valentian elsewhere assignes? The Scripture alone (that is in his language, without the infallible auouchment of their Cburch) is so farre from ending all controuersies of faith, that it rather occasions controuersies and dissentions in doctrines of faith. If to the Iewe, through his default, the writings of Moses and the Prophets bee so obscure: adde your infallible key to open his heart to them, or them to it. If by this obscuritie they minister matter of contention, or their sense mistaken exasperate Iewish malice against Christians: Interpose your humane authoritie inspired from aboue, to allay the feruencie of their distempered zeale.
11 You acknowledge this obscuritie and other obiected insufficiencies
 (disinabling the Scripture for ruling or iudging mens faith) to arise from the frailtie or vitiousnesse of humane nature, and hence you plead your Churches infallibility as necessarie and all-sufficient to supply these defects incident vnto Scripture, not in it selfe, but in respect of vs. Your Churches authoritie then (at the least adioyned to Scripture) should make men (oth^rwise subiect to the former infirmities or vitious dispositions) capable of heauenly doctrine. Tell vs then distinctly: Can it, or can it not make all, or most, or such as the Scriptures doe not, beleeue aright? If this it cannot doe adioyned to Scriptures: it is by your owne obiections against them, a rule as vnsufficient, as you would make them without it. If it can make all or most, or such as Scripture alone doth not, beleeue aright; this it must effect, eyther by remouing or not remouing those diseases or infirmities of humane nature, which Scriptures without it cannot cure.
12 First, if it would remoue that temper which makes the Iew a more vnprofitable hearer of Scripture, then young Gallants are of stoicall morall discpline, your Church is guiltie of wilfull malice and murther of soules that will not apply this infallible key, able of it selfe to open that veile of adamant, wherewith the Iewes hearts are so masked, that neither the light of Mosaicall, Propheticall, Apostolicall, or Euangelicall writings can finde entrance vnto them. Secondly, albeit this supposed infallible authoritie could remoue the former veile, yet were it not in this respect to be acknowledged an infallible rule of faith, but rather an ordinarie and necessarie meanes, (such as we acknowledge the lawfull magistracie or ministerie to bee) for squaring or proportioning mens fraile or exorbitant affections, the better to parallell with Gods word, the most exact, inerrable, and all sufficient rule of faith, euen by your consent: were it not for this infirmitie or vitious disposition of mans nature, which (as you likewise acknowledge) is the sole cause why the Scriptures are obscure and minister matter of contention.
13 But our aduersaries attribute not any such vertue to their infallible rule, as to make a foole wise, the lasciuious chast, the drunkard sober, a knaue honest, the impudent modest, or ambitious lowly: for euen the Pope himselfe, in whose bosome
 this rule lodgeth, may harbour these and like vices in his brest: he may (by his owne followers confession) be as incorrigible for bad life and manners, as infallible for matters of doctrine. Seeing then their supposed rule cannot remoue those impediments which detaine the Iewes with other infidels and heretikes from the truth: can it make men beleeue aright whilest they remaine? If it can: it is of greater force than eyther our Sauiours authoritie or skill in Scriptures. Neyther of which, not all his trauels and best indeuours heere on earth, though infinitely surpassing any paines the Pope is willing to take, could instruct the Iewes in the doctrine of faith, whilest their carnall affections remained in strength. How can ye beleeue, (saith he, who spake as neuer man spake,Iohn. 5.44. and had wrought those works none other could) which receiue honour one of another, and seeke not the honour that commeth of God alone?
14 To conclude then, If the infidelitie of the Iewes be any iust exception, why Scriptures cannot be the perfect rule of faith: this exception will disinable the Romane Churches infallible authoritie, for being such a rule. But if the generall error of the Iewes, in the very maine foundation of religion, be no iust exception, why eyther the Scripture according to vs, or the Churches authoritie according to them, should not bee the rule of faith: then cannot the errors of heretikes, or varietie of opinions about the sense and meaning of particular places of lesse moment, impeach the sufficiency of Scripture, for performing all that is required by eyther partie in their supposed absolute rule. For it shall, God willing, be made euident in due place, that the selfe-same affections (only different in degree, sometimes not so much) which caused the Iewes infidelity in our Sauiours time, are the onely rootes and fountaines of heresies and dissentions throughout all ages.
15 And as elsewhere is already proued, wheresoeuer the habituall affection for degree and qualitie is, the heresie or infidelitie is likewise the same, euen in such as hold contrarie opinions, and would perhaps maintain their co^trariety vnto death: for, as many, strongly perswaded of their beleefe in Christ, shall goe for infidels in that last day: so may such, as thinke themselues Orthodoxes, be tainted with the contrarie heresie which they impugne, if subiect
 to the same affections which did breed it. But for vs to account such as make profession of Christianitie, infidels, or such as subscribe to Orthodoxall doctrine, heretikes, would bee iniurious and vnlawfull: not because the former assertion indefinitely taken is not warrantable; but because no man can precisely discerne the identitie of inward affection, saue he alone that knoweth the secrets of all hearts. Thus all the blasts of vaine doctrine they can oppose vnto the truth we maintaine, doe in the issue fasten the rootes of faith once rightly planted, howsoeuer they may shake the timorous or faint-hearted Christian, or cause the weake in faith, not cleauing to Scripture as their onely infallible rule, and sure supporter, dangerously to reele and stagger. But though they fall, yet Gods word shal neuer faile to approue it selfe a most perfect rule, besides others in these two respects: first, in that none can faile in that course which it prescribes, or fall away from faith but by such meanes as the Iew hath done, the true causes of whose Apostasie, and incredulitie it hath expresly foretold, and fully registred to posteritie: Secondly, because such as it doth not, no other rule, meanes, or authoritie possible eyther in the earth, or in the region below the earth, shall euer winne to true Christian faith.


CHAP. V.
The sufficiency of Scriptures for finall determination of controuersies in Religion, proued by our Sauiours and his Apostles authoritie and practise.
1 NOr will they be ruled by an Angel from heaue^, that will not obey the liue voice of the Sonne of God; whose miracles, whilest he liued here on earth, ioyned with his doctrine, we will suppose, were of as much force (if the Iesuit wil grant no more) as the Popes proposal of Scriptures, to beget faith, or co^uince gainsaiers of truth. The Iewes were of diuers opinio^s about his doctrine. some said he was A good man, others said no, but he deceiueth the people,Iohn. 7.12. he giues them a rule (as you heard before) how to discerne it. If any man will doe his will, he shall know of the doctrine, etc. This contents them not,
 albeit he had done many and good workes amongst them sufficient to haue manifested his diuine authoritie vnto such as had neuer heard of Moses or a Messias to come: Nay, they goe about to kill him for those workes, which bare testimonie of his woorth, and as they thought, had warrant of Scripture for so doing, because he did them on the Sabbath day. Heere Christ is of one opinion, the Iewes of another concerning the sense of Scripture: who shall iudge? or by what rule must their contrarie doctrine be tried? By Christs infallible authoritie? they admit it not: By extraordinarie and miraculous workes? they persecute him for his miracles alreadie wrought for their peoples good. Doth Christ heere leaue them, because destitute of a rule to recall them? If hee had none, how shall the Pope, (by his owne challenge but his Vicar) haue any to conuince his aduersaries? If Christ submit his diuine doctrine to any other rule, how dare the Pope denie submission of his to the same? what rule then was left? Onely the Scripture, which both did acknowledge. They pretend Moses law concerning Sabbath-breach why he should die: vnto their false interpretation of this, our Sauiour opposed the true meaning of another Mosaicall Sctipture. Moses forbad murther as well as Sabbath-day breaking: and yet they seeke to kill Christ, onely for healing a man vpon the Sabbath day, so forgetfull are they of the one, and so partially addicted to the other. But how shall they know, that to make a man whole vpon the Sabbath, was not to breake it, and violate Moses law? This our Sauiour makes euident vnto them, by exposition of that law, and their owne custome, which, continued from the first promulgation, was a good interpretation of it. Moses, saith our Sauiour, gaue vnto you circumcision (not because it is of Moses but of the Fathers) and ye on the Sabbath day circumcise a man. If a man on the Sabbath day receiue circumcision, that the law of Moses should not be broken, be ye angrie with me, because I haue made a man euery whit whole vpon the Sabbath day? Iudge not according to the appearance, but iudge righteous iudgement. Thus was Scripture applied to their conscience, the last and finall rule by which they stand or fall: and is alwaies a light eyther bringing men to see their owne saluation, or putting out their wonted sight, in token of their condemnation to vtter darknesse. And Christes last wordes in that
 controuersie,Deut. 1. v. 16. and 17. Iudge not according to the appearance, are likewise a written rule of Scripture; so absolute a rule is this sacred word of God, (by our Sauiours consent and practise) both to informe the vnderstanding, and to moderate, affection which makes vs blinde.
2 The same methode our Sauiour vseth in a like dispute, with the last Glosse whereof if we compare the Romanists doctrine in this controuersie, it may appeare in som sort the same: Theirs is our Sauiours indeed, but quite inuerted, truly Antichristian. They teach we cannot know Mosaicall or other Scriptures, but by the Popes infallible proposall: The great infallible Teacher tels the Iewes, they could not beleeue him, or know his doctrine though proposed by him mouth to mouth, because they had not beleeued Moses writings, If ye beleeue not his writings,Iohn. 5. vers. 41. how shall ye beleeue my words? yet Christs words registred by his Apostles and Euangelists must be at the least of like force and vse to vs, as Mosaicall writings were then to the Iewes. Our conclusion therefore is inuincible: If Moses doctrine alone were a rule to trie Christes controuersies with the Iewes, then must it and Christ conioyned be the rule whereby all Christians controuersies must bee tried. From the opportunitie of this place, the iudicious Reader, though not admonished, would obserue, that our aduersaries, vnlesse possessed with Iewish phrensie or phantasticke madnesse (diseases causing men vsually misdeeme other for such as they most are, but least thinke themselues) could not possibly account it a part of folly in vs,Qui fieri potest, vt quae doctrina tam facile ab hominibus adulteratur vt in patrociniu^ omnium erroru^ aduocetur, eadem sit accommodatissima, appositissimaque regula ad reijciendum omnes omnino errores. Non magis hoc certe stare potest quam si quis diceret, illud esse accommodatissimum remediu^ ad recte vndendum ex quo accideret omnes caetulire quicunque fierent caeci Valentian loco saepius citat. @. 5. to make the WRITTEN WORD sole vmpeire in all contouersies of Religion, though not impossible to be thus peruerted by these Iewes, or others of Iewish disposition, as are all heretikes more or lesse. For we will giue our imaginations a yeares respite to roue about, vpon condition they will then returne an answere, what rule, eyther written or vnwritten, can possibly be imagined, which would not bee peruerted: what authoritie, eyther liuing or dead, which would not bee eyther disclaimed, abused, or contemned by men so minded as these Iewes, who in the liue presence of the Sonne of God, the heire of all thinges by whome the world was made and must bee iudged, thus sought to patronage the murther of his royall person by the authoritie of his Fathers
 word, vnto whose sense they thought themselues as strictly tied as any Papist to the Councell of Trent. The Heretikes with whomNon est mirum si l'elagiani dicta nostra in sensus quos volunt detorquere conantur: quando de Scripturis sanctis, non vbi obscure aliquid dictum est, sed vbi clara and aperta sunt testimonia, id facere consueuerunt, more quidem hareticorum etiam caeterorum August. lib. 2. de Nupt. and concupisc. cap. 31. This was the place which Valentian (as was noted in the first Chapter of this section) to proue the insufficiency of Scriptures for composing controuersies, would haue obserued. The reader I doubt not will note his shame or folly or both, that either could not or would not see how easily these men would haue wrested the Trent councel or any other rule they can imagine. For restraining such euident peruersnesse we acknowledge the necessity of a lawfull magistracy, whose vsefulnesse in this or like doth no way argue an absolute infallibility in determining all cases of controuersie. Saint Augustine had to deale, strangely wrested his words against a plaine and naturall meaning. Though so they had done the Bishops of Rome, or any others then liuing, not disdaining to call God his Lord: their practise had not seemed strange to this reuerend Father: for hee knew the seruant was not aboue his master, and therfore could not expect his or any mans should be free from any such wrong or violence which he saw offered to Gods word.
3 Our Sauiour in the fore-cited controuersies saw well how earnestly the Iewes were set to peruert Scriptures for their purpose, how glad to finde any pretence out of them eyther to iustifie their dislike of his doctrine, or wreake their malice vpon his person. Reason he had as great to distaste their practise herein as the Pope himself can haue to inueigh against heretiks for the like. Neither is there any person now liuing, against whom any intention of harme can be more heinous then the intention of murther against him, nor any sort of men (vnlesse the Iesuites, Spanish Inquisitors, or such as they suborne) so cruelly bent as these Iewes were, to seeke bloud vnder a shew of loue to pure immaculate religion. Yet doth not our Sauior accuse the Scriptures (though capable of so grieuous and dangerous misconstruction) of obscurity or difficultie, or of being any way the occasion of Iewish heresie, or his persecution thence caused: nor doth he disswade those very men, which had thence sucked this poisonous doctrine, much lesse others, fro^ reading, but exhorts them in truth and deed, not in word and fancie only, to relie on Scriptures as the rule of saluation. Search the Scriptures, for in the^ ye think, and (that rightly) to haue eternall life. Not intimating the least necessitie of any external authority infallibly to direct them, he plainly teacheth it was the infernal distorture of their proud affections, which had disproportioned their minds to this straight rule, and disinabled them for attaining true beliefe, which neuer can be rightly raised but by this square and line.
4 It was not then the reading of Scriptures which caused them mistake their meaning and persecute Him, but the not reading of them as they should. Erre they did, not knowing the Scriptures
 and know them they did not, because they did not read them throughly, sincerely, searching out their inward meaning. And thus to read them a fresh, as our Sauiour prescribed them, (laying aside ambitious desires) was the only remedie for to cure that distemper which they had incurred by reading them amisse. It were a mad kinde of counsell (better befitting a witch or cunning woman, then a wise man) to disswade one fro^ vsing medicines prescribed him by men of skill, because he had incurred some dangerous disease, by taking the like out of his own humour, or in a fancy, either without or contrary to the prescript of professed Physitio^s: yet such and no better our aduersaries aduise heretofore hath beene: and the strength of all their arguments in the point now in hand to this day cotinues this: We must not make Scriptures the rule of faith, because many heresies haue sprung thence, and great dissensions growne in the Church, whiles one followes one sense, and another the contrarie. Whereas in truth, the onely antidote against contentions, schismes, and heresies, is to read them attentiuely, and with such preparation as they prescribe; asGal. 5. v. 26. not to be desirous of vaine glory, not to prouoke or enuie one another:Pet. 1.2. v. 12 To lay aside all maliciousnes, guile, dissimulation, and euill speaking, like new borne babes desiring the sincere milk of the word, wherby we must grow,Rom. 12 v. ^. not fashioning our selues according to this present world, etc.
5 These were deliuered as soueraign remedies against all epidemicall diseases of the soule, by Physitions, as both acknowledge, most infallible. For better vnfolding, and more seasonable applying of these and infinite other like aphorismes of life, we admit varietie of Commentators: but as farre from suffering any, of whose spirit we haue no proofe, (especially any not readie to submit the triall of his receits, vnto these sacred principles and experimentes answerable to them,)And good reason the porest creature liuing should tender the eternall welfare of his soule, as much as the Pope doth the transitory health of his bodie. to trie what conclusions hee list vpon our souls, as the Pope would be from taking what potions soeuer any English Empirick should prescribe, though disclaiming al examinations of his prescripts by Galen, Hippocrates, Paracelsus, or any other ancient or moderne well-esteemed Physitions rules.
6 If since this late inuention of the Popes infallibility our aduersaries do not now, as heretofore, condemne all reading Scriptures simply: what maruell?Vide lib. 10. secund. part. @. 2. cap. 4. @. 2. For as Sathan after once God had spoken to the world by his Son, began to change his old note, and
 sought to imitate the Gospels stile, by writing his heresies as God did his new couenants in mens hearts: So in latter ages, since the Almightie gaue his word in euery language, and the number of Preachers hath beene greatly multiplied, the old Serpent permits the Iesuits and his other instrume^ts to translate, expound, and preach the Gospell to the ignorant. And in opposition to the practise of reformed Churches, the lay Roman Catholike may now behold, yea read the words of life. What difference then can any make betwixt theirs and our doctrine in this point? such as in times past was betwixt true miracles wrought by the finger of God, and diabolicall wonderments, all which latter were vsually wrought to idle purposes, and by some apish tricke or other bewraied their authors sinister intendments:The Popes drift in permitting his laity to looke into the holy Scriptures and behold the maiesty of God speaking in the^ (a matter heretofore held as dangerous for them, as for the Israelites in time past to haue approched the holy mount) is iust like the diuels in carrying our Sauiour into a high mountaine to shew him all the kingdomes of the earth, and the glory of them. The condition annexed to the Popes donatiue is the self same with that the diuell added to his profer, All these w^ll I giue vnto thee if thou wilt fall downe and worship me. For none may enioy Scriptures but with humble acknowledgement of asolute homage vnto the Pope as the sole and suprem iudg of all controuersie, co^cerning them: from whom all right vnto the means of their saluation must be deriued. Which kinde of worship is altogether as derogatory to Gods glory, as that which Sathan demanded of our Sauiour, or any other Idolatry that is or hath beene, as shall (God willing) hereafter appeare. So doth the cunning restraint of this liberty late granted to the Romane Laicks great in shew, bewray who was the author of this plot, and what his purpose. Some merry diuel sure is minded to make hell sport, by putting this gull vpon the learned Papist, his instrument to put the like vpon the ignorant, who now at length may read the Scriptures, but with absolute submission of their interpretation to his instructors, who may not take away any receit thence, but according to their supreme infallible Physitions prescripts, which may not bee examined by any rule of Gods written or vnwritten word: nor may any man call his skill in question, much lesse condemne him of imposture, by the lamentable issue and dismall successe of his practises. Should men vpon like termes be admitted to read Galen or Hippocrates, and yet the Monopoly of medicines permitted to some one Empiricke or Apothecarie, not lyable to any account whether his confectons were made according to the rules of Physicke art or no: They might be in greater danger of poysoning, then if these grand Physitions had neuer written: for that might be prescribed them, by such an authenticke Mountebanke, as a cordiall, which the other had detected for poyson. So should the Christian world, might, the Iesuites plea preuaile, be continually at the Popes courtesie, whether they should embrace that sense of Scriptures which Christ and his Apostles haue co^demned for the doctrine of diuels, as the Oracles of the liuing God, and food for their soules.
7 But some man more indifferent would here perhaps interpose; Though theirs bee bad, doe you prescribe vs any better method of health? Your former counsell to practise the Apostles rules, is, as if a man should say to one sicke of a dangerous disease, Expell the bad humour and you shall be well. Yet as we said before, Est pars sanitatis velle sanari. To desire the extirpation of such affections as hinder our proficiency in the Schoole of Christ or know edge of his precepts, is a good step to health. The Scriptures are the wordes of life containing medicines as well as meate, and must purge our soules of carnall affections, as Physicke doth the body of bad humours: They teach with all what abstinence must bee vsed ere we can bee capable of that spirituall welfare, which they promise to the soule of such as follow their prescriptions. And because our naturall corruption cannot be asswaged, much lesse expelled, but by their force or vertue, which is not alwayes manifested vpon the first receipt; wee are to come vnto them with such reuerence, as the Moralist did to meditations of vertue, Vacua and sobria mente: in sobrietie of Spirit, not in the heat, abundance or actual motio^ of such affectio^s as hinder their operation vpon our soules; as men vsually take Physicke vpon a fasting and quiet stomacke, although pestered with bad humours, which yet cannot be extirpate but by Physicke, nor by Physike, if ministred in the actuall motion, heate, or raging of such humours. If a man haue but this desire, to be ridde of such affections as breed this distemper in his soule, or worke a distaste of the word of life, he is capable of that promise, Habenti daebitur, and shall in good time see his desire augmented, whose encrease will bring forth greater feruencie in prayer; and prayers, if feruent, though in men subiect to such infirmities, auaile much, and shall in the end be heard to the full. And, as well in thankfull duty to the Redeemer of mankinde for his gracious promises, as in hope of being further partakers of the blessings promised; Euery one that heareth Gods word, ought, and such as heare it aright, will, as oft as they seeke recouery of their spirituall health by it, or such meanes as it prescribes, abstaine from all occasions and occurrents that may encrease, prouoke, or strengthen such affections as hinder the operations of it vpon their soules. For euen nature taught the Cynicke to accompt surfetting and intemperate diet madnes in the Heathen,
 whiles they sacrificed for health. If any haue erred in hearing Gods word amisse, or in the vnseasonable applying of sacred prescripts: these errors must be recalled by further consultation with their dispensours, by more diligent search and better instruction in other parts of this method of life.
8 Saint Peter knew many ignorant and vnstable soules had peruerted some hard places of S. Paules Epistles, as they had other Scriptures, to their owne destruction. Did hee therefore aduise them to whom he thus wrote not to seeke their saluation out of Saint Paules Epistles, but with absolute submission of their iudgement, to his, and his successours prescripts? Or doth he not seeke to establish them in that doctrine which Saint Paul had taught, according to the wisedome giuen him, in all his Epistles, Or can any endued with reason doubt, whether Saint Paul himselfe did not expect his writings should bee a rule of faith to all that read them, without continuance either of his owne or others actuall infallible proposall of them? He had protested once for all,Gal. 1. vers. 8. Fro^ this place Valentian after his woonted manner, would force an argum nt to proue the necessity of a perpetuall infallible authoritie to denounce viua voce the like Anathemaes against Heretikes. Whereas S. Pauls words, if wee consider all circumstances, do exclude any such infallible auhority or iudge of his meaning or other scripture by which he supposed all other doctrines should bee examined. And as a learned Papist well obserues vpon these words of S Paul to Ti. mothy, The scriptures are able to make thee wise vnto saluatio^ (2. Tim. 3. vers. 15.) The Scriptures which hee had learned (to wit the old Testament) might performe the same to him in his absence which S. Paul had done in his presence; as he saith, sine schola Simonis, as we may adde, sine schola Papae, without the Popes cursing or blessing. vide Safhot. in cap. 3. 2. ad Timoth. Though we, or an Angell from Heauen, preach vnto you otherwise then that wee haue preached vnto you, let him bee accursed. Hee had said before, and yet saith he now againe, If any man preach vnto you otherwise then yee haue receiued, let him bee accursed. For hee had taught them, as their owne conscience might witnesse, the doctrine of God and not man, as he intimateth in the next words.
9 Either Saint Paul is not authenticke in this protestation, or else all stand accursed by it, that dare absolutely admit any doctrine though from an Angels mouth, but vpon due examination and sure triall, whether consonant or contrarie to what Saint Paul hath left in writing. His meaning notwithstanding in many places as his fellow-Apostle witnesseth, was much peruerted. And seeing what was past could not be amended, it seemed necessary to S. Peter to admonish others least they should bee intangled in like errour. But what meanes had hee left to preuent this peruerting of Scriptures in them? Either none besides or none so good, as diligent reading or hearing the written word: For such was this Epistle, which for their admonition he now wrote, and was desirous, questionlesse, all of them should with attention heare or
 reade, least they also might bee plucked away with the errour of the wicked, and fall from their wonted stedfastnesse: from which others had already fallen, For what reason? Because they were vnlearned: Vnlearned? In what facultie? In the Scriptures no doubt. For Saint Peter himselfe was learned onely in them, and would not vouchsafe the secular Artes of that time (standing in opposition vnto the Gospell) this glorious title of learning And is want of learning and knowledge in Scriptures, the cause of falling from faith, and former stedfastnesse? And yet must men abstaine from reading them, because they are obscure to such blinded guides, or may minister matter of contention to contentious spirits, or occasion of errour to the peruerse? Must we bee ignorant in them, and expert in other meanes of faith; Because ignorance and want of learning in them causeth errours in faith, and what other meanes soeuer of mens saluation? Quis furor hic (shall I say) ne moriare mori; or rather, ne possis aegrotare perire?That there is no danger can come by reading Scriptures for which the Scriptures haue not present remedy. Must wee abstaine from our spirituall food, and so ineuitably starue, because some others by vnreasonable or intemperate taking of it haue incurred, what? diseases indeede very grieuous; Yet such as might easily haue beene cu^ed or preuented, had the diseased beene more accustomed to feede vpon those plaine and easie prescripts vsuall in the latter parts of Saint Pauls Epistles, as (for example) amongst others vpon that most generall:Rom. 12. v. 3^. Through the grace of God, that is giuen vnto me (I say) to euery one that is among you, that no man presume to vnderstand aboue that which is meete to vnderstand, but that hee vnderstand according to sobriety, as God hath dealt to euery man the measure of faith.
10 From carefull and assiduous attention vnto this and other like Elementarie precepts, those vnlearned but presumptuous readers of Saint Pauls Epistles might quickly haue grown so wise and well learned in Scriptures, as not to haue medled with these (...) so soone, at least not so much; rather contenting themselues while such they were, like new-borne babes with his milke, as much better for their weake digestion then his strong meate; so the same Apostle had else where expressely written for their instruction, had they not presumed to know aboue that which was written. Erred they had then from the truth, and fallen away from their former stedfastnesse, not so much by following the hard and
 difficult, as by not following the plaine and easie places of Saint Paul, able to haue conducted them from knowledge to knowledge, whose mature fulnesse (could they with patience haue expected it,) might in good time haue ouergrowne the former difficulties.
Instances enough haue beene, more might bee brought, to reuiue the generall conclusion intimated in the state of the Question before proposed. There is no occasion or temptation which may moue men to obstinate mistaking or peruerting Scriptures to abet contentions, but the Scriptures one where or other haue a remedie as easie as soueraigne prescribed against it, so men would be diligent to seeke, or resolute to apply it found in their practise or course of life. If some Spiders from the fore-mentioned, or like difficult places, haue suckt poyson; yet other parts of the same Canon teach vs to lay aside the Spiders temperature, euen1. Pet. 2.1. all malitiousnesse,Gal. 5. all enuie,Iames 4. all indignation or conten^ion. Though sundrie as subtil as Serpents haue beene mistaken in the interpretation of some, or haue inuerted others, yet some third place teacheth vs to ioyne the Doues innocencie to the Serpents subtiltie; and vnto both adding the Bees industrie, these verie places, whence others suckt poyson, shall afford vs honie. For the word of God is in it selfe, and vnto vs (if we be not Spiders to our selues)Psal. 19. v. 10. sweeter then honie, and the honie combe.


CHAP. VI.
That all their obiections, drawne from dissentions amongst the learned or the vncertaintie of priuate Spirits, either conclude nothing of what they intend against vs, or else more then they meane or (at the least) dare auouch against Gods Prophets and faithfull people of olde.
1 IT is a sure argument, the truth on our part is exceeding great, in that all obiections, hitherto brought by our aduersaries (as it vsually falleth out in men more eagerly set to offend others then defe^d themselues, though otherwise vnequally matched) conclude,
 Aut nihil, Aut nimium, either nothing or too much, or all for vs against the obiectours. But especially whilest they seeke to disswade the sufficiency of our supposed rule, by dissentio^s thence occasioned amongst the learned, or such as should be guides of others; as their proofes are curtailed, and will not touch the points they aime at, so the conclusion which they would shuffle in, not inferred from the premises, is aboue measure, euerlasting. First,Wherein our aduersaries proofes come short of what they aime at. they faile, in auouching that indefinitely of all, which is true onely of some parts of Scriptures. For many are so perspicuous and plaine, as they minister no matter of contention, no, not to the most contentious spirits professing our or their religion. These, well learned and laid vp in mens hearts, engaged in other particular controuersies, would be an excellent light to many other places, which for want of this method to most of both sides either seeme obscure, or of the same suite their seuerall dispositions are. But to omit particular causes of Heresies or Heretiques peruerting Scriptures (else where to be prosecuted) The most generall and Primarie is the quite contrary to that which our aduersaries assigne.
2 They except against Scripture, and say it cannot bee the rule of faith, nor ought to be so taken of all Christians, because it is so obscure, and apt to breede contentions among such as rely vppon it. Wee haue sufficiently prooued that all obscurities, all contentions about the sense of Scriptures in points of moment, arise hence; Because wee doe not admit of it for our onely rule;Partialitie either vnto our own or others opinion is the onely cause of contention amongst men, and dissention from the truth, euen amongst such as acknowledge the Scripture for their rule of faith: for it is one thing to say they make it, another indeed to make it or vse it as the rule of faith, in their practise or course of life. Whence our aduersaries obiections drawne f^om co^tentions amongst reformed Churches are easily answered. For these are not occasioned by relying vpon the Scripture, but because sundry in reformed Churches doe in deede, as the Papists both in deed and word, disclaime it for the rule of faith. all affection to mens persons, state or dignitie, all priuate quarrels laid a-part. If the Iesuite could prooue it should either continue obscure in points of faith, or minister matter of contention to such as conforme their liues to the Elementarie rules or easie precepts therein contained: their arguments were to some purpose. But while this they neither can nor goe about to proue; they shall onely proue themselues ridiculous Atheists, albeit we grant them all they desire, about the varietie of opinions (euen in places of greatest moment) among the learned. For, whatsoeuer they can obiect to vs, either concerning the varietie of opinions amongst the learned, or such distraction as might follow
 thereon in the simple and illiterate,Wherein their conclusions ouer-reach. will conclude as much, both against that certaintie the Auncient Prophets themselues had of their owne visions, and the stedfastnesse of that beliefe which the faithfull amongst Gods people gaue vnto their predictions or prophesies. First it is euident from the story of Ahab, that lying Spirits did counterfeit visions then, as the Spirit of errour doth now the Spirit of truth; So as the false Prophets had strange delusions and appearances, as well as the true their diuine illuminations; where the contention amongst the professed Prophets themselues was as great as any now amongst the learned Interpretours of Prophesies or other Scriptures. And from this contention amongst the Prophets, the vnlearned, or rather all in that people not Prophets, were, by the Romanist obiections against vs, (were they pertinent) to wauer and hault betweene the contrarietie of illuminations and visions, professed as well by the false Prophets, as the true.These seducing Spirits hopes were not so desperate as to make them leaue their woonted trade, euen in Saint Cyprians time Spiritus insinceri and vagi, qui postea quam terrenis vitijs immersi sunt, and a vigore coelesti terreno contagio recesserunt, non desi^unt perditi perdere, and deprauati errorem prauitatis infundere. Hos and poct^e daemonas vocant, and Socrates instrui se and regi ad arbitrium daemonis praedicabat. Hi ergo spiritus sub statuis atque imaginibus consecratis delitescunt. Hi ad flatu suo vatum pectora inspirant, extorum fibras animant, auium volatus gubernant, sortes regunt, oracula efficiunt. falsa veris semper inuoluunt: nam and falluntur and fallun^, vitam turbant, somnos inquietant Cyprian quod Idola Dij non sunt. Thus he spake of his owne experience, as he addes: nec aliud his studium est, quam a Deo homines auocare, and ad superstitionem sui ab intellectu verae religionis auertere: and cum sint ipsi paenales, quaerere sibi ad poe^am comites, quas ad crimen suum facerent errore participes. H^ tamen ad^urati per deum verum nobis statim cedunt and fatentur, and de obsessis corporibus exire coguntur. These were the effects of Christs triall ouer Sathan, sure pledges that the strong man was now cast out. And the like power had not been so manifest before among the Sonnes of men. Nor will any Iesuite (I thinke) be so bold as to denie (least euery man might perceiue him to denie more, then possibly he could know) that those lying Spirits in the mouthes of Achabs Prophets, were then as cunning in imitating true reuelations, as now in counterfeiting Orthodoxall interpretations of truths reuealed. Or if this they call in question, let them resolue vs why Idolatrie in those ages, wherein true Prophets flourished most, should bee as frequent and various, as heresies in latter times, wherein the preaching of the Gospell is most plentifull. The true reason whereof as we suppose is this: These lying Spirits were alike apt to imitate Gods seuerall manner of speaking (whether by meanes ordinary or extraodinary) in diuerse ages. At all times, if we compare either their natiue capacitie or acquired skill with our owne, though in matters wherein we haue beene most conuersant: if to their sagacitie wee adde their malitious temper and eager desires of doing ill, which alwayes adde
 an edge to wit in mischeuous inuention: In all these they so farre exceed the sonnes of seduced Adam, that vnlesse the Almightie did either assist vs by his Holy spirit, or restraine them in the exercise of their skill (especially in spirituall matters, wherewith the naturall man hath no acquaintance;) who could, in any age, be able to discerne their Iugling, much lesse, to avoide their snares, alwayes suited to the present season? Notwithstanding most euident it is, that in Ahabs as in al other times, tainted with the like or aequiualent sinnes; the Almightie giues them leaue to doe their worst; to practise with such cunning in euery kind, as leaues men, so disposed as these false Prophets were, (vntill they amend) no more possibilitie of distinguishing diuelish suggestions from diuine Oracles, than Ahab had (without repentance) to escape his doome read by Elias and Michaiah. For hee had not fallen, vnlesse his Prophets had beene first seduced; Their errour therefore was by Gods iust iudgement, as fatall as his fall; both absolutely ineuitable vpon supposition of their obstinate disobedience to the vndoubted mandates of Gods written law. Thus no one tittle of our aduersaries obiections (how the learned should be sure of their interpretations, when others as learned as they are as strongly perswaded to the contrary) but is as directly opposite vnto the certaintie of true Prophets reuelations; seeing many, yea most of that profession, and (in the iudgement of man) men of better gifts and places then such as prooued true Prophets, were otherwise perswaded; vsually such as the people esteemed best, strangeliest deluded.
3 That from this varietie of opinions among the Prophets about their illuminations, others not endued with the gift of Prophesie were in the selfe same case, the vnlearned people throughout the Christian world are in, wheresoeuer or whensoeuer dissentions arise amongst the learned, admit no question but amongst wranglers. For albeit the excellent brightnesse of diuine truth did necessarily imprint an infallible euidence in their apprehension, to whom it was immediately by meanes extraordinarie reuealed; yet could they not communicate this euidence or certainty vnto the people, but by preaching the word reuealed, after the selfe same manner we doe. Yea sometime it was onely communicated
 vnto them by theIeremie. cap. 36. vers. 5.6. And Ieremiah commaunded Baruch, saying, I am sh^t vp and cannot goe into t^e house of the Lo^d Therefore goe thou, and reade the roule, wherein thou hast written at my mouth the words of the Lord, in the audience of the p^ople in the Lords house vpo^ the fasting day: also thou shalt reade them in the hearing of al Iuda that come out of their Cities. Ministerie of others, no Prophets. Here let any Iesuite, or other Patron of the Romish Churches cause, answere mee to these demaunds. First, whether the people were not bound to beleeue the true Prophesies (either deliuered by the Prophets owne mouthes or read by others, or directed to them in writing) to be the word of GOD; and to reiect the contrary doctrine of false Prophets, as delusions? Secondly, whether, if the ordinary people of those times could by any Christian, though priuate men in latter, may not by the same, meanes, distinguish the word of God (being in like sort read, or expounded or preached vnto them) from the word of man? The word remaines still the same; the truth of it better confirmed vnto the world, by the continuance of it in power and strength throughout all ages intermediate, wher^in Gods Spirit (by which it was first manifested to the Prophets, and written in the peoples hearts) hath beene more plentifull then before, especially since the reuelation of the Gospell; most plentifull in this present (if I may so speake) the second time of grac^. Our argument then stands good (A fortiori) If euery priuate man amongst GODS people of olde might and ought beleeue, and beleeuing obey, his word reuealed to others, onely read or expounded vnto him, reiecting all contrarie or erroneous doctrines; the people of this age must doe the like: and all obiections possible against the iudgement of moderne priuate spirits, conclude as much against all priuate persons of auncient times: For, their meanes of knowing the Prophets illuminations or visions were ordinarie; such as wee haue now; liable to all excep^ions that can be made against our knowledge or perswasion of the true sense of Scripture; But neither theirs nor our imbecillitie in knowing, or facilitie of erring, was or is any iust exception why the Scripture should not be a rule to both. Albeit all the Papists arguments might be vrged with farre greater probabilitie against them who were to beleeue propheticall writings first. For more easie it is to assent vnto particulars contained in a general Canon already established by the approbation of former ages, and confirmed by ioynt consent of parties most aduerse and contrarie in the interpretation of seuerall parcels; then to admit the gener^^l
 Canon it selfe for the vndoubted word of GOD, or yeeld obedience to the particulars therein contained. Yet were the Auncient-people bound to admit the prophesie of Isaias, Ieremie, as the vndoubted word of God; albeit vnknowne to their Auncestors, but onely in the generalitie of Moses doctrine: much more (as we conclude) may Christians, now liuing, assent vnto the true expositions or particular contents of these prophesies, or other Scriptures; of whose absolute truth in generall they doe not doubt, and of whose particulars they may now beholde the sundrie opinions and expositions of diuers ages.
4 To presse the former arguments more fully paralelled to our presen^ controuersie, a little farther: I would demaund of any Iesuite, whether the word of God taught by the Prophets, (who were to winne credite by their skill, not presumed skilfull for their authority in the Church, or credit in Common-weale,) or the definitiue sentence of the High-Priestes or others in eminent place, were to be the rule of Israels faith? Whether the peoples distraction in following some one false Prophet, some another, fewest of all, the true Prophets, most, their High-Priests and men in authoritie; might exempt any from acknowledgement of such Prophesies, as in the issue prooued diuine, for the rule of their beliefe? If that people, either vpon the varietie of opinions, or the authoritie of the Priestes or others, might reiect the word of God, either preached vnto them by the Prophets, or read by others; or appeale from it to any visible companie of men; on whose decrees they might safely relie: then may the Romanists with some probabilitie teach men to relie vpon the decrees of their Church, for their infallible rule, not vpon Scriptures onely. But if the people of those times were bound to relie vpon MOSES Law and the Prophets writings, against all the world besides, albeit ioyntly co^spiring to teach them otherwise, though with glozes and pretences of Moses authoritie: then much more must these writings bee of like authoritie vnto vs. And all the mimicall obiections which the Iesuites can frame to this or like purpose [If the Scripture be the rule of faith, and must bee discerned by priuate Spirits, how comes it to passe that Caluin expounds it one way, Luther another, Zwinglius a third, and yet all thinke they haue the spirit?] are the very same in effect, with the false Prophet
 Zedkiah's exception against Michaiah1. Kings cap. 22. vers. 24. When went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speake vnto thee?
5 Zedkiah had foure hundred more of his opinion; and this people had beene very dull, if conscious of their owne factious greatnes they could not haue pleaded all the Papists arguments against Michaiah; all that can be drawne from the vniuersalitie or authoritie of the Church: All which haue mere ignorance or incogitancy of a diuine prouidence for their root, but branch themselues in their after-grouth into positiue Atheisme, and contradictious infidelitie. First their Authours (the Priests ^nd Iesuites) erre, not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God, able to leade men vnto life, by this written way, though narrow and priuate, yet straight and plaine: Afterwardes (as if they were Satans sworne Takers, or authorized Purueyours to furnish Hell with guests) obseruing some, who rather idly wish or loosly proffer, then seriously purpose or earnestly striue, to enter in at the straite gate, either faile in their first aduentures, or finally miscarrie; they watch hence all opportunites of hailing passengers to their broad beaten Catholique way, which almost all heretofore haue gone, as they brag, wherein a blinde man, so hee wil^ follow his guide, cannot easily trippe; so I thinke, vntill both come at the very Pitbrincke of destruction, whereunto it tends directly and infallibly. But is this your Catholike way more plaine or better beaten then rebellious Israels or Iudahs was? Could not these also (whilest backed by their blinded guides) haue mockt at priuate Spirits, and bestowed titles vpon Gods true seruants, (because in number fewest and most opposite to their Prelates) as foule and odious, as Sectaries, Schismatikes, or Heretiks? Or did these willingly and wittingly goe astraie, as knowing their wayes to bee the wayes of death?Esay. 5. v. 15. Therefore my people is gone into captiuitie (saith the Lord) because they had no knowledge. Ignorance, the nurse of your deuotion, was the true mother of their Superstition and Idolatrie: yet was this want of knowledge, which thus prooued the fertile seed of all t^eir insuing misery, the natiue fruit of their former negligence in not practising the knowne precepts of Moses Law. And because increase of ignorance in Gods word did breed in them a greater d^light of hearing lies, and pleasant things, then the truth, hee gaue them their iust, as he had done their forefathers quailes in his
 displeasure.Ezeeh 14. vers. 3.4.5. Sonne of man (saith the Lord vnto his Prophet) these men haue set vp their Idols in their heart, and put the stumbling blocke of their iniquitie before their face: should I, being required, answere them? Therefore say vnto them, Thus saith the Lord God, Euery man of the house of Israel, that setteth vp his Idols in his heart, and putteth the stumbling blocke of his iniquitie before his face, and commeth to the Prophet, I the Lord will answere him that commeth, according to the multitude of his Idols: That I may take the house of Israel in their owne heart, because they are all departed from me through their Idols.
6 This euidently prooues, that vnlesse the Morall Law be duly practized, and those stumbling blocks which the wicked set before their faces remooued: to seeke after such a facile, inerrable rule, as the Papists haue framed for direction in points of faith, is, to sollicit a snare for their owne soules, as no doubt God gaue the Romanes, for their d^stast of his word and that longing after GentilismeCap. 3. before mentioned, this broken reed, whereon to this day they relie, as hee had done the Israelites a King in his wrath. And though in euery age, since the Go^hes and Vandals ouer-ranne the Empire, God hath raised vp some poore Michaiah to withstand their state Prelates: Yet those lying Spirits, which possessed Ahabs Prophets, haue euer borne greatest sway in that Church, seducing Princes and people, as they had done Ahab, by multitude of voices, to their owne destruction. That the Romanists can produce men of great fame and note through many generations for their defence in some one point or other, it skils not much. For as God, inThis law of Deutronomie holds true in proportion through^ut all ages. Jf there arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of d^eames, and g ue thee a signe or wonder, (And the signe and th^ wonder which he hath told thee, come to passe,) saying, ^et v^g^ after other Gods which thou hast not knowne, and let vs serue the^, T^o^ shalt not hearken to the wordes of the Prophet, or vnto that drea^^r of dream^s: for the Lo^d you^ G d, p ooueth ^o^ to kn^w w^^ther yee (...) ^e Lord ^^^r God w h a^ your heart, an w th all y ur sou^e. times past, suffered Prophets or Dreamers to take opportunitie, from their strange predictions, of inticing his people to Idolatrie, forbidden by his written Law: so in euery age, his prouidence permits men of excellent gifts, and great skill in Scriptures, to haue, yea to seek to establish their plausible errours vnder pretences of reuelations, secret assistance, or abundant measure of his Spirit; that by this meanes hee may trie our fidelitie in searching Scriptures, and diligence in trying Spirits, as hee did the Israelites by such presumptions of diuine Prophesies, or Visions. And if amongst this great varietie of opinions I might deliuer mine, as freely as I willingl^ submit it to each sober Prophets censure, (much more to the correctio^ of my lawful
 Superiours,) I should (for ought I yet see to the contrarie) auouch; first, that no Christian in any age, but is oft put vpon his triall Whether hee loue God or the great ones of this world more? Whether he will confesse or deny Christ before men? Secondly, That, during these dayes of peace and securitie which we now enioy, our acquitall or condemnation in both the Two former mayne interrogatories, stands especially vpon our abandoning or abetting their errours in some points of danger, whose worth in others we iustly admire. So much addicted are we, for the most part, to such mens persons, as haue beene Gods instruments for o^r good; that vpon often experience of those wholesome medicines where with their shops are plentifully furnished, wee swallow downe whatsoeuer there wee finde: when as perhaps the disease they had to deale with, or some other circumstances of the time, were such, as required an extraordinary medicine, which whilest wee administer without mixture of like ingredients, or not vpon the same occasions, wee may chance to poyson both our selues and our Patients. Others of vs againe are so much accustomed to politique obseruation, that we commonly make no other triall of diuine truths, then by some such forinsicall forme of proceeding, as is vsed in secular inquisitions; wherein determinations goe by calculation of most voyces. But vnlesse the Lord did suffer vs to haue plausible shewes and goodly inducements in the worlds sight, for beleeuing that which is contrary vnto truth; our faith should not be sincere, nor as an Armour of proofe to resist all temptations; seeing there is no man almost, but is apt by nature to follow a multitude, to doe that which publique lawes haue iudged euill, much more to thinke or beleeue as most men, or men most esteemed, doe. On the contrary if wee looke into our calling,1. Cor. 1. v. 26. Not many wisemen after the flesh, not many noble are chosen of God. Such as are his ought to be like him in this, that they see not as men (not as naturall men be they neuer so many) see, nor iudge not as they iudge.
7 The stay whereupon they, as in all other difficulties, so especially in this triall of Spirits, must relie, is his prouidence; which in time will bring the truth to light, and daily diffuseth the odour of life, able, (were not our senses dull or prepossessed with the fragrant smell of earthly pleasures) to lead vs to that inuisible truth
 which in this life wee must follow not by view, but by faith. Yet not by faith, if we take the Iesuites for our guides, who in this present controuersie play false Huntsmen, alwayes seeking to bring vs from the prints of Gods prouidence, vnto the pathes and footsteps of men, that haue corrupt their wayes; casting the forme of secular proceeding before our eyes, so to withdraw vs from following him who hath sweetned the aire wherein we breath, with the words of eternall life. If men would bee so mad, as to frame their liues according to their doctrine: Hell it selfe could not wish a more diuellish meanes to make men Christians in conceit, and Atheists or Infidels in heart. And yet besides the impietie of all other kindes of Heresies or Infidelities that are or haue bin, this of theirs is the most palpably absurd, and most contradictorie to the rules of reason and principles of Arts receiued by all. For if the arguments they bring against vs, conclude any thing at all, they conclude as much against all certaintie of secular or natural sciences.
8 And because (whether purposely or as meere instruments managed by Sathan to what vse they know not) they still labour to make ciuill modestie but a maske for infidelitie; rightly iudging (though to a wrong end) ingenuous humilitie and mens lowly conceipts of their owne worth the fittest disposition, whence vtter distrust of Gods fauour towardes such poore creatures, as men so minded deeme themselues, can be wrought; and if once wrought and deeply planted in soft mindes or humble hearts, the onely sure foundation, whence they can hope to raise their blinde implicite faith: It shall not be amisse, whilest we prosecute the second branch of their immoderate folly, last mentioned, to discouer withall, and partly dissolue, the snares which they haue set for the simple and ingenuous.



CHAP. VII.
How farre, vpon what termes or grounds, wee may with modestie dessent from the Auncient or others of more excellent gifts then our selues: That our aduersaries arguments impeach as much the certaintie of humane sciences as of priuate Spirits.
1 LEt it bee granted, that many places of great moment are diuersely expounded by learned men: what will hence follow? That not the greatest Schollers in reformed Churches can bee assured of their true sense and meaning, as the Pope? Not, vnlesse you first can make it euident, that learning or subtilitie of wit is the onely meanes, whereby the true sense of Scriptures can be found out. And this being prooued; you must assure vs that the Pope is alwayes better learned then others; otherwise hee may faile as well as they. Or if you admit not learning for the onely meanes of distinguis^ing doctrines, as indeed it is not; yet must you secure the world, that the Pope hath all those other good qualifications, whose want caused the learned to erre. Or if you require neither one nor other of these; you must prooue that the best gifts of God, (the peculiar attribute of whose glory, is, to be no respecter of persons) are infallibly entailed to a certaine succession of men, without all respect of learning, wit, or honesty. Lastly you must proue that the holy Ghost was a priuate Spirit, and might erre, when he said, The Lord giueth grace to the humble, Or, the Law of the Lord, wisedome vnto the simple: And that our Sauiours words, Ventus spirat vbi vult, did not import, (as he ment) that his Spirit might enlighten whom he pleased: For if all these, and that, Deus cuius vult miseretur, be true; who can hinder him or his Spirit to open the eyes of some lesse learned, to behold clearely the true sense and meaning of that Scripture, wherein many excellent writers haue either erred or beene ouerseene? or who can hinder God (if these places be true) to reueale his will to little ones, and keepe it secret from the wise, and mightie, because it is his pleasure so to doe? and that for this end, that men should learne to relie vpon his mercy, and prouidence; not vpon the authoritie or skill of men.
 Or who can hinder his Omnipotency euen in this age to make his power seene in our weaknes? If this his power be not limited now: then may he still both reueale the true sense and meaning of his word in some points, vnto men of lesse capacitie in others; and furnish them with abilitie too, for demonstrating by euidence of argument, and surest grounds of reason vnto others, that this sense must needes be the true sense, and that all other interpretations giuen of the same places, by men otherwise excellent for their learning and skill in Scripture, cannot stand with those principles of Christian faith, which all sorts of beleeuers stedfastly beleeue. Must such a man, or those to whom God reueales the truth by his ministrie, doubt of the euidence of the truth reuealed, and mistrust Gods word; because others as learned, or more learned then either he that hath the truth reuealed vnto him first, or they that take it from him, are of another minde? Hee must verily by this obiection. For a Iesuite would say, Why should he not thinke others as likely to haue the spirit, as himselfe? Let him esteeme of them, as farre better Schollers, and men indued with as great, or greater measure of Gods Spirit then himselfe; for so the Scripture teacheth vs not to be wise in our own conceipt,Phil. 2. v. 3. but to thinke better of others then of our selues. And againe,1. Cor. 14. v. 32. the Spirits of the Prophets are subiect to the Prophets.
2 And yet both these rules concerne the greatest Schollers, and most skilfull interpreters in some degree, as well as the meanest. For none is so absolutely good, none so farre exceedes another; but in part may bee exceeded by him. Nor doth this Christian modestie, which the Scripture thus teacheth, binde any Christian soule, or ingenuous minde, to such absolute seruilitie, as the obiection must inforce vpon all, if it proue ought: For there is no ingenuous man, especially of meaner gifts, but will in heart and conscience acknowledge many, both auncient and moderne, for farre more excellent Schollers then himselfe: and yet be fully perswaded in conscience, that in sundrie particulars hee hath the truth on his side which they oppugne; and the true sense of Gods Spirit in some pointes wherein they haue erred, or were ignorant. For neither will an indefinite proposition, in matters whose reuelation depends vpon the free will and libertie of Gods Spirit, and are in respect of vs contingent, inferre euery particular:
 nor will one or few particulars in any point inferre an vniuersall proposition, or such as we call vera vt plurimum true for the most part. Now to say and beleeue, that such a man is a better Scholler and of far more excellent gitfs, is but indefinite, not infinite, for the extent of his Schollership, or gifts beyond mine: Wherefore it will not hence follow, that hee is a better Scholler, or interpreter in this, albeit he bee so in many, or in most other particulars; much lesse will it follow, that I am a better Scholler or interpreter then he, because I am better seene in this one, or few particulars. The consequence, or corollarie of which two assertions, is againe as euident: [I may without breach of modestie thinke I haue the truth on my side in sundrie particulars, against him that is farre better seene in Scriptures, and other sciences, then my selfe.] For albeit hee were much better seene in both then hee is: yet are his gifts measured as well as mine; although God hath giuen him a greater measure of such gifts, then me. Wherefore, as I would willingly yeeld vnto him in infinite others; so may I safely dissent from him in this or other particulars, that are contained in the small measure of Gods gifts vpon me; without any iust censure of arrogancy, or breach of modesty, for entring the lists of comparison with him absolutely. For now wee are to bee compared but in this one, or few cases; not according to the whole measure of Gods gifts in vs; which I acknowledge farre greater in him, and reuerence him as my superiour for them. And as I acknowledge him absolutely for my better; so is he in these particulars, in some sort, to yeeld superioritie vnto me. Christian modestie teacheth euery man not to bee hastie, or rash, in gain-saying the doctrine of the Auncient or other men of worth; but rather bindes him to diligence in examination of the truth, to vse deliberation in gain saying the opinions of men better learned then hims^lfe. But Christianitie it selfe bindes all Christians, not to beleeue mens authoritie against their owne consciences; nor to admit of their Doctrines for rules of faith, bee they neuer so excellent, vnlesse they can discerne them to bee the doctrine of that great Prophet, Cui DEVS non admetitur Spiritum: Hee cannot faile in any thing, and whatsoeuer hee saith, or what his SPIRIT shall witnesse to my SPIRIT to haue proceeded from him I am bound to beleeue. But for men,
 to whom God giues his spirit but in measure, albeit in great measure, because I cannot know the particulars vnto which it exte^ds, I neither may absolutely refuse, nor absolutely admit their doctrines for true, vntill I see perfectly, how they agree with, or disagree from his doctrine, of whose fulnesse we haue all receiued. And euen the truth of their writings, to whom he hath giuen his gifts in great measure, I am to examine, by their consonancie vnto that small measure of his vndoubted gifts in my selfe, so farre as they concerne my selfe or others committed to my charge. And in the confidence of Gods promises, for the increase of faith and grace, to all such as vse them aright, euery Christian in sobriety of spirit may by the principles of faith, planted by Gods finger in his heart, examine the sentences, and decrees of the wisest men on earth: to approue them, if he can discerne them for true; to confute them, if false; to suspend his iudgement, and limit the termes of his disobedience vnto them if doubtfull; and finally to admit or reiect them, according to the degrees of their probability or improbability, which he vpon sober, diligent, and vnpartiall search directed and continued in reuerence of Gods word, and sincere loue of truth, shall finde in them.
3 All the arguments which they can heap vp from the varietie of opinions amongst the learned (albeit they could make a catalogue of confusion in this kinde, as long as the tower of Babel was high,) can onely proue thus much;That this dissention amongst the learned should rather moue all sober Christians to d^sclaime all infallible authoritie of men then to relie vpon any. That no man (especially no man indued with the gift of interpreting,) may relie vpon any other mans opinions, expositions, or decrees, without further examination of them: but onely vpon the Scripture it selfe, which neuer varieth from it selfe, nor from the truth; for this cause to bee admitted as the onely infallible rule of all diuine truthes, whereunto euerie man must conforme his beleefe and perswasions. For euen this varietie of opinions, about the particular sense or meaning of this Canon of truth, amongst such, as ioyntly acknowledge the infallibilitie of it in generall, is a sufficient reason to disclaime any mans authoritie for the rule of fairh: seeing experience shewes such varietie, and partialitie in them; and the generall foundation of faith, (held by all thus dissenting) bindes euerie man to beleeue, that the Scripture is not subiect


 to any of these inconueniences. This vndoubted certainty of it, when it is rightly vnderstood and perceiued, should incourage all to seeke out the right sense and meaning of it, (which once found, is by all mens consent the surest foundation of faith, for by our aduersaries consent it is the ground of the Churches faith) and where they cannot presently attaine vnto it, to suspend their iudgements, and not to follow mens authori^ies (but onely in particulars, whose generals are contained in Sc^ipture) lest they may lead the^ against the true sense and meaning o^ i^. And if men generally should haue no other ground but mans authority, or beleeue this or that to be the meaning of Scripture because such a man or companie of men doth tell him so: beside^ his wronging of gods spirit herein, he should also wrong many other men, oft-times far better learned, and skilfull in Scriptures more deare in the sight of God, and better acquainted with his spirit, then are they, on whose authoritie he relies. Euery one to whom God hath giuen a wise heart, and power in Scripture, might iustly challenge him of partialitie and disobedience, in not giuing as much to his authoritie, as to the former. But as the truth, reuealed vnto him by the meanest of Gods seruants, bindes his conscience to beleeue it: so the varietie of other mens opinions, (be it neuer so great, the authors and fauourers of them neuer so well learned, neuer so stiffe and confident in maintaining them,) ought to ^e no motiue either to dissuade him from assenting vnto the truth knowne, or to discourage him in the industrious and sober search of it, by such good meanes as God hath appointed for his calling. For there hath beene as great varietie of opinions in other sciences and faculties, as in Diuinitie: yet no later Iesuite, nor other learned Papists, that I haue read or heard of, for these diuers hundred years, haue sought to proue, that no man can be certaine hee knowes any thing, because many think they know that which they do not. Or if any Iesuite will renounce Aristotle, and reuiue the old Academichs opinion, [That there can be no certaintie of any thing, but onely an opinion:] our Vniuersities shall be readie to answere him, albeit hereby they should disenable their supposed infallible rule as much as ours. In the meane time, holding Aristotles doctrine about the certainty of sciences for true, they answere themselues in all they can obiect against vs in this point.
 For they neither denie a certainty in secular artes, because many erre: nor do they perswade young students in their schooles, to giue ouer their studious and industrious searching into speculatiue sciences, because many haue taken much paines in them to little purpose: Nor doe they hold it sufficient for good schollers in such matters, to relie wholly on other mens iudgements, without any triall of conclusions, or examination of arguments, according to the principles of those sciences which they haue professed. In a word, the varietie of opinions hath not yet occasioned them to create a Pope of artes, and secular sciences, albeit such a creature were (by their arguments) much more necessarie, or (at least) lesse harmefull in those faculties, then in matters of religion. For in them we haue no promise for the assistance of a secret teacher, the true illuminator of our soules, whose authoritie is as infallible, as the spirit of truth. Aristotle takes it for an infallible token that there is a certaintie to be had in sciences, because all men thinke themselues certaine in their perswasions of things that may bee knowne: as well those that know not the truth, but onely thinke they know it, as those that know it indeed. If Aristotles argument (which the Iesuites so acknowledge,) bee good: then is their argument in this cause most absurd. Many men (say they) perswade themselues they know the right sense of sundrie places in Scripture, when they do not, therefore no man, no priuate man, no man but the Pope, (qui neque Deus est neque homo,) by any search or industrie, can be sure that he hath it. Whereas by Aristotles reason, (which indeed is a rule of reason) the contrarie rather followes, That there is a certaintie to be had concerning the truth and true sense of Scripture by all such as seeke it aright,) because euen such as erre, and seeke it amisse, are strongly perswaded of their certaintie in it. From the same Topicke doe the schoolemen and other iudicious contemplators proue a certainty of true and perfect blisse, able alone to satiate the greedie appetite, and stay the vnconstant longing of mans soule, because euen miscreants and such as indefatigably hold on like dromidaries in those vngracious courses, which in wiser heathens sight lead directly vnto infelicitie and true miserie, cannot cast away all conceit of happinesse from which they wander, but rather suppose it to be seated in those sensuall
 pleasures which they follow. Yet would our aduersaries arguments disprooue all certaintie in apprehension of true happinesse with greater probabilitie, then they can impeach the assurance of priuate spirits in any other points of faith, as might (to omit other reasons) bee proued by this one; Because some of their Popes (none of which as they suppose can erre in ordinarie matters of faith) neuer haue any taste or apprehension of true happinesse.
4 Of the manner of knowing the true sense of Scripture, occasion will be giuen vs in the last part of this discourse: of the impediments which trouble most men in this search, and of the originall of all errors in diuine matters, and the meanes to auoide them, wee shall speake, by Gods assistance, in the Article of the Godhead. Thus much may now suffice, that no man ought to be dismayed in seeking, or dispaire to finde, the true sense and meaning of Scriptures, in all points necessarie for him in his calling, because other men, much more expert in all kinde of learning then himselfe, haue fowly erred in this search, and finally missed of that they sought. For out of the rules of Scripture alreadie set downe, when such temptations shall arise in our breasts, wee may quell them thus. They who haue gone astray, were much better learned then I in all kinde of knowledge: It may bee they were hence more confident of their giftes; for scientia inflat, their excellent knowledge might puffe them vp with selfe-conceit;Isai. 29. v. 14. and hee that is wisest of all hath said, I will destroy the wisedome of the wise, and the vnderstanding of the prudent shall be hid: it may be, as they were exceeding wise, so they much gloried in their wisedome: but I will seeke to glorie onely in the Lord, of whom I haue receiued euerie good gift I haue, and will alwaies esteeme this best, which shall teach mee not to reioyce aboue that which is meete in any other: As they were prudent, so it may be they were proud, and the Scripture saith: Deus resistit superbis, God resisteth the proud, and such as trust too much to their owne conceit. As for mee I will not bee high-minded, but feare, for the same Scripture telles me, Deus dat gratiam humilibus, yea grace to vnderstand the true sense and meaning of his gracious promises made in Christ. And in confidence of them, I will continue these my daily prayers: Lord grant me true, vnfained,
 Christian humility, and with it grace to know the wonderful things of thy law. Others haue erred, of farre more excellent naturall parts, euen men of deepest reach and surest obseruation. It may be, as their wits were stronger, and their vnderstandings riper: so their willes were vnrulier, and their desires of affections greener. But O Lord breake the stubbernesse of my will, purifie my heart, and renue a right spirit within mee: so shall I see thee, and thy goodnesse in thy word, which shall enlighten mee to teach thy waies vnto the wicked, and conuert sinners vnto thee: so shall thy law, thy perfect law, conuert my soule, for thy testimonies are sure,Psal. 19. vers. 7. and giue wisedome to the simple. Yea but they who first instructed mee in thy word, doe dissent from mee in the interpretation of it. It may be they haue not folowed those rules, which thou taughtest the^, Lord giue me grace to meditate aright vpon thy testimonies, so shall I haue more vnderstanding then my teachers:Psal. 119. v. 99. But what if the most reuerend and ancient Fathers of former times were of a contrarie minde? O Lord they were faithfull seruants in thy house, and yet faithfull but as seruants, not as thy sonne: and it may be thou didst suffer those thy worthy seruants to go awry, to trie whether I thy most vnworthy seruant would forsake the footsteps of thine annointed sonne to follow them:Heb. 3. vers. 5. but Lord teach me thy statutes, so shall I (in this point wherein I differ from them) haue more vnderstanding then the ancient. Thy name hath beene alreadie glorified in their manie excellent gifts,Psal. 119. v. 100 all which they receiued of thy bounteous hand: and it may bee that now it is thy pleasure, in this present difficultie, to ordaine thy praise out of such infants mouthes as mine. They out of this thy fertile and goodly field haue gathered many yeares prouision for thy great houshold thy Church, but yet eyther let somwhat fal, or left much behind, which may be sufficie^t for vs thy poore seruants to gleane after them, either for our owne priuate vse, or for that smal flocke which thou hast set vs to feed. And let all sober-hearted Christians iudge, yea let God that searcheth the verie heart and reines, and Christ Iesus the iudge of all mankind, giue iudgement out of his throne, whether in reasoning thus, we are more iniurious to the ancient Fathers deceased, then they vnto the Ancient of daies, and Father of the world to come, in denying the free gifts and graces of his
 holy spirit, vnto succeeding, as well as former ages, we reuerence the Fathers as men indued with an especiall measure of his grace, as men that haue left many excellent writings behinde them, fit for the instructions of later ages as well as former: they will not honour God as much. For their agreements conclude, if any thing, him to haue beene a gracious God, and his spirit a guide only of some few generations of old: but in this present, and all late past, they make him a God, his spirit a guide, and his word a role onely of the Pope, who must be the onely God, the onely guide, and his decisions about Scripture the onely rule of all other mens faith, yea a rule of Scripture it selfe, as shall afterwards appeare.



SECT. IIII.
The last of the three maine obiections (before proposed) which was concerning our supposed defectiue meanes for composing controuersies, or retaining the vnitie of faith, fully answered and retorted: That the Romane faith hath no foundation.
THe last obiection is: Our Church hath no meanes of taking vp Controuersies, seeing we permit the vse of Scriptures vnto all, and euery man to follow that sense of them which hee liketh best. We doe indeed permit euery man to satisfie his owne conscience in matters of saluation, and God forbid (for by his Apostles he hath forbidden) we should vsurpe any supreme Lerdship or absolute dominion ouer their faith. Yet a Christian obedience vnto Pastors wee require in the flocke: vnpossible in our iudgement, to be performed aright, vnlesse vndertaken more for conscience then for feare of punishment. And, as obedience, if not framed by conscience, can neuer be syncere, so conscience, vnlesse regulated by the sacred Canon, must needs be erroneous, and alwaies relish more of superstition then religion. The Gospell we euer esteemed as a
 gladsome message of peace and saluation: and doe wee, by seeking to square mens thoughts and affections vnto it, prepare their hearts to deadly warre? It is, we know, and you denie not, the fountaine of life, apt to season the waters of Marah and Meribah, a medicine able to allay all bitternesse of contention, and qualifie the poysonous rootes of strife; and doe we, by setting it open for fainting soules to quench their thirst, digge pits of destruction for them to fall into? The Scriptures in generall wee haue proued to be a plaine and facile rule, a light vnto mens feete, and a lanterne vnto their paths: and doe we, by permitting the free vse of it to all, first explicated and vnfolded by the dispensers of diuine mysteries, lay stumbling blocks in their way not possible to be descried or auoided, or spread a snare to catch their soules in darknesse? we permit euery man to follow that sense or meaning of it which his conscience liketh best: but we permit no man to frame the liking of his conscience to his lust; wee teach the contrarie as a principle of faith and Christian obedience. If any disobedient spirits list to contend, where they should performe obedience, we know the Church of God hath no such custome: all such contentions we detest, and labour, as much as you, by all meanes lawfull, to quell: The same internall meanes [Gods word] are alike free to both, but more vsed by vs which relie more vpon them: all the difficultie is about meanes externall.

CHAP. I.
Containing the true state of the question, or a comparison betweene the Romish Church and ours, for their meanes of preuenting or composing controuersies.
1. THe question then must be, first, whether we can as well discerne such as reade Scriptures, as you, such as read your Church decrees, with contentious mindes. Secondly, whether wee haue meanes as forcible and effectuall as you haue any to reforme them, or stay the spreading contagion of their heresie. To begin with the latter.
Our manner of proceeding against conte^tious spirits, as effectuall for the end proposed as the Romish Church hath any.2 Such as you discerne to bee contentious, or to dissent from that doctrine which you conceiue or teach for true, you threaten, with what? The Pope or Churches curse. Such as wee discerne to breede contentions amongst vs, or dissentions from that truth, which wee in conscience thinke all ought to professe, we threate^ with death and damnation, and the terror of that dreadfull day which shall accomplish that wee denouncedMatth. 18. against all such by whom offences come. Will not the continuall preaching of this doctrine bee as forcible to deterre a man from sowing sedition, as the anniuersarie solemnitie of the Popes curse? Will men beleeue a Iesuite from the Pope, when they will not beleeue Moses, and the Prophets, nor Christ Iesus himselfe? But you will say, although men will not be kept in order with Peters keyes, yet will they dread Pauls sword: or rather if they will not dread the fire of Hell, which must but long hence torment their soules, yet will they stand in awe of the fagot alwaies readie in your Church for plaguing heretikes. If this were the best meanes to stoppe mens mouthes, from professing what they are in conscience perswaded the Scripture telles them: The fundamentall pointes of Christianitie had neuer beene knowne eyther to you or vs; Christian Religion it selfe had beene martyred with Christs martyrs. But as their Ashes was the fertilest soyle, wherein the seede of the Gospell could bee sowne: so was the long and cruell oppression of such as dissented from your Church, as a lopping or pruning to cause ours flourish, and hath at length set the Israel of God at libertie from Aegyptian slauery.
3 But supposing this violent course, vpon great exigence of circumstances eyther in the matter, manner, or times of contentions, to bee both lawfull and expedient: yet could not the ordinarie practise of it bee more effectuall to restraine men from contradicting, then it might bee to enforce them to oppugne the truth. It might, according to the diuetse dispositions of such as manage it, be a meanes, one way or other alike forcible, eyther to retaine men in heresie, idolatrie, and infidelitie, or in the vnitie of true and liuely faith: albeit feare alone may make men perfect heretikes or infidels, but not inwardly or syncerely faithfull.
4 And as for our Church, albeit she search not so narrowly into the secrets of euery mans conscience, nor bee so tyrannically iealous of euerie word that might bee ill interpreted, nor so outragiously cruell in punishing knowne dissention from her, or discouered errour: yet (God be praised) she hath Pauls sword as well as yours, which our Magistrate beares not in vaine, but can vnsheath it, when neede requires, against such as are open and euident abetters of contentions, vnlesse perhaps you will except, that it hath not beene so much exercised in cutting you off from amongst vs, (who are the ringleaders of all diuision, debate and trouble in our Church,) as it might be according to your doctrine; if in the practise of this coactiue authoritie ouer contentious spirits, there be any fault, God amend it, for in our Churches doctrine concerning this point there is none: and God grant our Magistrates may practise as our faithfull Pastors teach: whose doctrine is, that this externall as well as the internal power is giuen for edification, not for destruction, and must be directed by the same rule; that the vse and practise of it must bee limited by the end; that the end of it is by iniunction of things good and prohibition of euill, to proportion mens actions and conuersations to the rule of faith, and law of God, that so euery member of the Common-wealth, thus wrought and fashioned by the coactiue power, may bee more easily conformed into a member of Christ, as being more apt and pliable for the word of life to worke vppon. Nor are wee precisely wedded to any determinate course for quelling or preuenting contentious schismes or heresies, but wee may admit what other soeuer time shall detect more effectuall for attaining the former end; vnto which our loue is such, as will not suffer vs dislike any meanes allied to it, though hauing affinitie with your Church: part of whose externall discipline we are not ashamed to vse vnto good, because by you abused to bad and wicked purposes. But for your Churches practise in the vse of your best meanes for auoyding all contentions, you plead no infallibility; therein you may fayle as well as we, and the question now is about our doctrine.
5 Out of that which hath beene said, our means for punishing such as we know to be contentious appeares as good as yours, whose vse, so farre as wee like it, is as free for vs as for your
 selues, let vs now see whether we haue meanes as good, or as infallible as yours, to discerne who are contentious.
That our means for discerning the orig^nall causes or occasions of contentions are fully equiualent to the Romish Churches.6 For the Popes infallibility whether it be any or no, we are anone to enquire, and wee may not in this place giue you leaue to preiudice our Church with the supposall of it. Nor do your selues make this discretion of contentious spirits any essential part thereof.
7 None of you (that I haue read) doth attribute any Prophetical spirit to the Pope in this case, as if he could descrie the storms of contentions which might cause shipwrack of faith, before they arise, as farre off as Elias did the raine, when it first began to gather into a cloud like a mans hand. The excellency of his infallibilitie, by your owne positions (if I mistake not) consists in the decisions of controuersies brought vnto him, not in the discouery or finding out of such, as breed contention. But doth he vouchsafe to decide all controuersies that arise in his dominions, albeit brought vnto him?
Vix vacat exiguis rebus adesse Ioui.
The exercise of this Dominus Deus vester plenarie power, is much like the vse of the heathen Gods vpon the old Romane stage.

Nec Deus intersit, nisi nodus vindice dignus:
Vnlesse it be to loose some Gordian knot
The Popes decision is not easty got.

And where it is got, it goes no farther then to the iust and infallible censure of the opinion it selfe, in punishing the Authors or abetters of adiudged heresies or schismes: hee may erre aswell as we, because herein hee goes but by the information of priuate men, who neither are so absolutely holy, but they may proue partiall, nor so wise and skilfull alwaies, but they may erre in their information, especially where it goes successiuely fron eare to eare, and from one countrie dialect to another, (as drinke from vessell to vessell) alwaies loosing some part of its proper and natiue sapor, so that it may relish otherwise to his holinesse mouth, then it did at the first setting abroach by the author.
8 And seeing the best meanes to auoid contention is the iust puishment of them that causelesly cause them: your Churches authoritie being herein so much more obnoxious to errour and misinformation as her diocesse is larger, lesse vniforme or more
 remote, is liable to many exceptions, from which such little ones, as she out of her greatnesse contemnes, are free. Nor is the question (as you beare the simple in hand) betwixt publike and priuate spirits, but betweene your priuate men, and ours; as whether yours can better discerne who are contentious throughout your vaste precincts; then ours, who are such amongst vs at home. That no man should dissent from the doctrine of the Catholike Church you all agree. Some of you dissent from it (as most of their fellowes thinke) who yet will not professe; but rather seeke to cloake their dissent, eyther with colours of consonance or pretended reasons of no repugnance vnto Catholike tenants.Bellarmine lib. 3. de iustif. cap. 3. 4. etc. disputes so eagerly against this Bishop as might haue procured a censure of irregularity had he liued in his dioces. Catherinus will defend the Councell of Trent, and yet hold certaintie of saluation. Soto and Bellarmine reproue him: but how could eyther of them discern whether Catherinus had the true meaning of the Trent Cou^cell or not? Catherinus (I take it) had a suffrage in making those decrees, wherof neither Soto nor Bellarmine were allowed much lesse authentick interpreters: for the Popes BulApostolica authoritate inhibemus omnibus, tam Ecclesiasticis personis, cuiuscunque sint ordinis, conditionis, and gradus, quam laicis, quocunque honore, ac potestate praeditis, Praelatis quidem sub interdicti ingressus Ecclesiae, alijs vero quicunque fuerint sub excommunicationis latae sententiae poenis, ne quis si^e authoritate nostra audeat vllos commentarios, glossas, annotationes, scholia, vllumve omnino interpretationis genus super ipsius concilij decretis quocunque modo edere, aut quidquam quocunque nomine, etiam sub praetextu maioris decretorum corroborationis, aut executionis, aliove quaesito colore, statuere. Bulla Pij quarti super confirmatione oecum. gener. concil. Trident. co^firming that Councell prohibits all priuat interpretatio^s of it, yet hath not the Pope or any publike authority since that time conde^ned Catherinus for this dissention. How knewMaldonatus censure of these men, for dissenting (as he thinkes) from their Church, is so sharpe and peremptory, as might wel haue caused contention, should his writings haue come into their handes. Jmpediunt nos quo minus acriter and vehementer inuehamur in haereticos, Catholici qui^dam, qui, nescio qua imprudentia hereticis se iunxerunt. Neminem nomino, neminem violatae accuso religionis: scio Cathhlicos, scio doctos, scio religiosos ac probos viros esse, sed minime profecto vtilem atque fidelem in hac re operam Ecclesiae nauauerunt, Quod contra scripturae sensum, contra patrum omnium interpretationem, contra tacitum imo minime tacitum, sed satis superque explicatum consensum Ecclesiae dixerint atque contenderint hoc loco de Sacrametntis non agi. Maldonatus comment. in sex. Ioan. Maldonate, that Iansenius Hesselius, and others which denie that Christs words in the sixth of Iohn are to be vnderstood of sacramentall eating, did varie from the receiued doctrine of your Church, and iumpe with heretikes? difference betwene your selues and vs in this point you shall neuer be able to assigne any. Tell vs by what meanes you can discerne who dissent from your Canons; and our answere is readie: wee can discerne who dissent from ours by the same, if no other were left vs. This briefly may suffice for remouall of preiudices easie to be wrought in such as compare not particulars with particulars
 or consider not the vse of externall magistracie acknowledged by vs, for punishing contentious spirits, or our meanes of discerning who are such: In both which respects wee are least equall to the Romanes.


CHAP. II.
That the Romish Church hath most need of some excellent mean^s for taking vp contentions, because it necessarily breedes so many and so grieuous.
1 FOR the maine point, as well about the originall of contentions, and schismes, as incorrigible continuance in them, onely this difference I finde, That wee permitting a sober search of Scriptures vnto all, not binding any mans faith to the iudgeme^t of man, leaue a possibilitie to the learned of finding out a liberty vnto all of professing the truth found, for the health and life of their soules, without dread or danger to their bodies. And seeing we bind no man vpon paine of damnation, to beleeue any point of doctrine, which is not plainly and expressely set downe in Scriptures: we minister no occasion of deadly dissention vnto any. For contentions amongst our selues, they are rather distempers then dangerous diseases, nor doe they affect those parts of religion in which our spirituall life is properly seated. Yet euen these in latter yeares had beene, and alwaies would bee fewer, and their danger lesse, were it not for those Foxes which your Church subornes to bring fire-brands into the Lords haruest. And euen these your Foxes in this our land, howsoeuer, for this publike mischiefe against vs, and the intended combustion of our Church, their tailes were tied together by your Churches knot, haue yet wher their cankred teeth as eagerly, and opened their venemous mouthes as bitterly one against another, as any (but they) could haue done either against vs or any creatures liuing. But to leaue priuate dissentions amongst your selues; your Church prohibiting men the ingenuous search of Scriptures and free profession of their conscience
 tying them to submit their iudgements at all aduenture vnto the corrupt doctrine of your Cleargie: hath set open a wide gap to such grosse opinions, and monstrous heresies, as no man, vnlesse his iudgement had beene surprised by your pretended authoritie, or his spirituall senses lockt vp in superstition, sleepe, and midnight darknesse, would euer haue assented vnto, much lesse haue tolerated, when men were taught to hold them for points of faith, as infallibly true as the Scripture it selfe, onely because your Church hath proposed and practised them.
2 Thus did your doctrine and filthie practise of Indulgences (to omit many moe) from some surmises of the Ancient, concerning a third place after this life, as it were, from a small seed or kernell, by little and little come vp to such a mightie growth, that it violently rent, and tore asunder the maine wals of Christs Temple, and caused that irreparable breach and rupture, betwixt the Southerne and Northerne parts of Christs Church, established in this Westerne part of the world. And albeit Cassander with diuers other learned men in your Church, both before, and about the time of the Trent-Councell, wished a reformation of many pointes maintained by you; hoping the Lutheran, and other reformed Churches. would thereby be drawn to vnitie with you againe: yet what one suspicious opinion hath that Councel cleared, what bad amended, what harsh or odious one hath it mitigated? Nay what possibility hath it selfe for the amendment of any in ages to come, amongst such as shal acknowledge that authority infallible, which hath thundred out so many Anathemaes to all gainsayers? Before it was lawfull for Cassander and Caietan, Espenceus and others, to shew their dislike of your doctrine, and signifie their desires of amendment, retaining some relicks, or fashion of men, that had bin free-borne, not slaues or vassals to corrupt and dissolute tyrants. They vsed their liberty of speech euen in those cases, wherein it is not now lawfull for any in your Church to mutter, no not so much as to sigh, or groane vnder that heauie yoake, which their forefathers grudged to beare, whose weight and hardnesse notwithstanding you still increase, whilst your vpstart statesmen the Iesuites, (like Rehoboams greene-headed counsellers,) daily seeke to make your Ecclesiastick Monarchies little finger, greater then his predecessors loynes.
3 Some Iesuite or other happily would replie: Had Luther beene quiet, the Church had beene still at such peace and vnitie, as it enioyed for many yeares before. What manner of peace and vnitie was that? Any other then such, as vsually is found in any poly^ticall Argus-eyed tyrannie, before the sinewes of it shrinke, or the ligaments be dissolued? where no man may moue but he is seene, nor mutter, but he is heard; where the least secret signification of any desire of freedome in speech, or liberty in action, is interpreted for open mutinie, and the least motion vnto mutinie held matter sufficient for a cruell death. These were the bonds of your peace and vnitie, in this point of your Ecclesiastick Monarchie. As for your peace in other speculatiue points of lesse vse or commodity to your state, it was like the reuellings, or drunken consorts of seruants in their night sportings, when the master of the house is a-sleepe in a retired roome. Any schoole-man might broach what opinion he list, and make his auditors drunke with it, others might quarrell with him and them, in as vnciuill sort as they list, so no weapon were drawne against the Popes peace. Albeit in the meane time the Scripture suffered as open violence and abuse, as Priscian doth, when drunken or dunsticall Grammarians braule in extemporarie Latine. As for your Cardinals and States-men they were at league indeed, but it was foedissimum foedus, a league solemnized with more then barbarous and heathenish sacrifice, with the bloud of many thousand sillie Lambes, for whom the Lambe of God had sacrificed his pretious bodie and bloud. What number of Hussits, Bohemians, Picardes, poore soules of Lions were made a prey vnto your wooluish (I may not say Lions) teeth, seeing as the Italian Poet argues, this title so ill befits your Popes:
Nec cadit in turpes nobilis ira feras:No Lions they: for noble wrathNo place in such base creatures hath.
But what troupes of such harmelesse soules were slaine, burnt, and tormented, for their longing after the liberty of the sonnes of God, nor we, nor you that liue this day can know, nor shall bee knowne vntill the Register of the booke of life be opened. And howsoeuer they went (as their Lord and Master the great sheephe^rd of their soules had done before them) like sheepe vnto the
 slaughter, whilest their friends and kinsfolkes cries were drowned with your Iewish melodie, and ioy at their destructions; yet we assure our selues, (and ye might dread Gods further iudgement by the euent,) it was the crie of their innocent bloud which fild the court of heauen, and in a iust reuenge of their oppression procured Luthers commission for Germanies reuolt. And yet saie you, Luther was the cause of dissention in Christs Church: why so? Because he burst your former vnitie, whose onely bond was hellish tyrannie. Of such a dissention, and of the breach of such an vnitie, we grant he was the cause; and you haue no iust cause to accuse him of dissention, or disobedience for it.In this sense Christ is said to haue come, not to send peace, but a sword vnto the world. For all kinde of vnitie is not to bee preferred before all kinde of dissention or reuolt. He that will not dissent from any man, or societie of men, vpon any occasion whatsoeuer, must liue at perpetuall enmitie with his God and warre continually against his owne soule. For there is an vnitie in rebellion, a brotherhood in mischiefe, a socitie in murther both of bodie and soule. Wherefore vnlesse you can proue your cause or title, for exacting such absolute submission of mens soules, and spirits vnto your Church, or Popes decrees, to be most iust and warrantable by commission from the highest power in heauen: Luther, and all that followed him, did well, in preferring a most iust, most necessarie, and sacred warre, before a most vniust, and shamefully-execrable peace: A peace, no peace, but a banding in open rebellion against the supreme Lord of heauen and earth, and his sacred lawes, giuen for the perpetuall gouernment of mankinde throughout their generations.
4 To presse you a little with your obiections against vs and our doctrine, for nourishing dissention:That this very challenge of this infallible authority of the Romish Church for ending all controuersies doth necessarily occasion the greatest dissention from it that can be in all religious mindes. Our Church (say you) hath no meanes of taking vp controuersies aright. If this were true, yet (God be praised) it ministreth no iust occasion of any dangerous quarrell. But be ours, as it may be: hath your Church any better meanes for composing controuersies of greater moment, that raigne this day throughout the Christian world? Or doth it not by this insolent, proud, tyrannicall claime of soueraigntie, and imperiall vmpiership ouer all other Churches in all controuersies, giue iust cause of the greatest dissention, and extremest opposition, that can bee imagined could be giuen in the
 Church of Chiist? The whole world besides cannot minister any like it. Nature and common reason teach vs, that a man may with farre safer conscience take armes in defence of his life and libertie, then in hope to auoide some pettie losse or grieuance, or to reuenge some ordinarie cause of priuate discontent: the quarrell in the one, (though with assistance vnto our aduersaries bloud,) may bee iustifiable, which in the other (albeit within the compasse of lesse danger,) were detestable. But grace doth teach vs this equitie, Skinne for skinne, all that euer a man hath, the whole world (and more if hee had it,) is to be spent in the defence of faith, the onely seate of our spirituall life, or for the libertie of our conscience. You alone teach, that all men should submit their faith to your decrees without examinatio^ of them, or appeale from them: we vsurpe no such authoritie, eyther ouer yours, or any mens consciences. You challeng our soueraigne Lord, and all his people, to bee your ghostly slaues: wee onely stand in our owne defence: we exact no such absolute seruice, or allegeance, eyther of you, or any other the meanest Christian Church, no not our Prince and Cleargie of the naturall members of our owne. They only seeke (would God they sought aright in time) to keepe them short at home, whose long reach might hayle ouer Sea your long-sought tyranny ouer this people of Brittanie, happily now diuided (Lord euer continue this happie diuision) from the Romish world. Vnlesse your meanes of taking vp so great contentions (as hence in equitie ought to arise,) be so superexcellent, that it can make amends where all is marred, (for which I cannot see what meanes can be sufficient, vnlesse you either let your suit fall, or proue your title to be most iust by arguments most authenticke and strong) you euidently impose a necessitie of the greatest contentions, and extremest opposition that any abuse or wrong, losse or danger, possible to befall a Christian man (eyther as a man or Christian, eyther in things of this life or that other to come, eyther concerning his very life and libertie, whether temporall or spirituall) or whatsoeuer else is more deare vnto him, can occasion or breed.
5 That which yee vsually premise to worke such a preiudice in credulous and vnsetled mindes, as may make your sleight pretences of reason or scripture (to be sifted anone) seeme most firme and solid
 to ground your infallibilitie vpon, is, the supposed excellency of it, for taking vp all controuersies in Religion, and so of retaining vnitie of Holy Catholike faith in the bond of loue. If indeed it were so excellent for this purpose, you might rest contented with it, and hartily thanke God for it. Yea, but because you haue this excellent meanes, which we haue not, nor any like vnto it, yours is the true Catholike Church, and ours a congregation of Schismatikes. What if we would inuent the like? would that serue to make ours a true Church? Or tell vs, what warrant haue you for inuenting or establishing your supposed most excellent order for taking vp controuersies? Was it from Heauen? or was it from men? If from Heauen, wee will obey it; if from men, wee will imitate you in it, if wee like it. But first let vs a little further examine it.


CHAP. III.
That of two senses, in which the excellency of the Romish Churches pretended meanes for retaining the vnitie of faith, can onely possibly be defended, the one (from the former discourse) prooued apparently false, the other in it selfe as palpably ridiculous.
1 WHen you affirme the infallibilitie of your Church to bee so excellent a meanes for taking vp all controuersies in Religion: you haueThis diuisio^ is most immediate in our present subiect wherein we only examine whether from the knowne or possible fruits of the Romish Churches meanes (so excellent* as is pretended) for composing co^trouersies, any argument can be drawne to worke a preiudicial conceipt in mens minds, that it were likely Christ had bequeathed such authority to their Church, before they come to direct examination of the maine point (what right she hath to the challenged Supremacie by Scriptures.) no choice of any other, but one of these two meanings; Either you meane, it is so excellent a meanes de facto, and doth take vp all controuersies: or else it would bee such as might take vp all, if all men would subscribe vnto it.
2 If you take the former sense or meaning: we can euidently take you (as we say) with the very manner of falshood. For this claime of such authoritie (as wee partly shewed before) is the greatest eye-sore to all faithfull eyes that can bee imagined, and
 makes your religion more irreconciliable to the truth. And for this Church of England, as in it some dissent from you in many points, others in fewer, some more in one, some more in another, so in this, of your Churches infallibilitie, all of vs dissent from you most euidently, most eagerly, without all hope of reconcilement or agreement, vnlesse you vtterly disclaime the title in as plaine termes as hitherto you haue challenged it. Your dealing herein is as absurdly impious and impiously insolent, as if any Christian Prince or State should challenge another, as free and absolute as himselfe, for his tributarie, or vassall, and traduce him for a seditious member of Christendome, because hee would not compose the quarrell thus iniuriously sought, with the surrender of his Crowne and dignitie.
3 Princes may conclude a peace, for ciuill and free commerce of their people, though professing sundry religions: and they and their Clergie might perhaps procure a mitigation of some other points, now much in controuersie: but though all others might, yet this admits no termes of parly for any possible reconcilement. The naturall separation of this Island from those Countries wherein this doctrine is professed, shall serue as an euerlasting Embleme of the Inhabitants diuided hearts at least in this point of Religion: and let them, O Lord, be cut off speedi^y from amongst vs, and their posteritie transported hence, neuer to enioy againe the least good thing this Land affords: let no print of their memory bee extant so much as in a tree or stone within our Coast: or let their names by such as remaine here after them bee neuer mentioned, or alwayes to their endlesse shame; who liuing here amongst vs will not imprint these or like wishes in their hearts and daily mention them in their prayers,
Littora littoribus contraria, fluctibus vndas,Imprecor arma armis, pugnent ipsique nepotes.
Which words, though vttered in another case, applied to this, sound thus much to all wel-affected English or Brittish eares,
Let our and foraine Coasts ioyne battaile in the maine,Ere this foule blasphemy Great Brittaine euer slaine.Where neuer let it combat floting in a floudOf ours, our nephews, and their childrens bloud.
4 The leauen of the Pharisees, whereof our Sauiour willed his Disciples to beware, was sweet bread in respect of this pestiferous dough, whose poison is so diffused throughout the whole bodie and masse of Romish religion, as it hath polluted euery parcell therein, and makes in those particular pointes to bee damnable in moderne Papists, which in the Auncient holding them from other groundes were pardonable. Such as held a kinde of Purgatorie, or third place after this life, Euangelicall Councels, inuocation of Saints, or the like, because they thought the Scripture taught them, were deceiued in these particular Scriptures, but yet reserued their faithfull Allegiance to Gods word in general. Nay, euen those particular errours and mistakings of the sense of Scriptures, were witnesses and pledges of their obedience vnto the Scripture, or word of God; when they therefore beleeued them, because they were immediately perswaded in conscience that the Scriptures (the rule of their conscience) did teach them. But while you hold the same opinions, not because you are perswaded in conscience (immediately ruled by Scripture) that they are contained in Scripture, but because the Church, which as yee suppose cannot erre, doth teach them; or to speake more plainly, whiles you your selues either beleeue, or teach others to beleeue them or the Scriptures concerning them; because the Church, whose authoritie in this and all other cases you acknowledge for the infallible rule of your faith, commaunds you so to doe: you hereby openly renounce your owne, and sollicite the people to alienate their Allegiance from God and his word: and the passing ouer, or yeelding vp of stedfast and absolute assent vnto any particular point in your religion, vpon these groundes, is as euident a witnesse of high treason, committed against GOD by the partie thus beleeuing; as swearing of that Fealtie, or Allegiance to a pretended Vicegerent, or Deputie, which is onely due to the Prince himselfe, would be in a naturall and sworne subiect. Wherefore the supposed infallibilitie of your Church is no such excellent meanes of taking vp all controuersies, if your meaning be in the former sense proposed. For it is so farre from taking vp all, that it puts an impossibilitie of hauing any betwixt you and vs taken vp, vnlesse you abiure it quite; for it makes all the rest of your opinions deadly, to such as stedfastly beleeue it, or for it, them.
5 Your meaning then must be; That this infallibilitie of your Church would bee an excellent meanes for taking vp all controuersies, if all men would subscribe vnto it. Indeed I must confesse, there would soone be an end of all, or rather, no controuersies should euer be begun, if euery man would resolue with himselfe, not to dissent from others, but let them hold what they list, hee would hold the very same: or if all men would binde themselues to abide some one mans, or a Maior part of some few or more determinate persons, determinations without more adoe. In this case one might say of his Iudge, Hee shall determine for me; and another might reply, nay but for my opinion; the third might say, Hee shall iudge as I will haue him; and the fourth replie, or rather as I will: and yet neuer a one dissent from other, but all agree. All of them might haue the Iudges sentence at as absolute commaund, as the Shepheard had the Weather. For euery one might haue him determine as he pleased, because all of them were fully resolued to be pleased with whatsoeuer hee should determine. If you dreame of such an vnitie in faith, or such a manner of composing contentions; it must be further disputed, whether this were not an open dissention or solemne compact for mouing a generall Apostasie from the true faith. And they that labour for such an vnion in pointes of faith and saluation, doe in effect sollicite the whole Christian world to runne hand in hand, but head-long, into open infidelitie, least perhaps by breaking companies, some might slide into Schismes and Heresies. Should the Romists and Aristotelians, or generally all the professors of secular Artes and Sciences in our Vniuersities, binde themselues vnder penaltie of expulsion, or by solemne vow, neuer to swerue from the Beedle of beggars or Iohn-a-dogges his determinations, and resolutions in any point of Logicke, Philosophie, or Metaphysickes; would this be a sweet match to take vp all controuersies, or contentions betweene Colledge and Colledge, in our Schooles? were this so excellent a way, to retaine the vnitie of the truth, and skill in those faculties? or rather the onely ready way to make all bond-slaues to errour, ignorance, and falshood? And yet might wee, with more safetie, delegate greater authoritie in these cases to euery one, then we may to any liuing, in matters of faith and Religion; ouer which, or ouer our selues in respect of
 which we haue no lawfull power or authoritie. For this, and other reasons, should wee bee more afraide to subscribe vnto any mortall mans authoritie, as vnto a Iudge most absolute and infallible, whose decrees we may not resist, from whose sentence wee may not appeale in matters of faith: then to referre our selues wholy vnto the sole iudgement of the meerest naturall foole liuing, in maters of secular learning and naturall knowledge. For, (besides the danger hence accrewing to our selues,) GOD our Creator, Christ our Redeemer, and the Holy Spirit our comforter and Instructer, haue farre g^eater interest in our soules and consciences, then either Aristotle or P^ato, or any other Philosopher, or philosophie it selfe hath in our opinions, or perswasions.
6 But though gratitude to our God could not moue vs; are those blessed hopes of immortalitie so little worth, as vpon euery light or no occasion wee should aduenture their eternall losse? And yet idly, desperatly, and frantickly, aduenture it we doe, vnlesse such as vrge vs with solemne subscription to this more then Monarchicall Supremacie ouer our soules, enstamped not with any Romane Caesars but Gods owne image and superscription, can shew vs sufficient warrant, that thus to offer vp not only the calues of our lips but euen our faith (the best tribute our heartes can yeeld) wholy into Christs pretended Vicars hands, bee not a witnesse of our rebellion against Christ himselfe the Supreame Lord as well of them, that challenge this authoritie, as of vs, of whom this seruile subiection is exacted. All the warrant or euidence, which in this case they can pretend, must either be drawne from the rules of reason, or from the Scriptures, the rule (as wee contend) of faith; which for this reason may iustly controule all pretended rules of naturall reason. And (as we haue said before) if the Pope bee (as vsually he is,) butSect. 2. cap. 3. parag 4. 5. etc. homo (...) or (...) with a witnesse: then both Scripture and reason teach vs, that he cannot perceiue the thinges of God, nor the meaning of his Spirit; for, as our Apostle saith, they are foolish vnto him. And if they be foolish to him; then is he as foolish a Iudge of them, and of all thinges that must be spiritually discerned, as the meerest naturall Idiote would be of naturall Philosophie, or other secular Artes or Sciences. Euen to this one place of Scripture, vttered
 by the Spirit of God, and the Ministerie of that Apostle, no sufficient answere can be giuen, without the euident testimony of the same Spirit (vnder some Prophets, Apostles, or Euangelists hand,) either mitigating or restraining that sense which the words naturally import, and wee collect: whose probabilitie in it selfe, and consonancy with other Scriptures, are so great, that wee stand bound by our generall Allegiance, which we owe vnto GODS Spirit, to supect all men for incompetent Iudges, or witnesses in matters concerning GOD; vnlesse we know certainely of what Spirit they are, or haue great inducements to presume them of a better Spirit, and in more fauour with the Spirit of God, then they themselues report their Popes to be.


CHAP. IIII.
That their arguments, drawne from conueniencie of Reason or pretended correspondencie betweene Ciuill and Ecclesiasticall Regiment, doe preiudice themselues, not vs.
1 THat this is no generall Dictate of common reason or any part of the Law of nature, Reason and common sense make euident: And wee may rest assured hereof, in that no Iesuite, nor other Stickler for the Popes authoritie, hath beene so impudent hitherto, as to auouch thus much. That there are some probabilities, or conueniences, which in reason might perswade any indifferent man, that there must bee some one Vmpire, or Tribunall seate, by whose authoritie all controuersies of Religion must be determined,No^ ignorabat deus mu^tas in Ecclesia exorituras difficultates circa fidem; debuit igitur iudicem aliquem Ecclesiae prouidere: at iste index non potest esse scriptura, neque spiritus reuelans priuatus, neque princeps saecularis; igitur princeps Ecclesiasticus, aut solus aut certe cum consilio and consensu Coepiscoru^. Neque enim fingitur neque fingi potest aliquid aliud ad quod hoc iudic^um pertinere posse videatur. Bellar. 3. de verbo dei cap. 9. BELLARMINE thus goes about to prooue: GOD was not ignorant that many difficulties about faith would arise in the Church, What then? In reason then he was to prouide his Church of a iudge; suppose he were. But this iudge ca^not be the Scripture, nor any priuate reuealing Spirit, nor any secular: therefore an Ecclesiasticall Prince which may determine such matters either of himselfe alone, or at least, with the aduise and consent of Bishops his associates. Nor hath any as
 yet nor can any indeede imagine any other to whom the iudgement of th^se things can possibly appertaine,
2 That neither the Scripture, nor any priuate man, nor secular Prince is this Iudge, hee labours to proue by arguments, whose strength hath beene broken in the former discourses, concerning the obscuritie of Scriptures and varietie of interpretations. But how cunningly soeuer his sagacitie may seeme to haue cast about, he is at the same default Valentian and Sacroboscus were: all of them ouerran the sent by leaping from one extreme to another, with out search of the meane betwixt them: for they take it as granted, that we denie all liuing Iudges of controuersies, because we acknowledge no absolute infallibilitie in any. Our assertion is; The Scripture is a Law or rule most infallible, whereby euery man must iudge himselfe; whereby such as are in lawfull authoritie may iudge others for not iudging themselues by it; but not alwayes infallible. Nor can it stand with the sobrietie of Christian wisedome to expect such a precise determination of all pointes disputed, much lesse disputable among the learned, as might bind all men to an absolute beleefe (whether explicite or implicite) of this or that determinate sense, all others excluded. Notwithstanding the more conscious any ordinary iudge is of his owne or others fallibilitie or facilitie of erring dangerously, if they should take vpon them strictly to determine all religious doubts, much more all doubts, in matter of Religion, might be moued: the more infallibly may he rest assured that many cases of that quality are very doubtfull; that in sundrie, of many opinions all to his knowledge possible, as much may be as probably alleaged for any one as for other. Now the true and proper vse of an Ecclesiastique Iudge or Magistracie, is, not onely to punish oppugners of truthes, either euident in themselues and infallibly beleeued of all Christians, or generally receiued by the best and most vnpartiall writers in euery age; but, as well, to moderate mens carriage in controuersies of the former nature; sometimes by restrainng all peremptory assertions one way or orher, all exasperating censures or contumelious contradictions (as in difficulties aequipendent betwixt an equalitie of contrary probabilities:) sometimes (as in matters not so vse-full, or vnto whose search the signes of times present doe not solicite vs) by enioyning a generall silence,
 that all may hearken with better attention to GOD alwayes speaking by the ordinary course of his prouidence, albeit softly and leasurely, yet distinctly and audibly, to quiet minds alreadie instructed in that heauenly knowledge, though not simply vnto all: for many of vs can perfectly distinguish mens voyces whiles they repeate what in part wee know; though not whiles they pronounce matters vnheard before, or altogether vnknowne to vs.
3 By this it may appeare, would our aduersaries make an equall comparison, that God hath better prouided for hisChrists Church hauing by our doctrin a most infallible written Law, and liuing, though of fallible Ecclesiastike Iudges, is much better prouided for in all matters spirituall then Politike societies, whose lawes as w^ll as Iudges are fallible, in matters Ciuill. Churches Regiment in matters spirituall, then the Common-weale^ in Temporall. First the Scripture is a rule, as all-sufficient for a^l such businesie, as any Temporall Lawes could bee for effecting their proper end, albeit we should suppose the Lord had dictated them immediately, as he did the Scriptures. This our aduersaries cannot deny, vnlesse they doubt whether the eternall Spirit haue as great skill in heauenly matters, as in secular. For (as we shewed before) hee moued holy men to write the Scriptures, that wee by them might attaine eternall life. Secondly, besides this most infallible rule or Law, wee admit an equall necessitie of Ecclesiasticall, and Temporall Iudges, an equall authoritie in both to giue sentence viua voce. And albeit we denie any absolute infallibillitie in either, yet the possibilitie of not erring wee acknowle^ge so much greater in the Iudge Ecclesiastique, as his directorie ru^e is more certaine, and authenticall. But here I must request these great disputers of Rome (if their frenzie come but by fits, and admit dilucida interualla) one time or other, vpon their good dayes, or in their sober howers, (if God send them any) to bethinke themselues well, what manner of Iudge they require in matters Ciuill or meerely secular? such an one as cannot possibly erre in iudgement? one whom neither ignorance, leud desires, nor exorbitant affections can cause to swerue, either from the vndoubted rules of naturall or Ciuill equitie, the fundamentall Lawes of his Countrie, or the cheife Law-giuers true intent and meaning? if they willingly grant that our Ciuill Magistracie, which they acknowledge lawfull and necessarie in it kind, may sometimes iudge wrongfully, in causes by nature most determinable by ordina^^e course of Ciuill Iustice; as for example, in condemning Priestes
 and Iesuites: or generally in matters of life and death:The vtmost bounds of all Christian obedience vnto any authoritie on earth is only to abide a peaceable trial before their lawfull Iudges, patiently to imbrace the penaltie inflicted: but not to thinke, what penalties soeuer they shall inflict, or the cause for whi^h it is inflicted to be iust or such as shall stand for good in the day of finall iudgment; for so earthly powers should haue absolute authority ouer our soules, which is Gods peculiar. with what forheads can they demaund wee should beleeue the Pope or other Ecclesiastique Iudge cannot possibly giue erronious sentence in any matters of Religion, many of which are of that nature as can admit no other vse of externall or coactiue power, saue onely seuere restraint of all precise determinations, or curious search one way ot other? And to admit, though in cases meerely Ciuill, such an absolute inerrable Tribunall, from whose censure no man (though readie with patience to brooke the execution of heauiest bodily doome it could inflict) may so much as in the secrets of his heart or conscience so farre appeale, as to examine whether the determination be right or wrong; were either secretly to deny, or openly to praeocupate or preuent Christs finall iudgment: wherein euen Supreame Iudges shalbe iudged, and a^l forepast decisions examined by the written word, (which these men disclaime for any authentique rule of faith;) the right approoued, the wrong reuersed by Him, whose pecu^iar prerogatiue it is (though now vsurped by the Pope) to put a finall end to all controuersies vius voce.
4 Notwithstanding, be it supposed for disputations sake, that God had appointed such an authentique Tribunall (as these Drunkards dreame of) for deciding matters of Religion: yet were it most grosse to thinke (might reason alone without Scripture be admitted Iudge) there should be but one Supreame Tribunall for the whole Christian world. Euen common sense (were reason silenced) might instruct vs, that it were much more conuenient for euery seuerall Kingdome, euery free State or societie of men, to haue such a Consistorie, or Supreame Tribunall amongst themselues For by this meanes, might all differences in opinions be farre sooner knowne, more narrowly sifted, and present notice taken of euery circumstance, concerning their occasions, progresse, or fauourers; the controuersie it selfe quicklier decided; the offenders more speedily punished; and the like occasions better auoided. Whereas, for euery Nation to resort to Rome, or for the Pope to send his Legates into euery corner of the Christian world, would procure great toile, and long labour, with little successe. The causers of contentions, or maintainers of Heresies, might often die in their sinnes, before the controuersie
 were examined, or the truth so manifested, as might moue the^ to repentance, or recantation of their errours: the information might be impertinent, partiall, imperfect or false: the opinion, or supposed Heresie, being (happily) first set abroach in the presumed Heretiques Countrie Dialect, would be worse vnderstood of the Pope,Our aduersaries grant that a Prouinciall Councell confirmed by the Pope, is as authentike as a Generall, wherein he were present, though absent in the oth^r, and not acquainted with particular circumstances or cariage of the controuersie. Much more auaileable shold a Popes confirmation of such Councels bee, who were prefent and well acquainted with all occasions or other circumstances of the controuersie, or the diuisio^. Wherfore if reason without Scripture might decide this controuersie, it were more co^uenie^t to haue as many Popes as seuerall free States or Monarchies. whose instruction in many principall circumstances must oft-times depend vpon disagreeing heare-sayes; for his holines ^ees no better; his infallible-ship heares no farther in matters de facto, then meaner men; his plenarie power, euen while hee giues sentence ex cathedra, is not able to vnderstand more tongues, then many Linguists may in a meaner seate; his Fatherhood vnderstands none besides his mother-tongue, so well as the naturall inhabitants of euery Countrie doe their owne proper natiue language. Many such inconueniences might be alleaged, for which, (might wee chuse what manner of Ecclesiastique gouernment God should appoint vs) wee should make choice of a Supreame Iudge in all causes Ecclesiasticall at home, rather then go to Rome to haue them heard. If the controuersers were to goe from Norway, the Seas might be frozen and the enemies possesse the Land. The passages from sundrie other places might all bee so stopt, as we should haue greater controuersie in going to Rome, then that for which wee were to goe. Or if the election of men (for by man is the Pope elected,) could giue such infallibili^ie to any: the manner of such elections would bee much more agreeable to the rules of Gods prouidence, and the example of Christs Apostles, if all the congregation, which was to relie vpon his infallibilitie, should first make choice of some few most excellent and famous men, renouned for learning and integritie; afterwardes all with one mind and one heart, pray vnto the Lord to shew by lot which was the man, to whom hee would vndoubtedly vouchsafe this infallible assistance of his holy Spirit. Thus, might reason or common sense without Scripture be Iudge what manner of gouernment were fittest for Christs Church, wee could bring farre greater reasons for a multitude of Popes or Ecclesiasticall Monarches, (for one at least in euery Nation) then either our aduersaries bring, or can bee brought for one generall Monarch ouer the vniuersall Church militant.
5 And albeit this challenged large extent of the Romish
 Churches authoritie ouer others, (were the authoritie it selfe otherwise for the qualitie moderate,) had beene in former times not all together so vnreasonable: yet were it at this day to bee abandoned, as a turbulent deuise, apt for nothing so much as perpetuall disturbation of publike peace throughout Christendome, now diuided into so many seuerall Soueraigneties, and gouerned by so many absolute Princes, or States, no way dependent one of another. And Bellarmines reasons, brought for to proue the Monarchicall gouernment of the Church, would with far greater probabilities inferre a conueniencie for a seuerall Monarchicall gouernment in euery particular State, then for one generall Monarch ouer all. While the Christian world was gouerned by one absolute Monarch or Emperor, and all the peculiar customes or priuiledges of seuerall Nations (like diuerse members of the same bodie) conformable one to another, by their common subordination to one supreame Imperiall Law, the vertue of a like Exclesiasticall authoritie might haue beene equally diffused throughout the whole bodie thereof; as the splendor of the Sun throughout the whole Hemisphaere of the aire, and other aetheriall and caelestiall bodies, all, though different in their particular natures and peculiar properties, vniforme for the transmission of light. But after the dissolution of the Christian Empire, and the seuerall States and Soueraigneties, throughout Europe, all compleat within themselues, and different one from another in Lawes and customes: the transfusion of such an absolute Ecclesiastique authoritie through all would be vnequal, and make Christendome like a monster compact of many seuerall entire bodies made vp in one, or like some vgly liuing creature that had many heads and but one heart or soule.



CHAP. V.
That the finall triall of this controuersie must bee by Scriptures: That the Iesuites and moderne Papistes fierce oppugning all certaintie of priuate Spirits in discerning the diuine truth of Scriptures, or their true sense, hath made the Church their mother vtterly vncapable of any play by Scriptures, for establishing her pretended infallibilitie.
1 BVt what Christian heart could haue suspected, that any man, acknowledging the infinite Maiestie of an Omnipotent God, filling euery place with his presence, ruling all thinges by his power, and hauing euery least creature of the world a world of witnesses of his inconceiueable wisedome, and vnspeakable prouidence ouer the works of his owne hand: durst once haue presumed to thinke, much lesse haue opened his mouth to vtter, least of all haue imployed his pen to proclaime, such foule impietie to the world; as that a power so infinite, could not sufficiently prouide for his Church in deciding matters of faith, (surpassing all reach of reason,) vnlesse he had ordained some one Supreme Tribunall seate on earth; the Iudges whereof should bee but mortall men, whose bodies can bee but in one place at once, whose voyces cannot reach without the precincts of their Consistories; whereas the Law of this our God, (vnto whose sentence in matters of faith we appeale) is, or might bee (but for these our Antiscripturian aduersaries importunitie) euery where throughout the Christian world dispersed: and, besides the external helpes of an ordinary Ministerie or Magistracie: (alike common to all Nations) the holy Spirit is euery where assistant to all such as seeke him in the written word by him reuealed; whose liue-characters are as the prints or footsteps of his wonted motions in Gods Prophets, or Apostles hearts, by which the faithfull may discerne his approch or presence in their owne. Nor will the Iesuites bee so wilfull (I hope) as to denie that this Holy Spirit, who did dictate the Word to such as wrote it in these materiall Tables, (hauing
 first written it in the fleshly Tables of their heartes,) is able now also to write the same immediately in the hearts of all such, as with feare and reuerence prepare themselues for his fit and decent entertainment. That this was possible to be performed by the Almightie wisedome of God, they would not (I know) deny, were this, in direct and plaine termes, made the mayne controuersie betwixt vs. Albeit as much as we haue charged them withall, will most necessarily follow from their absurde, and lauishly-blasphemous speeches, which in the heat of contention haue distilled from their pens in this present controuersie. But of the possibilitie of Gods immediate teaching euery Christian heart, or rather of the probabilites, which may induce all to relie immediately hereupon; wee shall haue occasion to discourse hereafter. Let vs now in sobrietie of Spirit, rather dispute of Gods will then his power: as whether there be any sure argument to perswade vs, that it was his intent or purpose, either to instruct men in the true sense of Scriptures, or to take vp all controuersies in matters of faith, by this supposed infallibilitie of some visible Church. All this, and somewhat more our aduersaries in this point seriously auouch, and earnestly contend for. Let vs therefore briefly see, whether or no Gods Spirit hath taught thus much. That the sense of Scriptures cannot bee had without the assistance or working of Gods Spirit, both ioyntly acknowledge. They must bee vnderstood and interpreted, saithConueni^ inter nos and^uersario^, s^tu^as intell^ debere eo s^ quo factae s^ est Spirit^^cto. Quod^stolus Peir^ Epist. 2. cap. 1. docet cum ait: Hoc primum intelligentes, quod omnis Prophetia Scripturae propria i^ praetatione non sit. Non enim humana voluntate allata est aliquando Prophetia, sed Spiritu s^ inspirati loquuti sunt Sancti Dei homines. Vbi B. Petrus probat non debere exponi Scripturas ex prop^genio, sed secundum dictamen Spiritus Sancti, quia non sunt sc^iptae humano ingenio sed ex ins^iratione^tus sancti. Bel. lib. 3. de verb. Dei cap. 3. Bellarmine, by the same Spirit which wrote them; as he very well gathers out of2 Pet. cap. 1. vers. 20. and 21. Saint Peter.Tota igitur^stio in eo posita est, vbi sit iste Spritus. Nos enim existimamus hunc Spiritum, etsi multis priuatis hominibus conceditur, tamen certo inueniri in Ecclesia, id est in Concilio Episcoporum confirmato a summo Ecclesia Pastore, siue in summo Pastore cum Concilio aliorum Pastorum. Bellarmine ibid. In this place, as hee p^seth, he will not dispute, whether the Pope alone, speaking ex Catbedra, be the Church; for that h^ to dispute of afterwardes, and he and all his fellowes doe and must acknowledge it, as shall i^ place be shewed. That in this place he grants the communication of that Spirit, by which the Scrip^ were written, vnto priuate men, doth not argue any agreement with vs, but rather his disagree^ from some of his owne profession, who vrge the necessitie of the Churches proposall so much a^ farre, that not Gods Prophets or others to whom his word was extraordinarily reuealed, could(...) out it be certaine. Vide Bellar. lib. 3. de Justif. cap. 3. Whence likewise hee well collects, that the whole difficultie
 in this question about taking vp controuersies, and finding out the true sense of Scriptures, consists in this; wh^re this Spirit is, and where the distressed soule and doubtfull conscience ought to seeke it. In the visible and C^tholique Church, saith Bellarmine, and all the moderne Romane Catholiques; that is, (as they interpret it,) in the consistorie of the Pope and Cardinals, or in the assembly of B shops, or (as the moderne Iesuites will haue it) in the Pope alone speaking ex cathedra.
3 Euery man (say we) ought to seeke the Spirit of God in his own soule and conscience, being directed and ruled by the sacred word, which was reuealed and vttered by the same Spirit. This word directs them in this search, and the Spirit once found out, or rather finding them thus seeking him, establisheth their assent vnto the word alreadie reuealed and written, by imprinting the same inuisible word, or the true sense and meaning of it, in their hearts.
4 Why this Spirit should bee infallibly present to the visible Church, all our aduersaries vncessantly vrge Scripture. I will not abuse the readers patience with allegation of the places, which haue beene very fully answered by many of our Church. That which I intend at this time, is. First, to debarre them by their own groundes of this plea of Scriptures, by shewing their absurditie, and folly, in vrging any Scripture at all for the proofe of their assertion: And secondly, to ouerthrow the assertion it selfe by manifest proofes, that either their Churches transcendent authoritie (as it is now taught) must fall, or Christianitie cannot stand. To make way for our clearer passage in the former.
5The Papists assertions whence the proposed conclusion is gathered. They generally hold, that this infallibilitie of the visible Church consists directly in this; That the holy Ghost is infallibly present to it, and giues it the true sense and meaning of Scriptures: which he doth not giue to priuate persons; whom, in their iudgements, he will not vouchsafe immediately to instruct; so that his Dictates alreadie reuealed cannot bee a rule vnto them, because they want his infallible assistance for their exposition; and for the same reason, Certaine they cannot bee without the Churches authoritie that they vnderstand the Scripture aright.
6 This their assertion being two fold, (for their Churches infallible expositions, and against all priuate interpretations,) is
 grounded vpon these two principles. They are to bee beleeued in exposition of Scriptures fide diuina, whom the Holy Ghost infallibly assists. They are not so to be beleeued, whom the Holy Ghost doth not so assist. Whence what hee said before will follow, that no man, besides the Pope, may beleeue his owne interpretations of Scriptures: His or the Churches all must, nay all men must beleeue fide diuina, that the Church or Pope is in all determinations infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost. For if wee were not bound to beleeue their infallibilitie most infallibly, it could be no rule of faith, but might bee reiected till wee see it euidently proued; whereas they contend it should be the rule of faith vnto all, and by their owne confession a mayne Article of their Creed: but (according to their positions as we shall hereafter proue) the onely Article of Christian faith; how destitute these their assertions are of all groundes of reason, or rules of nature, hath beene made euident. There remaine onely Two pillars possibly imaginable for supporting this pretended infallibilitie, Tradition and Scripture. Against Tradition all the arguments they can heape against the certaintie of Scriptures stand good; as shall hereafter (God willing) be shewed. That no argument can be drawne from Scripture to their succour, albeit the later Iesuites haue earnestly sought to scrape a many (for better then scrapings are not the very best they bring) we are now to proue.
7 That our beliefe of Scriptures truth and their true sense (by what meanes soeuer we attaine thereto) must be infa lible, Both agree: The meanes that must infallibly ascertaine or proue their diuine truth and true meaning vnto vs (say our aduersaries) is the Churches infallibilitie, which likewise must be infallibly beleeued; otherwise it could not be the rule of faith, or beliefe infallible. It shall suffi^e here (once for all) to admonish the Reader, That as often as we mention beliefe of Scriptures or the Churches infallibilitie, in this dispute, wee meane not any kind of beliefe, but that onely which is infallible: so likewise, whiles wee mention the meanes or proofes of either, wee vnderstand onely meanes or proofes infallible, whereon faith may immediatly relie, as vpon a rule most sure and certaine. In all these we demaund nothing but what our aduersaries most willingly grant. From their grant we argue thus.
The generall points of diff^cultie how either the Church can ascertaine the diuine truth of Scripture vnto vs, or the Scripture the Churches infallible authoritie.8 If either the Scriptures can thus ascertaine or proue the Churches infallibilitie, or it the infallible truth of Scriptures to our soules: we must of necessitie, either beleeue the one of these before the other [The Churches infallibilitie before Scriptures, or Scriptures before it] or both together without all prioritie of beliefe, or praeeixstent knowledge of the one, whence the beliefe or knowledge of the other must spring. The members of the diuision are in the proposall actually two, but in the disquisition will proue three: To begin with the first.
9 If they say wee must beleeue the Scriptures to be the word of God,What inconueniences will follow if they admit the first memb^r of the diuision proposed ^hat is, if they beleeue the Scriptures infallibly before they can beleeue the Churches infallibilitie so. before we can beleeue the infallibilitie of their Church: they ouerthrow their owne, and establish our positions. For thus they make the Scripture a rule of our faith, at the least in this one Article of the Catholique Churches infallibilitie; which, by this assertion, wee may and ought infallibly to beleeue, because the Scriptures, which we first infallibly beleeue, doe teach and proue it. Hence priuate men should be taught by the Holy Ghost, first to beleeue the truth of Scriptures, and for it the Churches infallibilitie. Wherefore the Scripture must bee the immediate rule of their beliefe in the Article of the Churches infallibilitie, which to them is the generall rule of faith; and so by consequence, the Scriptures which to vs are onely the rule of faith must bee more then so to them, euen the rule of their rule of faith. But if the Scriptures may bee the immediate and infallible rule of their beliefe in this one Article of the Churches infallibilitie; what reason possibly can bee imagined, why they should not bee the infallible and immediate rule of their faith, in all other parts or Articles of their Creede? For I call Heauen and Earth, men and Angels, to witnesse betwixt ours and the Romish Church, whether the Articles of Christs incarnation, his death, his passion, his buriall, his resurrection, his ascention, his intercession for vs, the resurrection of the dead, and life euerlasting etc. be not to any mans capacitie in the world much more plainely set downe in sundrie places of Scripture, then the infallibilitie of the present Romish Church, in these words, Peter feed my sheepe. Peter to thee I giue the keyes of Heauen. Thou art Peter and vpon this rocke will I build my Church. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and vs, or in any place her sonnes can challenge for it. Wherefore if the Holy Ghost
 teach vs this Article of the Churches infallibilitie immediately, without the Churches infallible authoritie, (which as wee now suppose must be proued from the Scriptures first infallibly beleeued:) then questionlesse he may and will immediately teach vs the other articles of our Creed, and whatsoeuer necessarie to saluation, (which are more plainly and perspicuously set downe in Scriptures,) without the helpe or assistance of the Churches infallible authoritie, which it is supposed to teach by places more doubtfull.
10 Or if our aduersaries will hold it no absurditie to say, that the holy Ghost may teach vs the true sense and meaning of the fore-mentioned places of Scripture, which seeme to make for the infallibility of the Romish Church, as Petre pasce oues, etc. immediately without the helpe or assistance of the Churches infallibilitie, (which is heere the lesson supposed to be taught,) and referres all other points of faith or matters of doctrine vnto the Churches teaching immediatly they are bound in reason to shew a Scripture for this assertion. And besides, they must (perforce) make the same comparison betwixt the holy Ghostes immediate teaching, and the Church or Popes immediate teaching, which our SauiourIohn. 16.7. Christ made betweene the holy Ghostes extraordinarie teaching which was to ensue his glorification, and his owne immediate teaching before his passion: and as soone as the holy Ghost hath once taught vs the meaning of these places, which make for the Churches infallibilitie, that may be applied vnto him in respect of the Popes supereminencie in teaching, which our Sauiour Christ spake of himselfe, and his owne personall instructions in the daies of his humilitie, in respect of that blessed Comforters illuminations to bee bestowed in abundant measure vppon his Apostles, immediatly vpon his ascention. For thus (by their assertions) that holy Comforter, after that lesson once taught, Tues Petre; should take his leaue of faithfull hearts in the same termes our Sauiour there did of his disciples: I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I goe away. For if I goe not away, the comforter (that infallible teacher, on whose authoritie your soules must rest,) will not come vnto you, but if I depart I will send himVers ^. vnto you: and againe,Ver^. ^^. I haue many things to say vnto you, but ye cannot heare them now: howbeit when hee is come
 that hath the spirit of truth (your infallible teacher, whose tongue while he speakes ex Cathedra, I must attend) he will lead you into all truth, for he shall not speake of himselfe, but whatsoeuer he shall heare he shall speake, he shall glorifie me, for he shall receiue of me and shew it vnto you. These words (I say) might be taken as a typicall prophesie of the Popes infallible authoritie, (such a prophesie of it I meane, as the historie of the Paschall Lambe was of Cstrists passion:) if they will hold the first member of the former diuision; That the holy Ghost doth first teach vs infallibilitie to beleeue these Scriptures, which they vrge for the infallibility of their Church, and hauing once made vs infallibly to beleeue them, referres vs to the Churches infallibilitie, (taught and beleeued by them) for the rule of faith in all other articles.
11 Sed quia hac non successit, alia aggrediendum est via; Let vs now see,The inconueniences of the second member. If they should say they must infallibly beleeue the Churches infallibility, before they can so beleeue the diuine truth of Scriptures. whether they be like to finde any better successe, by following the second member of the forementioned diuision. (j.) If they should say, We must infallibly beleeue the Churches infallibility in expounding Scriptures, or points of faith, before we can infallibly beleeue them to be the word of God, or to containe in them doctrines of faith. This indeed they must say, if they hold their Churches authoritie to be the rule of faith, or whereby infallibly to distinguish diuine truth from Apocryphall.
12 Let vs first take the proposition for disputations sake; viz. [We must beleeue the Churches infallible authoritie, before we can beleeue the Scripture to be the infallible Oracles of God.] Secondly, let vs consider but this one part of the Churches infallible authoritie, which all the moderne Papists acknowledge [That the Scriptures cannot be knowne infallibly to be the word of God, but by the confi^mation of the present Church.] And let vs see how these two assertions can stand together. By the first, the Churches infallible authoritie must be infallibly beleeued before Scriptures: by the second (which containes the chiefe part of the Churches infallibilitie) the Scriptures cannot be infallibly acknowledged, or beleeued to be the word of God but vpon former supposall of beleeuing the Churches infallibilitie confirming this truth vnto vs.
13 Heere let all, whose braines are not intoxicate with the wine of fornication, pause a while, and contemplate what Babilonish giddinesse hath possest their braines, that haue runne
 round about so long, (though alwaies staggering,) in vrging Scriptures for to proue that, as an Article of beliefe, which must be infallibly beleeued, before those places of Scriptures which they vrge for it; or else nor they nor any other Scriptures can euer be stedfastly beleeued to be the word of God, or to haue sufficient authoritie in them to cause stedfast beleefe vnto that which they teach. For this is the issue of all our aduersaries arguments in this point, That such matters as are contained in Scriptures cannot be stedfastly acknowledged, or beleeued, for supernaturall or diuine truthes, vntill they be confirmed by this infallible authoritie of the present Church. Where againe I would haue the Reader call to mind, what was before obserued out of Bellarmines positions; That this infallibilitie of the Church consists directly in this, that it is perpetually as^isted by the holy Ghost: and it is all one with them, to say, wee beleeue the Churches infallible authoritie in matters of faith, and to say, wee beleeue the Church is perpetually assisted by the holy Ghost: Againe, (by all the later Iesuites positions) it is all one to say, We beleeue the Church is perpetually assisted by the holy Ghost in determining matters of faith, and to say, wee beleeue that the Pope, speaking ex Cathedra, is assisted perpetually by the holy Ghost in determining matters of faith.
14 Out of these assertions compared with the proposition supposed, [The Churches infallibility must be beleeued before Scripture, or other Articles of faith,] this will immediately and directy follow: We must beleeue that the holy Ghost, the supreme Iudge of Scriptures and matters of faith, doth infallibly assist the Church, or Pope speaking ex Cathedra, before we can beleeue that there is an holy Ghost. For this is one Article of faith, taught in Scriptures, which Scriptures (say our aduersaries) cannot bee beleeued, but by the confirmation of the Churches infallible authoritie, and this infallible authoritie consists (as we said before) in this, that it is infallibly assisted by the holy Ghost: wherefore the conclusion of this absurd posi^ion is: That we must first beleeue the holy Ghost is perpetually resident in the Popes breast, or consistorie of Rome, before it can be beleeued that there is an holy Ghost, or diuine Trinitie in heauen. If we consider the practise of our Aduersaries in vrging Scripture, to proue their
 Churches infallibility to be the rule of faith: they should in reason admit the first member of the fore-mentioned diuision, and hold that the Scriptures must be infallibly beleeued for the word of God, before the infallibility of the Church (which they seeke to proue by Scriptures,) can be infallibly beleeued. But againe, if we consider their obseruations concerning the Churches infallibility. [That the Scriptures cannot be knowne to be the Scriptures but by it; and that it is the rule of faith,] they must of necessitie admit the second member of the fore-cited diuision, and maintaine, that the Churches infallibilitie must infallibly bee beleeued, before we can beleeue the Scriptures to be the infallible Oracles of God: For Regula semper est prior regulato; but the Churches infallibility is the rule of faith by their positions, and to beleeue the Scripture to bee the infallible Oracles of God, is a maine point of faith, and necessarie to saluation:Valenlian. puncto 7. parag. for, This is the Iesuits principall Topicke, to disproue the Scriptures sufficiencie for being the rule of faith in all pointes, because it containeth not this one point, viz. that the Scriptures are the infallible Oracles of God. It is hence euidently proued, that neither of the two first members of the former diuision can stand eyther with reason, the allegators practise, or positions. For the first quite ouerthrowes their positions concerning their Churches infallible authoritie. The second proues their practise to be most absurd, in vrging Scriptures for to proue it. And yet the third member is of all the three the most absurd, albeit not so dissonant to their positions, or practise in this point, because as are they, so is it, senselesse both; which will euidently appeare by the bare proposall of it.The grosse absurdities of the third member, as well in reason as in respect of their assertions. If they should say they neither infallibly beleeue the Scriptures before the Churches infallibilitie, nor it before them.
15 The third member was, That we must infallibly beleeue the Scriptures to be the Oracles of God, and the Churches infallibilitie both together, without any prioritie of time, order, or nature. First, if this assertion bee true: then cannot the Churches infallibilitie serue as a rule to know the Scriptures to be the word of God infallibly, because regula prior est regulato. But by this assertion there is no prioritie in the Churches infallibilitie, (their supposed rule,) in respect of our knowing, or beleeuing the Scriptures to be the Oracles of God. Secondly, if the former assertion bee true: then neither can the Scriptures proue the
 Churches infallibility, nor the Churches infallibility proue the Scriptures to bee the word of God vnto any beleeuer. For all meanes or arguments of proofe suppose a prioritie, in respect of the parties vnto whom proofe is to be made. And to say, that of two things, both beleeued and knowne together without any prioritie, the one might proue the other, were as much, as if wee should say, that a thing might proue it selfe, and as we say in scholes to proue idem per idem. For the very reason why wee cannot proue idem per idem, is, because there is no prioritie of knowledge in such identitie: for otherwise, where the thing prouing, and the thing proued, are indeed the selfe same, yet if there bee a prioritie of conceits or notions in the same thing, one of them will sufficiently proue the other; as is euident in the Diuine attributes, none of which are indeede really disti^ct from others, and yet may one of them proue another, because in respect of vs one of them is better knowne then another, and consequently being knowne may proue the other. But of such attributes as are neither better knowne then other, or where the termes are only diuerse, without prioritie of conceit or knowledge, there can bee no prouing of the one by the other. For all discursiue knowledge, (such as is all knowledge by way of proofe or syllogisme,) must bee ex praeexistente cognitione: And where one thing is proued by another, that which proueth must first bee beleeued; for the beleefe of the other must spring or arise from the beleefe of it. If a man should goe about to proue that the Prince was sumptuously arrayed, because hee was sumptuously apparrelled or attired, the proofe would be ridiculous: seeing sumptuous apparrell, and sumptuous array in common speech are all one, and he that knowes the one knowes or beleeues the other. But if a man should say, the Prince was sumptuously apparrelled, because he ware a sute of Tissue, or beset with pearle, the proofe were good, so it could be proued that he wore such a sute. For it is sufficiently knowne to all, that such attire is sumptuous: and therefore he that can make proofe that hee was so attired, hath sufficiently proued that hee was sumptuously arrayed. And thus, would our Aduersaries admitte, that eyther the Scriptures wee better knowne then the infallibilitie of the Church; or the Churches infallibilitie better knowne
 then they the one of them might be brought to proue the other, without any fault in the manner or forme of proofe, howsoeuer their assertions in the proofe of eyther would ouerthrow eyther their owne positions, or the principles of faith, as appeareth in the two former parts of our diuision. But according to our supposition in the third member, to wit, [That the Churches infallibilitie, and the infallibilitie of Scripture, are both alike knowne vnto vs, and neyther beleeued from before other,] the verie manner, or forme of promising one by the other, would be as ridiculous and absurde, as if a man should prooue costly apparrell by sumptuous array: Or that one was costly apparrelled, because hee wore costly rayment.
16 The most of our aduersaries louing (in this point) darkenesse more than light, (like desperate debters, that keepe strict reckoning what others owe them, but are afraide to take an account of the debtes they owe,) neuer seeke to examine the particular difficulties of their owne opinions, but thinke it sufficient to cast stumbling blockes before their feete, that will not hoodwinke themselues, that they may stand in neede of leading by such blinde guides as themselues. Yet Valentian, who had gone so farre in searching the difficulties,Valentians attempted euasion out of the inchanted circle of Romane faith, refuted. and dangers of this darksome inchanted way, vntill he he had come to see some lightninges of these obiections heere set downe, at the first representation of them is so affrighted, as if hee had seene a night-walker or hobgoblin, that had put him so farre out of his right minde, as he neither dare go forwards, nor can he pray to God to blesse him, or send him his spirit to conduct him safely backe; but runnes round with the Colliars Catechisme in his mouth, in steed of a better charme. His resolution is thus.Vt breuiter quae fasius disputata sunt de resolutione fidei, colligamus, placet modum tradere quo quis de fide interrogatus debeat respondere. Igitur siquie rogetur, v.g. Quare eredat Deum esse trinum and vnum? distinguat vtrum viz. firmiter and infallibiliter id credat, vel de causa ob quam acceptauerat eam fidem, si primum respondeat, quia Deus reuelauit: si rursus interrogatus vnde cognoscat Deum reuelasse, respondeat se quidem non nosse id clare, credere tamen eadem fide infallibiliter, and id quidem non ob aliam reuelationem, bene tamen ob infallibilem propositionem Ecclesiae, tanquam ob conditionem ad id credendum r^quisitam. Si rursus, vnde cognoscat propositionem Ecclesiae esse infallibilem? similiter dicat se clare non nosse, credere tamen fide infallibili ob reuelationem Scripturae testimonium perhibetis Ecclesiae: cui reuelationi non credit ob aliam reuelationem, sed ob seipsam, quamuis ad hoc ipsum opus sit Ecclesiae propositione vt conditione requisita. Valent. tom. 3. in Aquinat. Epist. 1. quaest. 1. punct. 1. @. 16. That we may briefly collect the former large disputes concerning the resolution of faith, it shall not bee amisse to set downe a forme of answering to such as demaund a
 reason of our faith. If you be demaunded (for example sake) why you beleeue a Trinitie of persons in one Godhead: First, distinguish whether the question be of your firme and infallible beleefe of this truth it selfe, or of the cause which moued you to imbrace this beleefe. In the former case the answere must be, because God hath reuealed it: If it bee demaunded againe how you know that God hath reuealed it? the answere must be, you know it not euidently, but yet beleeue so, by the same infallible faith by which you beleeued the truth reuealed: and this not by an other Reuelation, but by the Churches infallible proposall of it, which is a condition necessary to such beleefe. If yet it be further questioned, how you know the Churches proposall or auouching of this Reuelation to be infallible? your answere must be againe, that distinctly and clearely you know not thus much, but yet beleeue it as infallibly as the former, and that for the Reuelation of the Scripture, bearing testimony of the Churches infallibility, which Reuelation you beleeue not by any other Reuelation, but for it selfe, although vnto this very beleefe the Churches proposall be required as a necessary condition.
17 It cannot chuse but be a great motiue to perswade any man (that doth not affect blindnesse in this point,) of the shallow and vnstable foundation of the Romish Church: when he shall thus behold so skilful an artificer as Valentia^, in laying the very ground-worke thereof, so grauelled in his owne obiections, that hee fares like one that had fallen into a deepe pit of loose sand, heauing and offering with might and maine to get out and goe forwards, but being destitute of all firme ground, whereon to rest one part till the rest be raised, beates himselfe blinde with too much strugling in such a sandie soyle. For surely, from more then Aegyptian or Sodomitish blindnesse did that attempted euasion of his in the fore-mentioned place proceede.Neque in sic ^redge;^ respondendo(...) aliquus vitiosi^ circulas tu^ qu^ reuelatio pro^ qua^ dicitur c^ infallibilitas(...) positionis, and(...) positio ob qua(...) dicitur credi^ uelatio, non bent vnu^ and(...) obiectum, se^ liud and aeliua^ (obiectum n^ propositionis ipsa reuelatio^ obiectum autem reuelationis est ipsa veritas credita; vt Deum esse trinum and vnum, aut propositionem Ecc^ esse infallibilem:) tum quia, cum ex reuelatione redditur ratio credendi propositionem, redtitur per cau^ (Reuelation^ est assensus fide^;) ^um vero ex proposit^one Ecclesie redditur ratio credendi reuelationem, ratio(...) ditur no^ per causam cred^nd, sed ^er conditio^^m ad id requisitatu, and ita v^tatur vi^i^sas circulus and solum^ ditur ratio connexorum v^c^ss^^n ex^ipsismet connexis sub diuersa ratione, id quod omnino licet. Valent ibid. Nor doe we commit any circular fallacy in this forme of answering, Partly, because the Reuelation, for which the Churches infallible proposall is beleeued, and the proposall for which the Reuelation is beleeued, haue not one and the same, but each it seuerall obiect. For the obiect of the Churches proposall is the Reuelation, but the obiect of the Reuelation is the truth it selfe beleeued, as
 that there is one God and three persons, or that the Churches proposall is infallible: Partly, because, when we assigne the Reuelation as a reason why we beleeue the Churches proposall, we giue the reason by the cause, (for the Reuelation is the cause of our assent or actuall beleefe,) but when we assigne the Churches proposall as a reason why we beleeue the Reuelation, the reason is not assigned by the true cause of our beleefe, but by a condition requisite thereunto. And so this Iuglers ring, or circular fallacie is auoided, and onely a reason is giuen of thinges connexed mutually from the things themselues connexed vnder a diuers reason or respect, which is nolegerdemaine but faire play.
If the diuers obiectes of the diuine Reuelation, and the Churches infallibity, were the onely cause or reason why wee take this resolutio^ for circular proofe, then this exception of the diuersity of their obiectes, were to some purpose. But we impeach this his resolution of naughtinesse, for the verie forme or manner, because the proofe is idem per idem. And being so, albeit the obiect of the diuine Reuelation and the Churches proposal be diuerse: yet is this no sufficient testimonie to acquite it, vnlesse they will affirme, that there can bee no circular proofe where the obiect of the things mutually proued are diuerse, which if they vniuersally affirme, (as without an vniuersall affirmation in this kinde, there can be no proofe:) wee shall as easily impeach this affirmation of open falshood, as their forme of argument of circular fallacie. For wheresoeuer any thing vncertaine to vs, is in^erred by another thing alike vncertaine, and th^t other onely proued by the former: there is a circular proofe, albeit we should by this forme of argument seeke to proue one thing by another, whose obect was quite contrarie to the former. Nay although wee should proue the very diuersitie, or contrarietie of the obiectes in two seuerall termes proposed, by this or the like circular forme: yet were our proofe naught, albeit this same diuersity of obiects might be proued by some other lawfull forme of argument. For the diuersitie or identitie of obiects in syllogisticall termes, is meerely accidentall to the nature of circular proofe, or inference of idem per idem.
18 To fit our aduersaries with a familiar example, euerie way parallel to their owne resolution in this point, (if they will acknowledge their owne Valentians resolution for their owne:)
 but more plaine and easie to the capacitie of the vnlearned Reader. Suppose some ambitious Captaine, or Courtier, (for whose integritie no man of place would promise much,) should bring vnto our King, or some States-man in this land, some forraine Princes (as the renowned King of Denmarkes) letters commendatorie, for his great sufficiencie in good place in Warre or State: I would request but any ordinarie Reader well to consider, what manner of resolution it would be, if with reuerence I may suppose that eyther his Maiestie, or any States-man in this land, in the bestowing of any such place of worth, as this supposed messenger would sue for, might thus resolue: Surely the King of Denmarke is a renowned religious Prince, and one that wisheth exceeding well vnto our King and State, and whatsoeuer he should write in any mans commendations, for his aduancement to such a place as this partie makes suite for, I dare not once call in question, lest I should seeme to disparage his Princely word: but how shall I know that these are his letters, and no counterfaite? If thus hee should doubt, and yet finally rest content with this or like suggestion; why? doth not he say they are his true letters, whose fidelitie and integritie the King in his letters commends? no man in the world (I thinke) of any ordinarie experience, although hee had neuer trauerst the schooles to know the meaning of a circular proofe, but could perceiue this resolution to be but dolus circulatorius: and he that would be cosened with this or the like, by any traueller of what fashion soeuer, may easily be circumuented by any domesticke Pedlar, or circumforaneall copes-mate. Yet is this resolution in euery point the selfe same with Valentians resolution, concerning the Romane Churches infallibilitie; and the exception which heere he brings, why this resolution of his is none, may altogether as directly and fitly bee brought to shew, that this supposed resolution is no circular resolution. First, let vs parallell the seuerall pars of both resolutions, in that resolution of faith which Valentian brings: All Christians beleeue, that whatsoeuer God saith is true; and so in this other resolution it is supposed that his Maiestie or any of his States-men firmely beleeues, that whatsoeuer the King of Denmarke writes or auoucheth in matters of this nature, (as of ciuill integritie, and sufficiencie for the discharge of such an office) is altogether true, and
 may not be suspected yet may they suspect whether he wrote thus much in this mans commendations, as these letters import, or no. And so saith Valentian, and other Papists, all Christians may suspect, (certaine they cannot be) whether God wrote those books which we call Scripture or no. The assurance which Christians in matters concerning faith, and States-men in this present case could haue for their securitie, is altogether the same. For the Statesman hath no other reason to perswade himselfe, that these are the King of Denmarkes letters, but onely the report, asseueration, or testimonie of this messenger, whose preferment they concerne. And so likewise by the Papists positions, no priuate Christian can haue any other certaine assurance, that these Scriptures are the word of God, but onely the testimonie or confirmation of the present Romish Church, whose state and dignitie they likewise seeke to maintaine by countenance of the Scriptures, whose misse-interpretation did eyther first occasio^, or not hinder, her rising to that height of temporall dignitie which she now enioyes. Thus finally it appears that all the reason or ground of beleefe, which any Papist following the Iesuites for their instructors can haue, must be the infallibility of the Romish Church, whose infallibility therfore cannot be proued out of Scripture, because the Scriptures by their positions cannot bee infallibly proued to be Scriptures, or that authenticke Word which onely can affoorde sure proofe in matters of faith, but by this their Churches supposed authoritie. As for Valentians exception, concerning the diuerse obiect of the Churches Proposall, and the diuine Reuelations by it proposed, the selfe-same diuersitie of obiect may be obserued in the former instance of the counterfeit messenger, whose resolution in effect is thus; You must beleeue these letters, because I commend them vnto you in the King of Denmarkes name, and you must beleeue mee in commending them vnto you because the King of Denmarke, whose words you trust in them, commends my trust and fidelitie. To apply Valentiaes exception to this resolution; As the obiect of that the Church proposeth, or rather of the Churches proposall, is the diuine reuelation: so likewise is the obiect of this counterfaites proposall the often mentioned kings supposed commendation of him. Againe, as the obiect of the diuine Reuelation is the truth beleeued, [Veritas
 credita, vt Deum esse trinum and vnum, aut propositionem Ecclesiae esse infallibilem, as that there is a Trinitie in the Godhead, or the Churches proposall is infallible:] So likewise the obiect of the kings commendation in the other instance, is the truth beleeued, or that at least which this counterfeit exactes to be beleeued as true to wit, that hee himselfe is a man of excellent partes, and one that will vse fidelitie as well in his doings as sayings, and in a word, one, whose proposall in matters of State or warre, is as infallible as the Popes in matters of faith. Yet notwithstanding that this counterfaites proposall or asseueration, which must be beleeued from the Princes commendation of him, which must be beleeued againe from his proposall, Non habent vnum and idem obiectum, sed aliud and aliud, haue not one and the same obiect: yet is the former resolution still ridiculous; and so is Valentians resolution of his Catholike faith most ridiculously most impious. For what other issue of such dissolute resolutions can bee expected, but that men who know no better, should hereby bee driuen to suspect the Scriptures for counterfeite, and the Catholike Church (if the Romane were onely the Catholike Church) of villanous forgerie, at the least in those places of Scripture which she pretendes for proofe of her owne infallibilitie.
19 As for Valentians later exception, why his resolution should not bee circular: it is more ridiculous then the former, most ridiculously false (to omit other points) in this one, that he dare denie the Churches proposall by their doctrine to bee the cause, why wee beleeue the diuine Reuelation, or rather that these Scriptures which we haue are diuine Reuelations. For by their positions we cannot assure our selues, that the Scriptures are the word of God, by any other cause or reason, besides the Churches authoritie: and therefore, by their doctrine, the infallible authoritie of their Church is the onely cause, why wee beleeue this sacred Canon of Scriptures, which wee enioy, to bee diuine Reuelations, although it bee no cause by their doctrine, why we beleeue that in generall diuine Reuelations are true. For this is a dictate of nature, not controuersed betwixt vs and them, or betwixt any who acknowledge a diuine power. And Valentian himselfe directly implies, that which he impudently denies in the selfe-same period. For he granteth, that Propositio Ecclesia
 est ratio credendi diuinam reuelationem; andIn matters of knowledge, or beleefe, reason and cause are synonymall, and euery cause in nature goes before the effect. And euen when we demonstrat^ the cause by it proper effect, the effect must needs be first knowne to vs, seeing it is the reason or cause of our knowing the cause, though no cause of the reall cause it selfe. ratio credendi, the reason or rule of beleeuing, must needs include in it a precedent cause of beleefe, it cannot be onely a condition annexed thereto: but of this point (God willing) hereafter.
20Sacroboscus intangled in the former circle, and caught in his own snare. Sacroboscus, (who hath followed Bellarmines and Valenti^es footsteps, as faithfully as any Irish footeman could his master, though sometimes taking a more compendious and smoother way, likely to entice pedestria ingenia, wits eyther by nature dull, or nouices in arts and smatterers in schoole-learning, to follow him sooner then those great ones,) hath taken vpon him to answere to this circle, in effect as Valentian doth, saue onely that he hath put more trickes of art vpon it, eyther to confound the iudicious, or deceiue the simple Reader. Which heere we shall not neede to examine, because we purpose to vnrip his mysticall euasions in that last Chapter of the next dispute. In the end of his tract in defence of Bellarmine, he frames his obiection, against both valentian and his owne resolution:Sed quaeris num quando quis credit aliquid propter authoritatem Ecclesiae, necessarium sit prius tempore vel faltem natura, formaliter, and explicite credat ipsam Ecclesiam esse infallibilis authoritatis, quemadmodum quando assentimur conclusioni propter praemissas, necesse est vt prius assentiamur ipsis praemissis. Respondeo, id minime esse necessarium: nam actus fidei sertur in suum obiectum, moda simplici, vt visus in suum: itaque ficut visus per speciem albi (v. g.) videt album, non videndo ipsam speciem, sic potest quis per Ecclesiae authoritatem: credere, ita vt non prius formaliter and explicite credat Ecclesiae authoritatem. Sacrobosc. pag. 13^. 139. A good examiner may know this fellow to be a Iesuite by his answere, so full stuft with mentall reseruations, secret euasions, and ambiguities. First he will not resolue vs whether men ordinarily must beleeue the Church before Scriptures: but a man may beleeue the Scriptures, although he do not first beleeue the Church explicite or formerly. And in the very next words he impertine^tly ads that beleeuing the Scriptures we cannot but implicite and vertually beleeue the Church. Which argues that the Scriptures must be beleeued before the Church. But say we could not beleeue the one, but we must vpo^ equ^l termes beleeue the other, this proues that neither could be any infallible or effectual means of beleeuing the other. For there is no man that knowes twise 4 make 8, but knowes as wel twise 2 make 4, yet is neither a means of knowing the other, for both are immediatly knowne of the^selues. This shews the impertine^cy of their answer that mutter they know not what, as if the knowledge of points of faith did rese^ble habitu^ principioru^, rather the^ habitu^ conclusionis. If so they do the^ cannot the Churches infallibility being by their positio^s a point of faith, be any means of knowing the Scriptures to be diuine, which is a maine point of faith. [Whether, in beleeuing the Church by Scriptures, and Scriptures by the Church, the beleefe of the one must in nature, (if not in time) goe before the other] He thinkes it not necessarie that the one should be before the other, Nam actus fidei fertur in suum obiectum modo simplici, vt visus in suu^. And therfore as we see colours per species visibiles, by the visible shapes, or resemblances which flow from them, not by seeing the visible shape before the colours: so do we beleeue the Scriptures by the Church, albeit we doe not expresly and formally beleeue the Church before wee beleeue the Scriptures.
 Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo? In the former part of this his discourse, the visible Church was vnto Scriptures, as theThis co^rison inde^ most con^nant to t^ positions as we sha^ terwardes proue, do^ as clearel^ wray the i^ stery of t^ iniquitie, the sunne colours. light was vnto colours; now it is vnto Scriptures, as visible shapes are vnto colours. What then? Doe we not see visible shapes before colours, nor colours before them? no. For we see no visible shapes at all, but by them colours onely are brought into our light: and wee cannot see one before the other, if the one we see not at all. And in like sense it were true, that we should not beleeue the Church before Scriptures, not Scriptures before we beleeue the Church, if we were not bound to beleeue the one at all. But if we see one thing by another which we likewise see, we must needs see that first by which we see the other: and so if eyther wee beleeue the Scriptures by beleeuing the Church, or beleeue the Church by beleeuing Scriptures, we must of necessitie beleeue the one before the other. For that by which we beleeue a thing is the meanes of beleefe, and the meanes of beleefe must needes in nature and order go before beleefe it selfe. And if the Church be the meanes of beleeuing onely in as much as we beleeue it; or to speake more distinctly, if the beleeuing the Church be the verie meanes of beleeuing the Scriptures: then must we needs beleeue the Church before we beleeue the Scriptures. If our aduersaries affirme, that their Church is the onely infallible meanes of beleeuing Scriptures, in any other sort then by beleeuing it: let them in the name of God assigne by what means they will she can make vs beleeue the Scriptures, we shall not much contend;This in(...) of his do^ very well(...) strate o^ mer asser^ concerni^ the vse of(...) ordinary(...) gistracie(...) ministry,(...) 2. cap. 1.(...) ^ag. ult.(...) the v^sib^ Church(...) bee said in such sense infallible as the shapes and resemblances of colours are called visible,(...) indeed by nature inuisible, and are visible onely by externall denomination, in as much as the pr^ colours to our sight, which onely are truly visible. Were they really visible themselues being rec^ into our eyes, they would hinder our sight of all colours so doth this admission of a reall infalli^ in the Church exclude all infallible beleefe of other points of faith. so they will not bind vs to beleeue this their Churches decisio^s. Sacroboscus his co^parison of rhe visible Church and visible shapes, we admit thus far for good, that as vnlesse there were such visible shapes, no colours could be seene so likewise, vnlesse God had some visible Church on earth, me^ ordinarily could not see the light of the Gospell. For it is not ordinarily communicate to any, but by the ministry of others, but being co^municate, we beleeue it in it self, and for it self, not by beleeuing others; as we see colours in themselues and for the^selues, not by seeing the
 visible shapes, by which they are presented or communicate vnto our eyes. But whether there bee any prioritie betweene the beleefe of these two, [Church and Scriptures,] according to our aduersaries doctrine, or whether the beleefe of the one be the cause of the beleefe of the other, or in what sort the cause, and what inconueniences will follow thereon: we shall dispute hereafter.
21 Let them in the meane time illustrate the manner, how we beleeue Scriptures by the Church, as they please. Let it haue the same proportion to Scriptures, which the light, or visible shapes haue vnto colours: they themselues make the beleefe of Scriptures most vncertaine, and for this reason seeke to establish the infallibilitie of their Church for to assure vs of the truth of Scriptures. We demaund how this certaintie of their Churches infallibilitie can possibly be proued? By reason? that is impossible, as you heard before. By tradition? of whom? of such as may erre; that is, vncertaine of the infallible Church? But her infallibilitie is called in question, and any Church may challenge this prerogatiue, as well as theirs, vnlesse they can shew a better title. Without Reuelation from aboue it is still vncertaine, fide diuina, whether we are to beleeue any Churches infallibilitie concerning Scripture:Jisdem fere argumentis efficitur neque solam traditionem vinae vocis eorum qui olim vita defunct ^^ni, esse iudi^e insuffidientem f^dei quo vatea^ per se ^i ne alia aeliqua infallibli ac pr^sente authoritate omnes omnino definire (...) quaestiones. Namprimum ^eut de authoritate ipsius Scripturae necesse est per aliquam alia (...) certam authoritatem constare: ita etiam de authoritate traditionis, si ea quoque reuocetur in dubium. Non enim traditio loquitur etiam ipsa clare and perspicue de sese, vt neque ipsa scriptura. Deinde cum traditio scriptis fere doctorum orthodoxorum in Ecclesia conseruetur, quastiones ac dubia moueri possunt de sensu illius, sicut dubitatur s^pede sensu and mente doctorum. Valentianus loco citato paragraph* 11. Or if any, which of all. Reuelations from aboue we acknowledge none but the written word: they acknowledge traditio^s as well as it, yet so as the Scriptures (by their confession) are as certaine as tradition, which they make equall onely with the written word acknowledged by vs, not aboue it. Wherefore, if the Scriptures bee in themselues (by their obiections) vncertaine: then is tradition as vncertaine. What shall assure vs of the truth of eyther? The infallible Church? But this can assure no man, vnlesse he first beleeue it for certaine and infallibly. What shall make it certaine to vs? The Scriptures? But they are vncertaine, say our aduersaries, and the Church must confirme their certaintie vnto vs. Though this circle (wherein Valentian and Sacroboscus haue runne giddie,) were of force to raise vp all
 the spirits in hell, and though they raised should sift all the Iesuites braines in the world: yet should not all the inuention of man, with the helpe of diuels, be able to finde out the least probabilitie of auoiding the former inconuenience. Nay they should farre sooner make ropes of the sand in the Adriaticke Sea, so strong as would haile Italy vnto the Ilands of Diuels, before they could teach all the Iesuites in the world so much Geometrie, as to make one of these vncertainties support another.


CHAP. VI.
The vnsufficiency of the Romane rule of faith, for effecting what it aimes at, albeit we grant all they demaund: the ridiculous vse thereof amongst such as doe acknowledge it.
1 WHen I was a child (as our Apostle saith,) and spake as a childe, vnderstood as a child: I thought some great matters might bee contained vnder those hyperbolicall and swelling titles of the Romish Church, wherewith mine cares were often filled. And although I had beene instructed to the contrarie, yet could I haue wished her doctrine true, such was my affection to her shape, as it was falsely represented to my childish fantasie. But after the day-starre had shined in my heart, the former humour wherewith the eyesight of my infant minde had beene corrupted, was quickly dispelled. Once able to looke more narrowly into the subtillest of her schoolemens disputes, and examine her learned Clearkes Apologies for her, by the Gospels light: I saw clearely, how by presenting mere shewes or shadowes of truth, they led weake-sighted soules into error, as it were in a mist: in the beginning of their works vsually inserting pretended grounds (here and there as they espie occasion) of their intended conclusions, supported with some sleight reasons for the present; feeding vs with expectatio^ of better proofes, either in some other work or (a great way after) in the same, which may stay our minds till we come at them, where they returne vs backe againe to what is past, and that being now far off, and most particulars out of mind, may seeme not altogether nothing to such as will not take paines
 to reuiew it. And thus in fine, as the mist, so their proofes seeme euery where somewhat, till a man come neare them, but then so vanish as he shall see nothing of that he looked for.
2 Bellarmines bookes de verbo Dei, compared with those others of his de Romano Pontifice, etc. and Valentians Analysis fidei will easily approue this obseruation to him that shall read the^ through with attention. Both of them in the beginning of their workes promising great matters made me expect some extraordinary proofe in the processe, but finding them best at the first, alwaies ambitious in producing multitude of allegations to little purpose, copious in bestowing glorious titles and prerogatiues vpon their holy Church, and yet finally contracting her Vniuersalitie and sacred Catholickship into one mans breast, (who by their owne confession may be so carnally grosse, that he cannot draw any spirituall breath) their former goodly encomions ending thus, made me cal to mind how craftie companio^s cosen children of what they loue, or stay their crying at what they dislike, by promising them some Gallant, Fine, Gaudie, Trimme, Goodly, Braue, Golden, New, Nothing. Such braue epethites so rauish a childs thoughts, as at the first hearing he parts with any thing hee hath, or forbeares to seeke what otherwise he would haue, in hope of such a gay reward, neuer looking into the substance of what is promised, which was indeed iust nothing. With like bombast outsides doe moderne Priests and Iesuites terrifie silly soules, (men or women meere children in vnderstanding) from all co^munion with our Church, leading the^ through such painted forefronts, or fained, but sightly entrances, into their vast imaginarie emptie Paradise, wherein growes nothing but forbidden fruit. Though volumes they write huge and large, and in the sublimitie of their speculatiue imaginations, fetch arguments from beyond the Moone: yet vnto him that hath but the eye of ordinarie reason in his head, (not blinded by their iuglings) their best collections proue in the end but like the drawing of a net spred farre and wide in the open ayre, able to retaine nothing of what it had compassed, onely such as looked a farre of, or had braines so weake or sight so ill disposed as could not distinguish betwixt the element of ayre and water, marking more then an ordinarie stirre in fetching so huge a draught, might happily suspect some goodly catch.
3 Suppose we should grant that the Pope whiles hee speakes ex cathedra cannot erre;Though w^ not doub^ what the(...) speakes ex^thedra; ye^ doubtfull(...) he speake ex(...) cathedra a^ when he^keth so. who shall (I am sure no Iesuit or priuate Spirit can) without all ambiguitie and pretence of gainsaying determine directly and absolutely, what it is to speake ex cathedra? And it is not to bee expected, that the Pope will ex cathedra define what it is to define a thing ex cathedra, in such sort as shall leaue no euasion to excuse his errour if he should be vrged with a sentence ex cathedra; which to the Maior part of professed Christians might seeme doubtfull whether it were palpably erroneous or no. But suppose we knew directly and authentically what it were to speak ex cathedra, and when the Pope did indeede so speake, when not; (which no man can knowAlbe^ wee knew(...) what it we(...) speake ex^dra, and t^ when the(...) speakes(...) speaketh(...) infallibly(...) yet woul^ not follo^ we shoul^ infallibly(...) solued i^trouersie(...) greatest(...) ment. but onely by hearesay, vulesse such as heare him giue sentence) yet what assurance can the Iesuits giue vnto the Christian World, that his holinesse shall so determine or speake, as, often as the peace of Christs Church or Weale of Christendome shall require? That hee shall speake de facto ex cathedra, whensoeuer the Church stands in neede of a decision, the Papistes themselues doe not hold as any part of his infallibilitie, but onely that he is able so to speake, when his infallibilitie will. And a posse ad esse non sequitur argumentum. No man, in their iudgement, can or ought constraine him to a decision, except he list. And seeing they affirme, he may be an Heretique, or a Sonne of Sathan; although it were true, he could not propose an Heresie to be beleeued; yet is there no shew of truth why hee may not be so malitiously bent, as hee will not vouchsafe actually to determine that for Heresie in others, which in his iudgement, as he is a Doctor or priuate man, is very orthodoxall; thus doing he should goe against his owne conscience to giue sentence. Gods Spirit as they say will guide his tongue when or whilst hee speakes ex cathedra. But an euill Spirit may so worke vpon his affections, that hee shall not come in good time so to speake, especially against that opinion, which in his priuate conscience hee holds for true. This I thinke none of them can denie.
4 Now whilest these doubts stand vnsatisfied, and yee without further assurance of his infallibilitie in deciding controuersiies, then onely this Hypotheticall or conditionall. [if he speakes ex cathedra] all the comfort, which the Christian World (perplexed with the varietie of opinions and diuersities of Sects) can
 reape from these faire promises of the Iesuites concerning their Church or Popes infallible authoritie, is, but as if a man should say vnto a Husbandman (doubtfull vpon the vncertaintie of weather, when to sow or reape) tush be of good cheare, you shall certainly know, what season is good, what not, for seed-time and haruest, when the man in the Moone sets forth an Almanacke. Veritas hypotheticae propositionis (saith old Iauell) nihil ponit in crumena. Many die with fewer pounds in their purses, then arguments in their heads, sufficient to proue the truth of this conditionall proposition, If I had fiue thousand pounds I should be a wealthie man. In like manner if this bee all the assurance their infallible rule can affoord vs. [That a generall Councell, if lawfully assembled, or the Pope if he speake ex cathedra, cannot possibly erre] The most pestiferous and noisome Heresies that now infect the Church may (perhaps) bee quelled, some hundred yeares after all, now aliue, bee dead. When the Pope will call a Councell, or consult his chaire, GOD knowes: what manner of resolutions were to be expected, if either should happen, wee may coniecture by their wonted practise; which is thus.
The politicke sophismes of the Papists in their Cou^cels.5 After a Councell is called, the Maior part being made to serue their makers turne (for of Bishops the most must bee the Popes new creatures) the rest must subscribe to their decrees; vsually set forth, in the weather Wizards language, and their sceptique Schoolemen appointed to riddle out some good meaning that may saue their Prelates credit. In the meane time, the Pope and his Cardinalls may follow their pleasures, take their ease, and with it the dreaming Captaines Motto, Tot vrbes capio dormiens ac vigilans. Wee take vp as many controuersies, we edifie the Church as much, sleeping as waking. If no tolerable interpretation of their doubtfull decisions can be found; yet a good sense must bee beleeued; and priuate Spirits may not peremptorily auouch, that the Councell meant this or that, but onely it meant the best, and this we take to bee the best, and therefore we thinke it meant thus, but with humble submission to their infallible authoritie. All this while the Sectaries (so they terme vs) must bee set to proue negatiues, as that there can bee no true meaning, in those speeches, which may haue twentie. But if out of their Schoolemens wranglings (who can better seek out then follow the truth found)
 any interpretation or manner of tenent can be found which may yeeld aduantage to them, or preiudice to their aduersaries; about some hundred yeares after, perhaps, (when they haue light on a Pope and Cardinals whose wits and they once in their life-times meet) a decision may bee had, vpon this opportunitie of seeming aduantage. And yet the Catholique Church, during this hundred or perhaps two hundred yeares of her silence, must bee supposed to haue held perpetually the selfe-same tenent, which this priuate man hath blotted out of late; albeit neither hee, nor any particular member thereof, did know as much, yea though fiue heads of the Church (and as many principall members) fiue successions of Popes, Cardinals, and Bishops, haue died in the meanetime, no one of which in all their liues did trouble their thoughts with any such matter: and whilest both their Schoolemens priuate speculations, and their publique practise haue witnessed the contrarie. Was the doctrine of iustification and merits held by any of their Doctours heretofore, as the later Iesuits haue refined them? Did any of their Popes and Councels determine of their manner of worshipping Images, as Vasquez hath of late? And yet (I thinke) if the Pope should bee driuen to a decision of this question, hee would define as Vasquez hath done; so extraordinarie is the approbation of his Apologie for imagerie; as if it likewise were worthie of adoration. And if this Pope should so determine it, you must thinke that all his predecessors were of the same opinion, if they had beene asked; eun dem fensum tenuit semper mater Ecclesia.
6 But, what is most strange, That Church may for fiue, sixe or twelue hundred yeares and more, vse a translation iustly suspicious, as for many other reasons, so for this, That of the diuers Authours thereof some we know not, others we know too well: and yet when a Councell after so long time shall meet, euery mans worke found very authentique.Ad illu^ tem quod(...) obijciebatu^ interpretes^ dum labi p^ se, non desu^ respondea^ int^ tem noui t^ menti, and e^ beatum H^ nymum int^ tem veteri^ stamenti, p^ ari spiritus(...) cti lamine(...) stratos, err^ potuisse; se^ est apus eo(...) fugere. A^ timus en^ ter pretem(...) esse Proph^ and errare(...) tuisse, tam(...) cimus, eum^ errasse in i^ versione q^ Ecclesia ap^ bauit. Bel.(...) de verbo(...) 11. parag.(...) lud. etc. Some learned Papists haue beene perswaded, that their vulgar translators were docti a Deo omnes, all assisted by the Holy Ghost in their translations. But Bellarmine thinkes this opinion too charitable, for so they must grant that Theodotion the Heretique (the vndoubted Authour of some parts of that edition,) was infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost. If he were not, how is that part of their Vulgar, which they haue
 from him authentique and true? Though erre he might, as being a priuate man or rather a publique Heretike, Dicimus tamen eum non errasse in ea translatione quam approbauit Ecclesia, yet wee say (saith Bellarmine, but I hope no wiseman will so thinke) that hee did not erre in that translation which the Church hath approued. I see then it is all one, whether the Holy Ghost doe assist the translatour, whilest he is about his worke, or the Pope his translation, after it be finished, and He dead: nor doth it skill how he were qualified whilest he liued, either for integritie, wit or learning: the cause is all one as in the Pope himselfe, who may as freely bestow this particular gift, of not erring in translations, vpon whom hee please without all respect of good qualities, as Saint Peter did that transcendent donatiue of absolute infallibilitie vpon him and his successors. Saint Ieroms translation had laudable testimonies of antiquitie, yet not generally receiued in his time, onely preiudiced by the newnesse of it, and antiquitie of the Italique. But whole is the Vulgar, or how first came it in request? It is (saith Bellarmine) partly Lucians, partly Ieroms, partly Theodotions the Heretike, partly anothers he knowes notNam vulgata editio non est vnius authoris, fed quaedam habet ex Hieronymo, quaedam ex Luciano quaedam ex Theodotione quaedam ex alio quodam interprete innominato: stultum aute^ videtur dicere, Theodotionem Haerel^cum non potuisse errare, and etiam Hieromymum nusqua^ ^errasse, cum ipse in cap. 19 Isaiae dicat se errasse, and Ecclesia correctionem eius receperit. Non igitur authores illos canonizauit Ecclesia, sed tantum hanc versionem approbauit, nec ita tamen approhauit vt asseruerit nullos in ea librariorum errores reperiri, sed certos nos redere voluit in ijs praesertim, quae ad fidem and mores pertinent, nulla esse in haec versione interpretum errata. Bel. ibid. Why the Romish Church from Gregories time vntill the Trent Councell should vse the translations of so many sundrie Authours, no cause saue onely the negligence or mishap of former ages that had lost all choice of better, or the necessitie of the middle ages or times of midnight dark^^sse, wherein the skill of interpretation was extinct. whose. Doe wee thinke the Trent-Councell did examine euery part of that translation? or did they know as much as Bellarmine hath confessed, that it should call so many Fathers, and one Heretike amongst the rest? Doubtles this is a miraculous power of their Holy Church; thar the Holy Ghost doth but keepe men from errour whilest they are liuing, but the Pope and his Councels infallibilitie can keepe an Heretike (whom they knew not liuing) from hauing erred after he is dead. And whereas the Almightie Creatour of Heauen and Earth did but make light shine out of darknesse, the incomprehensible Omnipotence of the Popes infallibilitie can make darknesse light, and light darknesse. For otherwise, why might not the Pope, and the Councell, haue yeelded the assurance of their Omnipotent Spirit vnto some then liuing, for authentique translation? Or why
 did they not admitThis Gr^ Comment^ hauing sai^ much as p^bly could b^ said in defe^ of the vulg^ translation^tering the^brew vowe^ for this pu^pose at his pleasure, y^ seemeth th^ errours dis^uered in it(...) him in his^ment vpo^(...) hath hinde^ the setting forth of hither com^taries vpo^ Prophets,(...) which for(...) part he ha^nished (as^peares by(...) latter par^ his Epistle the Trent^ fathers) s^ Church v^ haue appr^ them. Qu^ mobrem, f^stram oper^ nobis sanct^ patres, pro^ intellexero^ quos libros habeo iam lutos, prop^soras dabo^minus, ve^ iudicirad^tus recond^ mih^ que sa^rit, meu^ dium erga Christi Ecclesiam atque hoc sanctissimum concilium semel esse testatum. Franc. Farrerius correction of the vulgar for authentique, seeing this skill in the Hebrew, and good will to the old vulgar, was so great? The reason sure, why they would admit of this hodgepodge translation before any better, was, (as I haue said) to shew hereby the Popes infallibilitie to bee more then most Omnipotent and incomprehensible. They contend for the Vulgar, vnder the title of Hierom; and yet where it is euident that Hierom did not translate the Psalmes, which they vse, they will not admit that translation of them which is euery where extant, and without controuersie is Hieroms owne.
7 Yet thus much I perceiue by Bellarmines answere, That as an Heretique or vnknowne Authour may erre in a translation, because he is not infallibly assisted by the holy Ghost; but yet it must bee beleeued, that an Heretique did not erre in that translation, which the Pope and Councell hath approued: So a Iesuite may perhaps commit a murder, because his order is not so holy as can warrant him from falling into mortall sinne; but if it should please the Pope or Clergie of Rome to interpret the sixth commaundement otherwise; we must beleeue that no Iesuite doth commit any murder in that manslaughter, or bloud-shed, which the Church approues, albeit hee treacherously stabbe his Soueraigne Lord the Lords annoynted. Yf it please the Pope, he may antedate his pardon, or legitimate such hellish brood, ere it come to light, as well as authenticate an Heretiques translation a thousand yeares after his bones be rotten. These are the sweet fruits of this supposed infallible rule of faith and manners; but of the villanies included in this positio^, hereafter. I now onely giue the reader notice of the ridiculous vse of the same amongst themselues: For what a sweete decision was that concerning grace and free will, but lately so eagerly controuersed in Spaine, to theVide Vasquez i^fatione in primum Tomum comment. in D. Th. publique scandall of that Church. First, silence was enioyned all for foure yeares, and afterwardes Vasquez set (as a brach) to hunt a prey for the Romish Lion to take, if he could haue rouzed any to his liking. Is this the vse of your infallible rule? Should Christians trouble the Turke with their contentions, hee could decide as well on this fashion,
 as the Pope. TheSacrum siue missa Slauonica lingua apud illos peragitur, intermixtis etiam aliquando cantio nibus Graecis Epistolae, and Euangelium, quo magis a populo percipiantur extra chorum in medio Ecclesiae astanti populo clara voce recitantur. Concionatoribus carent, satis enim esse putant sacris interfuisse, ac Euangelij Epistolaru^que verba quae vernacula lingua recitat sacrificulus audiuisse. Con ionariquc in suis Ecclesijs obstinacissime prohibent, dicu^t enim se hoc modo varias haereses, and diuersas de fide opiniones effugere quae ex concionibus and subtilibus argumetis sophisticisque quaestionibus ortuntur. Gwaguinus Veronensis i^ Muschouiae descriptione. c. 2. Moscouite alreadie hath farre surpassed him, in this kind of composing or rather auoiding controuersies. For he not many yeares agoe (how affected now, I cannot tell) would haue no preaching in his Dominions, least Schismes and Heresies might thereby be occasioned.
8 Were not the consequences of this opinion so commodious to the Romane Clergie for matters of this life, and so preiudiciall to all other good Christians hopes of attaining that other farre better life: I should haue thought that Valentian, B^llarmine, and other such as haue beene most copious in this argument, had but sought to set out Commentum aliquod artificioseridiculum some artificial foolerie, to make the world sport. For what better merriment could an ingenious student wish, then in his howres of recreation, to descant vpon their serious paines in setting a shew of grauitie vpon idle foolish arguments, as vncapable of Theologicall, as an Ape of tragicke, attire. But why should we consort with Hell, which, no doubt, makes it selfe merry at these great disputers folly, thus vnwittingly imployed to purchase the miserable solace of infernall powers by their owne eternall sorrow, without repentance. As the opinion it selfe is most ridiculous to any vnpartiall iudgment: so euen for this reason is the consequence most lamentable, to any indued with humane affection. For what greater or more iust occasion of most grieuous sorrow, could bee presented to a religious true English heart, then to see so great a part of the Christian world, especially so many of his natiue Countrie-men, for such ridiculous apish impostures and false pretences of bringing Gods people vnder such a gouernment in matters of faith, as is vsually in Secular States, increase old Israels rebellion and incurre their grieuous curse not yet expired, by casting off their redeemer, the wisedome of God, and iudge of quicke and dead, from being their King or Supreame Iudge of controuersies in religion? For why should it seeme vncouth vnto any Christian, that Christ himselfe, though sitting in his throne of Maiestie in Heauen, should bee the onely Supreame infallible Iudge in all controuersies, concerning his owne or his Apostles precepts, or GODS lawes in generall?In what sense the Scriptures may bee truely said the Supreame Iudge of all controuersies in diuinitie. For who could iustly except against vs if we should say, that to most Physitians through Europe, Hyppocrates or Galen to
 Lawyers Iustinian, were the sole authentique Iudge? No Physitian in any other Countrie exacts subscription to his opinions of any liuing in this, further then vpon examination they shall proue consonant either t^ Galen or Hyppocrates, or bee euidently grounded on reason. Or doe wee exclude all vse or certaintie of iuridicall decisions in matters of right and wrong, though the Iudges bee but ordinarie, because Lawyers haue no authentique liuing Iudge to determine, infallibly, of such controuersies as may arise amongst themselues in speculatiue points of their profession?
9 It is supposed that good Students in any facultie haue wit and art with other good meanes for finding out their classicke authours Sentence alreadie giuen, whose writings in this respect may be truly said to be their followers Iudges, though euery one of them bee a priuate Iudge in matters of practise: Yet is it a paradoxe in vs to say, Gods written word is the Iudge of such controuersies as arise amongst professed Diuines or Ecclesiastique Iudges themselues? What if all of them doe not agree about the true sense and meaning of that Word whereto all appeale? No more doe Physitions alwayes in their interpretations of Hyppocrates or Galen, yet haue not their disagreements (for ought I haue read) bred ciuill warres in the Countries wherein they liue, nor doth their variance bring any danger to wisemens bodies, but rather all dangers are by this meanes discouered, and safer choice lest others what opinions or prescripts to follow, or refuse, ot in what cases it is most safe or dangerous to aduenture. Thus might Diuines dispute, without any danger to mens soules, if the Romanists had not beene so lauish in coyning matter for contention, rather then in searching Scriptures for edification of Christs Church: Or if the Laitie would bee as carefull of their spirituall as bodily health, and not take their physicke blind-folde at such Mountebankes hands as Iesuites, Priests, and Seminaries be; who minister none but such as either shall intoxicate the braine, or inflame the heart, with preposterous zeale. Nor should variance in points of doctrine amongst Diuines, breed any danger or disturbance to Common-weales, if they would not be Statists or Vnderminers of States, as the Iesuites be. If their contentions were for the manner vnciuill, or bitter, as are all contentions which the Iesuites breed: the Supreame Magistrate, whether Ecclesiastique
 or Ciuill, might bind their tongues and pens to good abearance; were it not for these Romish wolues, which in sheeps cloathing conuey themselues into the folde of Christ, and, once crept in, will admit of no triall, but in the Lions denne, vnto which they are sworne purueyors; for whose maintenance (l^ke their master that great accuser of Gods children) they compasse Sea and Land and fetch their range about the world.
10 Who can imagine any other cause (besides this their insolent challenge of soueraignetie ouer all others faith) why the Scripture might not be admitted Iudge ouer all controuersies of Diuinitie, much better the^ Hyppocrates or Galen of all co^trouersies in physicke, without any infallible physitian perpetually resident in the world, to giue sentence viua voce. It is no paradox to hold, that God, which made vs these soules, and gaue the Scripture for their health, did much better know what was necessary for them, then either Hyppocrates or Galen did what was good and holesome for mens bodies, one haire of which they neither made blacke or white. Euen what they best knew, they knew not otherwise to co^municate vnto posteritie then by these dumbe characters, or at ramentarie instructers. Whatsoeuer our aduersaries can vrge to the preiudice of Scriptures sufficiencie, or abilitie of Gods Spirit; is true of these great Authours and their writings: all other meanes of teaching though their dearest Schollers, died with them; now not able either to strengthen or consolidate the weake or shallow brain, or illuminate darkned vnderstandings; they cannot so much as take notice of their followers towardly paines and industrie, or reward such as are most deuoted to their memorie, and vse their aphorismes, as infallible rules of bodily life and health, with any blessing of art or nature. But our God liues for euer, and knowes best who are his, alwayes readie to reward such as loue him. And as there is none liuing but hath receiued some gift or other from him; so hath he promised to giue more and more vnto all such as well vse what he hath alreadie giuen. If nature be dulled, so it bee not slouthfull withall in good courses, he can sharpen it by art though both be defectiue; yet can he so inflame the heart with zeale, as it shall pierce more deepely into the mysteries of mans saluation, then the acutest vnregenerate wit, that nature yeelds, or art can fashion. His Spirit cannot be bound, but bloweth where hee listeth,
 and giueth life to whom hee pleaseth, and can inlighten our mindes to see that truth now written, which he taught others to write for our good.
11 Physitians looke not Hyppocrates or Galen should stand on earth again (Vesaluis-like) to reade Anatomy-Lectures vpon their followers liue-tongues or other instruments of breath and speech abused to debate and strife, or blowing the coales of bitter dissention about their meaning. But wee all looke (if we beleeue aright) that Christ Iesus, who hath left vs these his sacred lawes and legend of his most blessed life, as a patterne whereby to frame our owne, free from contention, peaceable, humble, and meeke, wil one day, after which shalbe no more, exact a strict accompt of euery idle word; much more will hee punish such Tongues or pens, as haue beene continually set on fire by Hell with the euerlasting flames of that brimstone lake.
12 Were our exorbitant affections brought within compasse, by hope and feare answerable to the consequences of the former sweete promises, made to such as rightly vse, and terrible threats against all such as abuse, the good meanes ordained by GOD for knowing his will: his infallible word, from whose mouth soeuer vttered, yea though but priuatly read with attentiue silence, would instruct vs, how to demeane our selues in the search of truth; informe vs how to direct, fasten, or inhibit; finally how (in all mysteries of our saluation) to moderate our assent, much better then this supposed infallible authoritie, residing vsually in men most like to Heathen Idols. Though mouthes they haue (as they pretend) infallible; yet scarce speake they once in two ages; whose wordes when they are vttered portend more danger to the Christian world, then it brute beasts should speake like men.
13 No Christian Common-wealth, but either hath or might haue good Lawes for composing contentions, or establishing vnitie in the studie of truth: To see what should be done is neuer hard; would strength of authoritie bee as willing to enforce men vnto a Ciuill and orderly obseruation of meanes knowne and prescribed. Our Statutes are much more absolute and complete thenDeut. 30. ver. 11. etc. Israels were, when it was a sinne to enquite after other meanes either more easie or effectuall for their conduction vnto
 that true happinesse, whereat all States aime, but only such shall light on, as put these Sacred Lawes in execution. It is the common errour of all corrupted mindes, to seeke that farre off which (as the Lord told his people) is within them, euen in their hearts and in their mouthes, so they would bee doers not hearers onely of the Law. Many Heathens haue vsed such diligent care and vnrelenting resolution for iust execution of their defectiue and erroneous Lawes, as would the coactiue power, euery where resident where Christianitie is professed, vse the like for establishing an vniforme and vnpartiall, though but an externall and ciuill practise of the ten Commaundements and other Sacred morall precepts, of whose truth no Christian doubts, about whose meaning nor Protestant, nor Papist, nor any Sect this day liuing, doe, or can contend: fallible Iudges might effect, what the Papists pretend, as infallibly, as if euery particular congregation had such a true infallible teacher as they falsely deeme or faine their Pope, to cathechise them ex cathedra thrice a weeke. For who could better resolue vs in all points of moment, or retaine our heartes in vnitie of faith, then truth it selfe, once clearely seene or made knowne vnto vs: yet is it in it selfe, much brighter then the Sunne we daily see; which it likewise heerein exceeds, That whilst Gods Word endures amongst vs, it still remaines aboue our Horizon, and cannot set: onely grosse and foggie interpositions (raised from exhalation of such foule lusts and reeking sinnes, as seuere vnpartiall execution of knowne Lawes might easily restraine,) vsually eclipse or hide it from vs. Such as are not so Eagle-sighted as to behold the brightnesse of euery diuine truth in it proper Sphere, might yet safely hehold the reflexion of it in one part or other of the Sacred fountaine, were it not troubled with the muddy conceipts of vnsetled and vnquiet braines; or were not such men oftentimes in great places, as minding nothing but earthly thinges, alwayes mingle filth and clay with the Christall streames of the water of life. Happie is that man of God, that in this turbulent age, can, in points of greatest moment, see the diuine truth himselfe; small hope haue any of causing others to see it, whilest carnall mindes may euery where without feare of punishment, but not without terrour of such Ecclesiastique power as shall controule them, forme out their owne shame, and ouercast the face
 of Heauen, whence light should come vnto their soules, with blasphemous vnhallowed breath: whilst dunghill sinkes may bee suffered to euaporate the abundance of that inward filth, (which is lodged in their hearts) as it were of purpose to choake the good Spirit of God, whilst it seekes to breath in others mouthes whose breasts it hath inspired with grace.
14 In breefe (least my aduersarie should challenge me of partialitie,) As the meanes which our Church from Gods Word prescribes for establishing mens hearts in the vnitie of true faith, (were the execution of knowne Lawes any way correspondent,) might (as is said) infallibly effect what the Papists falsely pretend: so in truth it cannot without hypocrisie bee dissembled; that whiles our practise is so dissonant to our doctrine, and our publique discipline so loose, though in detestation of their errors we haue turned our backs vpon them, with protestation to follow a contrarie rule, yet for the most part we iump with them at the iourneys end. To omit more finall agreements of our contrarieties, elsewhere shewed. They wholy permit the keyes of the Well of life to one mans hands; who, for his owne aduantage, we may bee sure, will locke it vp so close, as none shall looke vpon it but with spectacles of his making. For as the head is, such we must expect the eyes will bee, if the one, the other must bee vniuersall too, such as will leaue nothing to bee seene by priuate or particular eyes but what they haue seene before; or in one word, if we admit one absolute visible head, his must be the onely eyes of the Church. We, not through default of publike constitutions, nor so much by conniuence of Ecclesiastique Magistrates, as by presumptuous disobedience of inferiours, are so farre from committing the custodie of this sacred fountaine into one or few mens hands; that the flocke for the most part neuer expect the pastors marshalling, but rushing into it without order trample in it with vncleane feet. If any beame of truth haue found entrance into one of their soules, though quickly eclipsed or smothered by earthly cogitations, he straight-way presumes, Gods word more plentifully dwels in him, then in all his teachers: whence if his purse be strong, it is with him as with an horse when prouender pricks him, he kicks against all Ecclesiastike authoritie, and spurns at his poore Ouerseer that should feede him; like the wanton Asse in the fable
 that seeing the Moone lately shining where she was drinking suddainely couered with a cloud; vpon imagination she had dru^ke it vp, ran winsing out ere her thirst was quenched and threw her rider.
15 Thrice happie is that Land and State where ciuill pollicie and spiritual wisedome, graue experience and profound learning, (in whose right commixture consists the perfect temperature of euery Christian State) doe rightly symbolize. These, where they mutually claspe in their extreames (without intermedling in the essence of each others profession) are like the side-postes or arches in the Lords house: and the awful respect of Christ Iesus the Iudge of both, and that dreadfull day co^tinually sounding in their eares, by the voice of Gods faithfull and sincere Ministers, would bee as the binding stone, or coupling, to fasten them surely in the ioyning. But whilst these (each iealous of other) start a sunder, that brea^h is made, whereat the enemies of the Church and State hope for speedie entrance, to the vtter ruine of both.


CHAP. VII.
Briefly collecting the summe of this second Booke.
1 TO draw a briefe mappe of these large disputes. As the occasions that breede, so the right meanes to auoid all contentions and schismes, are most perspicuously set down in scriptures, amo^gst others most necessary for this purpose, (for the plantation, increase, and strength of true and liuely faith,) sincere obedience to spirituall authoritie is the chiefe. For more willing and chearfull performance hereof, choice should be made of Pastors or ouerseers, qualified as Scripture requires men of so high a calling should be; men not giuen to quarrels or strife, men of milde and lowly spirits, fearing God and hating couetousnesse; men esteeming the hidden treasure of a good conscience at so high a rate, as neither feare of man, nor hopes of any worldly fauour can moue them to hazard or aduenture it. Were these rules, by such as haue the ouersight of Gods flocke, as faithfully practised, as they are by Scripture plainly taught the knowledge
 of Gods word should daily encrease; pietie, deuotion and Christian charitie continually flourish; all strife and dissention quickly fade.
2 But if through the default of Princes or Potentates, no fit choice be made of spirituall gouernours, if by their negligence, worse be made of inferiour Ministers: the cause comes not by deuolution, to be reformed by the congregation: What then must they be altogether silent at such abuse? No; the Scripture hath giuen as plain a rule for their imployme^t as for the others. The more or more often higher powers offend, the more feruently frequent should the lower sort be in powring out1. Tim. 2. v. 1.2 supplications, prayers, and intercessions for kings, and for all that are in authoritie, that they may rule according to Gods word. In the meane time albeit they rule otherwise, inferiours should consider, that God giues them such superiours for their pronenesse to disobedience, scurrilitie, scoffing at lawfull authoritie, or other like sinnes, expresly forbidden by his word. To euery people as well as Israel hee giues such rules in his wrath, as shall not seeke them but theirs, not his glory in their saluation, but their owne glory by their harme.
3 But as the tongues of inferiours must bee tied from scoffing or ieasting at men in authorities bad proceedings: so must not the word of God be bound. If their consciences (rightly and vnpartially examined) direct them otherwise then their gouernours command, they must (notwithstanding their superiours checks) speake as they thinke, vntill death command them silence; if for the freedome of their speech (vpon good warrant of conscience) they be punished, vengeance is Gods, hee will repay superiours for it: vnto whose lawfull authoritie whilst obedience is denied, vpon sinister pretences, or humorous though strong perswasions of conscience, counselling vs to the contrarie: our punishment in this life is iust, whose present smart should teach vs to beware of farre more grieuous in the life to come. But whether offend or swerue more from the rules of Scripture prescribed for their seuerall Christian carriage; superiours in commaunding wrongfully; or inferiours in disobeying iust commaunds; cannot oft-times (if wee speake of particular actions) be infallibily knowne in this life; but must be reserred vnto that day of finall iudgement. The dread of which should in the
 meane time inforce euery superiour daily to consult his owne heart, and strictly to examine his conscience, whether it bee not likely then to giue euidence against him, for imposing too heauie burthens vpon his inferiours. And so must euery inferiour againe vse the like diligence in the daily examination of his conscience, whether it be likely or no to conuince him before the Iudge of quicke and dead, of disobedience to such as he had set in authoritie ouer him, or of such sinister pretences for vsing the libertie of conscience, as conscience it selfe neuer sought after, but were suggested onely by humour, popularitie, or other desires, whose maintenance haue either inforced him to obey man against God, or not to obey man commanding for God.
4 Our partialitie it is towards our selues, or rather to our sensuall delights or pleasures, that makes vs so ignorant in all things which concerne our weale. For would we truly and vnpartially1. Cor. 11. vers. 31. Iudge our selues, we should not be iudged. Not the best experienced Iustice in this land, can, by examining ordinarie malefactors, discerne, what issue their cause shall haue before an vnpartiall Iudge, better then we, by this strict pre-examination, might foresee what finall sentence were prepared for vs, good or bad, according to the diuersitie of our actions and course of life. To this end hath Christ left euery mans conscience in full authoritie, during his absence, to examine, reproue, conuince, and sentence the desires of his owne heart: of which would we daily in sobrietie of sp^rit, and feare of this last iudgement, aske counsell, and patiently expect Gods prouidence; we should by this ordinarie meanes discerne, who commaunded aright, who otherwise, as cleerely as others heretofore haue done by meanes most extraordinarie. For euen the most extraordinarie miracles did ascertaine the Anc^ent of diuine truth, and confirme them in the practise of Chr^^tian obedience, not immediately, as part of their rule of faith, whereon finally to relie, but by informing them to looke into their o^ne soules and consciences, in which truth was already writte^, if th^y had vrged it to confession. If our examination without m^racl^s were as strict, our beleefe would be as firme; spirituall g^u^^^ors commaunds as Christian-like, and inferiours obedience in all points as sincere as was theirs.
5 For conclusion I would giue the Christian Reader a present
 antidote, against al the poisonous inchantments of Romish sorcerers. The medicine is very briefe and easie; onely to thinke euery morning next his heart, or at other seasonable houres, That there is a diuine prouide^ce in this life to guide vs, and after this life ended, a fearefull iudgement to passe vpon all such, as heere abiuring the guidance of it, follow eyther the waies of flesh and bloud in breeding, or of carnall wisedome in composing, strife and dissension about matters spirituall. He that will seriously ruminate on these matters in his vacant well composed thoughts, calling the aduersaries arguments home to the point, which they must touch ere they can wound vs: let me haue onely his dying curse in recompence of all my paines, if any difficultie, any Iesuite or other learned Papist, eyther hitherto hath, or euer shal be able to bring, do trouble his minde. Whatsoeuer can bee brought eyther to countenance their vnchristian doctrine, or disparage our orthodoxall assertions, eyther presuppose a secret deniall of Gods peculiar prouidence, and inward calling of men, or else proceede from want of consideration, that there is a finall iudgment, wherein all controuersies must be taken vp, all contentious and rebellious spirits punisht according to their deserts: Indeed if the authors or abetters of schisme and heresie might escape for euer vnpunished, or Christian modestie and humilitie be perpetually ouerborne by impudencie, scurrilitie, and violent insolency, the inconueniences, obiected by the Romanists, might as much trouble vs, as the wickeds thriuing, did the heathen, that knew not God nor his prouidence. But whilst we acknowledge him and it, the best arguments our Antagonists bring, will appeare as improbable as they are impious.


FINIS.

