


A MOST TRVE RElation of the affaires of CLEVE and GVLICK.
THat I may not with any tedious impertinence of searching the causes of these motions from the reuolution of the heauens, and conditions of all things here below subiect to mutabilitie, adde (as it is sometimes affected) an ambitious frontispice to a poore house and as Mountebanks wrap vp meane trifles in many papers; I willingly omit Preface, which as a slow Porter, oft times keepes vs without till wee haue lost our stomackes: and come to our intended Discourse, raising vp (as it were by the rootes) the first ground of difference concerning the now questioned Title of Cleue and Gulick.

The Pedegree of the Dukes of CLEVE and GVLICK.
ABout an hundred yeares since (conditionally the lands of Cleue, Gulick, Marck, Bergh, etc. should for euer remaine vnited) there was a mariage solemnized
betweene Iohn the sonne of Iohn Duke of Cleue, Earle of Marck, and Lord of Rauenstein, and Marie the daughter and heire of William Duke of Gulick, of Bergen, and of Rauensberge, who had issue, one sonne, and three daughters, viz. Hans Willem, Sybilla, (who maried Iohn Frederick Duke of Saxonie, vpon condition also, that if the former Iohn and Marie should die without issue male, all the lands should descend vpon this Sybilla, and Iohn Frederick her husband, and their heires, shee giuing a peece of money to her other sisters) Anna and Aemilia, who died issuelesse. Now Hans Willem succeeding, Anno 1546. maried Marie of Austria, the daughter of King Ferdinand, after Emperour, and obtained from Charles the Fifth, that if hee should decease without heires males by this Marie his wife, that the lands should descend to the daughters begotten by him of the said Marie; which decree was also confirmed by the ensuing Emperours, Ferdinand, Maximilian, and the late Rodulph. He had issue by Marie; First, Charles Frederick, who died in Italie vnmaried: Secondly, Hans Willem, Bishop of Munster, who succeeded, but died also without issue: Thirdly, Marie Helionora: Fourthly, Anna M gdalena: Fifthly, Magdalena: Sixthly, Sybilla. Marie Helionora, (the third childe) who maried Albert Frederick Duke of Prussia, with assurance also vpon the mariage, that if Hans Willem and his wife died without issue male, that then these lands should descend vpon this his eldest daughter, maried to the Duke of Prussia, and her heires, he giuing to the other sisters a peece of mone^, but that to bee leuied of his owne goods, and not of the lands of Gulick or Cleue. And all this was onely to
vnite these lands more strongly together. This Marie died a yeare before her brother, leauing issue by the Duke her husband foure children: viz. Anna, maried to Iohn Sigismond, Duke of Brandenburge, the chiefe Competitor, one other daughter maried to the olde
That is, Elector. Cueruorst, a third to the Duke of Curland, a fourth to the Lord Hans Zorgien, Duke of Saxonie, brother to the Cuervorst, (or Elector.) The 4. and second daughter, Anna Magdalena, Anno 1574. maried to Philip Lodouick Duke of Newburgh, by whom shee had issue foure sons, besides daughters: viz. Wolfgang Willem, eldest, and one of the Competitors, Otho Henrick, Iohn Frederick, and Augustus. Magdalena, the 5. and third daughter, Anno 1579. maried with the Palsgraue, Iohn Duke of Zuyburge, the Duke of Newburghs brother, by whom shee had issue, three sonnes, and some daughters. Sybilla of Cleue, the 6. and fourth daughter, Anno 1610 maried Charles of Austria, Marckgraue of Burgou, the sonne of Ferdinand of Austria, and is yet without issue. Of these two youngest there is not any question. Now it may be coniectured, since Marie Helionora died a yeare before her brother Hans Willem the late Duke, Wolfgang Willem (that is the Duke of Newburge) sonne to the second sister Anna Magdalena, claimes these lands in his mothers right, as next of bloud to the late Duke at his death, and his sister; whereas Anna wife to the Duke of Brandenburge was but his Neece. And the said Anna claimes them as more vpon her by descent, as also by what particular interest was estated vpon her by her Grandfather Hans Willem in his life time. And me thinks Anna should succeed: for so did our Richard the second
before his vncles, notwithstanding his father, the blacke Prince, died before his grandfather. But this succession per Saltum, hath sometimes weightie reasons in some Countries, where remaineth any freedome of the Subiects election (beside the right of descent) where they finde it may profit or preiudice the common good.
Now the Duke of Cleue being dead, and Leopoldus in possession of the Towne and Castle of Gulick, or Iuliers, for his Master the Emperour; the Kings of Great Britaine, France, and the Estates of these vnited Prouinces, thought it not fitting that hee should nest himselfe there, to the preiudice of the lawfull heires or competitors. Wherefore his Maiestie of Great Britaine, with the Estates, sent a puissant Armie vnder the conduct of that braue Scipio of our age, the victorious Prince Maurice of Nassau, who after no long, but a forcible siege, tooke both the Towne and Castle, in the yeare 1610. Which done, it was consented vnto and agreed, that a companie of either Competitor Prince should remaine in the Towne, now become neutrall, till the right were adiudged, vnder the command of Pithan, a Germaine, as Captaine of both, hauing command of the Castle. But Neuburg, whether hauing the States in iealousie, or relying vpon the strength of his owne Title, or through a vindictiue resolution, (which seemeth to be the truth indeed) after Pithan had complained of some secret practise of his, contrary to the former agreement, (as it is reported) began new plots, and by many secret meanes endeuoured to be himselfe wholly possessed of the Castle. The States vnderstanding of his designes, strengthned it againe with new troopes. Neuburg seeing
his hopes now frustrate, and no likelihood of gaining an absolute possession of the same, growes discontented, changeth his Religion, marieth the Bishop of Collens sister, daughter to the Duke of Baueir, whose banner hee borroweth, and with whose purse hee leuies great troopes, beginnes to take the field, and in this discontent fortifies Duisseldorpe, but yet vnder a colour of prouiding for his owne person.
The States not sleeping, sent out Prince Henry with a strong conuoy of horse, to bring moe companies into Gulick, which with those that were in before, amounted to about 2500. men. Neuburg seeing this, adheres to the Spaniard, who vndertakes the cause, makes Spinola his Generall, who hauing gathered a mightie Armie together, the best of his old souldiers from all his Garrisons in those parts, besides many companies newly taken in, makes his rendez-vous at Maestricht, vnder a colour of executing the Emperors Banne against Acon and Mullem: whereupon he makes a great Bridge at Maestricht, and another at Rhine-berck; but these were as well to amuse the world, and to giue an occasion of distraction in opinion which way hee would turne head, as for necessarie vse. Yet by meanes of that at Rhineberck he had the Riuer at command. After hee had taken in Acon, hee came within Cannon shot, or not much further, before Gulick, where hee lay two or three daies, onely for a colour, and to giue no mistrust to those, whom hee intended to visit ere they expected him. In the meane time hauing secured the Rhine aboue, for his designes, hee sends his prouision and baggage downe the same, which, then leauing Gulick
with all speede possible he meets at Wesel.
The States all this while tooke no hot Alarme, but only made provision for the Armie, and al things necessarie thereto belonging, to be in a readinesse at an hours warning. Yet hereupon arose sundrie opinions and doubts, of most places of the Netherlands: those of the frontiers of Gelderland, the Betow, and other places, desired the Armie with all speede: others were of opinion they were in no danger at all; and the most were indifferent. But the wisedome of his Excellencie (who best could finde the old Foxe by his track, and better discerne this clowd then any other) knew a storme would light ere long somewhere; wherefore, not attending the resolutions of all, and opposing himselfe strongly against the perswasions of some; hee marched presently forward, neither could any certainty be agreed of, vntil hee was come as farre as Arnhem in Gelderland, where was brought the first newes vnto him that Wesel was taken, not without suspition of treacherie within: for they might very well haue held out, till his Excellence had relieued them, which would haue beene within two dayes, or three at the most.
From Arnhem, his Excellence marched toward Schenck Sconce, a Fort of great strength and import, lying at the mouth of the Rhine, as it diuides it selfe, one part towards Arnhem, retayning his name; the other towards Nieumegen and Bommel, losing it, being called Vahalis, or the Wael, where the whole Armie vnited it selfe into one body, to the number of betwixt eleuen and twelue thousand foote, which made one hundred and foure and thirtie Companies, and three thousand
horse, two thousand and fiue hundred whole armed, fiue hundred Bedets, fit and readie for seruice, if neede required, but not whole armed. So exquisite and braue an Armie, for the choice of able bodied men, and resolute spirits, so well clothed and armed, and generally so well exercised in the vse of their Armes, to the great commendation and honour of their Chiefes and Commanders, that these many yeares the like hath not been shene in these Countries, wanting nothing but an Enemie, to giue testimonie of their valour, yea though hee were double their number.
The Rendez vous being at Skenck Sconce, vpon the seuenth of September, 1614. The Armie marched from hence to
Or Eltenbergh. Elten on the Hill in Cleueland, they being diuided into three maine bodies, which made the Vantgard, the Battaile, and the Rereward.
The first body was lead by the Illustrious Prince Maurice himselfe, containing sixe Companies of his own Guardes: nine and twentie Companies of Sir Horace Vere, Lord Gouernour of the Brill his Regiments: Eleuen Companies of Colonel Ogles Regiment, and thirteene Companies of Wallons, of Count Iohns Regiment.
The second body was lead by Count William of Nassau, and contayned sixteene Companies of French, of Monsieur Chastillions Regiment: sixteene Companies of Courtemers, and eleuen Companies of Frizons.
The third body lead by Count Ernestus, Marshall of the Armie, contayned ten Companies of Scots, of the Regiment of Colonell Broge: ten Companies more of Scots, of the Regiment of Colonell Henderson. twelue
Companies of Sir Edward Cecils Regiment, who was Generall for his Maiestie at Iuliers, and nine Companies of Almaines.
This goodly and braue Armie, being come to Eltham, a little Towne, standing vpon a great and high Hill, about two Duch miles from Schenke Sconce (where may bee seene the goodliest prospect one of them, I thinke in the World, for varietie of Landschap) it marched to Emerick (or Embrick) whither being come by one or two of the clock in the afternoone, they lay all night before the Towne: on the next day, being the eighth of September, the Towne yeelded to his Excellence, who put a good Garrison into the same, the companies of Count Hohenloo, and the yong Lord of Brederod.
The afternoone this day, the Armie remoued to the Northwest of the Towne, where it continued that night, and all the next day, building in formall order, expecting a longer stay there.
Vpon the tenth of September, Prince Maurice marched away betime in the morning, his diuision hauing the Vantguard, Count Ernest the Battaile, and Graue William the Rere, thinking without doubt to haue encountred the Marques Spinola, neare vnto the Towne of Rais, whom wee vnderstood was comming by that way, to ferce the Towne, because hee was defeated of his purpose the day before, attempting to surprize it on the suddaine, with certaine of his troups sent from Wesel in sloopes or long boats, downe the Riuer of Rhine, who were by those of the Towne well beaten back, with some few slaine. But not being so happie as to meete
with him, wee quartered on the North North-East side of the Towne, where the Armie remayned till the breaking vp thereof.
Vpon the eleuenth of September, the Companies were drawne forth before the Towne of Reis, which for a smal time stood out, insomuch as certaine Waggon-men (or Voer-men, as they call them) being with some Souldiers in an Hop garden, by the walls of the Towne, were shot; whereupon his Excellencie himselfe on horse-back, went to the Gates, and told them vpon the Walls, that if they discharged euen but one shot more, he would beate the Towne about their eares, and giue the spoile to the Souldiers: hereupon (though with much difficultie and doubt) they yeelded.
Vpon the twelfth day, his Excellence drew out of the Armie, about 400. foot, who with the Companies of Lambert Charels, Gouernour of Nieumegen, tooke in these Townes ensuing, viz. Colker, Ravenstein, Kennop, and Gough, and returned the same night vnto the Armie.
Vpon the thirteenth of September, his Excellence sent out seuen hundred to take in Greete.
Vpon the fourteenth and fifteenth of September, his Excellence (at the request of the Princes Brandenburg and Newburg) considering the pitifull estate of the Countrie, spoiled and harried by either Armie, to haue them dissolued, sent Mounsieur Marquette, Lieftenant Generall of the Horse, and the Captaine of his Guard, to treat with Spinola about it, who refusing the same without the giuing ouer of Gulick,
which his Excellence vnderstood not to appertayne to this yeares action, by reason the States haue held it these foure yeares for some priuate and important consideration, sent for more Companies, and continued the treatie. Whereas Spinola had made fortifications at both ends of his bridge, and was in hand with a skonce without the Towne of Wesel, ground was laid forth to doe the like at the end of our bridge, on the other side of the Rhine against Rais, but not resolued vpon.
The eighteenth and nineteenth of September, his Excellence with all the quarter Masters, went vp the Riuer of Rhine, on the farther side, to view ground for new quarters, which was appointed, but after neglected, by reason it was said Spinola purposed to march and winter his men in Mark-land, whom, if he did, his Excellence purposed to follow.
On the twentieth, one and twentieth, and two and twentieth day: All lay still, and nothing attempted. Vpon the three and twentieth day, his Excellence drew forth his whole Armie of foot, and put them into Battaglia, which was a goodly sight, to see a large and spacious field, late laden with Eares, now with Armes, the aire depainted with so many sundry colours, so many Pikes advanced, that they seemed a mightie and mouing wood, the order and resolution of so many gallant Souldiers, that now I beleeued that saying, and found it true, That a braue Armie is the best of the three fairest sights in the World.
It was ordered and disposed in this manner. The Vantguard (as also the Battaile and Rere) consisted
of a Vantguard, Battaile, and Rere, Prince Maurice his Guardes, and ten Companies of Sir Horace Veres, making the Vantguard of the Vantguard, in two bodies, each distant from the other an hundred foot, either body being againe diuided into foure diuisions, or quarters, fiftie foot each from either: the Battaile consisted againe of two bodies, one contayning eleuen Companies of Colonel Ogles, being likewise diuided into foure diuisions, fiftie foot asunder, the other nine Companies more of Colonel Veres, being three hundred foot backward, and distant one from another 400. foot, a space to receiue the Vantguard if occasion required: the Rere six hundred foot behind the Battaile, and opposite to the Vantguard, consisted of twelue Companies of Wallons in one body, diuided as the other into foure diuisions, fiftie foot distant, so that the Vantguard (as the Battaile and Rere) stood in forme of a Crosse, according as I haue described it.
The Battaile, obseruing the same forme in all respects, had in the Vantguard ten Companies of Colonel Broges, and ten of Hendersons. The Battaile of the Battaile consisted of twelue Companies of Generall Cecils, and foure Companies of Almaines, (distant from the battaile of the Vantgard two hundred foot standing euen against it) in the Rere of the Battaile were the rest of the Almaine companies. The Vantguard of the Rere, consisted of sixteen companies of Courtemer, a French Colonel: the battaile, of sixteene companies of Chastilions: The Rere of the Rere, of eleuen Frizon companies.
The Vantguard was 4292. strong, the Battaile


3824. the Rere 4066. and the entire breadth of this Order, as they stood readie to fight, 2800. foot.
The foure and twentieth of September, a prayer was said throughout the Armie, for the preseruation and successe thereof, as also throughout all the vnited Prouinces of the States.
The fiue and twentieth day, Nothing obserued.
The sixe and twentieth, the Horse contayning eight and thirtie troups, with those of Brandenburgs, were showne in the field in order of fight: their manner was in forme of a Pile or wedge, called of the old Romans, Cuneus, narrow in the front, and dispreading themselues broad in the wings. In the front were the troups of Prince Henrie of Nassau, and Rijhouen: next to those the troups of Megang, Wagenman, and Marcellus Bax: the distance of ground from the right wing of Megang, to the left of Bax, was 1370. foot. Behind those, the troups of Stalkenburg and Marquette, possessing the distance of 2040. foote. Then the troups of Vanderwel, and Smelsange, hauing the distance of 2520. foot. Last of all Villebon, and Iohn Bax, in distance 3000. foote, which was the entire breadth of this Order.
September the seuen and twentieth, his Excellence at night sent foure and twentie troups of his owne, and sixe of the Marques of Brandenburgs, with foure or fiue hundred foot in waggons, commanded by Count Henrie, into Merck-land, whither two companies of Dragounes, and one of Carbines, were sent before, with which forces they tooke in the townes hereafter named.

 His Excellence sent Rocolier, a Serieant Maior of the French, vnto Gulick, with orders to draw the Companies from thence, and to take in the Townes thereabouts, hereafter named.
September the eight and twentieth, Prince Maurice, in case Spinola should stop or hinder any of these forces, sent command that all men should keepe their quarters, and be ready vpon any sudden warning to march after them if need required.
September the 29. and 30. order was giuen that no Souldier or Officer should depart the Armie without his Excellences passe, and that no souldier or waggon should goe out for forrage without conuoy.
Vpon the first of October, about seuen a clocke in the euening, ten Companies of Colonell Broges Regiment, and three of the Suisses or Amaines, had their quarters burned by mischance. How or where the fire began, it is vncertaine. They say, by the carelesnesse of a Suisses wife, who throwing a candle and candlesticke at her husbands head, being both drunke, let it alone in the straw till it had fired the quarter, which we beheld from the beginning to the end, being at supper neere the place.
About this time, or shortly after, the Boores of the Countrey acquainted his Excellencie with the danger the whole Armie was in of drowning, if the enemie should cut the banke of the Riuer by Bislick, which three or foure might easily haue done in two houres: wherefore he appointed certaine troopes to watch thereabouts euery night. The water so much now began to increase, that Sir Horace Veres quarter
remoued to the other side of the Rhine, by the bridge of boats laid ouer against Rais, by which I tooke the breadth of the Rhine there, which was six hundred of my paces.
On the second day of October, at the instance of Neuburgs Ambassador, who was come to his Excellence before to accept the conditions first offered, it was on both sides agreed, that after twelue a clocke the same day, there should be no more taking in of Townes on neither side, till the intercedent Princes had compounded their differences; and lay still.
On the third and fourth daies of October, the Ambassador of England, Sir Henry Wooton, and the French Ambassador, La Refuge, came to the Armie, whom Prince Maurice met with foure troopes of horse, as I take it, (for they went so close, I could not well discerne them) some three quarters of a mile from the Armie, conducting them into Rais, where they remained.
Vpon the ninth day they were inuited to Spinola's Leaguer, and that night went to Wesel. The English Ambassador was receiued at the entrance into the quarter by Neuburg, and the Marquesse Spinola, who, attended on by many Gallants, Italians and Spaniards, on horsebacke, met him there, and alighting off from their horses, and the Ambassador comming out of his Coach, saluted one the other: and after some few complements, they mounted him on horsebacke, and lead him betweene them thorow their quarters into Marquesse Spinola his Tent, with the principall of their followers, where they remained
till dinner was brought in, what time Neuburg and Spinola brought him in to dinner. The first quarter was Sir Griffin Markhams, a little within which was raised a plat, whereon were planted three peeces of Ordinance, which were discharged as they passed by. The foot stood also in troops, fiue deepe, the pikes on the one side, and the shot on the other, in their
That is, 24. foot distant, to auoid the Cannon where it plaies among troopes close together. open open order, discharging by volleies as they passed. The horse being Carbins and Lanciers about twentie troopes, veiled the Cornets, and discharged their Pistols as they passed. The whole number of horse and foot thus standing, was ghessed to be about seuen thousand. But ere I passe further, know the summe and strength of the enimies Armie as well as our owne.

The Marquesse Spinola's Armie.
Ambrosius Spinola, Marquesse of Venafri, an Italian, Generall.
Don Lewes de Velasco, a Spaniard, Generall of the Horse.
Bartholomaeo Zanchez, Lieutenant Generall of the Horse.
The Count of Bucquoy, Generall of the Artillerie, but not present in person.
Monsieur Wingard, Lieutenant Generall of the Artillerie.
Baltasar Lopez, Serieant Maior Generall.



Colonels of Spaniards.
Don Iuego de Boraga, Gouernor of the Castle of Andwarpe.

Simon Antonius.


Don Iuan de Menesis.


Each hath twelue Companies in his Regiment, euery Regiment containing a thousand men, so that the Regiments of Spaniards are three thousand.

Italians.
Marcello Giudice hath only twelue Companies, consisting of 1900.
Wallouns, or those of Artois and Hennegou.
The Count of Holstrate,

Monsieur de Mottry,


Monsieur Gulsene.


Each hath fifteene Companies in his Regiment, euery Regiment containing 3000. men, in all 9000.

Burgonians.
The Baron of Balanson, Colonell of eight Companies, in all 1000.


Almaines.
The Count of Embden, Colonell often Companies, in all 3000.


Irish.
The Baron of Dungannon, Tyrones sonne, Colonell of eight Companies, wherein are a thousand Irish. So that the summe of Spinola's Armie is 18900.

The English Ambassadour hauing remained a small time at Wesel, returned backe, and came to Santen, the appointed place for the treatie, where
he with the other Ambassadors lay vntill about the latter end of Nouember, all which time was spent in sundrie ouertures on either side, and drawing these ensuing Articles as indifferent as possibly they could deuise for either partie, whereby an absolute and finall peace might be concluded, as well to auoid the shedding of Christian bloud, as the miserable vastation of the Countrey, which was in so short a time so harried and spoiled, that the poore Inhabitants had little left them saue their bare houses. To which Articles the Duke of Neuburge set to his hand, but Spinola making many excuses and delaies, draue off the time from day to day, which our Ambassadour perceiuing, would brooke no longer, but hastened and determined forthwith to depart. Spinola perceiuing it, sent Count Octauio, an Italian, Post in the night (the gates of Wesel for that purpose being left open for him) to Santen, to intreat him to stay but till the next night, in which time hee assured him a messenger would come from Bruxels, by whom hee should know the Archdukes minde. Our Ambassador (to vse his owne word) being wonne by Spinolaes ciuilitie, staied till that night, in which time there came indeed a Courrier or Post from Bruxels, with Letters from the Archduke, (notwithstanding Peckius was in the treatie at Santen as his agent) by which Letters the Archduke seemed to like and allow very well of the Articles, intimating withall his consent thereunto, in generall termes, as, saying hee would accord and signe, but did not. Spinola made shew likewise to allow of them. But touching that
Article and point, of quitting the engarnisond towns, as Wesel, and the rest, his answere was, hee knew not the King of Spaine his master his pleasure, and for his owne authoritie, it was not sufficient and strong enough. Hereupon the Ambassadors seeing all their labour in vaine, and Spinola intending nothing else then to gaine time by playing fast and loose in this manner, returned, nothing to any purpose (as you see) in many weekes effected.
A day or two after Sir Henry Wooton, our Ambassador, returned, which was about the first of December, or latter end of Nouember, the Armie of Prince Maurice brake vp, euery Companie returning to his Garrison, hauing laien in the field very neere foure moneths, viz. from the eleuenth of September vnto the second of December, hauing endured much by reason of the vnseasonablenesse of the weather and dirtinesse of the place, being subiect to euery inundation and ouerflowing of the Rhine, insomuch that on the very day of their departure, the souldiers marched to the ships almost vp to the knees, and the waggonmen were glad to let their waggons swimme to saue their horses.
This is the summe of this last yeares businesse in Cleueland, which hath so filled the world with rumour, and those Countries with feare. What this yeare will produce, euent must shew. He that is acquainted with the Spaniard, and the policie of Spinola, (being the most able Generall he hath had in the Low Countries these many yeares) will not imagine that he will giue Wesel ouer in haste, hauing fortified
it in that manner he hath done, and daily doth by all meanes possible. I rather beleeue (and truly) with Prince Maurice, that he purposeth to make it (to vse his owne phrase) Sedem Belli, the home of his Armie, and seat of his intended warre against the low Countries, hauing gotten footing on this side the Rhine, and a faire way into Freezland, which hee hath long aimed at, beside some aduantage vpon the Frontier parts of Gelderland, Schenk-sconce, and the Betow. As for Rees and Embrick, they are esteemed by him as balles plaied withall for a time, and recouered not with much difficultie, if occasion required. Where beside, the Iesuites and Iesuited Burgers, very likely, may proue his friends, as appeared lately by their sundrie and open affronts done vnto Vtenhouen the Gouernour about exercise of the Protestant Religion, setting vp Edicts and Plaecaets vpon the Gates, with threatning of banishment and confiscation of goods to whosoeuer of the towne of Embrick should come to Protestants praier or Sermon.
But, Quicquidid est, timeo DANAOS and dona ferentes.



The names of such Townes as Marquesse SPINOLA hath taken in this last Summer in CLEVELAND and other places.


Aken.


Duren.


Sounkfol.


Dalen.


Barken.


Castrum.


Grauensberch.


Hensberch.


Sitterts.


Drusbech.


Orson.


Dinxlaken.

Wesel, before our Armie came vp.
Santen, since our Rendez-vous at Schenksconce.

Braggon.




The townes Prince MAVRICE hath taken in.


Embrick.


Rees.


Colker.


Gough.


Rauenstein.


Kennop.


Greete.

Linick. Which Spinola had by those of Gulick.
Hamuach. Which Spinola had by those of Gulick.
Older houen. Which Spinola had by those of Gulick.
Titts. Which Spinola had by those of Gulick.
Randlerood. Which Spinola had by those of Gulick.

Andermach. Taken in by Graue Hendrick.
Ham. Taken in by Graue Hendrick.
Soust. Taken in by Graue Hendrick.
Lunen. Taken in by Graue Hendrick.
Onne. Taken in by Graue Hendrick.
Lipstots. Taken in by Graue Hendrick.
Hurst. Taken in by Graue Hendrick.
Cleue was possessed by Brandenburg before our Armie came vp.



The names of our English Captaines and Commanders at this present in the Low Countries.

Sir HORATIVS VERE Lord Gouernour of the BRILL.
Lieu. Colonel Metkerck.
Sir Edward Vere.
Sir Thomas Gates.
Sir Henrie Carew.
Sir Thomas Dale.
Sir Henrie Payton.
Sir George Hollis.
Sir Thomas Dutton.
Sir Iohn Vere.
Sir Robert Carew.
Sir Thomas Mewtas.
Sir William Louelake.
Sir Edward Harwood.
Captaine Cooke.
Captaine Woodhouse.
Captaine Bingham.
Captaine Lindley.
Captaine Burrough.
Captaine Ashley.
Captaine Myles.
Captaine Mason.
Captaine Dexter.
Captaine Conway.
Captaine Rookwood.

Captaine Wynne.
Captaine Holcroft.
Captaine Euerard.
Captaine Pigot.
Captaine Connock.
Captaine Zouch.
Captaine Sellinger.
Lieutenant


Colonell Cecil his Regiment.
Lieutenant Colon. Pagenham.
Serieant Maior Proud.
Sir Barnard Dewhurst.
Sir Gerard Harbert.
Captaine Wigmore.
Captaine Zouch.
Captaine Spry.
Captaine Courtney.
Captaine Slingsby.
Captaine Clarke.
Captaine Blundel.
Captaine Corbet.
Captaine Butler.


Colonell Ogle his Regiment.
Sir Charles Morgan Lieutenant Colonell.
Sir Thomas Panton Serieant Maior.
Sir Christopher Cleue.
Sir Iohn Burlary.
Captaine Frier.
Captaine Shelton.
Captaine Orell.
Captaine F. Woodhouse.
Captaine Ramme.
Captaine Huntley.
Captaine Roger Orme.
Captaine Spenser.

Whom for honours sake I haue here set downe, being all either renowned for valour, or loue of Arts, and to whom (for the most part) I am much beholden.




The Articles agreed vpon at SANTEN.
ARticles agreed vpon amongst the Ambassadors of the Kings, Princes, and Potentates vnderwritten, vpon the controversies hapned betwixt the most Illustrious, High, and Mightie Princes, George William, Marques of Brandenburgh, Duke of Prussia, etc. on the one side; And Wolfgang William, Countie Palatine, Duke of Newburgh, etc. on the other side: Concerning the gouernement and provisionall Administration of the Countries of Gulick, Cleue, and other, being of the succession of the late Duke of Cleue. Which Articles haue beene set downe by writing after many seuerall conferences held by the said Ambassadors, both amongst themselues; and with those that haue beene thereto committed by the said Princes of Brandenburgh, and Newburgh, and vpon the consent of the said Princes, to the most part and chiefest of the said Articles.
And to the end to cut off many light difficulties, which might lengthen the Treatise begun for a finall agreement, and consequently continue the oppression of the people of the said Countries, hinder the reestablishment of the said Princes in the common Administration of the same, and through the stay of
the Armies and Garrisons bred diuers suspitions and inconveniences, to the great preiudice of the co^mon peace. It hath beene thought good that the said Articles should be presented by the aforesaid Ambassadors to the said Princes, and that they should bee entreated to conforme themselues thereto, and to accept of them for their owne good and quiet, and that of the said Countries, and of all Christendome, vpon promise of the said Ambassadours, in the name of their Kings, Princes, and Superiours, to maintayne the said Princes of Brandenburgh and Newburgh, in the said provisionall Administration, according to the said Articles.

The Articles are these.
ALL the Garrisons which haue beene put into the Townes, Castles, and other places of the Dukedomes of Gulick, Cleue, and Bergh, Earledomes of Marke, and Rauensbergh, and Lordship of Rauenstein, taken by whomsoeuer, and vnder what pretext soeuer, euen those which haue beene put into the Towne and Castle of Gulick, and into the Towne of Weesel, shall be presently drawne out: and all the Munitions that shall bee found in the same, shall bee carried away by those that brought them in. Likewise, all the troups of both Armies shall retire themselues into their owne Countries, without any pretention whatsoeuer in this behalfe, and without doing any damage to the people of the Townes, and Subiects of the said Duchies and Countries.
The said Princes shall promise, to put neuer a
place of the said Countries into the hands of a third, whatsoeuer hee might bee, but to helpe one another against all such, as by force or otherwise should pretend any thing vpon the said Countries. Yet it shall be lawful for the said Pretendors to make their claim by friendly meanes, and course of Law. No Garrisons likewise shall bee put or established into any Towne or Castle of the said Countries, by any man whatsoeuer; vnlesse it were by the common consent of both Princes: Who also for their gards and securitie of their persons shall keepe at the most but fiftie horse, and a hundred foot a peece.
The fortifications made on both sides, in the said occupied places, since the moneth of May last, shall be throwne downe and demolished, without being lawfull for any man hereafter to repaire them, or to fortifie any place in the said Countries, vntill the finall decision of the maine matter.
The Church-men, Officers, Gentlemen, and others, of what Religion, Facultie, and Qualitie whatsoeuer, which should haue been dispossessed of their Benefices, Offices, Houses and Goods, or should haue beene driuen away, or had absented themselues through the ill correspondencie hapned betwixt the said Princes, shall bee reestablished againe into their said benefices, offices, charges, houses and goods, without any exception; and those that shal be found to haue beene heretofore lawfully preferred to the said benefices and offices, according to the contracts, agreements, and conventions, made betwixt the said Princes, shall be thereto admitted; yet it shall not be
lawfull for any of the said common Officers to engage himselfe particularly to the seruice, more of the one then the other of the said Princes.
All innovations, both in the estate of the Church, and in politique gouernement, shall by Commissioners appointed by both Princes ioyntly be redressed and reestablished, and all ordered henceforth according to the Treatie of Dortmund and Hall, and to the Contracts and Declarations made vpon the same, with the common consent of the said Princes and States of the Land, so farre forth as the said declarations shall not bee against the promise, made to the late most Christian King, Henrie the Great, of immortall and most glorious memorie, by the said Princes of Brandenburgh and Newburgh, which in all points shal be throughly obserued and followed, according as it is mentioned in the Treatie of the reduction of Gulick; which Commissioners shall be chosen by the said Princes of men of qualitie, and of meanes, dwelling in the Countrie, and hauing interest in the publike Peace and quiet, and shall bee named within a Moneth after the date of this present Treatise. And if one of the said Princes should faile to name any within the said time, the execution of this present Article shall bee done by the Commissioners named by the other. And if it should happen that the said Deputies should bee in any doubt amongst themselues vpon the execution of the said Treaties, Contracts, Declarations, and promise, the states of the Prouince, which the different shall concerne, shall name two men of both Religions, which together
with the said Commissioners shall aduise and resolue that which they shall iudge most convenient according to the said Treaties, Contracts, Declarations, and promise.
The said Princes shall haue their residence asunder in the said Countries, and to that end the same shall be prouisionall diuided into two parts, without preiudice to their Vnion, and to the Treaties of Dortmound and Hall. In the one of the said two parts shall be the Dukedome of Cleue, the Countie of Marke, Ravensteine, and the countie of Rauenbergh, with all that belongeth and appertayneth to the Chancelrie, and Exchequer of Cleue, as also the Fees, Lands, and Lordships, seated in the Dukedome of Brabant, and countie of Flanders, and the said countie of Rauenbergh, shall be seuered from the Chancelrie and Exchequer of Dusseldorp, and ioyned to that of Cleue.
And in the other part, shall be the Dukedomes of Gulick, and Bergh, with all their appurtinances and dependances, vpon condition that the Towne and Castle of Gulick, with all the compasse thereof, shall be put out of defence, and the said compasse reduced to a simple inclosure. In like manner, and at the same time, shall the new Fortification of the Towne Castle, and Citadell, of Dusseldorp, be also broken and demolished. And for execution of the present Article, there shall bee a Captaine or Ingenior, named by each of the said Princes, to proceed to the said demolitions in all diligence, and without any intermission, and that at the charges of the Land.
Vntill the time that the Fortifications of Gulick
and Dusseldorp, shall bee throughly demolished, the said two Townes, and their Castles, and Citadels, shall bee put into the hands of the States of Gulick, Gleue, etc. which they shall commit to the gard and keeping of the same men of qualitie, faithfull, and well affected to the Countrey.
And to this effect, four men shall be named by the States of the Dukdome of Gulick, 2. of each religion, for to be 2. of them Captains, and the 2. other Lieftenants, and by each of the Dukdomes of Cleue and Bergh, and the Earledome of Marke, 2. of both Religions, to be likewise the one a Captaine and the other a Lieftenant, each of which Captains shall haue the co^mand of 100. men, raised in the said Land, without admitting any stranger amongst them. Of these 5. Captains, 3. shalbe ordained for the keeping of the town, castle, and citadell of Dusseldorp, for which they shall cast lots.
The said Captaines, Lieftenants, and Souldiers, shall promise and sweare, to keepe the said places well and faithfully for the Countrey, vntill the entire demolition of the same, and to receiue into the same no man whatsoeuer, that could enterprise any thing vpon them: As also to obay no co^mand whatsoeuer, that should be made vnto them, to the preiudice of the keeping of the place, that shall be committed to their charge, or of the demolition thereof. Which parts so diuided, the said Princes shal cast lots for, and each of them shall gouerne that which shall befall him in the name of them both, and likewise all publike writings in both the residences shall bee dispatched in the name of the said Princes ioyntly, vnder the hands of the Presidents of each Chancelrie,
And a common seale of the said two Princes; about which they shall agree.
Each Prince shall put in each of the two residences, two Presidents with foure Councellors, and such number of Secretaries as shall bee found conuenient by the Princes to serue as well in the Chancelrie as in the Exchequer, which Presidents shall preside by turnes weekly, and for to beginne as also for signing, the presidence shall bee continued to him that hath had it heretofore. And the law businesses and mony matters shalbe determined by plurality of voices, without being lawful for any to addresse himselfe to either of the said Princes, to interrupt the course or execution of Iustice, or the businesses that shall bee there handled. But if any contention with the neighbours should arise whatsoeuer, shall be resolued vpon that behalfe in the said Chancelries, shall not bee put in execution, without hauing beene before communicated to each of the Princes.
And if the Presidents and Counsailors of one Chancelrie were diuided in opinions, the businesse shall be examined againe, and put in deliberation twice at two seuerall daies, and if they were againe diuided, the Prince of the Residence with the Presidence, shall come betwixt them.
The distributions of graces, offices, and benefices, in all the said Countries, shall remaine to the said Princes; who shal dispose of them by turnes monethly, according to their former conventions, and contracts, after a due information taken of the qualitie, life, and conditions, of the sutors, by the Counsellors of the Chancelries, which shall bee thereto appointed:
and examination made of the said sutors, according to the ancient order. In the meane time, the benefice that shall bee vacant, shall bee exercised by the next Churchman of the same Religion, and Dignitie, vntill it be disposed of by the Prince: And the said person shall enioy the reuenewes belonging to the said benefice, for the time that he shall exercise the same.
And if it should happen that one of the said Princes should delay by the space of three monethes, to name capable men for the parsonages, and benefices, fallen voide at his turne, it shall bee lawfull for the other Prince in such a case to bestow the same to men of requisite qualities.
The reuenewes of the said Countries shall bee diuided equally betwixt the said Princes, after the payment of wages, rents, pensions, and ordinarie charges, and each of them shall receiue his share from the Receiuers thereto committed, and by order of the Exchecquers, without being lawfull for one of them to dispose alone, and without the other of any part of the said reuenewes, nor make any diversion of the same.
No contributions, or impositions, shall be raysed nor euer asked in the behalfe of the said Princes, without their common consent and allowance, and that which the States of the said Countries shal contribute, eyther of their owne accord or at the instance of the said Princes, shall bee diuided betwixt them equally.
The accompts of the Generall and particular Receiuers,
both for the time since the said communion and before, shall be examined, and after information taken by the Presidents or other thereto appointed by the Exchequer of the reuenewes of the said Countries, a true estate shal be made of the same, and the Leases, Morgagements, and Debts of the said Countries shall be examined and corrected if neede bee.
The places where the Writings, and Registers, that concerne the rights of both Chancelries, and Exchequers, are kept, shall bee exactly and diligently visited within a yeare from the date of this present treatie, by Commissioners therto ordained by both Princes, and a generall Inuentorie of them shall bee taken, as also a speciall one of the titles, and writings, of the Countie of Rauensbergh, which shall bee left in the Chancelrie of Dusseldorp, when the originals shall bee taken away from thence to bee brought to the Chancelrie of Cleue: And hee to whose lot the said Countrie of Cleue shall fall, shall promise to restore the said writings vnto him, to whom in the end Rauenbergh shall be adiudged.
The effect of all Alienations, gifts, and morgagements made by the said Princes before the moneth of October last shall be suspended, vntill the decision of the maine matter: but it shall bee lawfull for the Prince that shall haue alienated, giuen, or morgaged any thing out of the residence that shall befall him, to recompence as hee shall thinke good in the compasse of his residence, those to whom the said Alienations, Gifts, or Morgagements, should haue beene
made. And euen the Lord Kettler for the Land and Barronery of Monioy; and that prouisionally and vpon condition, that for the time to come, the sum to which the thinges alienated, giuen, or engaged, shall amount, shall bee deducted vpon his halfe, in the reuenewes of the whole of the said Estates. And as for the alienations, and engagements, that haue beene made since the beginning of the said moneth of October last, the things so alienated or morgaged shall be restored againe on both sides.
The said Princes shall liue and behaue themselues in the said Countries Iure familiaritatis, according to the treaties of Dortmund, and of Hall, to the contracts and to the priuileges of the Countries, vntill the decision of the maine matter.
It is not vnderstood by this present treatie that anie reseruations, offers, contracts, or other declarations, that the Princes may haue giuen or done heretofore in the behalfe of any of the pretendors, to the succession of the said Countries, should be reuoked, but to the contrarie the same shall remaine in the same force, and value, that they were in before the said treatie.
The said Princes shall promise by the word of a Prince, and the officers of the said two Chancelries, and Exchequers, in which this present treatie shall be read, published, and registred, shall sweare to keep, obserue, and maintaine the same inviolably, according to the forme and contents thereof, and ^uen the said Princes to giue good and due ratifications of the same within sixe weekes at the furthest. And if one
of the said Princes should not satisfie thereto within the said time, the same being expired he shal be depriued of the libertie of casting lots, and to him which shall haue brought his ratification and notified the same to both the Chancelries of the said Countries, shall bee granted his choise of the residences aforesaid.
Without expecting which ratifications, this present treatie shall bee executed in that which concerneth the departing of the Armies, and Garrisons, the demolition of the fortifications before mentioned, and the reestablishment of the innouations, vpon condition that at the same time that the Armies and Garrisons shall retire themselues; the Towne and Castle of Gulick, and the Towne, Castle, and Citadell of Dusseldorp, shall bee yeelded to the power of those, which shall haue beene appointed by the States of the Countrie for the keeping of the said places: And that for the good of publique quiet, securitie of the common administration of the said Princes, rest, and ease of the subiects of the said Countries.
Done and concluded at Santen the twelfth of Nouember, 1614.

Refuge, counsellor of the most Christian King in his councels of State, and Priuie; and Am bassador of his Maiestie for the pacification of the controuersies of Cle^e, Gulick, etc.
Du Meurier, Counsellor of his most Christian Maiestie, and his ordinary Ambassador to the States of the vnited Prouinces, deputed to the same effect.
Henrie Wooton Knight, Ambassador extraordinarie of his Maiestie of great Brittaine, for the pacification of the controuersies of Gulick, etc.
In the name of the Elector Princes, and vnited States of the Holy Empire.
Iohn Albert Countie of Solmes, and great master of the Palatinate Electorall, etc.
B. Buwinchansen de Walmerode Counsellour in the counsell of the Lord Duke of Wittenbergh.
In the name of the States generall of the vnited Prouinces of the Low Countries.
Derick Bas Alh-Ioachim, Mark de lidama of Xicholt, Ivan Goch, W. Borr van Emerongen. Ivan Hacrsolte.
Iohn Dickenson agent of his Maiestie of great Brittaine to the Princes possessing.

 All Ambassadours and Deputies of the Kings, Princes, and Potentates, which haue heretofore assisted the said Princes of Brandenburgh and Newburgh in their prouisionall establishment in the Countrey of the succession of the late Dukes of Cleue, etc.
FINIS.




